DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 2, March 2010, pp. 92-96
© 2010, DESIDOC

E-journal Consortium: Is it a Success Story Always?
S.J.D. Varaprasad* and S. Madhusudhan
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad-500 007
* E-mail: varaprasad@iict.res.in

ABSTRACT
Libraries have experienced many transformations along with time. Scenario has further changed with
the information explosion and advent of Internet and telecommunications technologies. Information seeking has
become much more complex due to ever increasing amount of data, in both printed and electronic forms, and
no single library is self-sufficient to purchase all the books/e-books, journals/e-journals and other library
documents within their library budgets. Library consortium is one of the solutions to overcome this problem.
However, due to ever increasing prices of journals, vendor dominated market, lack of competition, and for
other reasons, question of whether consortium approach, some of the experiences in accessing e-journals
through this approach, a viable alternative for journal’s price hike or not? This paper is a case study of CSIR
e-journal Consortium and discusses need for consortia, types, advantages and disadvantages of a consortium,
problems faced by the consortiums and possible solutions for some of these problems.
Keywords: Consortium, e-journals, CSIR e-journal consortium, IISc, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology

1. INTRODUCTION
The word consortium has been derived from Latin,
meaning association or partnership. In the language of
law it means the partnership or relationship between a
husband and wife. There are various definitions in different
dictionaries on consortium. Broadly the meaning is same
in the context of library; an e-journal consortium means
the collaborative acquisition of access rights to electronic
databases and journals. The aim of consortia is to achieve
what the members of the group cannot achieve
individually. Journals play a major role in the R&D but
unfortunately the number and cost of journals are
increasing at a galloping speed. Number of journals and
their costs have increased by three-folds every 15 years
and 226 per cent, respectively during the last 20 years in
terms of dollars, which may be further compounded by
currency conversion whereas the increase in library
budget was only 110 per cent during the same period 1. In
another study by the Association of Research Libraries in
USA, it was found that average CPI (Consumer Price
Index) for US increased by 73 per cent during 1986-2004,
but the research libraries expenditure for journals
increased by 273 per cent during the same period2. Also,
there is an increase in number of research scholars,
institutions and global competition. The estimated

92

number of STM (Science, Technology and Medicine)
journals is about 25,000. Out of this 15,000 journals are
peer-reviewed and 12,000 are in e-form3. All types of
libraries/information centres are not in a position to
subscribe all the information resources required by their
users. Not even a single library can meet the thrust of
knowledge required by all the readers from its stock of
information to the full extent.
To solve this, libraries have started library
cooperation, i.e. inter-library loan (ILL), resource sharing,
and library consortium, etc. Though library consortium is
a concept of 1960s, e-consortium is a nascent feature.
For the past four centuries, dissemination of information
was done through print media alone, now the electronic
media has taken over this mean of communication. Basic
purpose of consortia is sharing of resources, money, and
manpower. In the digital context, it is the access to
information rather than holding information. ‘Collection
building’ concept has changed to ‘Connection building’
with the help of Information and Communication
technologies (ICT). Access to the e-resources and the
subscription amount is shared among the participating
libraries. Significant price reduction can be achieved
through consortium and individual libraries in the
consortium will have collaborative acquisition of access

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

rights to databases and e-journals. Library consortias
have become powerful negotiating parties and
incorporating their own clauses in the contracts with the
publishers and just no longer signing the standard
contract texts provided by the publishers/vendors.

Keeping this in view, the contract with publishers
must be carefully drafted/altered so that the interests
of
consortium
are
fulfilled.
Determinant
characteristics for e-journals like content,
authenticity, equivalence to print, navigation
characteristics, search features, and seamless
movement to other related articles, etc., have to be
addressed before signing the deal with the
publishers/content providers. Therefore, committee/
negotiating body should scrutinise the various
clauses of agreement for a win-win situation.

2. TYPES OF CONSORTIUM
There are many types of consortia. Formation of a
particular type of consortium depends upon many factors.
Broadly there are the following groups with different
features3:
(i)

(ii) Closed Consortium: As the name indicates, this
type of consortium is formed by coalition, affiliation,
and collaboration among exclusive member libraries.
For example, CSIR, DAE, and IIM Consortia.
(iii) Centrally-funded: In this type, a parent body or the
coordinating agency will have the financial
responsibility for running the consortium. For
example, CSIR, INDEST, UGC-INFONET, and ICMR
Consortia, etc.
(iv) Shared Budget: In this type, management of funds
and other aspects are handled individually by the
member libraries. For example, IIM, and Forum for
Resource Sharing in Astronomy and Astrophysis
(FORSA).
(v)

±

Committee or the negotiating body should also take
care of the issues like archival policy and provision of
e-journal dump along with the software to retrieve it in
case of termination of the agreement so that
perpetual access to the e-journals is available for the
subscribed period.

±

Source of funding to meet the subscription costs.

±

Infrastructure facilities like high speed Internet/
broadband, personal computers with accessories are
minimum requirement to access the e-journals and
other databases.

±

Publisher will provide the members either IP- or
Password-based access.

±

Publisher/vendor will provide usage statistics to
consortium members.

±

Realignment of library structure, space, facilities,
collection, services and skill upgradation of existing
manpower are required for efficient management of a
consortium.

Open Consortium: In this type, libraries are free to
join and leave as and when they please. Member
libraries are usually homogeneous in nature and
require cross-sharing of the resources in a specific
subject area. For example, INDEST Consortium of
MHRD, Government of India.

Publishers’ Initiative: Certain publishers are also
encouraging consortium formation by giving a deep
discount in prices to the member libraries. For
example, Emeralds’ Publishing Group.

(vi) National Consortium: This is a model perceived at
national level which includes member libraries from
one country.

4. ADVANTAGES OF A CONSORTIUM
±

Main advantage of e-journal consortium is that it
checks the space problem, shelving, binding,
lending, and related aspects of member libraries.

±

It can keep growing at a phenomenal rate,
characterised by the update policy of the publishers
and addition of dynamically and automatically
generated content, which is very useful to the
scientific community.

±

It saves the time of the user since instant access will
be available after every updating unlike the shipping
time, missing issues, and mutilations. etc., which
prevail in respect of print media.

±

Instead of user coming to the library, the library is
available at the user’s desktop/laptop virtually all the
time (24/7).

±

For publisher, it can save publishing and shipping
costs; improved income stability, incremental

(vii) International Consortium: The end of this model is
international level.

3.

MANAGING A CONSORTIUM

±

Any type of consortium requires a core committee or
a negotiating body which acts as a bridge between
the consortium members and the publisher/vendor to
deal financial and legal aspects mainly. Usually an
agreement will be signed between the publisher and
consortium. These agreements are of standard
nature and normally publisher oriented. Nowadays
takeover among the publishers is a common feature.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

93

revenue, and greater visibility for his products.
±

It is easy to assess the areas of interest of users so
that efficient services can be provided by the
concerned librarians through usage statistics given
by the publisher or gathered through Intranet.

±

Consortium builds communication among different
libraries and avoids duplication of core journals.

±

Consortium provides different search facilities to
retrieve the documents including cited journals and
supporting information to make search more
convenient.

±

Consortium provides access to unsubscribed print
materials and developing a union catalogue of
participating libraries.

±

Consortium provides high quality literature and
faster document delivery service, i.e., it provides a
wealth of relevant resources readily available and
helps survive the array of challenges to have a
meaningful presence in this digital era to its users.

5.

DISADVANTAGES OF A CONSORTIUM

±

One of the disadvantages of consortia is nonpayment of allotted portion of the cost by member
libraries or abide by the decisions that were taken by
the negotiating committee/body, in maintaining the
committed print subscriptions, etc.

±

It requires high initial investments among licensees
towards infrastructure, internet connectivity, and
other accessories.

±

It requires training of staff and updating their skills
from time to time.

±

Problems like copyright/excess downloads from the
publisher.

±

Content provider/publisher combines both essential
and non-essential journals as a package. Whereas in
print collection, the selection is done by subject
expert(s) and only journals of core area are
subscribed. Therefore, measures have to be taken to
avoid unwanted items and recall the most relevant
items.

6.

CONSORTIA INITIATIVES—INDIAN
SCENARIO

UGC/INFLIBNET
Initiative:
University
Grants
Commission (UGC) is a statutory organisation and a
national body for coordination, determination and
maintaince of standards of university education (hhtp://
www.ugc.ac.in). UGC has taken up the big task called
UGC-INFONET, which seeks to provide high speed
94

internet connections, electronic access to professional
literature, development of multimedia, and infrastructure
to supplement the traditional teaching and learning.
INFormation and LIBrary NETwork an autonomous
inter-university Centre (IUC) of the UGC, has taken the
responsibility of creating infrastructure for sharing
information among academic and R&D institutions (http:/
/www.inflibnet.ac.in) and is located at Gujarat university
campus, Ahmadabad. INFLIBNET/UGC through its onepoint programme is trying to provide access to esubscription to all important journals for the entire
university community. It is directed towards the
modernisation of libraries and information centre’s for
information transfer and access by establishing a national
network of libraries of the universities and institutions of
high learning. It is mainly a cooperative effort in resource
development and sharing at national level.
INDEST: Indian Digital Library in Engineering Science and
Technology (INDEST) is a Consortium of all Indian
institute of Technologies (IITs), Indian Institute of Science
(IISc) and a few other institutions which include RECs,
NITs, IIMs, etc., set up by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Government of India with its
headquarters at IIT Delhi. Differential access to electronic
resources has been provided to various institutions
depending on their nature of research activity and
education. Category I denotes highest usage institutions
which includes IITs and IISc, Category II indicates modest
level of usage which includes NITs, ISM (Indian School of
Mines), SLIET (Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering &
Technology) and NERIST (North Eastern Regional
Institute of Science and Technology), Category III
indicates lowest usage which includes IIITs (Alahabad),
and PEC (Chandigarh). There is one more category called
Special Interest Group (SIG) which includes IIM’s, NITIE
(National Institute of Industrial Engineering), IIITM (Indian
Institute of Information Technology & Management). In all,
about 38 institutions have been included under these four
categories.
FORSA: The Forum for Resource Sharing in Astronomy
and Astrophysics is a consortium of Raman Research
Institute (RRI), Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA), Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Inter-university
Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), National
Centre for Radio Astrophysics (NCRA), and Physical
Research Laboratory (PRL). In this consortium,
subscription for both print and electronic format is paid by
the supplier. Each member maintains its own print
subscription and by paying an additional 12 per cent of its
print subscriptions can access the journals subscribed by
other libraries electronically4. This consortium has
successfully negotiated with publishers of Nature to
provide access to its e-version at a price of almost onethird of the list price.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

CSIR Consortium: The Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), a public-funded organisation,
is India’s largest R&D organisation established in 1942
with a chain of 37 National laboratories and institutes.
CSIR is carrying out the research work in various
disciplines all over the country. There has been a constant
decrease (~66 per cent) in the journal base of CSIR over
the last decade, which necessitated its libraries to find
out alternate solution to make available R&D information5.

Continual and steep increase in the number of downloads
has also been recorded5.

As a first step, the Director General, CSIR, set up a
study group in April 2001 to collect/study and compile
information on the journals subscribed by the CSIR labs.
After several deliberations the consortium project finally
took shape as a Network Project under 10th Five Year
Plan with a budget layout of Rs11.79 crores for the plan
period 2002-2007 targeting to access 4500 e-journals.
CSIR’s National Institute of Science Communication and
Information Resources (NISCAIR) was identified as the
Coordinator for implementing the consortium, with a task
force team to negotiate and finalise the agreements with
the publishers. The Heads of the libraries of the
participating labs were the Nodal Officers to implement
the Consortium access to e-journals at their respective
labs. CSIR e-Journal Consortium strengthens its library
resources by pooling, sharing and providing electronic
access services like e-journals and international
databases to its scholars and scientists. The first step
taken in this direction was on 10 June 2002 when CSIR
signed an agreement with M/s Elsevier Science to
access around 1500 world class e-journals6.

6.1 Publishers’ Context

NISCAIR has coordinated well by constituting different
committees like Core Committee, Negotiating
Committees, etc., for effective implementation of the
consortium. Price model was chosen to maintain the print
collection of the individual institution libraries irrespective
of the duplicate and triplicate subscriptions from the same
publisher and paying an extra amount of 9 per cent of the
print to ScienceDirect at the beginning of the project. This
extra amount has varied subsequently in the following
years based on effective negotiations by the concerned
committees. Usage statistics is being provided by the
publisher to the individual institutes for effective
monitoring of the Consortium. Archival issues pertaining
to past five years (minimum) are also being provided by
the concerned publisher as per the agreement.
CSIR Consortium has proved to be a great success
and its impact can be measured in terms of revenue
savings, usage of e-journals in terms of downloads and
contribution of articles in international journals, etc.
Substantial revenue has been saved, and significant
growth in number of papers and IF (Impact Factor) have
been achieved. Quantitative as well as qualitative
improvements have been achieved in the years following
the access to e-journals through the Consortium.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

However, access to ScienceDirect was stopped in
April 2008 as the agreement was not renewed between
the CSIR Consortium and the publisher due to failure of
negotiations with the regard to price hike by the publisher.
The reasons for the failure in negotiations are described
below:

The scenario of publishing is changing due to the
advent of open access (OA) movement. Roger Clarke’s
study on the operational costs of refereed-journal
publishing models confirmed that the cost of publishing
an open access e-journal is inherently less than the cost
of publishing a subscription-based e-journal. Commercial
publishers have a hard time realising the economies
because they are locked in expensive practices, including
higher quality branding and marketing, more aggressive
customer management, and costly content protection
systems that offset them. It takes a commercial publisher
about $ 3400 to produce an article for an e-journal, while a
nonprofit publisher could produce the equivalent article for
about $ 730. The study suggested that it is easier for a
nonprofit association to flip its business model to OA in
comparison of large commercial publisher7.
According to a market intelligence service, the top 10
STM publishers pulled in 53 per cent of the revenue in the
$ 16.1 billion periodicals market in 2006. In the same time
period, five of the six journal publishers in the top 10—
Elsevier, Springer, ACS, Wiley, and Blackwell—showed
growth only in the single digit, ranging from 0.5 to 7.6 per
cent. The slow growth reflects a fairly stagnant and
saturated market. Elsevier is the dominant player in the
STM world with market share of about three times that of
its nearest competitor. Unhappy with profit growth (7.2 per
cent in 2006), Elsevier started making changes. The
company initiated an ambitious plan to cut $ 2 million in
costs for each of the next five years. In February 2008,
Reed Elsevier CEO Crispin Davis announced that the
company will sell Reed Business Information, which
publishes trade journals like Library Journal and
Publishers Weekly, and purchase ChoicePoint, a large
personal data company. Davis said these moves are part
of a company strategy to get out of traditional advertisingbased publishing with its slowing sales growth, and
venture in the online information services with higher
margins7.

6.2 CSIR Context
As scientific literature is exploding, publishing has
become an increasingly profitable enterprise. The delirium
to judge scientific output in number of publications is now
being exploited by the publishers. The competition in the
95

publishing world is fierce, with even old scientific societies
turning to commercial publishers, to bring a degree of
professionalism of producing and marketing their journals.
As journals multiply and costs increase, libraries must
worry about budgets and coverage. Problems of libraries
in India are compounded by growing costs of sometimes
maintaining both print and online subscriptions and
issues related to perpetual electronic access to back
files. Large publishing houses like Elsevier Science and
Springer-Verlag are beginning to monopolise the world of
science journals; a situation that promotes a seller’s
market8.
CSIR Consortium did not agreed to the price hike
proposed by publisher and termed it as unreasonable and
gave a counter proposal for consideration of the publisher.
As there was no consensus between the two, accesses
to ScienceDirect was stopped.

7. CURRENT SCENARIO: INDIAN INSTITUTE
OF SCIENCE’S EXPERIENCE
To tackle the problem of monotonically increasing
library budget, an interesting exercise was conducted at
the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, which
probably houses India’s largest holding of science and
engineering journals. To prune the library subscriptions, a
survey was conducted and journals in which the
institutional faculty did not published papers for few years,
and which were not cited by institutional authors and also
did not cite any papers emanating from the institution
were listed. IISc could have saved Rupees one crore if
subscriptions of these journals were stopped, and utilised
this to subscribe more useful journals. Surprisingly when
the list was circulated among the faculties, none agreed
to drop a single journal8.
Researchers expect that the administration subscribe
to all journals. Librarians also like to give access to all
journals to researchers, and publishers too like to
maximise their profit. But the efforts to contain bloating
library budget lies on the administrator who cannot alter
dynamics due to resistance from all quarters. As some of
the top publishers are merging and increasingly becoming
monopolistic, the pricing policies are likely to become
more intransigent9. Large publishing houses like Elsevier
Science and Springer-Verlag are beginning to monopolise
the world of science journals; a situation that promotes a
seller’s market8.

8. CONCLUSION
From above discussion it is felt that there should be a
concerted effort by the researchers and librarians in
trimming the library budget, and judiciously use money for
subscribing core journals so that more than 90 per cent of

96

the users’ needs can be satisfied. Increased cooperation
and document delivery services among the homogeneous
libraries may help in achieving higher user satisfaction.
With the available ICT and Internet, it is a simple task in
the present context. Bundled packages and big deals
from the publishers may be avoided and those journals,
which satisfy to the highest degree of user needs, may
only be subscribed. Formation of a National Consortium
and collective and logical negotiation with the publishers
for a win-win situation may be another alternative that can
be suggested. OA initiative is also gaining nowadays and
needs to be encouraged. Judging a researcher’s output,
other than publications in journals with high IF, by using a
different scale which may logically estimate his
contribution to science may be another alternative.

REFERENCES
1. Chand, P.; Nishy, P. & Sen, I. Access to knowledge
by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR), India: A case study. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Digital Libraries (ICDL),
5-8 December 2006, New Delhi.
2. Association of Research Libraries. (http://
www.arl.org/sc/marketplace/jnlprices.shtml).
3. Arora, Jagdish; et al. Library consortia and resource
sharing initiatives in India: A white paper. In
Proceedings of the HELINET Consortium, Rajiv
Gandhi University of Health Sciences, May 1 May
2004, Bangalore.
4. Pathak, S.K. Role of electronic journals in astronomy
and astrophysics libraries in India: An overview of
IUCAA Library. In Proceedings of the XX IASLIC
National Seminar, 2002, Patiala.
5. Chand, P. & Nishy, P. Strengthening R&D information
systems through library consortium: A case of CSIR
laboratories. Annals Lib. Inform. Studies, 2008,
55(3), 45-51.
6. Varaprasad, S.J.D., et al. E-Journal access through
library consortium: A case study of IICT, Hyderabad.
In Proceedings of the National Seminar on Electronic
Publications, Hyderabad, 2006.
7. Van Orsdel; Lee, C. & Born, Kathleen. Periodicals
price survey 2008: Embracing openness. Library
Journal, 2008. (http://libraryjournal.com/article/
CA6547086.html)
8. Balaram, P. Science journals: Issues of access.
Current Science, 2008, 94(7), 837-38.
9. Giridhar, Madras. Scientific publishing: Rising cost of
monopolies. Current Science, 2008, 95 (2), 163-64.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

