DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 4, July 2011, pp. 213-216
© 2011, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Semantic Web-driven e-Learning System
Nikita Joshi
Amity University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh-226 010
E-mail: nikitajoshi502@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
E-learning is an important domain which can be benefitted from the Semantic Web technology. The
aim of Semantic Web is to provide distributed information with well-defined meaning, understandable for
humans as well as machines. Semantic Web applications should be able to satisfy the individual needs
and requirements of the users by providing them optimised access to information. This paper focuses on
the uses of Semantic Web technology in e-learning. A conceptual architecture of semantic e-learning is
proposed which offers various semantic-based services to the students and the instructors.
Keywords: Semantic services, e-learning, Semantic Web, ontology

1. INTRODUCTION
The concept of Semantic Web has greatly
influenced the Web. Semantic Web has enabled
intelligent access to Web services and resources.
Semantic Web will eventually prove to be beneficial to eLearning as well. The concept of ontology is the basic
framework for Semantic Web. Ontologies assign a
vocabulary of terms with their specific meanings.
Ontology is popular because it provides a shared and
common understanding of a domain that can be
communicated between people and application systems1.
Standards and tools for the Semantic Web are under
development by the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C)2.These tools aim at providing unambiguous
meaning to the Web content which can be processed by
software agents in contrast to the content that is only
intended for human consumption. This enables
automated software agents to reason about Web
content, thereby producing an intelligent response to
unknown situations. The Semantic Web consists of an
environment in which humans and machine agents will
communicate on the basis of semantics3. Semantic Web
technology can enhance the process of e-Learning to a
great extent. e-Learning has replaced the location and
content-specific learning with a customised and ondemand process of learning at any place and at any
time.
The aim of Semantic Web is to add structure or
meaning to content residing on the Web, thereby
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

allowing intelligent navigation, personalisation, querying,
and retrieval. To fulfil the goal of Semantic Web, the eLearning system must have access to structured
collections of information and a set of inference rules that
can be used to perform automated reasoning4.

2. RELATED WORKS
According to Schwartz5, the Semantic Web is meant
to enable an environment in which independent, Internetconnected information systems can exchange knowledge
and action specifications. Lara and Olmedilla have given
a proposal for a Web services modelling ontology in
distributed environments, which aims at providing the
basis for a flexible and scalable definition of the service
layer in the e-learning domain6. Crampes, and Ranwez
have developed the system Karina7 which enables the
user to dynamically build his learning courses according
to his preference. It is based on the conceptual
description of the learning material
and some
(prerequisite) strategies to fulfil the users' objectives in the
searching process. The ontology-based intelligent
authoring tool8 uses an intelligent training system in the
e-Learning scenario. It uses four ontologies (domain,
teaching strategies, learner model and interfaces
ontology) for the construction of the learning model and
the teaching strategy model, but it fails in exploiting
modern Web technologies. Considerable amount of
research on knowledge-based systems and intelligent
systems moves towards concepts and ontologies
focuses
on knowledge sharing and reusability9.
213

the searching process. The Ontology-based Intelligent
Authoring Tool8 uses an intelligent training system in the
e-learning scenario. It uses four ontologies (domain,
teaching strategies, learner model and interfaces
ontology) for the construction of the learning model and
the teaching strategy model, but it fails in exploiting
modern Web Technologies. Considerable amount of the
research on knowledge-based and intelligent systems
moves towards concepts and ontologies focuses on
knowledge sharing and reusability9. Juan Quemada and
Bernd Simon have also presented a model for
educational activities and educational materials. The
educational activities include the events in which the
instructors are involved10.

3. PROPOSED E-LEARNING MODEL
The proposed e-learning model provides various
services to the students (Fig. 1). Once a new student
registers or an existing user logs in. Students can view
the syllabus, track any extra classes, study the course
documents hosted by the instructor, refer books, view
various useful URL links provided by the instructor, and
perform semantic search for resources. Students can
also submit their assignments and tutorials, assess
themselves by various exercises and quizzes, and view
their progress reports as well. Browsing allows students
with varying levels of knowledge to easily navigate
through the resources. Semantic browsing locates the

metadata and collects interfaces from a combination of
relevant information. Search refers to the semantic
search, a step ahead of simple keyword matching, and
delivers only relevant information from the result set.
Smart question- answering provides precise answers to
a specific question. For instance, given a question,
“Which state in India had the highest literacy rate in
2010?”, the system would directly return the name of the
state, with a little summary about the result instead of the
list of webpages consisting of the words in the query.
Thus, students can perform semantic querying for
learning materials. Students can also compose their own
course with specific contents.
On the other hand, through our e-learning model, the
instructor can make various announcements, set up a
session plan, host various documents and resource files
for students, manage URL links, compose exercise and
assignments for students and control their submissions,
and compose the weekly progress report of the students
(Fig. 2). The instructor can keep a track of the students'
searches and the manner in which students compose
their own course. The instructor provides annotations,
which comprise content, context, and structure. All the
contents of the database need not be created by the
same person, the content can be frequently updated
from time-to-time, and data can also be exported
between different learning systems.

View syllabus
Extra classes

Make anouncement

Documents
hosted by
instructor

Session plan set-up

Reference
books

Weekly progress
report of student

Assignment
tutorials
Student

Registration
login

Exercises/
quizes
Useful links
Search

Host documents and
resource files
Instructor
Manage links
Compose exercise
and assignments

Browsing

Control and monitor
users

Smart question
answering

Control submission
done by students

View progress
report
Figure 1. Student services.
214

Figure 2. Instructor services.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

4. ONTOLOGY
The ontology is defined as a hierarchy of relevant
domain concepts, relations between these concepts,
further properties of concepts (attributes with value
ranges), and the derivation rules to imply new knowledge.
The student entity component searches and receives the
learning contents, while the students’ performance is
being evaluated. The learning content is searched by
sending queries to the learning resources (i.e., ontologybased knowledge, RDF and database).
The ontological knowledge added to the learning
resources is searched by means of queries. The
students’ performance is measured by the evaluation
component, and the result is stored in the student records
database. The instructor component can locate a new
content in the database. To perform the searching of
learning contents, a knowledge base is required. The
knowledge base is constructed by adding metadata to the
learning content. The metadata consists of the contextual
knowledge of the learning resources and the general
representation of the structural knowledge on particular
domains (Fig. 3).

5. ANNOTATION
Using Extensible Markup Language (XML) users can
add arbitrary structure to their document by creating tags
Monitoring and
Performance
Evaluation

Instructor

Student

Information Retriever
(Semantic Knowledge Transfer)

to annotate a webpage or text section. Tag names do not
provide semantics by themselves11. XML (XMLSchema,www.w3.org/XML/Schema) is used as a
"transport
mechanism".
Resource
Description
Framework (RDF)12,13 and RDF services14 provide a
basic framework for expressing metadata on the web.
DAML+OIL and OWL (build on RDF) offer better
knowledge representation support2.
The text documents written in plain ASCII or HTML
are annotated with a set of tags that consists of names of
the slots of the selected class in ontology. The ontology
can include a class named Course .This class contains
different slots such as "name" ( name of the course),
"type" (video or document), "has-level" (difficulty level of
the course), "institute" (educational institute providing the
course), and objectives (indicating learning outcomes).
The documents can then be annotated using any of the
above slots. Various annotation tools are available like
annotation tools for producing semantic markup include
Annotea15; SHOE Knowledge Annotator16 MnM17 Melita18
and OntoMat-Annotizer19 .

6. LIMITATIONS
If interoperability is an issue, then standardisation is
required. There are some useful standards for
specifications on the learning resources, such as the
"Learning Objects Metadata Standard" (http://
ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/) by the Learning Technology
Standards Committee (LTSC) of the IEEE, established as
an extension of Dublin Core. A related standard is the
SCORM, the Sharable Content Object Reference Model
(http://www.adlnet.org/). Both these standards attempt to
assist the creation of reusable learning objects, in a
similar manner to that of the Semantic Web. Moreover,
standardisation of the user (learner) information also
needs to be maintained by a (learning) system. Two
standards emerged for this are Public and Private
Information (PAPI) for Learner (http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg2/
and http://edutool.com/papi/) and IMS Learning
Information Package (LIP) (http://www.imsglobal.org/
profiles/index.cfm). These standards define several
categories for information about a user (learner)20.

7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Ontology
based
knowledge

RDF

Database

Figure 3. Proposed e-learning model.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Various aspects of e-learning in the emerging
Semantic Web have been illustrated. It contains a
hierarchical
contents
structure
and
semantic
relationships between concepts. Thus, it can provide
useful information for searching and sequencing learning
resources. It can help the instructor in understanding the
learning process of the students. e-learning in Semantic
Web is a more flexible learning structure and is different
from the traditional teacher-student model in which the
students take responsibility for their own learning and
215

determine their learning patterns. Future work may
include students discussion forums to be included in the
above system in which the students can discuss among
themselves aboutthe learning activities and helping each
other in composing better courses.

REFERENCES
1. Davies, J.; Fensel, D. & Harmelen, F. Towards the
Semantic Web. Willy Publications, 2002.
2. Scott Cost, R.; Finin, T.; Joshi, A.; Peng, Y.;
Nicholas, C.; Soboroff, I. ITtalks: A case study in the
Semantic Web and DAML+OIL. IEEE Intell. Syst.,
2002, 17(1), 40-47.
3. Berners-Lee, T. What the Semantic Web can
represent, 2000. http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/
RDFnot.html
4. Berners-Lee, T.; Hendler, J. & Lassila, O. The
Semantic Web. Scientific American, 2001, 29-37.
5. Schwartz, D.G. From open IS semantics to the
Semantic Web: The road ahead. IEEE Intel. Syst.,
2003, 18(3), 52-58.
6. Ruben, Lara; Olmedilla, Daniel & Arroyo, Sinuhe. A
Semantic Web services framework for distributed elearning environments. Digital Enterprise Research
Institute, Innsbruck, Austria.
7. Crampes, M. & Ranwez, S. Ontology-supported and
ontology-driven conceptual navigation on the World
Wide Web. In 11th ACM Hypertext Conference, San
Antonio, TX, USA, 2000. pp. 191-99.
8. Chen, W.; Hayashi, Y.; Jin, L.; Mitsuru, I. &
Mizoguchi, R. An ontology-based intelligent
authoring tool. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Computers in Education, Beijing,
1998. pp. 41-49.
9. Moreale, E. & Vargas-Vera, M. Semantic services in
e-learning: An argumentation case study. Educat.
Technol. Soc., 2004, 7(4), 112-28.
10. Quemanda, J. & Simon, B. A use-case based model
for learning resources in educational mediators.
Educat. Technol. Soc., 2003, 6, 149- 63,.
11. Stojanovic, N.; Staab, S. & Studer, R. e-learning
based on the Semantic Web. In the World
Conference on the WWW and Internet
(WebNet2001), 23-27 October, 2001, Orlando,
Florida, USA.

216

12. Lassila, O. & Swick, R.R. Resource description
framework (RDF): Model and syntax specification.
recommendation. World Wide Web Consortium,
1999.
13. Hayes, P. RDF model theory, W3C Working Draft,
2002.
14. Brickley, D. & Guha, R. Resource description
framework schema specification 1.0, Candidate
recommendation. World Wide Web Consortium,
2000.
15. Kahan, J.; Koivunen, M..; Prud'Hommeaux, E. &
Swick, R. Annotea: Open RDF infrastructure for
shared Web annotations. In WWW10 International
Conference, 1-5 May 2001, Hong Kong.
16. Hendler, J.; Berners-Lee, T. & Miller, E. Integrating
applications on the Semantic Web. J. Instit. Elect.
Engg. Japan, 2002, 122(10), 676-80.
17. Vargas-Vera, M.; Motta, E.; Domingue, J.; Lanzoni,
M.; Stutt, A. & Ciravegna, F. MnM: Ontology-driven
semi-automatic and automatic support for Semantic
markup. LNCS, 2002, 2473, 379-91.
18. Ciravegna, F.; Dingli, A.; Petrelli, D. & Wilks, Y. Usersystem cooperation in document annotation-based
on information extraction. In 13th International
Conference on Knowledge Engineering and
Knowledge Management (EKAW02), 1-4 October
2002, Sigüenza, Spain, 2002.
19. Handschuh, S.; Staab, S. & Maedche, A. CREAM—
Creating relational metadata with a componentbased, ontology-driven annotation framework. In
International Conference on Knowledge Capture (KCAP 2001), 21-23 October 2001, Victoria, B.C.,
Canada, 2001.
20. Cristea, A.I. What can the Semantic Web do for
adaptive educational hypermedia? Educat.Technol.
Soc., 2004, 7(4), 40-58.

About the Author
Ms Nikita Joshi holds an MTech (Computer
Science and Engg) from Amity University, Uttar
Pradesh and BTech from Uttar Pradesh Technical
University. She has been working as a faculty in
Amity University, Lucknow. Her research interests
include machine translation, data mining, ensemble
learning, Semantic Web, and wireless sensor
networks.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

