DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 4, July 2011, pp. 226-233
© 2011, DESIDOC

Social Semantic Digital Library: The Future
Projes Roy and Dipti Arora*
Shaheed Rajguru College, Jhilmil Colony, Vivek Vihar, Delhi-110 095
*Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre, Delhi-110 054
E-mail: dipti30arora@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Conversion of classic and digital libraries into digital libraries is now passe. With evolution of
technologies, classic libraries have upgraded themselves and have emerged as library and information
centres. This paper discusses the integration of computer technologies with library and information
science, and how semantics can be customised for library operations, and what can be the measures for
converting routine tasks to semantic tasks. The paper concludes that making social semantic digital library
is not at and the only thing required is to reduce the gap between library and Semantic Web communities.
Keywords: Ontology, Semantic Web, social semantic digital library, WWW consortium, Web technologies

1. INTRODUCTION
Digits, digital, digitisation, ontology, metadata,
Semantic Webs were the terms developed in computer
science but intruding the libraries. Pushing libraries and
information centres to cyberage, and serving the key
ingredient, i.e., information to the right user at the right
time, these terms and technologies have played a vital
role. Digitisation and metadata have secured enough
place in libraries and information science, but the terms
semantics and ontology are comparatively new, and still
need to be adopted. Semantic Web and ontology are
terms that are often used interchangeably. In computer
science the word ontology stand for “representation of
entities, ideas, and events, along with their properties
and relations, according to a system of categories”1.
Ontologies provide structural framework for organising
information, whereas Semantic Web is the format or the
technology that enables machines to understand human
readable data. Semantic enables formal organisation of
information.
Since the beginning of computers, formal computer
languages have been categorised as low-level languages
and high-level languages. Low-level languages are
machine languages, i.e., the actual 0110100 language
and high-level languages are the languages which human
can understand and discuss. Semantics is something
226

which correlates between these low-level and high-level
languages. It emerged as a separate field under the
existing world wide web (WWW) or Web of data. As most
of the information on the Web is designed explicitly for
human consumption, still people working on Internet
carry different views on WWW. Some people say that
they could directly get the information which they had
intended to search. Some opine that they are happy with
the Web as designed for human browsing; they get more
or less what they want, and are also finding other things
of interest as they browse.
Over the years, the Web technologies have also
undergone several changes and advances as per the
requirements and the availability. Web 2.0 is one such
technology that came into existence with the advent of
such technology upgradation. As users of WWW
observed drastic changes with the way material was
flowing on the web, they were forced to call advanced
Web as Web 2.0. Features like personal websites, content
management system, message boards, buddy lists,
address books, etc., were left for the earlier version, i.e.,
web 1.0, and the new terms like blogs, wikis, Google
personalised, Google scholar, book search, community
portal, online social networks were categorised as web 2.0.
What we want, what we see, and what we get has lot
of other things attached to it, and every style carries
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

different meanings. This meaning and the meaning of the
meaning has been utilised and evolved into new
technologies that forced mankind to think that new
generation of Web, i.e., Web 3.0 is emerging. Semantics,
as by its nature, is now one of the important components
of Web 3.0. It is providing the existing Web a logical view
to provide a consistent readability. The way technologies
have been upgraded, LIS also has upgraded. A lot of
changes are still expected. Semantics Webs need to be
adopted with the feeling that we should not think what
Semantic Webs can do for us, but what we can do with
the Semantic Webs.

2. THE VISION
Bush gave the idea of the ‘memex’ machine in the
1940, which was based on a universal library, complete
with a searchable catalogue. Current Web is more or less
influenced by this ‘memex’ machine and provides a vision
for Semantic Web from the current web.
Tim Berners-Lee, the original man behind the
WWW, envisioned the Web as repository of richer
descriptions of documents and links between these.
However, in an effort to provide a simple, usable, and
robust working system, these ideas were put to one side,
and the simpler, more human-mediated Web, which we
know today, resulted.
Tim Berners-Lee, Jim Hendler and Ora Lassila have
provided a compelling vision of a world where people
need not put much labour to retrieve information through
the Web but the Web should come forward directly to
carry out routine tasks such as scheduling appointments,
finding documents and locating services, giving added
information, and giving links to the added information,
i.e., the Web itself can do the hard work for them. Their
vision more or less falls under artificial intelligence and/or
fuzzy logic, where machine itself will be forced to think
and act as a human brain. This can be done by providing
sufficient context about resources on the Web and also
providing the tools to use the context so that machines (or
'software agents'-programs working on behalf of people)
can find the right things and make decisions. In the
words of the article2:
"The Semantic Web brings structure to the
meaningful content of Web pages, creating an
environment where software agents roaming from page to
page can readily carry out sophisticated tasks for users.
Current Web focuses on documents whereas Semantic
Web focuses on creating a Web of data. This new
approach will allow machines and automatic processes to
access information and provide reasons about the
(intended) meaning of documents.
According to Gartner3, an information technology
research and advisory company, "During the next ten
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

years, web-based technologies will improve the ability to
embed semantic structures in documents, and create
structured vocabularies and ontologies to define terms,
concepts and relationships. This will offer extraordinary
advances in the visibility and exploitation of information,
especially in the ability of systems to interpret documents
and infer meaning without human intervention. The grand
vision of the Semantic Web will occur in multiple
evolutionary steps, and small-scale initiatives are often
the best starting points."
According to Frank van Harmelen4 states, "Semantic
Web technology is like Nikasil (coating in the cylinders of
a car). Very few car drivers are aware of it, but they are
aware of reduced fuel consumptions and the extended
lifetime of the engine. Semantic Web technology is the
Nikasil of the next generation of human-friendly computer
applications that are being developed right now. People
can only feel the change in the performance and output
of their search from Internet, but could not guess how
and where the Web changed the search mechanism."

3. SEMANTICS IN KNOWLEDGE
ORGANISATION
Broadly speaking, development of Web and also the
emergence of Semantic Web from the existing Web
moves around Cutter's objectives. Almost a century ago,
i.e,. much before the development of the Web, Cutter
gave some objectives for cataloguing. In the book,
Cutter's Rule for Dictionary Catalogue, he gave some
principles to meet those objective that even influence
current cataloguing activities. He said, "Subject
specificity is expressed by informing cataloguers to enter
a work under the subject heading of a class which
includes that subject." Most call numbers in the Cutter
classification follow conventions offering clues to the
book's subject. The first line represents the subject, the
second the author (and perhaps title), and the third and
fourth dates of editions, indications of translations, and
critical works on particular books or authors. Size of
volumes is indicated by points (.), pluses (+), or slashes
(/ or //).
For some subjects, a numerical geographical subdivision follows the classification letters on the first line.
For example, 1 stands for history and criticism of a
subject, 2 for a bibliography, 5 for a dictionary, 6 for an
atlas or maps, 7 for a periodical, 8 for a society or
university publication, and 9 for a collection of works by
different authors.
Cutter's rules are simple and are close to the
keywords, which one can try to search the book. The
same logic is needed to be provided to the current Web,
i.e., semantics+current Web. The Cutter's rule that were
described specially for subject classification in the
227

library science are applicable to WWW and computer
science also. As the WWW is already facing the
information overloading, and also the way information is
dispersed through various media, forgetting even about
the useful and useless information, we need to apply
Cutter's principle to shed the information overloading,
and also to make the right information available to the
right user at the right time even for WWW.
With the complexity of the availability of information,
vast resources that are accumulated as a backdrop of
daily activities, there is a bulk of information available on
Internet. Such information needs organisation to make it
ready for use. The Semantic Web is creating such
infrastructure for knowledge acquisition, knowledge
representation, and knowledge utilisation. Marshall and
Shipman5 gave three perspectives to sort out the
objectives of the Semantic Web (Fig. 1). They said that on
one axis we can keep the representations used on the
Web, as moving from the particular to the universal." Here
particular means which are limited to the authors original
motivation for publishing something on the web, and the
universal means which are useful in any context. On the
other axis, we can keep kept the user, using any of the
representations. The users may be either human, who
use or retrieve the information directly, using any of the
queries or as a result of interacting with a web application,
or it may be a machine that do computational processes,
either meshing up the information holdings of specific
applications or may be weaving a silent mesh of
knowledge through the work of agents.
What?
particular
human

much of current
Web use

universal
Library of
Alexandria or
Taming the Web
perspective

Who?
machine

Federated
Knowledge Base/
Database
perspective

Knowledge
Navigator
perspective

Figure 1. Perspectives of semantic webs.

4. EVOLUTION OF LIBRARIES
Libraries have always been engaged in providing
better services to the users with maximum utilisation of
their resources and available technologies. Starting with
just storage of books, these are now well established and
are using every new computer technology and

228

advancement to provide quality services to their patrons.
With meager available resources and few services to
now open access, open libraries all libraries have come
of age. During the last century, libraries have undergone
dramatic changes—starting from classic libraries—to
scientific libraries—to digital libraries. Twenty-first century
will see the evolution of semantic libraries. Semantic
digital library is a digital libraries+Semantic Web+social
networking (Web 2.0). It will integrate classic digital
libraries, with Semantic Web and social networking, and
other Web 2.0 technologies. It will integrate information
based on different metadata, e.g. resources, user profiles,
book marks, and taxonomies on either metadata or
communication level, or both, delivering more robust,
user-friendly and adaptable search and browser interfaces
empowered
by
Semantic
Web
technologies,
expressiveness of annotations and interoperability with
other services (not only digital libraries). The Web 2.0
approach allows users to be engaged in the annotation,
and knowledge-sharing process, and thus make semantic
digital libraries more useable. Schematic of formation of a
semantic digital library is shown in Fig. 2.

5. SEMANTICS CUSTOMISED FOR LIBRARY
SERVICES
The WWW itself is more or less like a digital library
with digital content and metadata as key commodity.
Though many libraries have also upgraded themselves as
digital libraries and open libraries available on internet,
still if a mixture of semantic is added, these will be more
user-oriented and less labour-intensive. It is the need of
the hour to add and mix semantics to digital libraries as
both share many similarities. Some of these are6:


Abundance of information and material availability in
a variety of forms



Better services, full information access, and
knowledge discovery are the mission statements for
both, libraries and Semantic Web.



International and national standards, which help
library and the Semantic Web grow more and more.



Information and resource sharing and collaborative
spirit, which has advanced both libraries and
Semantic Web.

Based on the similarities, Semantic Web can be
used in libraries in a number of ways. Libraries and
information centres perform some basic tasks such as
knowledge acquisitions, i.e., building the collection;
cataloguing; reference; and circulation. All these tasks
with their corresponding similarities with semantics are
shown in Fig. 3.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Semantic Web

Digital Library

Web 2.0

Expressiveness interoperability

Controlled Vocabulary
Knowledge Organisation System

Semantic Digital Library

Tagging Community of Users

Figure 2. Formation of semantic digital libraries.

Collection Development

Semantic Web Selection

Cataloguing

Semantic Representation

Reference

Semantic Services

Circulation

Semantic Resource Use
Figure 3. Making routine tasks to semantic tasks.

5.1 Collection Development
Collection development aims to build and develop a
coherent collection to serve its respective users. A
contract, that is actually a written collection development
policy, is maintained between the library and its users. It
also includes guideline and selection criteria to acquaint
the users how to acquire knowledge in various formats.
Libraries and information centres need to review and
revise these guidelines and policies as per the present
demand and the user change. As new areas of studies
and also disciplines are emerging, libraries should also
change their agreements to serve at the best possible
levels. Correlating the collection development, though
Semantic Web selection is not oriented for the specific
type of user or community, some specific Semantic Web
projects are there that serve specific type of population,
topics, or areas.
The http://musicbrainz.org/7 is one such website or
Web project that is a user-maintained open community
which collects, music metadata in the form of a relational
database and makes it available to the public. Figure 4
shows the home page of the website of musicbrainz.
There are a number of library collection development
guidelines and resources available like Guidelines for
Writing Collection Development Policies. One can use
these resources for developing Semantic Web selection
policies. With these master guidelines, one can also
develope future projects.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Figure 4. Home page of the musicbrainz.

5.2 Cataloguing
Cataloguing allows library collection findable and
easily retrievable even if the user is not professionally
sound. The user may know the name of the book, or
author, or title, publisher, etc. The best cataloguing
facilitates the users with the material available even with
least knowledge about the same.
Since both, Semantic Web and cataloguing, deal
with the representation of the knowledge, the similarities
between the two are obvious. McGuinness8 found the fine
boundary between the representations standards
229

between the two environments, i.e., Semantic Web and
the library cataloguing. He said, "How should a Semantic
Web project decide which metadata schema or ontology
to use: What level of representation is required to
properly represent the information entity so that an agent
can successfully manipulate the information and provide
a useful service?"
As cataloguing revolves around its objectives,
principles and standards like MARC and CCF to manage
standardised policies around the globe, similar are the
various technologies and formats for semantics Web like
resource description framework (RDF), Extensible Mark
up language (XML), and web ontology language (OWL). If
proper documentation of such technologies with globally
accessible standards and Semantic Web representation
policies are created then a general framework may also
be developed to assist future projects feeding into the
overall Semantic Web initiative.

5.3 Reference
Reference service is establishing the contact
between the reader and the information through personal
service. Reference services keep some of the documents
ready for providing immediate services. These may
include dictionaries, encyclopedias, bibliographies.
yearbooks, directories, standard work of information such
as gazetteers, etc. Though the scenario changed after the
arrival of computers and electronic resources and slanted
more towards keeping the users abreast of current
developments and advances with their current awareness

services, they (users) were enhanced to personal
interaction, dissemination of documentation, and
educative and outreach activities. One of the extensions
of reference service is community outreach. To meet the
basic objective of serving the users, the library and
information centres may adopt community outreach.
Similar to the reference services policies, if
standardised metadata standards are followed, then it will
be easier for Semantic Web algorithms to track the data.
Reference and User Services Association (RUSA)9 has
recommended certain guidelines for the information
services which address information services from the
following perspective (i) Services,
(ii) resources,
(iii) access, (iv) personnel, (v) evaluation, and (vi) ethics
To serve the users best, Semantic Web projects can
refer to the RUSA's Guideline for Information Services.
Tables 1 and 2 show service policy and selection policy
statements respectively from RUSA's Guidelines for
Information Services and demonstrate how the
statements could be modified to guild Semantic Web
development.

5.4 Circulation
There was a time when users had to wait for the
arrival of their copy or have to book it in advance. But the
digital technologies have changed the whole scenario,
and multiple users can access the same source of
information at the same time, apart from the other benefits
also. Using digital libraries' objectives and principles, it is

Table 1. Library reference and semantic web project service policy statements

230

Library Reference Se rvice Statements*

Semantic Web Project Service (SWPS) S tatem ents

RUSA Statement 1.1

SWPS Statement 1

Th e goal of information services is to provide the informa tion
sought by the user. Information service should anticipate as
well as meet user needs. It should encourage user awareness
of the potential of information resources to fulfill individual
information needs.

The goal of Semantic Web project x is to provi de the information
sought by agents (comp uter and human). The Semantic Web
service should anticipate agent needs. It should facilitate agent
awareness of the potential the services’ its information resources
can fulfill to individual needs.

RUSA Statement 1.3

SWPS Statement 2

Th e library should strive to provide users with complete,
accurate answers to information queries regardless of the
complexity of those queries.

Semantic Web project x sh ould strive to provide agents (compu ter
and human) with complete, accurate answers to information
queries regardless of the complexi ty of those queries.

RUSA Statement 1.6

SWPS Statement 3

Th e library should a ctively publicize the scope, nature, and
avail ability of the in formation service s it offers. It shoul d
employ those media most effective in rea ching its entire
clientele or selected segments of that clientele, as
appropriate.

Semantic Web project x sh ould actively publicize the scope,
nature, and availability of the information services it offers. It
should employ those media most effective in reaching its entire
clientele or selected segments of that clientele, as appropriate.

RUSA Statement 1.7

SWPS Statement 3

Th e library should survey and assess the information n eeds of
its community and create local information products to fulf ill
those needs not met by existing materials.

Semantic Web project x sh ould survey and assess the information
needs of its community and create local information products to
fulfill those needs not met by existing materials.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Table 2. Library reference and semantic web project evaluation policy statements
Library Reference Service Statements*

Semantic Web Project Evaluation (SWPE) Statements

RUSA Statement 5.1

SWPE Statement 1

The library should regularly evaluate its information services to
ensure that the service furthers the institution’s goals and that
the goals reflect the needs and interests of the community
served.

Semantic Web project x should regularly evaluate its information
services to ensure that the service furthers the initiatives goals
and that the goals reflect the needs and interests of the
community served.

RUSA Statement 5.2

SWPE Statement 2

The library should integrate the perspectives of staff and
community in the overall evaluation procedure for information
service.

Semantic Web project x should integrate the perspectives of
managers, staff, and user agents (computer and human) in the
overall evaluation procedure for Semantic Web service.

*RUSA’s Guideline for Information Services (2000).

easy to develop the Semantic Web policies and
guidelines for circulation services. Though many libraries
are adopting the open access policies, still some of these
have made mandatory the subscription, sometimes paid,
or may be just login-password-based. Semantic Web
resource use policy can be generated for computer and
human agents. For example for accessing, an
identification number (digital signature) can be used; for
tasks like loan period and renewing loans, policy can be
formed to indicate how long an agent can access the
project resources and how access privileges can be
renewed. Policies for other events, as to provide a venue
for agents to request additional resources or semantics;
to indicate explain the arrangements of resources within
a project, or to inform agents any tracking or recording
data use can also be formed.

to face the same challenges. Some of the challenges
are11:


Vastness: The World Wide Web contains at least
26 billion pages (March 2011). People keep on
uploading the information; sometimes without even
deleting the earlier version, they upload the fresh
version and fresh webpages. The website links and
the webpages contained and maintained even by a
single website are enormous. So the Semantic Web
policies need to face this challenge. An automated
reasoning system can be adopted to overcome this
overhead.



Vagueness: Some time, information uploaded on the
websites is vague in the context that it is not relevant
or may be of no use for any one. It happened hardly
that sometimes any particular page is accessed, or
may be vaguely people use the words irrespective of
their meaning. For that, Semantic Web may use
additional thinking, i.e. fuzzy logic technique, to
deal with such vagueness.



Uncertainty: If precise things or values are
required, then uncertain things and values carry no
importance, rather these are futile. Semantics of
similar words may match and may be used at
different places for different meanings. Then, if a
user seeks a particular phrase or word, he may get
uncertain results. Probabilistic reasoning techniques
can generally be employed to deal with such
uncertainty issues.



Inconsistency: Since standards may vary while
uploading, or logical contradictions may be there
cause of large ontologies, combined from separate
sources. It may give inconsistency to the world wide
web. In Semantic Webs, one can use Deductive
logical reasoning to overcome such inconsistencies.

6. ARE PRESENT LIBRARIES SUFFICIENT?
The way the libraries and information centres have
adopted the technologies and have come up with new
system, format, standards, and upgradation in their
services, prove that the present libraries and information
centres are prepared and ready to accept and customise
the technologies. Categorising to the traditional types like
classic libraries, scientific libraries, digial libraries, etc.,
they have really come up with amazing features and
services. Apart from serving the user to the best possible
extent, these are finely mixing the 4Ps of marketing mix
(product, price, place, promotion). Marketing mix helps
to position the library and information services firmly in
the perceptions of their communities served—the wider
community for the academic library or the clients and
customers and to reach target audience meeting
specified objective10. The Semantic Web services are
quite compatible with libraries services. If both are used
together, it will be wonderful cohesion of technology with
information.

7. TAMING THE OVERHEADS
As information overloading is not only the problem of
information centres but also of WWW, the WWW need
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Incubator Group
for Uncertainty Reasoning for the World Wide Web
(URW3-XG) Final Report combines these problems
together under the single heading of "uncertainty". Many
231

of the techniques mentioned here will require extensions
to the OWL.

8. FUTURE OF SOCIAL SEMANTIC DIGITAL
LIBRARY
Best utilisation of resources and technology in
Semantic Web made WWW as virtual digital library . At
the click of a button, one can get desired result with all
thick and thin possibilities. But, this is not the end, we
need to form communities and also be more social in
sharing knowledge and information. The new community
that will arrive will be social semantic. Technologies of
Semantic Web like RDF may set a framework to model
any kind of metadata and can deliver it to certain level of
technologically interoperability. Figure 5 shows how the
concept has been evolved from libraries to social
semantic digital library12. The social semantic digital
library will help digital library to build heterogeneous
networks of Semantic Web. It may deliver more robust,
user-friendly, adaptable search and browsing interfaces
empowered by semantics.

metadata representations, absence of user-friendly
applications, limited available literature to constraints the
librarian to initiate and adopt the semantics Web, but
librarians need to participate in ontologies and semanticbased conferences to explore the technology more and
also to give wider coverage to their skills and talent.

REFERENCES
1. Ontology, http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology_inf
ormation_science (accessed on 14 March 2011).
2. Matthews, Brian. Semantic Web technologies. World
Wide Web Consortium, JISC.
3. http://www.gartner.com/technology/home.jsp
(accessed on 14 March 2011).
4. Harmelen, Frank van. European Research
Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics.
January 2008. http://ercim-news.ercim.eu/whichfuture-web (accessed on 5 April 2011).

Figure 5. Heading towards social semantic digital library.

9. CONCLUSION
Semantic Web digital library would contain features
like semantic blogs, semantic wikis, semantic search,
social semantic digital libraries, semantic social
networks, semantic social information spaces, etc.
These will have open access, open information, and
open source. Semantic Web initiative is not difficult for
libraries, but information professionals need to acquaint
themselves with wide technologies and standards (RDF,
OWL, etc.), so that they can generate compatibility of
semantic with their vast knowledge for faster and userbased information dissemination. Though there are some
other factors like communication barriers, absence of

232

5. Marshall, C.C. & Shipman, F.M. Spatial hypertext:
Designing for change. Communications ACM,
1995, 38(8), 88-97.
6. Greenberg, Jane. Knitting the semantic web.
Catalog. Classifi. Quart., 2007, 43(3-4).
7. MusicBrainz. http://musicbrainz.org/ (accessed on 5
April 2011).
8. McGuinness, D.L. Ontologies come of age. In
Spinning the semantic web: Bringing the world wide
web to its full potential, edited by F. Dieter; J.
Hendler; H. Lieberman & W. Wahlster. MIT Press,
Cambridge, 2003. pp. 171-94.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

9. RUSA guidelines for information services. http://
www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/rusa/resources/
guidelines/guidelinesinformation.cfm (accessed on
17 April 2011).
10. Dhiman, Anil Kumar & Sharma, Hemant. Marketing
mix in library and information centres. In ICAL 2009–
Advocacy and Marketing. pp. 456-60.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

11. World Wide Web. wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Wide_
Web (accessed on 5 April 2011).
12. Building heterogeneous networks of digital libraries
on the semantic web. http://www.slideshare.net/
skruk/building-heterogeneous-networks-of-digitallibraries-on-the-semantic-web (accessed on 14
March 2011).

233

