DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 4, July 2011, pp. 234-241
© 2011, DESIDOC

Semantic Web Model for Design and Operation
of Network Control Centre
Chaynika Taneja
Directorate of Management Information Systems and Technology
Defence Research and Development Organisation, New Delhi-110 105
E-mail: chaynika@hqr.drdo.in

ABSTRACT
The Semantic Web, which represents the next generation of the Web, will be characterised by
machine-interpretable content, intelligent semantic agents, advanced searches and improved Web
services. The underlying languages and technologies for Semantic Web are fast evolving. The paper
discusses model of a network control centre created using OWL, a Semantic Web language.
Keywords: Ontology, Extra Markup Language, resource description format, Web ontology language, OWL,
XML

1. WEB TO SEMANTIC WEB

2. SEMANTIC WEB LANGUAGES

The Web, at the time of its conception, was
envisioned as an information space. It was meant to be a
huge mesh of data, which would be used not only for
human interactions but would involve machine
participation1 also. Today, the Web is no longer just a
repository of data; it has become a provider of services2.
However, the inherent structure of the Web and the
formats used limit the role of the machines to only the
extent of pasteing the encapsulated data to our computer
screens3.

The WWW used Hyper Text Markup Language
(HTML) as the markup language for coding information
as text. Multimedia objects like images, etc., were
interspersed within it and the resulting webpage was
displayed through a Web browser6. However, HTML was
semantically limited and lacked a rich vocabulary bank to
read the meaning behind the text7.With the coming of
XML, data was liberated from these opaque, inextensible
formats. It provided a way for encoding data in machine
readable formats, thereby, laying the foundations of the
Semantic Web applications8. The resource description
format (RDF) is the language that Semantic Web uses to
describe data (or resource) so that it can be conveniently
read and manipulated by a computer program. It builds
over the Extensible Markup Language (XML) providing
the semantics. While XML is just a data format, RDF is a
model6. Web Ontology Language (OWL) further extends
the concept of the Semantic Web by describing
additional vocabulary than just formal semantics. Its core
idea is to enable efficient representation of ontologies9.
OWL has three flavours, OWL Lite, OWL DL, and OWL
Full, in order of increasing complexity and availability of
features6.

The painstaking task of interpreting the data was left
to humans only4. So although the plethora of information
on the web was immensely meaningful, it could not be
read by the machines because the structure of the web
was not designed to be interpreted by the computer
without any human intervention5.This gave birth to the
vision, which we now know by the name of Semantic
Web. The Web would now be a collection of information
capable of machine interpretation.
At this point, the semantics of information became
more important than its syntactics. So the Semantic Web
is merely an extension of the World Wide Web (WWW);
the only improvement being that the semantic of the
information is well-defined, making it easy to be
interpreted and processed by a machine.
234

Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the
above technologies and their position in the Semantic
Web architecture6. All these technologies, namely XML,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

 

OWL provides vocabulary 
Provides a Model 

Provides machine  
readable formats 

Figure 1. Semantic Web architecture.

RDF and OWL together add semantics or meaning to the
information on the Web, so that the computers can now
process not just text but also meaning, resulting in more
meaningful and relevant searches and applications.

3. OBJECTIVE
The objective of the study was to create a Semantic
view of a network control centre (NCC). Most of the large
organisations have a NCC or the Data Centre that acts as
a central nervous centre of the network. It is the
controlling node and is used to manage and monitor the
health of the network. The intended model was a generic
one and could represent any network centre. The paper
also describes how the Semantic Web languages like
RDF and OWL can be used to model any process, flow or
framework and hence be made part of the Semantic Web
dataset.
The ontology once defined becomes a resource on
the web, enabling it to be accessed, interpreted and
processed by Semantic Web applications. The Semantic
Web heavily relies on ontologies to make data structured

 

Start 

Reference the Ontologies 

Define the classes 

Define the instances of 
the classes 

Define the properties 

and hence makes it capable of machine understanding10.

4. PROCESS FLOW

Link the classes 

The steps required for creating the semantic view of
the NCC are illustrated in Fig. 2.

5. EDITING WITH SEMANTIC WORKS
Altova’s SemanticWorks 201111, a graphical RDF/
OWL editor was used for the purpose of modelling. The
ontology was created in the OWL DL, which is one of the
flavours of OWL. However, the choice of the version of
OWL may vary with the complexity of the ontology. The
process begins with creating a RDF schema file, which
was used to develop the information model, in this case
“network_control_centre.rdf”.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Ontology 
Complete 
Figure 2. Flow chart of process flow.

5.1 Referencing the Ontology
The first step after creating the RDF Schema file is
to reference some of the already existing ontologies, so
that they can be used directly in the proposed model.
235

Prefixes for these ontologies were also created so that
these can be conveniently used in the model being
created.
Figure 3 shows the ontologies that are referenced in
the RDF file. The prefixes are also defined, which can be
used to directly refer to the ontology. The prefix ‘cen’
shown in the Fig. 3 refers to the NCC ontology that was
intended to model.

5.2 Defining Classes
The next step is to define the classes, which can be
created by clicking new in the ‘Classes’ tab. The next step
is to describe the classes by going the detail view of each
class and by providing additional information about the
class like its sub-class, parent class, its predicates, etc.
The classes defined for the NCC ontology are illustrated
in Fig. 4.

Figure 3. Creating the prefixes.

Figure 4. Defining the classes.
236

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

5.3 Defining Instances
Instances of classes are defined and associated
once their classes have been defined. This is done by
creating the new instances in the Instances Tab and
linking these to their parent classes. Figure 5
demonstrates this step.

5.4 Defining Properties
Properties characterise the classes. Once the
classes and instances are defined, defining the

properties is the next step. In the ‘Properties’ Tab of the
main window, click new property and create the required
properties. The domain and range of each properties is
suitably pointed out in the details view. Figure 6 lists some
of the properties of the model discussed here.

6. NETWORK CONTROL CENTRE MODEL
The virtual NCC may represent any division/working
unit of an organisation/establishment. The ontology has
been divided into two parts. Both the workflow as well the
infrastructural aspects have been modelled. However, the

Figure 5. Defining instances of the classes.

Figure 6. Defining properties.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

237

scope of the tool and the languages is not limited to these
and may be extended to model other entities as well like
objects, concepts, flows, structures, hierarchies, etc.

±

Database management

±

Router configuration

The property, ‘DoneBy’ has the domain as one of
the Activities and range as any of the following classes:

6.1 Workflow Modelling
To begin with, a workflow modelling of the network
was attempted. Various activities that are carried in a
NCC, the roles or designations of the personnel carrying
out the jobs, their qualifications, etc., were modelled.
Figure 7 shows the graphical representation of the
ontology. The activities class has a predicate one of,
which implies that Activities can be any of the following
classes:

±

Network engineer

±

System administrator

±

Web designer

Another property ‘ShouldBe’ has its domain as any
of the roles defined above and range as any of the
following:

±

LAN maintenance

±

BTech

±

Website updation

±

MTech

±

Network security

±

CCNA

Figure 7. Workflow modelling.
238

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Now that the ontology has been defined, Statements
like the following can be derived from it.
“RouterConfiguration is an activity that is DoneBy a
SystemAdminitrator who Should Be an MTech qualified
personnel.”

6.2 Infrastructure Modelling
The ontology defining the infrastructural aspects of
NCC is explained here. The parent class ‘Infrastructure’
is the union of two classes ‘NetworkComponents’ and
‘DatacentreComponents’. Let us now go down the
hierarchy and analyse the ‘NetworkComponents’ class
which is further a union of two classes ‘Hardware’ and
‘Software’.
Software Class
±
Union of classes:
Antivirus
Databases

Predicate: Developed
Microsoft, CISCO}

by

with

Range

{IBM,

These details are specified while describing the
class in the details view.
Hardware Class
±
Union of classes:
Router
Switch

This process is what forms the basis of Semantic
Web applications and makes the whole Web a huge
virtual relational database through which information can
be extracted through the process of querying. If one
considers the Workflow model in Fig. 7, one can derive
the following reasoning “If X performs Network
Monitoring in the Network Control Centre, It can be
inferred that X is a CCNA”. As is evident from the OWL
ontology, since X performs network monitoring, he/she
must be a Network Engineer, and hence should be CCNA
qualified. The Semantic Web agent will do this reasoning
in the background and give the user this result thus
making in an intelligent agent. This is a simplified version
of the actual processing that runs behind any Semantic
Web application.

As the Web evolves and inches towards the utopia
called the Semantic Web, more and more languages and
tools will be developed by Web developers and
researchers in this field. However, the widespread
acceptance of the concept, its understanding and
contribution from everyone is what will make this dream
of Semantic Web come true. The paper is an attempt in
this direction. It tries to demystify the concept using a
model, which is applicable to almost every setup or
organisation.

REFERENCES

Server
±

7. INFERENCES DRAWN ON THE MODEL

8. CONCLUSION

Network Monitoring System
±

in Fig. 8. The complete ontology of infrastructural
modeling has been graphically depicted in Fig. 9

Predicate: Manufactured by with Range {Cisco,
Dlink, Juniper, Sun, IBM}

The relationship between the various classes
described above can be visualised by the Class Diagram

1. Goswami, Sumit; Sarkar, Sudeshna & Rastogi,
Mayur. Stylometric analysis of blogger’s age and
gender. In Third International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 17-20 May
2009, San Jose, California, 2009.

Figure 8. Class diagram illustrating the relationship between classes.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

239

Figure 9. Infrastructural modelling.

2. McIlraith, Sheila A; Tran Cao Son & Zeng, Honglei.
Semantic Web services. IEEE Intelli. Syst., 2001,
16(2), 46-53.
3. Hendler, J. Agents and the Semantic Web. IEEE
Intelli. Syst., 2001, 16(2), 32-37.
4. Goswami, Sumit; Verma, Susheel & Krishnan, N.R.
Relationship visualization between books and users
based on mining library circulation data. In ACM
International Conference on Intelligent Interactive
Technologies and Multimedia (IITM), 28-30
December 2010, IIIT, Allahabad, 2010.
5. Noy, Natalya F.; Sintek, Michael; Decker, Stefan;
Crubézy, Monica; Fergerson, Ray W. & Musen,
Mark A. Creating Semantic Web contents with
240

protégé-2000. IEEE Intelli. Syst., 2001, 16(2), 6071.
6. World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). http://www.
w3.org/ (accessed on 7 April 2011).
7. Cardoso, Jorge. The syntactic and the Semantic
Web. Semantic Web Services: Theory, Tools and
Applications, 2007.
8. XML from the inside out, XML resources, XML
specifications. http://www.xml.com/ (accessed on 7
April 2011).
9. Shadbolt, Nigel; Hal, Wendy & Berners-Lee, Tim.
The Semantic Web revisited. IEEE Intelli. Syst.,
2006, 21(3), 96-101.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

10. Maedche, Alexander & Staab, Steffen. Ontology
learning for the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelli. Syst.,
2001, 16(2), 72-79.
11. XML Editor, Data Management, UML, and Web
Services Tools from Altova. http://www.altova.com/
(accessed on 6 April 2011).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

About the Author
Ms Chaynika Taneja is working as a Scientist in the
DMIST, DRDO HQ, New Delhi. She holds a
Bachelor’s
degree
in
Electronics
and
Communication from NIT, Kurukshetra. Her areas of
interests include networking, web hosting and
security, biometrics and Semantic Web.

241

