DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 4, July 2011, pp. 262-274
© 2011, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Web Interface in Library Management Software Systems
Shailendra K. and Namrata Rai
University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007
E-mail: shail3@yahoo.com; namrtarai@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Though a variety of softwares are available in software market, but only few of these are fully
compatible with Web. This is a review of the research on library automation software and their
compatibility with the recent advancement of Web as an interface used for accessing the software in www
environment. It also focuses on the growth and development of library automation software way back to
their origin. It also discussed standards, both in terms of library and Web technology. Finally, the topic on
Web interface used in library management software system (LMSs) is covered including the technological
implication, Web-based technical services, security issue, database used and evaluation of LMSs.
Keywords: Library automation, software, Web, standards, databases, networking architecture

1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of Internet literally opened up a pilthora
of opportunities for the library professionals, who reacted
by seeking to leverage the Web to enable better delivery
services to their clients. For libraries, the Web is one of
the several networked-based systems to be pressed into
service at the same time as the Internet was changing the
rules for widespread communications1.
During 1994, libraries began to show their presence
on the Internet setting up their websites. Now Web has
become a dynamic platform for information delivery over
the Internet and very useful for libraries to provide
various types of information. Library management
softwares came into existence in all parts of the world,
from mid 1970s. These may be broadly divided into four
different generations.
Library management softwares of the ‘first
generation’ were ‘module-based’ with no or very little
integration between various modules. Circulation module
and cataloguing module were the priority issues for these
systems and were developed to run on specific hardware
platforms and proprietary operation systems.
The ‘second generation’ of library management
softwares became portable between various platforms
with the introduction of UNIX and DOS-based systems.
The LMS of this generation offered links between
Received 15 April 2011

systems for specific functions and were commanddriven or menu-driven systems.
The ‘third generation’ of LMS were fully integrated
library systems based upon relational databases
structures. These embodied a range of standards which
were a significant step to an open system
interconnection (OSI). Colours and graphic user
interface (GUI) features such as windows icons, menus,
and direct manipulation became standards and norms in
this generation of LMS.
The ‘fourth generation’ of library management
softwares are fully Web-centric architecture and facilitate
access to other server-over the Internet. These systems
allow accessing multiple sources from one multimedia
interface2. In this paper, a review of the research on the
Web interface in LMS system is reported with the aim of
identifying the development, standards, technological
implication, etc.

2. GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF
LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
SYSTEMS
After a long period of gestation, the libraries in India
are now in a take-off stage of automation and
modernisation. Financial and technical inabilities are the
major issues these have to tackle during modernisation.

Though funding appears as the biggest problem faced by
the libraries in India, the technical issues of manpower
training, procurement of hardware and software, creation
and maintenance of databases, etc., also raises serious
hindrances in the way of automation. But despite all these
hurdles, the growth of library automation softwares in
India is increasing day-by-day.
Seneviratne and Amaraweera3 gave the outlines of
the historical background about the use of software for
library automation, particularly in Srilanka with special
reference on the use of CDS/ISIS. They also described
the implementation of a prototype low-cost Web-based
library automation system. Ebenezer4 explained the
development of integrated library systems (ILSs) and also
identified and evaluated the significant trend in LMSs in
relation to library services. Assimilation of Web-based
technology in library automation software made the
drastic change in earlier module-based ILSs. In Web
environment, the scenario is totally changed and all ILS
are driven by Internet. The paper also includes the
Application Services Provider (APS) and how it
subscribes the Internet services in the software. Haravu5
described the growth and development of LMSs in
libraries for performing various library operations. Library
automation was in its infancy during 1954-70. First half of
the period saw a trend towards the application designed
primarily for the benefits of users. The second half saw a
trend towards the applications that used computer for
performance of library routine tasks.
The period of 1970-90 is known as the adolescence of
library automation. The first phase of automation had
helped in the development of technical specification,
requirements analysis, and functionalities desired from
automated library system. The opening up of the Internet
in the late 1980s was responsible for the development of
protocols, software and hardware. The standards, which
makeup the World Wide Web (WWW), added completely
new dimensions to the information world. Now libraries
prefer to use fully Web-compatible library software in
which all functionalities are based on Web.
Mukhopadhyay6 gave a different perspective about the
development of LMSs. Over the years, open source
software solutions for library management have emerged
as a viable alternative to commercial close product. The
paper discusses the open source and Web-compatible
software KOHA and its distinct features.
Bailey7 discussed the operational definition of ‘Webhosted software’ and ‘Browser-based Software’ and
software applications hosted on a Web server instead of
PC or within the organisation. This kind of developments
gives emphasis to the third party suppliers like APS. This
paper examined the pros and cons for small institutes,
e.g., charities of engaging application service providers to
Web host their online catalogue. It explains how this form
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

of outsourcing works and offers lower cost, maintenance
and better performance, subscription pricing, data
ownership, and interoperability. Haravu8 discussed the
evolution of library management systems (LMS) and how
changes in technology, information environment, user
expectations and searching behaviours, competition from
related application streams, and the availability of
enterprise wide systems particularly in academic and
research environments have influenced changes in LMS
functionality and design. The drawbacks of current LMS
offerings, both commercial and open source, are then
described followed by a description of major new
initiatives that have taken place in the last two or three
years leading to new ways of freeing the LMS from its
monolithic nature into one which supports new workflows
via services-oriented architectures (SOA) and Web
services. These initiatives, particularly that of the OLE
Project, eXtensible catalogue, the recommendations of
the Digital Library Foundation (DLF) and National
Information Standards Organisation (NISO), and the
recent proposal of OCLC to move LMS into a Web-spaced
platform using cloud computing paradigms have also
been discussed. Koneru9, Shafique and Mahmood10,
Moorthy11, Lynch12, and Breeding13 have discussed about
the growth and development of library automation
softwares from their beginning till date.

3. STANDARDS
We live in an increasingly globalised and
interconnected world. Globalisation also means
increased dependency on one another in various
domains. Computers, telecommunication infrastructure
and the Internet are not only desirable but indispensible
in the world we live today. The library and information
world has traditionally been borderless long before
others. However, Internet and the WWW have pushed
libraries to became even more interdependent than
before because of the bewildering array of sources and
providers of information from which they draw their
information. So, for libraries to maintain interconnectivity
to such a diversity of systems and to enable mutual
sharing of resources and exchange of data between
them requires that all of these follow internationally
agreed upon standards.

3.1 Library Automation Software Standards
The one element, in all library automation and
networking today that has assumed highest priority, is the
use of international standards. Some of these are:


Metadata standards: Dublin Core, EAD, LOM, VRA
Core Categories, etc.



Information exchange standards: AACR, LCSH,
ISO10160&10161, ISO2709, etc.
263



Communication Standards: MARC, UNICODE, TCP/
IP, Z39.50, Z39.71, OPEN URL, etc.



Content representation standards: PDF, HTML,
WORD FILE, XML, etc.



Interoperability standards: OAI-PMH, etc.

Sherbini and Klim14 explained the metadata
standards, which depend in the large part, on the
resources for which they were created. The paper reviews
the different kinds of metadata standards and their uses in
cataloguing practices and how these standards are
applied in libraries. Metadata is basically ‘data about
data’. This standard is widely used for cataloguing in
electronic environment and use of metadata standards
with cataloguing provides consistency and exhibits
tremendous flexibility. The OHIOLINK electronic theses
and dissertation (ETD) are an example how AACR2 (Rev)
and MARC21 are used as metadata standards to store,
describe
and
access
information
resources.
Chandraker15 has discussed how Unicode standard came
in to light and what kind of other standards were used
place of Unicode. From the start of automation, in the
absence of proper standards, professionals tried to
romanise documents as computer used to accept only
binary digits of Roman script to represent the English
language. Later, the development of new technology,
ISCII, which is an extended form of ASCII, values from 126
to 255, helped library professionals in developing bilingual
databases or bilingual text files on DOS or UNIX-based
applications. Gradually, fonts for window-based
applications were developed for creating websites or
document files. But now with the requirement of different
languages in the world, there is a forum available called
Unicode Incorporation, which provides a solution to the
localisation of problems of world language. Unicode is a
multilingual standard and technology for localiation of the
Indian language materials.
Z39.50 protocol also promotes centralisation of
resources shared by libraries situated worldwide. This
protocol is implemented in bibliographic databases in
libraries. Nowadays, personal bibliographic managers
such as Reference Manager, End Note, Procite, help in
accessing bibliographic database via Z39.50 protocol16,17.
Wu18 gave detailed description of Open URL standards.
Recently, growth and development of electronic
information have progressed rapidly. Therefore, their
proper architecture and organisation of electronic
information required some standards. The open URL
standards solve this problem. Open URL provides a
standardised format for transporting bibliographic
metadata about objects between information services.
The purpose of such research was to define context
sensitive linking for ensuring users access to the
appropriate copy of materials based on the subscription of
264

their institution or libraries. This standard is also useful for
libraries, because it provides appropriate ways to link
across information sources, irrespective of their providers.
Aliprand19 gave details about the structure of
MARC 21. MARC 21 records may be encoded in
individual character sets including ASCII and ANSEL or
in Unicode. He considered the effect of the use of
Unicode without any constraints on the structure and
data content of MARC 21. The case of a model where
Latin was the preferred script was examined in detail.
Haravu20 discussed the need of standardisation in library
automation software as well as for establishing
networking among the group of libraries so that they can
work under similar environment as well as resource
sharing can be made possible. Yu21 suggested the
standards regarding digital archives. Basically, digital
libraries stow huge amounts of data, including text,
image, map, audio, video and illustrations via electronic
formats. Furthermore, digital libraries could be
conveniently accessed through the Internet. The
traditional library automation systems, applying
technologies and protocols, such as MARC, Z39.50 and
ISO 2709, could not completely match the requirement of
digital archives. The purpose of this study was to find out
how to effectively manage and apply the related
technology of digital archives to handle the existing
operation processes in library and the management
requirement of digital archives. This paper discusses an
evolution model of the related technology of library
automation systems.

3.2 Web Technology Standards used in Library
Management Systems
Web services are the set of technologies and
standards for interoperability well adapted to exploit the
characteristics and potential of the Web environment.
Web services refer to a network-addressable software
component that can receive a call and provide a given
behaviour on behalf of the calling system, application or
component. Web technology is being used in LMSs to
make these compatible for working in Web environment.
Some of these technologies are: HTML, XML, XUL, Open
URL, HTTP, SOAP, etc. There have been some studies,
which gave the detailed description of Web technology
standards now being used in library automation software.
Ryno22 explained the advent of Web and how the
system librarians find themselves managing or facilitating
a wealth of mainstream technologies. System work
revolves around many resources that live outside the
library walls, security access for our patrons and
pushing access to the desktop users. XML is the Web
technology that is tying together the system, applications
and formats and the possibilities for component-based
applications seems revolutionary. Banerjee23, Chang,24,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

and Wusetman25 described the use of XML technology in
libraries in different ways like used in OPAC, and
suggested a prototype OPAX and XML to manage
information in digital environment.
Cordiero26 introduced the main ideas and concepts
underlying Web services, and their potential for a new
generation of Internet-based distributed applications. A
summary of the key standards that are the foundation of
Web services technology and its underlying basic model
was provided, exploring the potential for interoperability
among independently managed systems. This is of
special importance for libraries, along with the advantage
of reducing the development and deployment costs of
distributed applications, and of leveraging the value of IT
and data legacy assets. The paper explains
developments in Web services technology in the library
field and underlines its significance for changes in the
library information systems paradigm. Contreras27 has
discussed changing needs and expectation of the users
and from the example taken from the Penn State
University libraries, which are using Web technology in
reference service, which included synchronous and
asynchronous references, by working with vendors to
support services across various system platforms.
Jayakanth, Sharada and Minj28 elaborated the OAIbased approaches to build and maintain union
catalogues. In this approach, the individual OPACs (data
providers) expose their metadata for harvesting. The
OAI-based service providers harvest the exposed
metadata automatically. The metadata thus harvested is
ingested into a centralised database, which serves as an
online union catalogue, supporting search, browse, and
other value-added functionalities for the end-users. The
OAI-based approach eliminates the manual work involved
in getting the OAPC updates and also in updating the
union catalogues.

4. USABILITY OF WEB INTERFACE IN
LIBRARY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
This section discusses the use of Web in library
automation software, technological developments, which
make software compatible with changing demands of
users, and Web as a interface used for management
modules, etc.

4.1 Databases used in Library Management
Systems
In early days computing, data was kept into the data
files and programs were written to interact with these data
files to produce reports. This type of environment led to a
situation in which every new application required the
services of an experienced programmer, who usually took
a fairly long time to study, design, develop, and test his
software. There were some other factors also, which gave
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

birth to file management systems, in which most of the
common
file
management
programmes
were
incorporated, thereby eliminating the need of writing
separate writing programmes for them. So the 'database'
concept is a more systematic approach in a database
management system.
A database is an organised collection of structured
data, unit of information or data records, independent of
any application in a computer memory that serves the
need of the multiple users. So, the database
management system is a collection of programs that
enables one to store, modify, and extract information from
the database.
Ravindran29 gave the overview of various library
management softwares and also described the
management of their bibliographic databases. Because
the success of any information centre not only lies on
their resources but also in identifying and enlisting various
information sources and develop the requisite tools for
maintaining these information resources. This paper gives
the important criteria for selection of library software also.
Mishra30 explained the importance of computers in
generation of different bibliographic databases at
international, national, regional and local levels, and for
different levels of exchange formats needed for
exchanging information. He also suggested different
national and international exchange formats of
bibliographic databases such as UKMARC, USMARC,
CCF, UNISIST reference manual, etc., and suggested
certain national and international standards for the
generation of exchange formats. Chandraker31 gave
detailed description about the character encoding
because everything associated with the Web requires
character encoding by the developers. Library and
information networks of India hold the responsibility to
digitise all these valuable resources stored in print media
and make them accessible to users through the Web.
Chandrakar tried to explain the limitations and the
problems being faced in this regard and highlighted the
issues involved with multi-script databases creation and
the required state-of-the-art technology.
Rhyno22 described relational database management
system (RDBMS), as best suited for storing and
managing many different forms of digital content and new
strategies defined to provide RDBMS solution for XML.
Some of the relational databases now offer special
mechanism to accommodate XML while several
technologies have emerged to facilitate the use of XML
representation of data housed within an RDBMS. This
paper highlights that XML and XML-enabled technologies
may find new application for libraries by combining
RDBMS concept with Web-based services. Matoria and
Upadhayay32 have discussed about various library
automation software packages that are lacking the Web
265

interfaces and thus do not provide library access
databases (e.g., OPAC) through Web. These packages
provide less flexibility to the librarians for making desired
changes in the existing databases and to publish same
on the Web. So, designing in-house databases using
common relational database tools like MS-Access, SQL,
and DB2, etc., can be a back-end solution. They
discussed the merits and demerits of the currently
available RDBMS software for library applications as
back-end solutions, and the various tools/technologies
required/available for publishing the library databases over
Web. They also emphasised to use the technologies that
are more user-friendly, easy to design, require less
programming skill, and thus suitable for librarians to setup Web-enabled solutions in the libraries.
Sridhara, Makhija, and Pandey33 discussed the
advent of database connectivity to the Web servers and
possibilities to generate dynamic webpages using
database as the back-end and a Web browser as the
front-end. This article focuses on implementation of
WINISIS and WWWlSlS on Microsoft Windows XP using
professional Microsoft’s Web server (Internet lnformation
Server 5.1) for generating an information retrieval system
for defence science and technology articles database
developed by Defence Scientific Documentation and
lnformation Centre (DESIDOC). The database provides an
instant access to information on defence-related articles
to the scientists of Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO).
The paper also focuses about generating a current
awareness service, Current Literature in Defence
Science and Technology using defence science and
technology articles database. Buxton34 suggested a
variety of software solutions for putting CDS/ISIS
databases on the Internet. He briefly described the
origin, history, characteristics, and availability of
software packages and identified the type of skills
required to implement the packages and the kind of
applications that will suit. It covers CDS/ISIS UNIX
version, Java ISIS, WWW-ISIS Versions 3 and 5, Genisis,
IAH, and Open ISIS. This paper concluded that CDS/
ISIS databases provide a range of options to their users
for putting their databases on the internet, so that it
provides ease to the users who are residing at remote
locations. CDS/ISIS provides various options, which are
free but the choices may well depend upon the users’
capabilities and ease of use with CDS/ISIS, HTML, open
source software, and programming.

4.2 Technology Interface in Library and
Management Systems
Librarians have a special seat at the table of the 21st
century, now that we live in the age of information.
Librarians have traditionally been the keepers of
266

society’s knowledge. While the challenges are
considerable, the tools that are presently available
provide views of information at levels of granularity
previously unavailable at any price. That power is not
automatically a good thing—we suffer from information
overload—but it is a reality that must be managed. There
are several technologies that are already or will very soon
be impacting the library and may offer advice on how to
live in relative harmony with most of them.
There are several technologies being used in library
automation software for the ease of staff and users also.
Some of these are:


Radio Frequency Identification Device (RFID): This
technology is used for stock checking, circulation,
and security systems, using RFID tags instead of the
traditional barcodes and magnetic strips to identify
and track items (e.g., VTLS’s FASTRAC).



Application Programmer Interface (API): API is a
feature of several of the new generation ILMSs.
These allow systems staff in libraries to modify the
vendor’s software to fit local requirements, and also
faster upgrading of software.



Virtual Reference Service (VRS): This is a relatively
new component of the ILMS. It can be associated
with the Web OPAC when an “Ask a Librarian” link is
made available from the OPAC page to a Web form.
The most advanced use of VRS is chat room
technology, which users can use to interact with a
reference librarian in real time.



Personal Digital Assistant (PDA): PDA is the
computing and storage device which is mobile in the
hand-held sense, which means it cannot be carried
easily but is designed to be used with the user’s
bare hands without need of desk, study carrel, etc.
(e.g., innovative interface facilitated PDA devices).



Computer Integrated Telephony: Used for sending
reminders and information on reservations to users,
and enable them to conduct circulation-related
transactions such as book renewals, checking of
account status and cancellations or reservations
over the telephone (e.g., Dynix’s horizon telephone
messaging).



Smart Card and Reader: Smart cards have an
intelligent, single-chip microcontroller embedded
within the plastic. This facilitates the implementation
of a very high level of data security and means that
data can be securely updated or written to the card
after it has been issued. The key development in
recent years has been the integration of reusable
memory–Electrically Erasable Programmable Read
Only Memory (EEPROM)–onto a single-chip
microcontroller.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)



Biometric Devices: These comprise finger print
reader, voice recognition, etc.

Lee35 described the cutting-edge hardware and
software for multimedia information storage and access.
Lee will focused on the NeXT computer as the innovative
hardware platform and introduced the VTLS InfoStation as
the new generation software that offers user-friendly
multimedia information access using expert systems,
natural language processing, direct manipulation
graphical techniques and retrieval of full text, images, and
audio data.
Singh36 discussed the concept of multimedia and its
use in library automation software. It also states that
compatibility of library software to store, organise and
properly displayed multimedia materials. Mc Cullough 37
draws attention towards the recent technological changes
in library automation software marketplace. So, one of the
barometers of the level of demand placed on libraries to
evolve their services is the rate at which the library
automation vendors release enhancements, new features
and entirely new product lines to serve the library
marketplace. An area in which new technology and library
need intersect is in the area of development for PDAs and
other hand-held devices for wireless communication.
PDAs in the hands of patrons and staff offer a number of
opportunities to improve interactions within the library.
PDAs for patron provide all libraries-related information
like reminder of due date; checked out item, date and
time; information of upcoming events; name and address
of branch libraries; etc. Library system vendor
demonstrated ‘innovative interfaces’ at ALA 2000 and their
ability to send pertinent information from a library
workstation directly to PDA using infrared data
transmission. So, this capability used third-party software
and hardware on the PC workstation, in particular, an
infrared device which would actually transmit the specified
information sent to the PC from the library server, to a
waiting IR-capable device.
Kern38 gave a detailed description of RFID system
and its uses in libraries as well as the standards required
for RFID chip. Muir39, Butters40, Shahid41 have highlighted
the use of RFID in library for anti-theft, inventory control,
etc. Lambrinoudakis42 pointed out the continuously
increasing need of de-centralised information system
offering data to the people who need it, irrespective of
their physical location, as well as the requirement for
exchanging information between different interoperable
systems. The concept of a ‘secure portable information
file’ that can nowadays be easily implemented through
the available smart card technology, can significantly
ease information management and ensure maximum data
protection wrt their integrity, confidentiality and
availability. This paper presents the use of smart cards in
an educational environment as a case study for
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

demonstrating the above-mentioned benefits, focusing on
the utilisation of the smart card’s cryptographic functions
for implementing mechanisms capable of providing an
extremely secure operational framework in terms of user
and application provider authenticity, management of
access privileges and data integrity, and confidentiality.
Library automation software incorporates various
technologies to facilitate their users and library personnel
also. RFID, smart cards, biometric devices, PDAs, etc.,
are the example of these technological changes, which
enable libraries to provide value-added services to its
users.

4.3 Implication of Web Interfaces used in
Technical Services
Library automation is a generic term used to denote
the various activities related to the location, acquisition,
storage, update, manipulation, processing, repackaging
or reproducing, dissemination or transmission or
communication. Libraries that have always been active in
the information and knowledge access arena cannot
afford to ignore either the threats or opportunities that the
evolving Web provides. It would be reasonable to predict
that more and more libraries in the near- and mediumterm will turn to applications that will be Web-based.
Recently, libraries have started using some Webbased interface in their library automation software
systems. The most common areas where Web interfaces
used are:


Web OPAC



Web-based ILL system



Online library portals



Common user interface



Copy cataloguing



Digital reference services



Web-based document delivery services, etc.

Foo and Lim43 discussed the integrated Web-based
ILL system used by the Singapore libraries. They
described the system requirements that must be
supported to make it a viable and acceptable solution to
all participating libraries, and presented the client-server
Web-based system architecture, database design and
Java development platform that are used to implement the
system. The new system exhibits a host of advantages
over the manual system including the minimising of
human resources by eliminating form filing and other
forms of paper work completely, improving the access and
267

speed of the ILL process by allowing participating libraries
to update each others databases directly ensuring data
integrity, simplifying status tracking and also provide
statistical reporting. Anderson44 described the multiple
and redundant access to new media in the form of
catalogue entries and separately maintained list
(prepared by public service librarians). Now the debates
have raged which method of access serves users best.
This pattern persists as libraries provide access to
electronic sources via Web list and the OPAC.
Rameshbabu and Brian45 enumerated various features of
the WebOPACs. Web-based OPACs began to appear in
the late 1990s and many libraries are currently
considering its implementation. As catalogues, they
demonstrate advances on traditional OPACs, especially
in terms of remote access by users and their potential to
integrate many document types and sources via a single
interface. Their paper highlights some of the features and
functions of WebOPAC interfaces. But yet, very little
evaluation of systems and users has taken place, and
until more such literature appears, a general approach to
products available will be considered of any value. In other
comparative studies about OPAC Joint46, Bordeianu,
Carter and Dennir47; Kapoor and Goyal48; and Bernrad49
also showed the similar results. Dorner and Curtis50
explained the online portals, also called Common User
Interface, which replace the multiple interfaces found
among individual electronic library resources, reducing
the time and efforts spent by the user in both searching
and learning to use a range of databases, although the
primary purpose of Common User interface is to simplify
the search process such as user authentication and site
branding. Their paper covered the detailed summary of
software that incorporate this feature such as MetaLib,
ZPORTAL, Muse Search, Single Search, Meta Find,
CPORTAL, WebFeat, etc.
Bandhopadhyay explained the concept of copy
cataloging and its benefits and suggested that the
national library should take a leading role in organising
online copy cataloguing programme in India so that all
libraries in the country can use its bibliographical
information to prepare their catalogue entries without
wasting manpower and money. In online copy cataloguing
one may search in the database for the bibliographic
record using keywords and then compare with the
existing record item, and if it matches then the record
may be processed for the local library. Modification facility
is also available in this copy cataloguing. OCLC also
provided CatExpress used for simple and fast copy
cataloguing solution. Cat Express is a fast and easy
Web-based copy cataloging solution. CatExpress also
gives access to WorldCat, the world's most
comprehensive bibliographic database, and provides the
power of Dewey through the Web as an add-on service.
Hariharan52, et al. explained the current awareness
51

268

services to meet users' requirements at SERC library. A
few libraries and many e-publishers are providing alert
services to keep the users informed about the latest
additions to their collections and other information
relating to the users' areas of interest. This paper
described the experiences in using the AutoLib library
software and explained the various innovative and useful
Web-based library and information services and the alert
service being provided at the SERC library. SERC library
maintains portal in which different kind of Web-based
alert services are provided to the users with the help of
AutoLib software where users may create their own
profile and post their query to the portal and get updated
through new alerts regarding the publications,
collections, research activities, etc.

4.4 Security Measures used in Library
Automation Software
With the growing dependence on network for smooth
communication and increased outputs, information
technology industry must become more concerned about
the possible security threats that can breach network
security resulting in costly damages. A network or
Internet work perimeter is a secure boundary of a network
that may include some or all of the following:


Firewalls



Routers



Intrusion detection system (IDS)



Virtual private network (VPN) mechanism



Screened sub-nets

Suman and Lal53 explained the security aspects in
computer network environment. In the paper, concept of
'Firewall' came. Firewalls are hardware and software
combination built using routers, servers, and a variety of
software. Firewall basically used for packet filtering-a
screening examines the header of every packet of data
travelling between the internet and corporate network. So
along with fencing of network and working with firewalls,
the paper also described the Worms and Bugs and some
recent developments in the area of networking security.
Prevelakis and Keromytis54 explained the purpose of
drop-in firewalls/VPN gateway, called Sieve, which can be
inserted between the mobile workstation and the network
to provide individualised security services for the
particular station. Sieve is meant to be external modem;
the users only need to plug it in. Its existence is
transparent to the users, requiring no modification to the
workstation configuration. Sieve has been designed to be
compact, low cost, requiring little administration or
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

maintenance. Gupta55, et al. discussed the demands of
networking among the organisations and what kind of
security threats they faces while networking. Not only
this, paper also discussed the designing of a secure and
robust network infrastructure. Secure connectivity also
must for the protection of information. For this, digital
signatures can be used for encrypted information.
Basically ‘Encryption Technology’ converts network
messages into formats that are specially designed to
prevent third parties from accessing their contents. This
paper explored the process of building and implementing
a successful, secure and robust network infrastructure
and discussed various techniques to overcome possible
security threats. The security process required constant
monitoring of the network along with the measurement of
staff knowledge and awareness levels to ensure that
there is a continuous improvement in their level of
security knowledge and awareness. Braid56 defined the
Digital Right Management (DRM) System and its use in
secure document delivery services in libraries. The
digital management of rights means the technical
protection measures that are added to a piece of content.
This usually involves the use of some form of encryption
and access control mechanism as well as preventing
unauthorised access. The controls can limit various
aspects of the use of the contents. Such limitations
include the number of copies that can be printed,
whether the file can be copied, the length of time file can
be accessed, and whether the content can be ‘cut and
pasted’. At least three major document suppliers, namely
British Library (BL), CISTI and Infotrieve, implemented
this kind of secure electronic document delivery system.
The paper also gave the following reasons for applying
this security:


Publishers are not in direct control when supply is
through a third party,



They fear that inappropriate use might result and,



They fear erosion of their subscription base.

Although DRM very early made confident predictions
but this technology makes system too secure in that it do
not permits intermediaries to carry out any form of
checking of supplied items before forwarding them to end
users. So DRM should help in maintain the stability of
scholarly publishing; it may well be the users and not
suppliers, who will derive need. Kush and Ram Kumar57
discussed the need of the security and gave emphasis on
wireless networking which having large bandwidth and a
range of several feet. Moreover, multiple wireless access
points can be easily installed on same network to cover
more areas. So the main challenge is to design these
networks is their exposure to security attacks. The paper
categorised security measures as logical, organisational,
procedural, and physical by tactics which are preventive,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

detective, corrective and repressive. As well there is no
single standard routing protocol which prevent security
attacks.
Roedig and Schmitt58 have described about the
firewalls. Firewalls are well-established security
mechanism to restrict the traffic exchanged between
networks to a certain sub-set of users and applications. In
order to cope with new applications like multimedia, new
firewall architectures are necessary. The performance of
these new architectures is a critical factor because
Quality of Service (QoS) demands of multimedia
applications have to be taken into account. This paper
discussed how the performance of firewall architectures
for multimedia applications can be determined. It
presents a model to describe the performance of
multimedia firewall architectures. This model can be used
to dimension firewalls for usage with multimedia
applications. In addition to this, results of a lab
experiment, used to evaluate the performance of
distributed firewall architecture and to validate the model
was also discussed.
Lekkas and Lambinoudkis59 gave detailed description
about the digital signatures which are very useful from
security point of view. A digital signature preserves basic
security characteristics of the digital documents, such as
integrity and authenticity of binary data. Digital signatures
are only enjoying a gradual and reluctant acceptance,
despite the long existence of the relevant legal and
technical frameworks. One of the major drawbacks of
client-generated digital signatures is the requirement for
effective and secure management of the signing keys and
the complexity of the cryptographic operations that must
be performed by the signer. Outsourcing digital signatures
to a trusted third party would be an elegant solution to the
key management burden. This paper aims to investigate
whether this is legally and technically feasible. It also
discussed the weakness and security threat that implies
on client side management and compared the basic
features of client generated digital signature and
outsourcing of digital signature and finally the technical
approach for the outsourcing of digital signature.
Hudomalj and Jauk60 point out the current state of
authentication and authorisation in satisfying the
academic library users’ mobility and instant access to
use of digital information resources and proposed that
libraries strongly support effort to establish a global
authentication and authorisation infrastructure. A global
authentication and authorisation infrastructure will enable
users to use a single username and a password for all
local and remote library services. It will consist of
interconnected authentication/authorisation servers
where each institution will be responsible for a local user
database. This paper also discussed the practical
implication of this global authentication and authorisation
269

infrastructure because this service can improve services
for their user’s who are reside at remote places from their
institution and enable users to access new services
faster. Herzog and Shahmehri61 discuss about concrete
and verified guidelines for enhancing the usability and
security of software that delegates security decisions to
lay users and captures these user decisions as a security
policy. Setting up a security policy or security rules for a
personal firewall, for application surveillance on one’s
computer, or for how one Web browser should interact
with the privacy policies of visited Web sites, is a difficult
task. So to solve this problem is required to establish at
least one security tool for setting up security policies at
run time succeeded. Firewalls are used by many users
and allow and disallow the network connections. Firewalls
are not complex in their run time rule syntax.

4.5 Networking Architecture used in Library
Management Softwares
Due to knowledge explosion or enormous growth in
volume of published information, it is necessary for
libraries to satisfy the diverse need of users and establish
network among the group of libraries. Not only this,
libraries always faced budgetary constraint, staff pressure
and increased cost of printed resources. Networking can
help libraries overcome these problems.
A compelling advantage of using Web-based
solutions is the possibility to leverage the Web to create
an effective network for libraries. The various libraries
could be belonging to the same organisation but
distributed across the number of locations. So, webbased networking provides solution for establishing
effective network among these distributed libraries.
Networking among libraries is of the following types:


Single-user system



Multi-user system



Local area network



Client- server architecture

Evans62 draws the attention of globalisation of library
systems. Libraries are using virtual union catalogue
enabled by Z39.50 standard which allows libraries a
common research purpose. e-lending and MARC
databases, etc. are some examples of these technology.
Web and various standards compel librarians to ‘think
locally act globally’ so that group of libraries distributed
across the world can easily communicate and share their
resources. Application service provider is yet another
technology which is highly applicable in networking. ASP
models look in future in which application runs remotely
somewhere in world, it matters not where. Dzuriniko63
elaborated the various features of ASP. Integrated online
library system ASP is an Internet-based service, which
270

allows to rent software or service on per-use or
subscription basis. The software sits on the ASP server
and the connection is established via Web. All the data
stored on ASP server is available for anybody at any part
of the world belonging to that firm. The paper also
discusses the advantages and disadvantages of ASP.
Kaula64 explained the Web architecture, i.e., twolevel architecture and three-level architecture. Two-level
architecture is a client/server architecture where many
computers behave as a client connected to the server
computer. In three-level architecture, a database level is
added which is DBMS software. The third layer is called
the application layer, which manages the interaction of
the Web server with the DBMS. The three-level
architecture is very useful for the management of
RDBMS on Web. Haravu5 discussed the technology of
client-server architecture. The main difference between
client-server architecture and LAN architecture is that
client server use a relational database management
system on the database server and users query are
answered directly. Earlier, file server was used in LAN
architecture. The client-server architecture thus reduces
network traffic by providing a query response rather than
file transfer. It improves multi-users updating through a
GUI front end to a shared database. In client server
architecture, remote procedure calls (RPCs) or standard
query language statements are typically used to
communicate between the client and server.
There are two kinds of client server architecture,
namely two-tier architecture, and three-tier architecture or
n-tier architecture. Earlier two-tier architecture was used
in LAN or intranet environment. The two-tier architecture
allocates the user system interface exclusively to the
client. It places database management on the server and
splits the processing management between the client and
the server, creating two layers. In n-tier architecture, a
middle tier added between a client and a database
management server. The middle-tier performs queuing,
application execution and database staging. The middletier accesses the data and gives answer to client.
Li65 described the Web-based library information
architecture, outlining the ubiquitous library’s most
relevant concepts and features tied up with the Internet
platform. Utilising successful library projects and
applications from the real world, this paper explores
primary technical solutions for the ubiquitous library in the
digital age, which could be utilised to transform the
concept of ‘Ubiquitous Library’ (ubiquity here define as
‘the capacity of being everywhere or in all places at the
same time”) into a real “dynamic engine for the
knowledge and information society.’ Also discussed is the
future of Web-based ubiquitous library information
architecture. This paper intends to draw a clear road
map for librarians, instructors, IT specialists, managers,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

executives, and other professionals to utilize cutting-edge
technologies and emerging technologies to design,
develop, integrate, enhance, and implement ubiquitous
library services and projects in the 21st century.

4.6 Evaluation of Library Automation Systems
In any endeavour in which we make a substantial
investment of money, energy, and time or other
resources, we like to know what kind of return we get.
The ability to evaluate the return on our investment gives
us the basis on which to choose between alternative. So
an evaluation is basically a judgment of worth. It is a
matter of comparison of actual result with external
standard, in the light of existing institutional realities
which may be relevant to evaluating the future trajectory
of the program or services and provide an objective basis
for decision making. Software evaluation is quite a
difficult task.
Francis66 elaborated important software problems
faced by the library professionals in India and points out
various compatibility and suitability issues in the
selection of library software. The paper also highlighted
that these problems have affected the progress of
computerisation of libraries. Up-to-date and detailed
information on softwares available in India can prevent
several issues that may arise in the course of
computerisation. An agency/mechanism to continuously
evaluate the softwares may be formed to meet this
requirement.
Saxena and Srivastava67 evaluated important library
software packages such as Granthalaya, Libsys, Sanjay,
Suchika, Basisplus-Techlibplus, etc. Parameters
selected for evaluation of software packages include
facilities provided in the software packages, hardware
requirements, operating system platforms, language of
software
development,
search
facilities,
etc.
Mukhopadhyay2 discussed the development of library
management softwares over the past decades, traced out
the characteristics and trends of software with special
reference to packages available in Indian environment and
compares services and facilities incorporated in library
automation packages available in India against various
checklists and with the help of tables and appendices.
For evaluating number of software, author prepared
one checklist, which is broadly divided into following
categories: hardware and backend software requirement,
intrinsic features of LMS, services and activities, core
services, user oriented services, enhanced services, and
value-added services. The present study indicates that
the SOUL developed by the INFLIBNET has most of the
features of a third generation LMS. Goh, et al.68 described
open source software packages available for
organisations and individuals to create digital libraries. To
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

evaluate digital software packages author prepared a
12-point checklist.
Evaluation of library software package is a very
complex process. For evaluation, all the packages must
be used by the evaluation team under the same
conditions, which is not possible practically due to
various factors. But with the help of evaluation one can
know about the merit and demerits of software and also
choose the best software according to the requirement
and budget of the library.

5. CONCLUSION
The above studies revealed that information and
communications technology plays a very important role in
our society. It has influenced the every aspect of human
society and libraries as a part of the society are not the
exceptional one. The library community is largely made
up of not-for-profit, publicly funded agencies, which hardly
command a major voice in today’s high tech information
industry. Libraries today face the challenges of
implementing the latest technologies, keeping their data
and resources secure and providing their users access to
the resources, while coping with shrinking budgets,
increased competition and rising demand for more
consumer-like-services. With information technology
remaining an ever changing landscape, libraries
increasingly need to pay more attention to total cost of
ownership issues. They must choose the very best, most
future proof products for IT investments and
developments.
Earlier every task in libraries was performed by the
library personnel manually, which used to take lots of time
and manpower. But after a long period of gestation, the
libraries in India are now in take off stage of automation
and modernisation. Now in ICT environment, most of the
technical works in libraries are being performed with the
help of computers and new technologies without losing
much time and efforts. The use of computers for all library
operation and services began during the mid 1950s. The
advent of Internet in the 1980 was responsible of the
protocols, software, hardware and standards that make
up the WWW, added a completely new dimensions to the
information world. Now libraries prefer using Web-based
library automation system rather than using window
based automation software. Earlier libraries used windowbased softwares for automation but these softwares are
not affordable by every library due to financial constraint.
Web-based Library Automation Software Systems which
use Web as a platform have solved this problem. After
seeing the steady growth in library automation drastic
changes came, not only in terms of library activities but in
terms of increase in the working efficiency of library
personals. Now library softwares are hosted on a Web
server instead on PC or within the organisation.
271

Now when the softwares are hosted on Web server,
they required certain national and international standards
for communication. Certain standards develop by
national
and
international
organisation
for
communication and acceptable to all over world, are
Z39.50, AACR-2, ISO2709, ISO10160 and 61, etc.
Nowadays we are dependent on networking for smooth
communication. Earlier for networking, libraries were
using peer-to-peer model but now client-server
architecture provides much ease for establishing network
among terminals to Web server. Information industry
must become more concerned about the possible
security threats that can breach network security
resulting costly damages. Firewalls, routers, screened
subnets etc. provide various options for preventing these
kinds of threats. Not only this, content security is also
necessary because all content are hosted on Web
server. Softwares incorporate various facilities like DRM,
water marking, guest right, password authentication, etc.
for secure document delivery.
There are several technologies that are already or will
very soon be impacting the libraries and provide ease to
staff and users like PDA, barcode reader, smart card,
biometric devices, etc. Advancements in Web technology
have impacted technical services of libraries. Now with
the help of copy cataloguing libraries can outsource the
information from other libraries as well. Not only this, Web
OPAC, ILL, Web-based document delivery accelerated
the working efficiency of library staff. Though in India the
development of Web-based software is still in its infancy
stage but it is already in steady growth. Web-based
automation software are the good example of sharing
resources worldwide and satisfying the users need ever
at remote location.

REFERENCES
1. Rhyno, Arthur. From library system to mainstream
software: How web technologies are changing the role
of system librarians. Library Hi-Tech, 2003, 21(3),
289-96.
2. Mukhopadhayay, Parthasarthi. Progress of library
management softwares: An Indian scenario.
Vidyasagar Univ. J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2002, 1-15.
3. Seneviratane, Gihan P. & Amaraweera, J.P.
Automation of library operation in SriLanka: A costeffective
web-based
solution.
Information
Developments, 2002, 18(2), 111-15.

6. Mukhopadhyay, Parthsarthi. Five laws and ten
commandments: The open road in library automation
in India. In Proceeding of the National Seminar on
Open Source Movement–Asia Perspective, IIT,
Roorkee, 2006. pp. 27-36.
7. Bailey, Penn. Let someone else provide your online
catalogue. Library+ Information Update, 2006, 5(10),
39-41.
8. Haravu, L.J. Emerging initiatives in library
management systems. In International Conference
on Academic Libraries-Technology, Policy and
Innovation, University of Delhi, Delhi, 2009. pp.
239-48.
9. Koneru, Indra. Integrated library system: Selection
and design. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2005,
25(5&6), 3-9.
10. Shafique, Farzana & Mahmood, Khalid. Integrated
library Software: A survey of Lahore. Library Hi-Tech
News, 2008, 6, 6-13.
11. Moorthy, A.L. Library automation in India. In Horizon
of information technology: New age, new wage trend
and impact of library science. A Festschcrift, Vol. 1,
edited by Suryanath Singh, 2004. pp. 288-300.
12. Lynch, Clifford. From automation to transformation:
Forty years of libraries and information technology in
higher education. EDUCASE Review, 2004, 60-68.
13. Breeding, Marshall. Automation system marketplace
2002: Capturing the migrating customers. Library
Journal, 2002.
14. Sherbini, Magada El. & Klim, George. Metadata and
cataloguing practices. The Electronic Library, 2004,
22(3), 238-48.
15. Chandraker, Rajesh. Unicode as a multilingual
standard with reference to Indian languages. The
Electronic Library, 2004, 22(5), 422-24.
16. East, John W. Z39.50 and personal bibliographic
software. Library Hi-Tech, 2003, 21(1), 34-43.
17. Banka Bihari Chand. Z39.50: The standard for
information reterival and its application in libraries.
SRELS J. Inf. Manage., 2001, 38(4), 317-26.

4. Ebenzer, Catherene. Trends in integrated library
system. VINE, 2002, 32(4), 19-45.

18. Wu, Carol H. Keeping pace with Open URL: A
perspective. The Serials Librarian, 2004, 47(1&2),
117-28.

5. Haravu, L.J. Library automation: Design, principles
and Practices. Allied Publishers (P) Ltd, Hyderabad,
2004.

19. Aliprand, John M. The structure and content of
MARC 21 records in the UNICODE environment. Inf.
Technol. Lib., 2005, 24(4), 170-79.

272

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

20. Haravu, L.J. Standards in library automation and
networking, 2006. https://drtc.isibang.ac.in/bitstrea
m/1849/291/1/Standards%2 0in%20Library%20Auto
mation%20and%20Networking.pdf

with special refrence to RDBMS: Selection tools and
technologies. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2002,
22(4&5), 9-15.
33. Sridhara, B.; Makhija, Veena & Pandey, Ajay Kumar.
Application of WWWISIS: Web-based CDS/ISIS
bibliographic database for journal article. DESIDOC
Bull. Inf. Technol., 2006, 26(4), 17-30.

21. Yu, Shin-Chian. Study on digital archives standards
for library automation systems. In Asia-Pacific
Conference on Library and Information Education
and Practice, edited by C. Khoo; D. Singh & A.S.
Chaudhary, School of Communication and
Information, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, 2006. pp. 288-93.

34. Buxton, Andrew. Opinion for putting CDS/ISIS
databases on the Internet. Program: Electr. Lib. Inf.
Syst., 2006, 40(3), 286-95.

22. Rhyno, A. XML and relational databases: Uses and
oppurtunities for libraries. OCLC Syst. Serv., 2002,
18(2), 97-103.

35. Lee, Newton S. Infostation: A multimedia access
system for library automation. The Electronic Library,
1990, 8(6), 415-21.

23. Banerjee, Kyle. How does XML help libraries?
Computers in Libraries, 2002, 22(8).

36. Singh, Anil. Compatibility of library automation
software packages with multimedia. Herald of Lib.
Sci., 1998, 37(3&4), 184-87.

24. Chang, Naicheng. Data manipulation in an XMLbased digital image library. Program: Elect. Lib. Inf.
Syst., 2005, 39(1), 62-72.
25. Wusteman, Judith. About XML: From ghostbusters
to libraries—the power of XUL. Library Hi-Tech, 2005,
23(1), 118-29.
26. Cordeiro, Maria Ines & Carvalho, Joaquim de. Web
services: What they are and their importance for
libraries. VINE, 2002, 32(4), 46-62.
27. Contreras, Paula. Expansion of web-based library
services in large research libraries: A Penn State
case study. https://www.educase.edu/ir/library/pdf/
EDU0370.pdf
28. Jayakanth, Francis; Sharada, B. & Filbert, Minj. An
OAI-based approach to build and maintain union
catalogue of OPACs. In International Conference on
Semantic Web and Digital Libraries, edited by A.R.D.
Prasad & Devika P. Madalli, 2007. pp. 451-58.
29. Ravindaran, Sreedevi. Bibliographic databases:
Software issues. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 1997,
17(5), 11-16.
30. Mishra, Kamini S. Bibliographic databases and
exchange formats. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol.,
1997, 17(5),17-22.
31. Chandraker, Rajesh. Multiscript bibliographic
database: An Indian perspective. Online Infor. Rev.,
2002, 26(4), 246-51.
32. Matoria, Ram Kumar & Upadhayay, P.K. Design and
development of Web-enabled databases in libraries

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

37. McCullough, John. Redesigning library applications
for PDAs: ILS vendor perspective. Library Hi-Tech,
2003, 21(4), 393-99.
38. Kern, Christian. Radio-frequency identification for
security and media circulation in libraries.The
Electronic Library, 2007, 25(4), 430-39.
39. Muir, Scott. RFID security concerns. Library Hi-Tech,
2007, 25(1), 95-107.
40. Butters, Alan. RFID systems, standards and privacy
within libraries. The Electronic Library, 2007, 25(4),
430-39.
41. Sahid, Syed Md. Use of RFID technology in Libraries:
A new approach to circulation, tracking inventorying
and security of library materials. Lib. Philos. Prac.,
2005, 8(1).
42. Lambrinoudakis, Costas. Smart card technology for
deploying a secure information management
framework. Inf. Manage. Compu. Secu., 2006, 8(4),
173- 83.
43. Foo, Schubert & Ee-Peng Lim. An integrated Webbased ILL system for Singapore libraries. OCLC Syst.
Serv., 1999, 15(1), 24-34.
44. Anderson, Barbara. Web lists or OPAC: Can we have
our cake and eat it too? Library Computing, 1999,
18(4), 312-17.
45. Ramesh Babu, B. & Brian, Ann O’. Web OPAC
interfaces: An overview. The Electronic Library,
2000, 18(5), 316-27.

273

46. Joint, Nicholas. URLs in the OPACs: Comparative
reflections on US vs UK practice. Library Review,
2007, 56(3), 182-93.

management burden. Inf. Manage. Compu. Secu.,
2006, 14(5), 436-49.

47. Bordeionu, Sever; Carter, Christina E. & K. Dennis,
Nancy. Delivering electronic resources with web
OPACs and other web-based tools: Need of reference
librarians. Ref. Serv. Rev., 2000, 56(3), 111-19.

60. Hudomalj, Emil & Avgust, Jauk. Authentication and
authorisation infrastructure for the mobility of users of
academic libraries: An overview of developments.
Program: Electr. Lib. Infor. Syst., 2006, 40(1), 6373.

48. Kapoor, Kanta & Goyal, O.P. Web-based OPACs in
Indian academic libraries: A functional comparison.
Program: Electr. Lib. Inf. Syst., 2007, 41(3), 291-309.

61. Herzog, Almut & Nahid Shahmeri. Usable setup of
runtime and security policies. Inf. Manage. Compu.
Secu., 2007, 15(5), 349-407.

49. Bernard, Harmsen. Adding value to web OPACs. The
Electronic Library, 2000, 18(2), 109-13.

62. Evans, Peter. Trends,pressure and realities in the
library system marketplace. American Libraries,
2000, 50-53.

50. Dorner, Danniel G. & Curtis, Anne Marie. A
comparative review of common user interface
products. Library Hi-Tech, 2004, 22(2),182-97.

63. Dzuriniko, Mary K. Application service providers.
Integ. Lib. Syst. Rep., 2000.

51. Bandhopadhyay, Ratana. Copy cataloguing and
national library. IASLIC Bulletin, 2005, 50(2), 69-73.

64. Kaula, Rajeev. Internet and PL/SQL server pages.
INICAE, 2004, 23(1), 45-52.

52. Hariharan, A. et al. Customised web-based services
at SERC library with special refrence to alert
services. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3),
31-38.

65. Li, LiLi. Building the ubiquitious library in the 21st
century. World library and information congress. In
72nd IFLA General Conference and Council, 22-24
August 2006, Seoul, Korea, 2006. pp. 72-84.

53. Yogesh Suman & Banwari Lal. Network and
intenetwork security: An overview. J. Lib. Inf. Sci.,
2000, 25(1), 47-58.

66. Fransis, A.T. Software problems in library automation
in India. In information management in academic and
research libraries, edited by Mahapatra, et al.
INFLIBNET/UGC, Ahmedabad,1998. pp. 60-64.

54. Prevelakis, Vassilis & Keromytis, Angelas. Drop-in
security for distributed and portable computing
elements. Internet Research: Electr. Networking
Appli. Policy, 13(2), 107-15.
55. Gupta, Vaibhav, et al. Networking and Security
measures. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2004, 24(2),
9-16.
56. Braid, Andrew. The use of digital right management
systems for document supply services. Interlending
Docu. Supply, 2004, 32(3), 189-91.
57. Kush, Ashwini & Ram Kumar. Wireless network
security issues. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2005,
25(1), 13-18.
58. Roedig, Utz & Schmitt, Jen. Multimedia and firewall:
A performance perspective. Multimedia Systems,
2005, 11(1),19-33.
59. Lekkas, Dimitrios & Costas Lambrinoudakis.
Outsourcing digital signatures: A solution to key

274

67. Saxena, S.C. & Srivastava, R.K. Evaluation of library
software packages available in India. DESIDOC Bull.
Infor. Technol, 1998, 18(5), 9-17.
68. Goh, Dion Hoe-Lian, et al. A checklist for evaluating
open source digital library software. Online inf. Rev.,
2006, 30(4), 360-79.

About the Authors
Dr Shailendra K is Associate Professor in the Department
of Library and Information Science, University of Delhi since
2001. Earlier, he worked as Lecturer at Indira Gandhi National
Open University and as Faculty at National Institute of Science
Communication and Information Resources during 1982 to 1998.
He has received Young Information Scientist Award and
Fellowship Award of Society for Information Science in 1993
and 2008, respectively.
Ms Namrata Rai is Research Fellow in the Department of
Library and Information Science, University of Delhi.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

