DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 4, July 2011, pp. 217-225
© 2011, DESIDOC

Semantic Web Applications
Misha Mehra and Nishant Kumar
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre, Delhi-110 054
E-mail: misha@desidoc.drdo.in; nishant@desidoc.drdo.in

ABSTRACT
With changing technology, the Internet has taken a pivotal role in all kinds of applications in our daily
lives. To handle flood of information on the Internet, smarter Web technology is also required. This
requirement has led to the advent of newer, smarter and better Web technology called 'Semantic Web'.
Semantic Web is the next step in Web evolution. High usability of Semantic Web has found significant
applications in the field of life sciences, crime investigation, scientific research, literary analysis, social
networking, electronic commerce, knowledge management, digital libraries, defence, e-government,
energy sector, financial services, healthcare, oil and gas industry, publishing, website back-ends,
multimedia, etc. This paper discusses the most prominent areas for application of Semantic Web
technology.
Keywords: World Wide Web, Semantic Web, Internet, knowledge management, social networking, electronic
commerce, digital libraries

1. INTRODUCTION
Semantic Web is the next step in Web evolution.
Semantic Web was conceived by Tim Berners Lee, the
inventor of World Wide Web (WWW). He defined
Semantic Web as Web of data that can be processed
directly or indirectly by machines. Semantic Web is
about reading, processing, transforming, and assembling
the data repositories and documents available on the
Internet into useful information. It relies on structured sets
of information and inference rules that allow it to
understand the relationship amongdifferent data
resources1. It accesses and connects the information
available on Websites, XML documents, and databases,
and provides useful amount of data needed.
The data or information provided from semantics will
take the future of Web to a new level, where there will be
knowledge-based repositories having better understanding of Web content. This will facilitate accurate
searching, accurate filtering, and categorisation of
information and intelligent retrieval of data. The WWW
contains boundless information in the form of documents.
The websites represent text in natural languages and use
graphics, images and videos. The information available
in the Web documents is easy for people to read.
However, this information cannot be perceived by
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

machines the way it is perceived by humans. With the
Semantic Web, this information can be made machinereadable. For example, if one wants to get some
information from 10 different sites, one will have to go to all
ten different sites and then copy the information one
requires. Semantic Web will perform the same work
intelligently, efficiently, and effectively. It will access the
required information by connecting to all the websites in
a network and will provide the consolidated data at the
user's desktop. Due to these specialties of Semantic
Web, major companies like Adobe, Oracle, IBM, HP, and
Microsoft are developing and offering semantic tools2.
Intensive research work is being carried out in this field.

2. APPLICATIONS OF SEMANTIC WEB:
E-BUSINESS
According to Wikipedia, e-business may be defined
as any business process that relies on an automated
information system. E-business software solution allows
the integration of intra- and inter-firm business
processes and can be conducted using the Web, the
Internet, extranet, etc. The application of Semantic Web
in the field of e-business is wide and significant in terms
of exchanging information between different business
groups for mutual or collective purposes. It is believed to
provide good semantic solutions when information
217

exchange is concerned. Semantic Web has found a
prominent place in e-business in terms of searching of
relevant data, exchange of information between different
agents, filtering of relevant information useful for finding
good business sites or analyzing new market trends,
online advertisements, composition and integration of
complex systems, multimedia collection, exchange of
machine dialogue across the domains, virtual community
and vocabulary flexibility, and standardisation3.
One of the major limitations or drawbacks in ebusiness is the problem of interoperability between
systems of two or more business partners (business-tobusiness). Interoperability is to be ensured for the
business exchange to be effective and efficient between
business companies. Extensible Markup Language
(XML) has been used to provide the Web interoperability
for the past few years. XML is capable of providing only
syntactic interpretation, and not semantic interpretation.
It does not understand the content and meaning of the
messages being exchanged among different systems.
Semantic Web solves the problem of interoperability
using Web Ontology Language (OWL). OWL is a popular
language used for representing ontologies on the Web. It
is a World Wide Consortium (W3C) Standard and provides
a strong ontology that is used as a standard. All the
services on the Internet share the same standard for the
interpretation of terms being exchanged between them.
OWL facilitates greater interoperability of Web content.
Moreover, the software used earlier for business purposes
were hard-cored and always required direct human
intervention by changing the code and then running the
script. But with the use of Semantic Web tools and
software, the pages can be dynamically changed and
highly tailored and cost-effective results can be produced.

2.1 Research in E-business using Ontologies
Provided by Semantic Web
Information exchange among business processes
takes place through Web services. Web service is a selfdescribing, self-contained software system, which
exposes its functions to consumers to support
interoperable machine-to-machine interaction4,5. Web
services for an organisation are registered in public
registry like a catalogue of books. The three fundamental
methods (Fig. 1) in a Web service system are: register,
discover, and bind6.
Figure 1 explains the working of Web services.
During registry, Web services advertise their services in
the public registry. Registry provides a database for the
Web services. Once registry is done, service consumer or
a requestor will send a request corresponding to a
particular service. The registry will check in its database
and will provide the relevant information of the most
appropriate service. This procedure is called discover. At
218

binding, the service consumer, upon receiving the
relevant information, will directly bind with the Web
service and data exchange will start taking place. In this
way, exchange of data takes place among
heterogeneous systems in a distributed network. In order
to retrieve the most optimal Web services, registry
function relies on standard ontology language like Simple
Object Access Protocol (SOAP), Web Services
Definition Language (WSDL) and Universal Description
Discovery and Integration (UDDI), Web Ontology
Language (OWL) and DARPA Agent Markup Language +
Ontology Interchange Language (DAML+OIL). These
ontologies are very popular as these are the fundamental
building blocks in the development of e-business
applications.
DAML+OIL is a semantic markup language for Web
resources. It builds on earlier W3C standards such as
Resource Description Framework (RDF) and RDF
Schema, and extends these languages with richer
modelling primitives7. The language has a clean and welldefined semantics. DALM-S uses DAML+OIL ontology
language for the information exchange between different
Web services across the Web. UDDI is a specification
designed to allow businesses of all sizes to benefit in the
new digital economy8. There is a UDDI registry, which is
open to everybody. It is an Internet-wide registry of Web
services. It allows companies to register their information
like company name, specific service or type of service.
This allows companies providing or needing Web
services to discover each other and share the
information over the Internet in a truly global manner.
OWL is a semantic markup language for publishing and
sharing ontologies on the WWW. OWL is developed as a
vocabulary extension of the RDF. Researchers have
used OWL-S for developing Web service models
capable of exchanging information on the Web. OWL is
very popular among the researchers due to its strong
semantic interoperation.
DAML+OIL and UDDI have been used as ontology
languages to provide architecture for the information
exchange5. DAML-S defines DAML+OIL ontology for the
description of Web services. The concept of process
model allows interaction of both service consumer and
Web service provider by specifying an interaction
protocol where service consumer will know of what
information to send and what information to receive. On
the other hand, Web service consumer will also know
about the status of the information received by Web
service provider. The information being exchanged
between both the parties is mapped into messages to be
exchanged on the Internet by DAML grounding. Web
architecture, using the process model and DALM-S
grounding, consists of DAML parser, for transforming
specification for process model and grounding into
DALM-S descriptions; DAML processor for extracting
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Web
Services

Web Services

Registry DB
Web Services

Web Services

Registry

sends request
Service Consumer
Registry DB

Checks the database and sends back the
information

Discover

sends input
Service
Consumer

Web Service
sends the
information

Binding

Figure 1. Web service system.

information protocol and composing message to be
exchanged with the Web service provider; and Web
service invocate for contacting other Web services.
One of the matching criteria in OWL-based Web
services, where input and output of Web service is
subsumed by input and output of service consumer9. This
matching criterion has been further enhanced by putting
constraints of subsuming the initial state of business
process with the pre-conditions of potential Web service
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

and also the after-effects of service execution with the
final state of request4.
The concept of Web service community was also
used to provide a hierarchical classification of Web
services sharing the common domain interests as
subject clubs. Now the search engine matches request
from the service consumers based on the
representations of Web services in the subject clubs as
well as the pre-conditions set in the matching algorithm.
219

3. APPLICATIONS OF SEMANTIC WEB:
SOCIAL NETWORKING
Social networking has become an important part of
the modern society and puts a strong impact on social,
political, educational, professional, personal, and
business life. It connects people across the world
through social networking sites like Facebook, Orkut,
MySpace, LinkedIn, etc. It allows information sharing on
twitter, messaging through Yahoo Messenger, Google
talk, content and ideas sharing through blogs, discussion
forums, uploading and downloading of media, tagging,
and folksonomies through wikis and podcasts, etc. The
social networking have attracted millions of users across
the globe and has become the most popular, convenient
and cheaper mode of communication. A lot of social
networking sites are coming into the business because of
wealth being generated by these across the world.
Social networking sites or services offer the basic
features, but there are certain limitations in terms of
connecting people and content in a meaningful way10.
One of the limitations is the lack of interoperability among
different social networking sites. Suppose a person
having a profile account in one of the site wants to reopen the new profile account in some other site, and
wants the same information in his previous account to be
migrated into his new account, will not be able to do so
because the provision is not available in social
networking services. In such a scenario, the user has to
re-enter the entire information, and update its information
at two different sites, making the process more
cumbersome. Second limitation is the lack of privacy. In
case of certain centralised sites, the user does not have
complete
control
over
the
information
they
provide11.Thirdly, social networking sites do not provide
relationships or connections between common profiles of
people sharing common features liking visiting the same
sites, or same likes, and hobbies. Semantic Web solves
the problem of interoperability by providing globally
accepted semantics to share information about people,
their profiles, contents and connections through which
they are interconnected. Security and privacy is being
preserved as data is machine-readable.
Many projects have been initiated and various new
applications and tools have been developed in the field of
social networking. Search engines designed for public
use are gradually assimilating the technologies of
Semantic Web. Tumbup is a new search engine
connected to Facebook, which analyses the activities of
members of social network, like recommendations about
places, products, etc. to produce more meaningful
results12. Other search engines like Wolfram Alpha, True
Knowledge, and Zoom are also integrated to the Intranet
sites and corporate blogs. Facebook has introduced the
Open Graph Protocol, a technology based on the
220

Semantic Web, which allows third-party sites to interact
with the social networking sites by sending and receiving
information to Facebook. This new protocol integrates
webpages into the social graph and sustains the social
interactions between the visited Websites and the
Facebook profile of a user12. Concept of Semantic Web
has been used by many researchers and many projects
have gained momentum in recent years. Some of
prominent ones include Friend of a Friend (FOAF) and
Semantically Interlinked Online Communities (SIOC).

3.1 Friend of a Friend
Friend of a friend (FOAF) consists of machinereadable pages used to describe people, their activities,
and their relationships with the other people and objects.
It connects social networking sites and the people it
describes using a decentralised database. FOAF has got
it applications in a number of services running on the
Web. Some of the services are13:


Google's Social Graph API indexes all the public
FOAF data in the Web.



Yahoo's Search Monkey also has support for FOAF.



Garlik's QDos system includes a FOAF search
facility, a FOAF builder tool, and various other
services.



The FOAF-search.net site offers search/browse for
several million crawled FOAF file



The Yandex search engine (wikipedia) has some
support for FOAF.



Export Address Book to FOAF is an AppleScript for
Mac OS X that allows users to manage their FOAF
profile from within the Address Book including
uploading of the FOAF file to the Website using FTP.



Morla is a RDF editor. There are templates for FOAF
Person, FOAF Personal Profile Document, FOAF
Image, etc.



FOAFDrive is another FOAF XML file generator. It is
also used for FOAF file import, APML, social
networks connections etc.



Elmo contains a set of tools for crawling, smushing
and validating FOAF profiles



MyFOAFexplorer Java 1.5 applet used to browse a
scientific network based on FOAF



FOAFMap display FOAF profiles on a Google Map



FOAF-inator is a FOAF navigation tool developed in
PHP
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

3.2 Semantically Interlinked Online
Communities



Engage, the community information application from
Talis, is using SIOC, SKOS and FOAF.

Semantically Interlinked Online Communities (SIOC)
allow the integration of online community information. It
provides Semantic Web ontology for representing
information in social Web like blogs, discussion forums,
wikis, photo galleries, shared bookmarks, aggregated
feeds, etc. SIOC has found significant place in the
variety of commercial and open source applications and
is used in combination with FOAF ontology for defining
user profile and social networking information. Some of
major application areas are14:



RDFa on Rails is a library for Ruby on Rails. It helps
in publishing of RDFa data by providing set of helper
methods to the rails application. SIOC terms are
used to describe blog posts in this library.



OpenQabal, an open source social networking and
collaboration platform, also has SIOC support.



The Seesmic micrologging service has decided to
adopt the SIOC ontology as one of their open platform
formats



An RDF converter for IRC has been created that
exports metadata in Turtle format, and SIOC is being
used as one of the main representation formats.



Faculty Academy's Fishtank project uses the RDF
structure and searching power to fully utilise tags
and feeds on blogs.



BAETLE (Bug And Enhancement Tracking
Language) uses SIOC for creating a software bug
ontology that can be used by people to query for
bugs.



WordPress SIOC exporter exports information about
WordPress based blogs, blog users, posting and
comments.



OpenLink Data Spaces modules export SIOC meta
data for various applications like ODS based blogs,
Wiki, Bookmarks, AddressBook, Calendar, polls,
photo Gallery, ODS-Feeds and Discussions.



Talk Digger is a Web service for locating people and
uses SIOC to export all its data in RDF/XML.



SWAML is an exporter used for publishing mailing
list archives into RDF format. It uses SIOC as the
main ontology to represent a mailing list in RDF.



Twitter2RDF is an RDF exporter for Twitter
microblogs that uses SIOC (for the microblog
entries) and FOAF (for describing the people).



Gnizr, an open source social bookmarking and
mashup application from ImageMatters exports
saved bookmarks using SIOC.



IkeWiki is a semantic wiki for knowledge
engineering. IkeWiki attach discussions to wiki
pages using the SIOC ontology.

4. APPLICATION OF SEMANTIC WEB:
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Knowledge management system (KMS) as a whole
describes the creation of knowledge repositories, a
method for knowledge access and sharing as well as
communication through collaboration and also
enhancing the knowledge environment and managing
knowledge as an asset for an organisation15.
Development of a good KMS is basically a collaborative
effort. Figure 2 illustrates a traditional collaborative
KMS.The traditional collaboration of KMS has undergone
Researchers

Administrtor

Knowledge
Repository

Students

Lectures

Figure 2. Knowledge management system.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

221

a revolution with the advent of WWW. The WWW or
Internet provides a knowledge repository with variety of
information from various sources and also from
geographically distant corners of the world. This makes
the repository information rich like never before but this
also brings the real challenges. These challenges, like
overload of information, keyword searching being not
appropriate,
integration
of
information
from
heterogeneous sources and geographically-distributed
Intranet problems, have been triggered by the Web. In
fact, this enormous amount of data has made it
increasingly difficult to search, access, present, and
maintain the information required by a wide variety of
users. This is because information content is mainly
presented in a natural language. Thus, a wide gap has
accured between the information available for tools
aimed for knowledge extraction and the information
maintained in human-readable form.
The most critical issue in intelligent knowledge
management is how to represent and extract the
semantic meaning from information contents.
Researchers have tried to address this issue through
various research areas including artificial intelligence,
information retrieval, natural language processing,
multimedia, knowledge management, etc. All these
methods ask for a smarter Web to assist in knowledge
acquisition, knowledge representation, knowledge
sharing and distribution of human knowledge through the
Web. This requirements have been answered by
Semantic Web.
Tim Berners Lee has referred to Semantic Web as
an extended Web of machine-readable information and
automated services that extends far beyond current
capabilities. Semantic Web is useful for KMS because
this technology helps people to find and correlate the
information they require irrespective of their sources and
types. Semantic Web is relevant to knowledge
management because it has the capacity to enhance the
speed with which information can be synthesised
manifolds. This is achieved by automating its aggregation
and analysis. Most of the time information on the Web is
presented in HTML format but the problem with it is that
this format does not provide structure or metadata useful
for effective management. Without structure, elements of
content cannot be related to each other, and without
metadata, the nature of the elements themselves cannot
be known. Semantic Web is designed to provide these
missing components. It can provide structure, (through
the use of XML tags); metadata descriptors, (through
RDF) and relationships (through Web Ontology
Language). 'Ontology' is the key enabling power in
realising the full potential of Semantic Web technology.
Ontology is not knowledge or information. It is in fact,
meta-information which is information about information.
222

In the context of the Semantic Web, using a special
ontology language, the relationships between the various
terms within the information can be encoded. Ontologies
provide background information, which strengthens the
description of the data and which helps in making the
context of the information more explicit. Since ontologies
are shared specifications, the same ontologies can be
used for the annotation of multiple data sources, which
include webpages, collections of XML documents,
relational databases, etc.
The use of such shared terminologies enables
interoperability between these data sources up to a
certain extent. But, this does not solve the integration
problem completely, because it is not possible for all
individuals and organisations on the Semantic Web to
use one common terminology or ontology. It is very much
possible that different ontologies will appear and, to
enable interoperation, mediation is required between
these ontologies. Ontology mediation is necessary in
semantic knowledge management for enabling sharing of
data between heterogeneous knowledge bases and also
to allow applications to reuse data from different
knowledge bases. Another utility of ontology mediation
appears in Semantic Web Services. In general, it is not
necessary that the requester and the provider of a
service use the same terminology in their communication,
and thus, mediation is required to facilitate
communication between the knowledge seekers and the
knowledge providers.

4.1 Research in Semantic Web-based
Knowledge Management System
4.1.1 Ontology-based Framework for Semantic
Web Services for Knowledge Management
Systems
Researchers have proposed a conceptual model of
ontology-based framework for Semantic Web services
for KMS. This framework has a layered structure. These
layers are user interaction, interface, mediator, and
ontology. All these four layers will communicate with other
layers for specific roles and responsibilities of each layer;
however each layer is designed to behave independently.
This approach is based on 'Web service Modelling
ontology' conceptual model which identifies four top level
elements as the key aspects to define Semantic Web
services: Ontologies, Web services, goals and
mediators,16 as shown in Fig. 3.

4.1.2 Components of Ontology-based Semantic
Web Services Framework for KMS
Distributed KMS will enable different knowledge
providers (individuals, groups, and organisations) to share
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

4.2 On-to-Knowledge Project

Goals

Web Services

On-to-Knowledge (OTK) project supports efficient
and effective knowledge management by providing a tool
environment powered by Semantic Web technology17. It
focuses on acquiring, maintaining and accessing weakly
structured information sources. The layered tool
environment of OTK17 is shown in Fig. 4.

Figure 3. Ontology-based services framework for KMS.

Acquiring means extracting semantic information
from textual information, is done through text mining and
extraction techniques. OntoExtract and OntoWrapper are
the two tool supports for acquiring ontology extraction
from text.

Ontologies

Mediators

the knowledge stored in various forms in distributed
repositories within their organisations. The first layer,
which is the user interaction layer of this framework,
employs a Web services infrastructure and then
enhances it ontologically so that lifecycle of a knowledge
transaction is supported. Another layer, that is the
interface layer specifies the functionality of the Web
service through which it can communicate and
cooperate with other Web services from different service
providers.
Third layer, which decides the mediation, is
concerned with handling heterogeneity, which is
concerned with resolving the possible mismatches
between resources that may be interoperable. The
ontology layer is the important layer which provides
support required by all the three components in mediator
layer. It presents the semantic descriptions in three
ontologies; user, domain and Web services ontologies.

To explain the syntax and semantics of semistructured information sources, RDF, XML, and OIL are
used. OntoEdit is the tool support as ontology editor, and
ontology storage and retrieval (Sesame), so as to enable
automatic maintenance and view definitions of
knowledge.
Accessing refers to accessing of information. It is
supported by push-services and agent technology.
RDFFerret is the tool support for ontology-based
information navigation and querying, and Spectacle is the
tool support for ontology-based visualisation of
information. vAs a whole, the complete layered tool
environment of Ontoknowledge operates like this: The
unstructured and structured textual information sources
from specified domains on the Web are extracted by
OntoExtract and OntoWrapper. This extracted

Figure 4. The layered tool environment of the on-to-knowledge.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

223

information, now, is entered into the RDF database,
where it can be edited with the OntoEdit tool. Finally, the
RDF querying language reasoning engine can be used to
query this database and delivers results to a user through
RDF, which may be visualised by spectacle.

4.3 SWAP
To demonstrate the power of peer-to-peer (P2P)
computing, and how the Semantic Web can actually be
combined to support decentralised environments, where
participants can maintain individual ideas of the world, by
sharing knowledge in such a way that administration
efforts are less but knowledge sharing and finding is
easy, another IST project SWAP is undergoing. Key to
the success of combining P2P solutions with Semantic
Web technologies is the use of emergent semantics.
Emergent semantics builds on lightweight and/or
heavyweight ontologies that different individuals,
departments or organisations have created. It basically
works on the principle of ontology mediation as
discussed above. There are certain challenges, which
pop-up because of the major differences between
ontologies in a P2P environment or because of differences
in ontologies in an environment working on the clientserver structure. The tasks of SWAP will mainly counter
such challenges. Four of these can be categorised as
(i) peer selection service, (ii) variation of ontologies,
(iii) lack of ontological precision, and (iv) ontological drift.

5. CONCLUSION
Due to the huge collection of data, it has become
difficult to manage and retrieve meaningful information
from the Web. There is a need of Semantic Web when
useful and meaningful data retrieval is required. Semantic
Web has overcome the problem of interoperability by
providing a standard format for data exchange using
ontologies. It provides access to the information in
heterogeneous and distributed environment using
machine-readable semantics. This helps in development
of KMS where input comes from distributed sources.
Popular ontologies like OWL, DAML+OIL, FOAF,
SIOC form the basic building blocks for the development
of Semantic Web applications. Researchers have
developed models using these ontologies. New ontologies
have been developed by them to provide more flexibility
and add more functionally to the tools and applications of
Semantic Web. However the research is still in its
preliminary stage and much more has to be achieved
through continuous efforts.

2. Herman, Ivan. What is being done today? http://
www.w3.org/2009/Talks/1214-Darmstadt-IH/
Applications.pdf (accessed on 26 April 2011).
3. Yuxiao, Zhao & Kristian, Sandahl. Potential
advantages of Semantic Web for Internet
commerce. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
(ICEIS), Angers, France, 23-26 April 2003.
4. Huang, Xuejuan; Chen, Xinmeng; Xu, Jiazhen; Li,
Hua & Liu, Jinshuo. Approach toward flexible
semantic e-business in web service community. In
Proceedings of the 8th
ACIS International
Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial
Intelligence, Networking, and Parallel/Distributed
Computing, SNPD, IEEE Computer, 2007. pp. 76671.
5. Paolucci, Massimo; Sycara, Katia;
Nishimura,
Takuya & Srinivasan, Naveen. Toward a Semantic
Web e-commerce. In Proceedings of 6th
International Conference on Business Information
Systems (BIS 2003), Colorado Springs, USA, 2003.
6. Bose, Ranjit. Applying Semantic Web services to
web-based IS and applications. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Information
Technology, New Generations, IEEE Computer,
2008. pp. 1150-55.
7. "DAML+OIL
Reference
description.
http://
www.w3.org/TR/daml+oil-reference (accessed on 26
April 2011).
8. SOAP, UDDI and WSDL. http://www.enterprisecomponent.com/docs/ cxsLesson5.pdf (accessed
on 26 April 2011).
9. Paolucci, M.; Awamura, T.; Payne, T.R. & Sycara, K.
Semantic matching of web service capabilities. In
Proceedings of 6th IEEE International Symposium
on Wearable Computers (ISWC), Seathle,
Washington, USA, 2002.
10. Breslin, John & Decker, Stefan. The future of social
networks on the Internet: The need for semantics.
IEEE Internet Comput., 2007, 86-90.
11. Mika, Peter. Social networks and Semantic Web.
Springer, 2007. ISBN: 978-0-387-71000-6.

REFERENCES

12. Semantic Web: The actual fields of applications.
http://en.kioskea.net/faq/9880-semantic-Web-theactual-fields-of-applications (accessed on 26 April
2011).

1. Semantic Web. http://www.altova.com/semantic_
Web.html (accessed on 26 April 2011).

13. Tools. http://wiki.foaf-project.org/w/Tools (accessed
on 26 April 2011).

224

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

14. SIOC
applications.
http://sioc-project.org/
applications (accessed on 26 April 2011).
15. Abdullah, Rusli; Selamat, Mohd Hasan; Sahibudin,
Shamsul & Alias, Rose Alinda. A framework for
knowledge management system implementation in
collaborative environment for higher learning
institution. J. Know. Manage. Practice, 2005, 6.
16. Che Cob, Zaihisma & Abdullah, Rusli. Ontologybased Semantic Web services: Framework for
knowledge management system. In International
Symposium on Information Technology. ITSim 2008,
Malaysia, 2008. pp. 1-8.
17. Fensel, Dieter; Harmelen, Frank Van; Klein, Michel
& Akkermans, Hans. On-to-knowledge: Ontologybased tools for knowledge management. In

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(4)

Proceedings of the e-Business and eWork
(EMMSEC) Conference, Madrid, Spain, 2000.
About the Authors
Ms Misha Mehra is a graduate in computer
engineering from Jamia Millia Islamia. She is
presently working as a Scientist at DESIDOC
and handling software and Intranet Web services.
She has also written technical papers on use of
open source technology in library automation.
Shri Nishant Kumar is presently working as a
Scientist at DESIDOC. He is an engineering graduate
and has seven years of experience in the field
of Internet and Intranet Web services. He has
also worked in the field of data mining and machine
learning. He has presented five research/technical
papers in various conferences including two National
conferences.

225

