DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 5, September 2011, pp. 340-347
© 2011, DESIDOC

Lorenz Curves Determine Partial Orders for
Comparing Network Structures
Ronald Rousseau
Antwerp University, University of Antwerp, IBW, Venusstraat 35, B-2000 Antwerpen, Belgium
and
KHBO (Association K.U.Leuven), Faculty of Engineering Technology,
Zeedijk 101, B-8400 Oostende, Belgium
and
K.U.Leuven, Dept. Mathematics,Celestijnenlaan 200B, B-3000 Leuven (Heverlee), Belgium
E-mail: ronald.rousseau@khbo.be

ABSTRACT
Networks can be studied from different points of view. In this paper, it is shown that the traditional
Lorenz curve and some of its generalisations can be used for characterising inequality in network properties.
Each type of Lorenz curve determines a partial order in a set of networks and a Gini-type index can be
associated to each of these curves. The following types of Lorenz curves, each related to a different type
of inequality in network properties and resulting in a different partial order, are briefly discussed: (a)
Classical Lorenz curves and evenness measures; (b) intrinsic diversity profiles (or k-dominance curves)
and associated measures of diversity; (c) generalised Lorenz curves as introduced by Shorrocks, that are
not scale invariant but take absolute numbers into account; (d) weighted Lorenz curves for comparisons
with an internal or external standard; and (e) Lorenz-type curve introduced to perform source per source
comparisons of items. This paper claims that the Lorenz curves and the Gini index are universal tools for
studying inequality, including inequality in network properties.
Keywords: Inequality, networks, Lorenz curves, Gini index

1. INTRODUCTION
With the advent of the internet and the world wide
web, and renewed interest in social networks, business
networks, and citation networks, the scientific activities
related to network theory have, over the latest decade,
grown at an unprecedented scale1-2. Not only the number
of network studies has grown, but also the size itself of
the networks studied. As the studied networks have
become so big visualising them adequately becomes
almost impossible. In such cases methods of descriptive
statistics may still provide useful information about
structural characteristics of the networks. Moreover,
different approaches, studying various aspects of
network structure, are necessary. Whatever the
approach taken, precise definitions are called for.
Degree centrality (in-degree, out-degree in a directed
network), closeness centrality, and betweenness
centrality are all characteristics of nodes2-3. When the
network is subdivided into groups, the nodes have global
and local Q-measure values4-5.

In this paper, the general term ‘array of node
properties’ has been used to indicate the ordered set of
values of one of these characteristic values. More
generally, the terminology of sources producing items
(nodes having certain network characteristic values)
have been used. For the sake of simplicity, the paper will
mainly focus on undirected networks and exclude
networks without any link. It is recalled that the h-index
has been defined for node properties too6. This aspect,
however, will not be studied here. Only ‘complete’
networks-not samples-studied at a precise moment in
time will be discussed.
Dynamical aspects and estimation problems fall
outside the scope of this contribution. Modelling using
continuous curves is not discussed either. Many of the
points made here are already made in the sociological,
economical, and ecological literature. Hence, only most
appropriate references have been given. The terms
‘network’ and ‘graph’ are used interchangeably.
340

Besides giving rise to a partial order satisfying the
permutation invariance and the scale invariance
property, this ranking also satisfies the Dalton’s transfer
principle and the replication property. A short explanation
of these notions has been included.Any array of node
properties gives rise to precisely one classical Lorenz
curve (while the opposite is not true at all). It is assumed
that the reader is familiar with classical Lorenz curves
(Fig. 1) but just recall that there are two versions: a
concave one and a convex one. For the convex form, the
node properties are ranked from low to high and ranking
from high to low yields the concave variant (Fig. 2).
These two approaches are mathematically equivalent.
The convex form uses the array X = (x1, …, xN) ranked
from smallest to largest. The corresponding Lorenz curve
connects
the
origin
(0,0)
with
the
points

⎛ j ∑ j xi ⎞
⎜ , iN=1 ⎟ for j = 1,.....N .
⎜ N ∑ xi ⎟
i =1
⎝
⎠

Cumulative proportion of items

The number of nodes in a network and the inequality
or evenness in their properties are two basic notions
related to network structures. The number of nodes is a
simple notion, which is, at least theoretically,
unambiguous. In practice, however, there might be
serious difficulties as to when to consider two objects as
different (what is a webpage?) or whether or not to
include particular actors (is this author a computer
scientist, and hence she belongs to the corresponding
network of computer scientists or is she active in
information retrieval?). In any case, evenness is an even
more subtle notion. It is defined as the relative
contribution of nodes, actually present or assumed to be
present. The author agrees with Taillie7 and Gosselin8 that
the classical Lorenz curve9 is the perfect representation
of evenness ranking, being independent of the number of
nodes concerned10.

Cumulative proportion of items

2. EVENNESS

Cumulative proportion of sources
Figure 1. Convex Lorenz curve for evenness. X—Lorenz
curve of the array (1, 3, 6, 10, 20), while D—diagonal
representing perfect evenness.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

Cumulative proportion of sources
Figure 2. Concave form of the same situation as in Fig. 1.

Considering the convex form, one obtains a partial
order where one Lorenz curve corresponds to a higher
degree of evenness as another one if it is situated above
the other. Highest evenness occurs for the diagonal line,
corresponding with perfect evenness. As Lorenz curves
may intersect, this construction yields a partial (not a
complete or total) order, referred to as the Lorenz
dominance order.
Permutation invariance refers to the fact that
evenness is not a property of individual nodes but of a
network as a whole. Scale invariance means that node
properties differing by a proportionality factor are
considered equivalent. As Lorenz curves are drawn
using proportions they are automatically scale invariant.
Dalton’s transfer principle11 states that when a node
property, say the degree centrality of a node with a small
number of connections decreases in favour of a node
that has already more connections, evenness must
decrease. It has been shown that the Lorenz order meets
this transfer principle. Finally, the replication property,
also due to Dalton, says that the evenness of any
replication of a network must be equal to the evenness of
the original network. In other words, the evenness of the
node array (2,3,5,8) is equal to that of (2,3,5,8,2,3,5,8)=
(2,2,3,3,5,5,8,8), which is equal to that of
(2,2,2,2,2,3,3,3,3,3,5,5,5,5,5,8,8,8,8,8). As replication
has no influence on the Lorenz curve also this
requirement is clearly satisfied. It is noted that this
property is probably of less practical importance in a
network context. Rings and fully connected networks are
perfectly even for degree centrality.
An evenness function E is a function that associates
a non-negative number to each network array. It must,
341

Gini Evenness Index
The Gini evenness index G, is equal to twice the area
under the convex Lorenz curve, or 1 minus twice the area
between the Lorenz curve and the diagonal. If X = (xj),
denotes a network property array, the Gini
j=1,…,N
evenness index is calculated as:

G '( X ) =

⎞ 1
2 ⎛ N
⎜
N +1− j) x j ⎟ −
2 ⎜∑(
⎟ N
μ N ⎝ j =1
⎠

(1)

where, the xjs are ranked from low-to-high and μ
denotes the mean of the set {xj}.
The modified Gini-Simpson index, Ë is defined as:
Λ( X ) =

1
2

⎛x ⎞
N ∑⎜ j ⎟
j =1 ⎝ S ⎠
N

(2)

where, S denotes the sum of the X-array:
N

S =∑ xj
j =1

The reciprocal of the coefficient of variation:
1/ V.
1 μ
This evenness measure is defined as =
, where,
V σ
σ denotes the standard deviation of the set {xj} (the
components of the array X).
The adapted Shannon-Wiener index, H’, is:

H '( X ) =

1
⎛ xj ⎛ x j ⎞⎞
ln(N ) + ∑ ⎜⎜ ln ⎜ ⎟ ⎟⎟
j =1 ⎝ S
⎝ S ⎠⎠
N

(3)

Note that this index is not defined (or equal to ∞ ) for
the perfect evenness situation. It can be concluded that
striving for a total order representing evenness is a futile
endeavour. A partial order is the best one can achieve.

3. INTRINSIC DIVERSITY PROFILES:
COMBINING EVENNESS WITH NUMBER OF
NODES PRESENT
In many situations one can include the number of
nodes into a measure describing the whole network. For
instance, one can make a distinction between different
fully-connected networks. It has been shown12 that if no
zeros occur in the property array, then the intrinsic
342

Cumulative proportion of items

moreover, respect the Lorenz partial order. This means
that if array X has LX as its Lorenz curve and array Y has
LY as its Lorenz curve, and if LX is strictly above LY (in the
convex form) then E(X)>E(Y). The examples10 of
functions E satisfying this requirement are10:

Cumulative proportion of sources
Figure 3. Intrinsic diversity profiles for two arrays with the
same evenness: X = (1,3,5,10) = (10,5,3,1) and X1 =
(10,10,5,5,3,3,1,1); X -<< X1.

diversity profile as introduced by Patil and Taillie13 in
ecological investigations is the best possible choice.
Under the term ‘best possible’, one means that the
resulting partial order is the strongest one among a
number of reasonable candidates12. Also note that the
intrinsic diversity profiles are equivalent to k-dominance
curves as introduced by Lambshead14 These curves can
be drawn as follows: assume that node properties are
ranked from high-to-low. Then the cumulative number of
nodes is shown (not normalised) on the abscissa. As
ordinates the cumulative proportion of the network
property under investigation is used. Figure 3 illustrates
the concept. These profiles introduce a partial order
denoted as: -<<. If X -<< X1, then the intrinsic diversity
profile of X never lies under the profile for X1. In this
partial order, perfect evenness for N nodes is less
‘diverse’ (borrowing a term from ecology) than perfect
evenness for N + 1 nodes (while their evenness is the
same). A measure respecting the partial order for
intrinsic diversity profiles (-<<) is obtained by taking
twice the area between the intrinsic diversity profile, the
line x = 0 (the ordinate axis) and the line y = 1. This
measure is called the adapted Gini coefficient (AG). It is
calculated as:
AG( X ) =

⎞
2 ⎛ N
⎜∑ j xj ⎟ − 1
S ⎝ j =1
⎠

(4)

where, X = (x1, x2, …, xN) and the xj’s are ordered
from high to low; S is the sum of the xj’s as before.
Applying an atan-transformation yields a normalised
function (a function taking values between 0 and 1).
Recall that one requires that no array contains a zero
value otherwise problems arise with the construction of
intrinsic diversity profiles. Yet, zeros may occur in
practice. Indeed, when studying a specified set of nodes
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

it may happen that some are not connected at all.
Consider now, for instance, X = (4, 2, 1, 0) and Y = (4, 2,
1). The evenness of X is strictly smaller than that of Y;
hence one would expect that the intrinsic diversity of Y is
larger than that of X. This does not happen, showing that
intrinsic diversity profiles cannot cope with null classes.
Another variation on the Lorenz curve theme, namely
shifted Lorenz curves, does not have this drawback.
Here, the Lorenz evenness curve is essentially shifted 1/
(2N) to the right. Concretely, the shifted Lorenz curve
connects the origin with the points
⎛ j + 0.5 ∑ j xi
⎜
, ij=1
⎜ N
∑ i =1 xi
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

where j = 0, …, N-1, x0 = 0; the curve ends in the point
(1,1). Data are ranked from smallest to largest. For more
details about this construction, one can refer to paper by
Rousseau15.

4. SHORROCKS’ GENERALISED LORENZ
CURVES
In many studies, not only the number of nodes and
the relative properties are important, but also the values
of these properties themselves. The previous approaches
did not take this aspect into account. Economists
studying household incomes face the same problem.
Besides, the number of households and the inequality
between their incomes, also the absolute income plays a
role. To cope with this problem Shorrocks16 proposed the
use of generalised Lorenz curves. Rousseau12 referred
to these curves as intrinsic stability profiles. A

generalised Lorenz curve is simply a convex Lorenz
curve where each ordinate value is multiplied by the
average value under consideration, μ (average income
in Shorrocks’ case). This yields a new partial order
where situations with a higher average number of
property values are considered to be more unequal than
those with a lower average value. This approach clearly
has the disadvantage that it is not anymore scaleinvariant, but in cases where the counting measure is
used, as for degree centrality, this is of no importance.
Also, here twice the area under the convex generalised
Lorenz curve is an acceptable diversity measure of Ginitype. This Gini measure, however, is not anymore
bounded by one, but again, one may apply an atantransformation if this is considered desirable (Fig. 4).

5. COMPARISON WITH AN AVERAGE OR
HYPOTHESISED SITUATION: WEIGHTED
LORENZ CURVES
Sometimes one is not interested in the actual
inequality among node properties, but it is more
interesting to study how different the distribution of values
is wrt to an average or a hypothesised situation. An
average can be considered as an internal standard, a
hypothesised situation as an external standard. Often this
external standard is a factor hypothesised to be the main
factor in explaining observed differences in node
properties.
Consider the following hypothetical table of crossclassified data (Table 1): a row classification consisting
of M rows and a column classification consisting of N
columns, with M, N ≥ 2, e.g. paper by Rousseau17. It is
assumed that columns are different types of actors, while
rows refer to different clusters or regions. Cell values
give the sum of all node centralities.

Cumulative proportion of items

Table 1.

Hypothetical cross tabulation (3x4) of actors and
regions

Species

A1

A2

A3

A4

Average: R

R1

20

140

200

140

125

R2

25

10

20

95

37.5

R3

15

90

80

65

62.5

Average: A

20

80

100

100

Clusters or regions

Cumulative proportion of sources
Figure 4. Generalised Lorenz curves: B corresponds to the
array (1, 3, 5, 10) with an average of 19/4, while A
corresponds to the array (2, 6, 10, 20) with an
average of 38/4=19/2.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

Given the data of Table 1, one might assume that for
actor type 3 available funding (just as an example) is the
main factor explaining the observed difference in links
between regions. In that case, one may use the 3-array
of available funding (not shown) and compare it to the
A3-column. Here, funding acts as an external standard.
On the other hand, one might also be interested in
studying how the evenness of the actor array of a
particular region compares with average actor linking.
This average array plays then the role of an internal
standard. Note that we are not considering the complete
343

analysis of a given contingency table. This is another
type of study. In both cases (external or internal
standard), one uses weighted Lorenz curves and
measures respecting the partial order determined by
these weighted Lorenz curves. Weighted Lorenz curves
are constructed as follows. Let S= (s1,s2,…,sN) denote
the standard array and let X= (x1,x2,…,xN) denote the
studied array. This array is the one we want to compare
with the standard. Note that indices must correspond and
that the studied array and the standard, one have in a
natural way the same number of cells (or sources). If,
e.g., X denotes the number of links of actors in different
regions and S denotes funding, then xj and sj must refer
to the same region. It is assumed, moreover, that none of
the components of the standard array S is zero. In order
to construct the weighted Lorenz curve for comparison
with a standard the components of both arrays are first
ordered in such a way that
x1 x 2
x
≥
≥L≥ N
s1 s2
sN

(5)

This ranking leads to a concave curve. Using the
other ranking leads to a convex representation. Next we
normalise the arrays S and X, leading to arrays W and
AX, where components are determined as:
aj =

xj

and w j =

N

∑x
k =1

k

sj
N

∑s
k =1

k

(6)

Figure 5. Weighted Lorenz curve (concave form) for the array
X = (1, 3, 5, 10) compared with S = (1, 1, 7, 1); after
re-ranking and normalising the curve based on AX
= (10/19, 3/19, 1/19, 5/19) and W = (1/10, 1/10, 1/10, 7/
10) are drawn.

The interpretation of this index is the same as that for
the (unweighted) Gini index, namely, twice the area
above the weighted concave Lorenz curve. When the
weighted Lorenz curve coincides with the diagonal, the
weighted Gini diversity index is 1.
(b) Asymmetric (or weighted)
coefficient of variation:

Note that normalising does not change the order.
Finally, the weighted Lorenz curve is defined as the
broken line connecting the origin (0, 0) to the points with
components
j
⎛ j
⎞
⎜ ∑ w k , ∑ ak ⎟
k =1
⎝ k =1
⎠ j = 1,K,N

Vw2 ( X ) =

∑
j =1

6.

Functions that respect this partial order are
sometimes referred to as measures of asymmetric
relative diversity18. The term ‘relative’ refers to the fact
that one compares with a standard. The term
‘asymmetric’ stresses the fact that the roles of the
standard and the array under study cannot be
interchanged. Examples of such measures are:
(a) Weighted Gini diversity index19:
GW ' ( X ) = 1−

344

1
2

N

N

∑∑

i =1 j =1

w i a j − w j ai

(8)

(a

1
j

−wj )

2

squared

−1

wj

(9)

This measure takes values between 0 and ∞ .

(7)

For a fixed standard, these weighted Lorenz curves
again introduce a partial order in the set of N-arrays. Fig.
5 provides an example of a weighted Lorenz curve.

N

inverse

SOURCE PER SOURCE COMPARISON OF
NODE PROPERTIES: DIFFERENCES OF
RELATIVE VALUES

In this approach, introduced by Egghe and
Rousseau20, one directly compares relative arrays.
Relative contributions of the same sources (nodes), but
at different times are compared by taking differences.
These differences may be positive or negative, and one
compares with the zero-array.
A type of Lorenz curve adapted to this situation has
been constructed as follows. Let X= (xj) j=1,…,N and Y = (yj)
be two N-arrays and let A= (aj) j=1,…,N and B= (bj)
j=1,…,N
denote
their relative arrays (sum of all components
j=1,…,N
equal to one). Then the components of the difference
array D= (dj) j=1,., N with dj = aj-bj are ranked from largestto-smallest. Finally, again using partial sums, one puts:
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

j

j

t j = ∑ dk = ∑ ( ak − bk )
k =1

k =1

(10)

The corresponding Lorenz curve is obtained by
joining the origin (0, 0) with the points with coordinates
⎛ j
⎞
⎜ N ,t j ⎟
⎝
⎠ j =1,L,N

( 11 )

Note that this curve always ends in the point (1, 0).
For this reason one may call it the Lorenz bridge. (See
Fig. 6 as an example).
Similar to the other Lorenz curves also the Lorenz
bridge leads to a partial order and functions respecting
this partial order are the ones one is interested in. Such
functions are sometimes referred to as measures of
symmetric relative concentration. Here, the term ‘relative’
again refers to the fact that one compares with a
standard (the zero line). Examples of such measures
are:
Gini diversity (bridge) function:
1 N
∑ jd j
N j =1

(12)

where, the dj are ranked in decreasing order. This is the
area of the unit square (namely 1) minus the area under
the Lorenz bridge. The Gini bridge function takes the
value one in the case of perfect correspondence.
Another acceptable measure of symmetric relative
diversity is the adapted Simpson index of relative
difference:
Vr2 =

7. OTHER DEVELOPMENTS AND RECENT USE
OF THESE NOTIONS
7.1 TIP-and TOP-Curves

Figure 6. Lorenz bridge for the arrays B = (0.6, 0.2, 0.1, 0.1);
A = (0.1, 0.2, 0.2, 0.5).

Gr' ( X ,Y ) = 1 +

This measure is related to the squared coefficient of
variation, hence the notation Vr2. It can be concluded that
the exact relation between different forms of Lorenz
curves and the appropriate measures follows from a
general mathematical theory put forward by Egghe21.

1
N

N ∑ d j2

(13)

In socio-economic studies, scientists have often
focused their attention on people with the lowest income.
They introduced the notion of poverty line, a threshold
line or value such that if someone’s income falls below
this threshold income, this person is considered to live in
poverty. Inequality among the poor with respect to the
whole situation, e.g., the whole country, is then studied
by an adaptation of Shorrocks’ generalised Lorenz
curves, the so-called TIP-curves22. In network studies, as
in research evaluation studies, however, one is usually
more interested in the most productive sources rather
than in the low producers. For this reason, the opposite
of TIP-curves, called TOP-curves has been introduced,
as these are designed to study the most productive
sources23,24. Important notions when studying the most
productive sources are incidence, intensity and
inequality among the top. For more information one can
refer to papers by Rousseau23, et al. and Rafols &
Meyer25.

7.2 There is More to Inequality Measurement
Than Variety and Evenness
It has recently been argued25 that besides the total
number of sources (variety) and their evenness
(balance) there is another dimension to inequality
measurement25. This third factor is the disparity. This is a
measure for the degree to which sources themselves are
different. The Rao-Stirling measure (or quadratic
entropy) is proposed when all three aspects are to be
taken into account26,27. Rafols & Meyer25 used this
approach in their study on interdisciplinarity. The RaoStirlling measure is further studied by Leydesdorff &
Rafols28 in order to find out if it can really play a role in
benchmarking interdisciplinarity on the journal level.
They found that this measure was rather sensitive to the
distance measure involved in its calculation.

7.3 Applications of Lorenz-type Curves and
Gini Index in Informetrics
The Rafols-Meyer article mentioned above brings us
to a short review of recent applications of Lorenz curves
or inequality measures in informetrics, but no attempt is
made at being complete. These studies are not
necessarily applicable to networks. Egghe29 showed that

j =1

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

345

the g-index30 is an indicator that respects the Lorenz
dominance order in the case of a fixed number of
sources. Liu & Rousseau31 use the Gini index to
investigate if different h-type indices are able to separate
classes in a library classification system, and this based
on book loans, while Chiang32, et al. use a page view Gini
index to determine the Web 2.0-ness of Web users. It
turns out that the standard Lorenz curve is a well-known
tool in the field as shown e.g. in Larivière33, et al. Yet, the
more special Lorenz-type curves and associated
measures are rarely used. It is noted though that Egghe
& Rousseau34 characterise own-group preference by a
weighted Lorenz curve, while Albarrán35, et al. use the
idea of incidence, intensity, and inequality (as in TOPcurves) to study high and low citation impacts. Burrell36
emphasised that concentration studies should
incorporate a time dimension and illustrated how this can
be done.

8. CONCLUSIONS
It is concluded that the Lorenz curve and Gini index
are universal tools for studying many aspects of network
theory, or more general, any unequal situation. It is
important to be precise in stating the aim of diversity or
evenness measurements, and carefully choose the
corresponding Lorenz curve and Gini index17.

REFERENCES
1. Newman, M.E.J. The structure and function of
complex networks. SIAM Review, 2003, 45, 167256.
2. Otte, E. & Rousseau, R. Social network analysis: A
powerful strategy, also for the information sciences.
J. Infor. Sci., 2002, 28(6), 441-53.
3. Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. Social network analysis.
Cambridge University Press, 1994.
4. Guns, R. & Rousseau, R. Gauging the bridging
function of nodes in a network: Q-measures for
networks with a finite number of subgroups. In 12th
International Conference on Scientometrics and
Informetrics (ISSI 2009), edited by Birger Larsen &
Jacqueline Leta. BIREME & Federal University of
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 2009. pp. 131-42.
5. Guns, R.; Liu, Y.X. & Mahbuba, D. Q-measures and
betweenness centrality in a collaboration network: A
case study of the field of informetrics.
Scientometrics, 2011, 87(1), 133-47.
6. Schubert, A.; Korn, A. & Telcs, A. Hirsch-type
indices for characterizing networks. Scientometrics,
2009, 78(2), 375-82.

346

7. Taillie, C. Species equitability: A comparative
approach. In Ecological diversity in theory and
practice, edited by J.F.Grassle, G.P. Patil, W. Smith
& C. Taillie. International Cooperative Publishing
House, Fairland, MD, USA. 1979. pp. 51-65.
8. Gosselin, F. Lorenz partial order: The best known
logical framework to define evenness indices.
Community Ecology, 2001, 2, 197-07.
9. Lorenz, M.O. Methods of measuring concentration of
wealth. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., 1905, 9, 209-19.
10. Nijssen, D.; Rousseau, R. & Van Hecke, P. The
Lorenz curve: A graphical representation of
evenness. Coenoses, 1998, 13, 33-38.
11. Dalton, H. The measurement of the inequality of
incomes. The Economic Journal, 1920, 30, 348-61.
12. Rousseau, R.; Van Hecke, P.; Nijssen, D. & Bogaert,
J. The relationship between diversity profiles,
evenness and species richness based on partial
ordering. Environ. Ecol. Stat., 1999, 6, 211-23.
13. Patil, G.P. & Taillie, C. An overview of diversity. In
Ecological diversity in theory and practice, edited by
J.F.Grassle, G.P. Patil, W. Smith & C. Taillie.
International Cooperative Publishing House,
Fairland, MD, USA. 1979. pp. 3-27.
14. Lambshead, P.J.D.; Platt, H.M. & Shaw, K.M.
Detection of differences among assemblages of
benthic species based on assessment of dominance
and diversity. J. Natural History (London), 1981, 17,
859-74.
15. Rousseau, R. Concentration and diversity measures:
Dependence on the number of classes. Belgian J.
Oper. Res. Stat. Comp. Sci., 1992, 32, 99-126.
16. Shorrocks, A.F. Ranking income
Economica, 1983, 50, 3-17.

distributions.

17. Rousseau, R. Concentration and evenness
measures as macro-level scientometric indicators. In
Keyan pingjia yu daxue pingjia (Research evaluation
and university evaluation), edited by Z. Wang & J.
Jiang. Red Flag Publishing House, Beijing, 2001. pp.
72-89. (In Chinese)
18. Egghe, L. & Rousseau, R. Symmetric and
asymmetric theory of relative concentration and
applications. Scientometrics, 2001, 52, 261-90.
19. Theil, H. Economics and information theory. NorthHolland, Amsterdam, 1967.
20. Egghe, L. & Rousseau,
asymmetric concentration

R. Symmetric and
theory of relative

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

concentration and applications. Scientometrics,
2001, 52(2), 261-90.
21. Egghe, L. Construction of concentration measures
for general Lorenz curves using Riemann-Stieltjes
integrals. Math. Compu. Modell., 2002, 35, 1149163.
22. Jenkins, S.P. & Lambert, P.J. Three ‘I’s of poverty
curves, with an analysis of UK poverty trends.
Oxford Eco. Papers, 1997, 49, 317-27.
23. Egghe, L.; Rousseau, R. & Rousseau, S. TOPcurves. JASIST, 2007, 58(6), 777-85.
24. Rousseau, S.; Verbeke, T. & Rousseau, R.
Evaluating environmental and resource economics
journals: A TOP-curve approach. Rev. Environ. Eco.
Policy, 2009, 3(2), 270-87.
25. Rafols, I. & Meyer, M. Diversity and network
coherence as indicators of interdisciplinarity: Case
studies in bionanoscience. Scientometrics, 2010,
82(2), 263-87.
26. Rao, C.R. Diversity and dissimilarity coefficients: a
unified approach. Theo. Population Biol., 1982,
21(1), 24-43.
27. Stirling, A. A general framework for analysing
diversity in science, technology and society. J.
Royal Soc. Interface, 2007, 4(15), 707-19.
28. Leydesdorff, L. & Rafols, I. Indicators of the
interdisciplinarity of journals: Diversity, centrality,
and citations. Journal of Informetrics, 2011, 5(1),
87-100.
29. Egghe, L. An econometric property of the g-index.
Info. Proc. Manag., 2009, 45(4), 484-89.
30. Egghe, L. Theory and practise of the g-index.
Scientometrics, 2006, 69(1), 131-52.
31. Liu, Y.X. & Rousseau, R. Properties of Hirsch-type
indices: The case of library classification categories.
Scientometrics, 2009, 79(2), 235-48.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

32. Chiang, I.-P.; Huang, C.-Y. & Huang, C.-W.
Characterizing web users’ degree of web 2.0-ness.
JASIST, 2009, 60(7), 1349-357.
33. Larivière, V.; Macaluso, B.; Archambault, E. &
Gingras, Y. Which scientific elite? On the
concentration of funding, productivity and citations.
In ISSI 2009-12th International Conference on
Scientometrics and Informetrics, edited by Birger
Larsen & Jacqueline Leta. BIREME & Federal
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 2009.
pp. 576-85.
34. Egghe, L. & Rousseau, R. How to measure owngroup preference? A novel approach to a
sociometric problem. Scientometrics, 2004, 59(2),
233-52.
35. Albarràn, P.; OrtunÞo, I. & Ruiz-Castillo, J. Highand low-impact citation measures: Empirical
applications. Journal of Informetrics, 2011, 5(1),
122-45.
36. Burrell, Q.L. Time-dependent aspects of coconcentration in informetrics. Scientometrics, 2007,
73(2), 161-74.
About the Author
Mr Ronald Rousseau is the President of the
International Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics
(ISSI). He is a Professor in mathematics at the
Engineering School of the Catholic College for Higher
Education Bruges-Ostend. He is also a professor
associated to the Catholic University of Louvain (Leuven)
and a Guest Professor at Antwerp University, School for
Library and Information Science. He holds two
doctorates: one in Mathematics and one in Library and
Information Science. He received the Prize of the
Belgian Academy of Science for his mathematical work
and the Derek J. de Solla Price award (2001) for his
work in scientometrics. He received an Honorary
Professorship from Henan Normal University (China).

347

CALL FOR PAPERS
DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology (DJLIT) in its endeavour to
keep its readers up-to-date about the current happenings in the field of library and
information science is planning to bring out Special Issues on the following subjects.
Original ideas, theoretical and application-oriented papers and case studies in the
context of the themes in the digital form (MS Word) may be sent to the Editor, DJLIT.
The paper will be published only after peer-evaluation by the respective Guest Editors.
Topics of the Special Issues


Methodological Issues and Problems in LIS Research



Health Information Systems and Services



Intellectual Property Rights



Open Source Software



E-Books

Please send your paper/queries to:
The Editor
DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology
Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre
Defence Research and Development Organisation
4th Floor, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
Phone No. 011-23902469, 011-23902470
E-mail: djlit@desidoc.drdo.in

Prospective author(s) can submit their paper through our online submission system at
http://publications.drdo.gov.in/ojs in MS Word format for the fast processing of paper.

348

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

