DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 5, September 2011, pp.395-400
© 2011, DESIDOC

Web 2.0 and Libraries: Facts or Myths
Mohammad Aqil, Parvez Ahmad, and Mohammad Asad Siddique
King Saud University Saudi Arabia
E-mail: maqil.c@ksu.edu.sa; pahmad.c@ksu.edu.sa; msiddique.c@ksu.edu.sa

ABSTRACT
The objective and scope of this paper is to assess and highlight the potential of Web 2.0 in the context
of libraries. The concept of Web 2.0 such as social networks, RSS feeds, blogs, streaming media, podcasts,
Wikis, tags, mashups, etc. is defined and the possible applications in various library functions and activities
are mentioned. In addition, the difference between the Web 2.0 and Web 1.0 is given and how during the past
several years, new advances in web technologies have enabled libraries to create new interactive services,
such as virtual reference services, personalised interfaces of online catalogues, and audio-visual media that
can be downloaded by the user community irrespective of their physical locations. Thus, these emerging webbased features (Web 2.0) are opening new avenues and giving libraries the ability to offer the improved,
customer-driven services to the user communities.
Keywords: Web 2.0, library 2.0, world wide web, social networking

1. INTRODUCTION
The Web 2.0 refers to the interactive, user-centred
design of the world wide web where users not only access
the web content but at the same time generate the web
content. The term ‘Web 2.0’ was coined in 1999 by Darcy
DiNucci. Its rise and popularity began in 2004, when
O’Reilly Media and MediaLive organised the first Web 2.0
conference. In the opening remarks, John Battelle and
Tim O’Reilly outlined their definition of the ‘Web as
Platform’, where software applications are built upon the
web as opposed to upon the desktop. They further
argued, that “customers are building your business for
you”. “Users generating the content (in the form of ideas,
text, videos, or pictures) could be harnessed to create
value”, they argued. O’Reilly1, et al. compared Web 2.0
with what they called ‘Web 1.0’. They associated Web
1.0 with the business models of Netscape and the
Encyclopedia Britannica Online2. According to
Miller3,“Web 2.0 applications work for the user, and are
able to locate and assemble content that meets our
needs as users, rather than forcing us to conform to the
paths laid out for us by content owners or their
intermediaries”.
At the moment there is a hot debate, questioning the
existence of Web 2.0. Many argue that Web 2.0 is not a
new phenomenon but the very features of Web 2.0 were
Received: 14 December 2010; Revised: 16 May 2011

already available on Amazon.com as early as Amazon
came into existence. As O’Reilly1 describes, “Web 2.0
has clearly taken hold, with more than 9.5 million
citations in Google. But there’s still a huge amount of
disagreement about just what Web 2.0 means, with some
people decrying it as a meaningless marketing buzzword,
and others accepting it as the new conventional wisdom”.
Figure 1 gives an idea and the difference between the
Web 1.0 and Web 2.0. In the Web 1.0 environment the
user community is less connected or interaction between
the various communities and group of people are
restricted; sites are passive or read only; content is static
and rarely changed; sites are closed or less collaborative
while the Web 2.0 environment invites participationsubmitting new posts, rating and commenting on content;
content is dynamic, collaborative, and changed quite
often; the user community is potentially well connected
with one another, therefore not only able to share the
information but also contribute web content at the wider
extent.

2. LIBRARY 2.0
The idea of Library 2.0 was first generated by Michael
Casey and published on his blog, library crunch in 2006.
The idea is a transformation of the library services-the way
they are delivered to the user community, basically
allowing the library services to operate in an interactive,
395

Figure 1. (a) Web 1.0 phenomenon and (b) Web 2.0 phenomenon

collaborative atmosphere driven by community needs4.
Library 2.0 encourages synchronous social interactions
between library staff and users. It is evident from the
characteristics of library services that many things of
what libraries implemented in the first generation of web
are static.
The earlier version of the web-based library instruction
and services were text-based and non-interactive where
library users have very limited freedom in terms of their
interaction with library staff and user community. As
Casey and Savastinuk4 stated that, “Any service, physical
or virtual, that successfully reaches users, is evaluated
frequently, and makes use of customer input is a Library
2.0 service. Even older, traditional services can be Library
2.0 if criteria are met.” Moreover, various aspects and
utilities of Web 2.0 are growing by leaps and bounds with
each passing day and something new is emerging and
being added to the ever expanding universe of knowledge.
Web world is, therefore, a great source and channel of
information to share ideas and experiences. It is
recommended that librarians should welcome and adapt
this new concept, i.e., Web 2.0, in order to survive in the
changing technological world.

3. WEB 2.0 TOOLS AND APPLICATIONS IN
LIBRARIES
Some of the important aspects of Web 2.0 vis-à-vis
libraries and information centres are discussed.

3.1 Blogs/Weblogs
A blog is a website, which is updated very frequently,
post dated and arranged in reverse chronological order. A
blogger maintains his/her blog with varied and unlimited
information depending upon the purpose and nature of the
blog where everybody can read and write their views and
ideas without changing the original content. According to
Reichardt & Harder5, “In very simple terms, a weblog, or
396

blog, is a website resembling a personal journal that is
updated with individual entries or postings”.
The most important application of blogs in libraries is
that, they can be used as a platform for in-house
publication. For example, a library may set up a blog as a
part of its permanent collection development tool where
the user community can suggest titles of their choice and
interest. Moreover, book reviews published on the library
blog may also help the user community to choose and
suggest an appropriate title for library collection. Libraries
can also provide reference services through the blog
where users can post their comments and queries and
receive real-time responses from reference departments
where these questions and answers can be tagged and
automatically archived for future users.
As Reichardt & Harder5 stated, “The traditional
solution for many reference teams has been to develop a
reference binder or book…A reference blog is one
alternative that could possibly help this situation.” In
addition, blogs could be useful to update the user
community about the new arrivals and new titles added in
the library collection, list of the books recently published
in a particular area of subjects as a part of current
awareness services.
Other possible implications of a blog in a library
culture could be, posting the overdue notification, items
returned or reserved by a user, library discussion forums,
a library newsletter where monthly progress and events of
the library can be published; it can also be used as a
marketing tool for propagating the various facilities and
library services among the user community and so on.
Receiving comments and feedback about the various
library services and library staff is another possible way to
implement the blog culture in libraries. For example,
University of British Columbia (UBC) library6, Vancouver,
provides up-to-date information to its user community on
various library services such as, events, resources,
news, etc.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

3.2 Wikis/Wikipedia
Wikis have emerged in 1995 and since then growing
by leap and bound. The most important characteristic of
wikis is that it allows users to create and edit web content
freely. Compared to other information sources, wikis are
not very reliable and authentic, but this does not
undermine their the value and importance. As Godwin7
said, “Critics have been quick to point to lack of editorial
control, bias, inaccuracy, and lack of academic
credibility”.
Although the non-editorship and lack of peer review of
wikis is a great challenge to librarians, it does not mean
that users should avoid wikis; instead, users should use
the critical approach when depending on the wikis and “A
health warning should be given, with encouragement to
check information given against another source”6. Wikis
as information sources are certainly going to play a very
crucial role in future libraries. In addition, a wiki, as a
library service, can facilitate the social interaction among
librarians and the online user community. As users share
information on wiki through discussions, comments,
criticism, etc., a record of these discussions can archived
for future reference. Owing to its authenticity and
reliability, libraries may initially start this service with
some restrictions where users might be restricted from
direct addition and deletion in the wiki. Users can also
give their suggestions to the responsible authority for
further improvement in the content of the wiki. For
example, Jean and Alexander Heard Library Wiki
(Vanderbilt University)8 is available for the general public.
But the direct addition, deletion, and any kind of editing is
restricted. If a user wants to add some information into the
wiki he/she can directly contact the library.

3.3 Live Streaming Media
Streaming media is the multimedia content (audio &
video) that is constantly received by, and normally
presented to an end-user while it is being delivered by a
streaming provider. Although streaming videos were
widely employed before many of the so-called Web 2.0
technologies had not even been invented, the
synchronous attributes put the streaming videos into Web
2.0 phenomenon.
The concept of streaming media is another application
that libraries might adopt to deliver various information
services to end users. The modern libraries might
implement this concept to improve the delivery of
interactive multimedia library services right at the door of
library patrons such as the online tutorials coupled with
multimedia features and interactive video sessions.
Likewise, live user training sessions, library
orientation, and demonstration on how to use various
library services, such as online catalogues, to search the
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

online databases, discussions, library events and
exhibitions, etc. can be delivered directly to library
patrons through the live streaming videos. Similarly,
streaming media might become the part of audio video
collections of the future libraries as Maness9 has rightly
stated, “As media is created, libraries will inevitably be
the institutions responsible for archiving and providing
access to them.”

3.4 Tagging
A tag or meta-tag is a non-hierarchical keyword which
is assigned to a particular piece of information. Metadata
represents the subject of an item and helps in the retrieval
process. The idea of tags is not new to libraries as the
concept of keyword indexing, subject headings are
almost the same ‘tags’ in the Web 2.0 environment. In
contrast to subject headings and keywords, tags are
chosen informally and personally by the content creator
or by its viewer, depending upon the system.
On a website in which countless users tag its items,
this collection of tags called folksonomy. In the Web 2.0
environment, users can participate in the cataloguing
process by tagging the library collection. But tagging
creates the problem of standardised classification or
standardised subject heading which is a big issue as far
as libraries are concerned. Although the meta-tags and
standardised subject headings are not replacements of
each other, by adopting the Web 2.0 utilities, perhaps the
future libraries would be able to implement both the user
generated tags and standardised subject heading,
simultaneously, in their cataloguing system. Therefore,
the user community will have more options and shall be
able to use an integrated cataloging system based on the
librarian’s view point as well as users’ approach10.
As Kroski11 rightly mentioned on her blog infotangle,
“The advantages to top-down hierarchical taxonomies for
library collections are without question. For cataloging the
web, however, they just aren’t feasible. The new, ‘voice of
the people’ approach of folksonomies emerges at a time
when attitudes about information organisation and
retrieval are shifting and the technology is developing to
support them.”

3.5 Social Networking Websites
Social networks are based upon the software that
facilitate people to connect, collaborate, and form virtual
communities via internet. Normally social network sites
are full of features, which allow the user community to
send e-mails, post comments, share audio and video
files, take part in live chats, etc. As Barsky and Purdon12
righty said, “Social network sites offer a free and easy
way to create personal web pages and fill them with
content such as blogs, digital photographs, favorite
music, short video clips and much more.”
397

MySpace, Facebook, Orkut, Youtube, Flickr, Picasa,
etc., are the social networks that are very popular
nowadays. While MySpace, FaceBook, and orkut enable
users to share the information at various levels among the
network community; flickr and picasa enable the sharing
of pictures; and Youtube allows users to share their audiovisual files10. Recently, Library of Congress13 Prints and
Photographs Division joined hands with Flickr, the popular
photo sharing site, to provide new avenues to the library’s
photos and build new levels of interac-tion with the public.
Similarly, ‘Kete’14 an open source software developed by
the mother organisation of ‘Koha’ Katipo Communications
and the Horowhenua Library Trust enables the users to
collaboratively build and maintain their own digital
multimedia content. The user community builds the
repository by uploading images, audio, video, documents,
text, and then linking and discussing them. Therefore,
Kete14 can be deemed open source social networking
software for the library community. Other social networks
websites such as Goodreads15, is a social cataloging
website started in December 2006 by a software engineer
and entrepreneur named Otis Chandler. This website
allows the individuals to sign up and register books to
create their library catalogs and reading lists. It also
allows users to write reviews, rate the book, create their
own groups of book suggestions and discussions, etc.
Moreover, the website navigates the users on various
online bookshops such as worldcat.org to buy a particular
title. Goodreads15 had reached 4,100,000 members who
have added more than 110,000,000 books to their
shelves. Librarians can do many things with social
networks such as to create various subjects oriented
groups according to the interest of the specialised user
community. Moreover, librarians can also setup the
professional groups where they may discuss and share
their ideas on various issues related to cataloguing,
classification, collection development, reference services,
etc. Librarians can do many other things with social
networks depending upon the specific requirements and
changing needs of the library patrons and staff.

3.6 RSS Feeds
The RSS stands for ‘Rich Site Summary’ or ‘Real
Simple Syndication’. Weblogs and other sites can provide
a ‘feed’ in XML language which enables anyone to
subscribe the content and receive it on their chosen page,
thereby eliminating the need to visit the site repeatedly7. It
is a web utility which facilitates the publication of
frequently updated works—such as news headlines, blog
entries, and audio-video files in a standard format. It is a
channel for a subscriber to automatically receive updates
from blogs, newspapers, and podcasts.
Libraries may apply this concept to provide the
current awareness services to its user community,
upcoming new items, services, and new content which
398

have been added in the library collection and databases.
Updates on library services, events, exhibition etc. can
also be accessed by subscribing to the RSS feeds from
the library website. Zanin-Yost16 mentioned the utility of
RSS for libraries: libraries can inform others of purchases,
exhibitions or other events of the library; RSS saves the
time of librarian and user community as librarian has
choice which links can be distributed; and user has
choice what to receive or accept.
Cranfield University3, UK is a good example of the
many libraries which are already beginning to guide its
users through the web pages toward RSS feeds.

3.7 Instant Messaging
Instant messaging (IM), also known as synchronous
messaging allows real-time text communication between
individuals and groups. This utility has already been
adopted by many libraries especially in the western world.
Libraries can provide the reference services such as ‘chat
reference’ via IM applications where users can
communicate with reference librarians in a real time
environment or as they would in a face-to-face
communication.
Maness9 expressed the similar views, “The time will
almost certainly soon come when web reference is nearly
indistinguishable from face-to-face reference; librarians
and patrons will see and hear each other, and will share
screens and files.” There is plenty of free software
available such as skype, gtalk AIM, which can provide the
real-time face to face virtual reference services, through
which users can start the interactive video session with a
reference librarian. Though this concept is becoming very
popular in developed countries, it’s still not so popular in
the third world countries. Librarians of the third world
countries must pay their attention towards this as it is one
of the efficient tools to handle real-time reference queries.
A simple example can be of Chat services at Van Pelt/
Opie Library, Michigan Technological University17. It is
evident how the library has expanded its real-time
reference services to include both instant messaging (IM)
and embedded web chat. Both of the services are
available during reference desk hours and work best to get
quick answers to brief reference queries.

3.8 Web Podcasting
The term ‘podcasting’ was first mentioned by Ben
Hammersley in The Guardian newspaper in a February
2004 article, along with other proposed names for the new
medium and formally came into existence in the year
2005, when “podcast” was named word of the year by the
New Oxford American Dictionary18. A podcast (or nonstreamed webcast) is a series of digital media files (either
audio or video) that are released episodically and often
downloaded through RSS feed.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

The way information is delivered via podcasting makes
it significant and different from other methods of
accessing media files over the internet such as direct
download, or streamed webcasting.
Usually a list of all media files launched earlier and
recently on a particular aspect or series is maintained on
the network of the service provider. Podcasts use the RSS
feeds to distribute the latest information to its target
community. The users receive the new items
automatically or manually by checking the new updates.
Librarians can do a lot many things with podcasts. For
example, podcast could be very helpful for the children
with learning or reading disabilities. Podcasts could be a
good for kids as they normally like to read loudly. It is also
a beneficial and excellent learning tool for the partially
deaf, blind and low vision community. Also librarians can
record the stories from the books in public domain and
organise story telling sessions. The rare books and
documents which are in public domain and there is no
more copyright issues, can be provided as podcasts to
target user community18. Moreover, libraries might
propagate their important audio/video collections,
speeches of dignitaries and important personalities,
classroom lectures, multimedia presentations to its user
community via podcasting.
The John Hopkins University19 propagates its Library
services through the podcasting about collection,
services it offers, User groups, and how to use library
services efficiently etc. Library of congress10 is also
offering podcasting services such as oral histories and
interviews with African Americans who endured the
hardships of slavery, books festivals, etc.

3.9 Mashups
Mashup is a web-based application which combines
two or more services or data, using technologies including
AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) and RSS in
order to create a new service. Nowadays, many
organisations are providing various featured services, for
example, Google map and Flickr have started new
Mashup service named ‘Earth Album’, which allows to
search most stunning photos available in Flickr database
by simply clicking on a particular geographical location in
a Google map20,21. In addition a similar Mashup service
offered by this website is the combination of YouTube and
Earth Album by just clicking on a particular location you
can access the video uploaded on YouTube in that
particular country.
Another example is of Mashup service by Housing
Maps22, a website where a user can search the housing
information such as buying, selling, renting of apartments
in various cities of United States within the preferred range
of price. Similarly, there could be many possibilities with
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

regard to the use of Mashup features in libraries, such as
libraries can indicate the circulation section, reference
section, shelf areas, specific collection or may be a
specific title on shelves, and various library branches in a
university etc. in an online map by combining the similar
technologies, which might be useful for the user
community.
Moreover, libraries can collaborate with various
commercial database vendors to linkup their catalogues
with them. For example, Huddersfield University, UK has
used Greasemonkey to display their local catalogue
information in Amazon so that users can be linked back
into the library OPAC to view the full record. To adopt and
trial these features, the libraries really need technically
sound IT staff.
Therefore, libraries which do not have sufficient IT staff
may face problems in adopting and trialing these
services. Infact the concept of library 2.0 is itself a
mashup as it is rightly mentioned by the Maness9,
“Library 2.0 is a mashup. It is a hybrid of blogs, wikis,
streaming media, content aggregators, instant
messaging, and social networks.”

4. CONCLUSIONS
Web 2.0 is making library services more interactive9; it
will surely improve the quality of library services in terms
of the requirement of the user community. It will also be
able to transform the various library functions and
services, the way they look and delivery to the library
patrons in the Web 1.0 world. Moreover, it will increase
the user’s participation in various library functions such as
cataloguing, classification, reference services, current
awareness services, collection development process,
information delivery, information retrieval, user orientation
programs, library events and news, etc. The
metamorphosis of library functions and services into Web
2.0 phenomenon is going to be very interesting and
indistinguishable in its appearance which resembles the
early stage of web world or Web 1.0 era. The librarians’
authority and domain will be open to a larger section of the
user community and will actively participate in the various
library functions and services. A lot of libraries have
already adopted and implemented the Web 2.0 tools,
especially in the developed countries, but the third world
nations are far behind in adopting and implementing the
Web 2.0 tools mostly because of their restricted and tight
budget.
Finally, it is also necessary to consider that the web
will continue to develop and Web 2.0 is just the beginning
of one of many changes occurring in the web world, so
librarians and information managers must welcome and
adapt this new concept in libraries as they did with the
web originally.
399

REFERENCES

14. Kete. http://kete.net.nz (accessed on 16 May 2010).

1. O’Reilly, Tim. What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and
business models for the next generation of software.
2005. http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.
html (accessed on 16 May 2010).

15. Goodreads. 2010. http://www.goodreads.com/about/
us (accessed on 15 October 2010).

2. Wikipedia.Web 2.0. 2010. http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Web_2.0 (accessed on 16 May 2010).
3. Miller, Paul. Web 2.0: Building the new library.
Ariadne, 2005. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue45/
miller/ (accessed on 16 May 2010).
4. Casey, Michael E. & Savastinuk, Laura C. Service for
the next-generation library. Library Journal, 2006.
http://www.libraryjournal.com/article/CA665200.htm
5. Reichardt, Randy & Harder, Geoffrey. Weblogs: Their
use and application in science and technology libraries.
Sci. Technol. Libr., 2005. http://stlq.info/blo gstl.pdf
6. The University of British Columbia Law Library. Law
Library Blog. 2010. http://blogs.ubc.ca/lawlib/
(accessed in May 2010).
7. Godwin, Peter. Information literacy in the age of
amateurs How Google and Web 2.0 affect librarians’
support of information literacy. ITALICS, 2006. http://
www.ics.heacademy.ac.uk/italics/vol5iss4/godwin.p df
8. Jean and Alexander Heard Library.Vanderbilt
University. LITS Wiki. 2010. http://wiki.library.vande
rbilt.edu/lits/pmwiki.php/Main/HomePage
9. Maness, Jack M. Library 2.0 theory: Web 2.0 and its
implications for libraries. Webology, 2006, 3(2). http:/
/www.webology.ir/2006/v3n2/a25.html (accessed on
16 May 2010).
10. Library of Congress. Podcasts. 2010. http://
www.loc.gov/podcasts/ (accessed on 15 June 2010).
11. Kroski, Ellyssa. The Hive mind: Folksonomies and
user-based tagging. 2005. http://infotangle.blo
gsome.com/2005/12/07/the-hive-mind-folksonomiesand-user-based-tagging/ (accessed on 16 May 2010).
12. Barsky, Eugene & Purdon, Michelle. Introducing Web
2.0: Social networking & social bookmarking for
health librarians. JCHLA/JABSC, 2006, 27, 65-67.
http://article.pubs.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/RPAS/rpv?hm=H
Init&ca lyLan g=eng&journal=jchla&volume=27&afpf=
c06-024.pdf
13. Library of Congress. Tradition meets Web 2.0–The
Library’s Flickr Project. 2010 http://www.digitalpreser
vation.gov/news/newsletter/200906.pdf

400

16. Zanin-Yost, Alessia. Library 2.0: Blogs, Wikis, and
RSS to Serve the Library. Library Philosophy &
Practice,
2010.
http://unllib.unl.edu/LPP/zaninyost2.htm (accessed on 25 October 2010).
17. Van Pelt/Opie Library of Michigan Technological
University. Ask a librarian. 2010. http://www.lib.m
tu.edu/reference/ask/byIM.aspx?pid=2 (accessed on
3 November 2010).
18. Farkas, Meredith G. Social software in libraries:
Building
collaboration,
communication,
and
community online. Information Today Inc, New
Jersey, 2007, pp. 181-84.
19. John Hopkins University Library. Sheridan Libraries
Podcasts. 2010. http://www.library.jhu.edu/podcasts/
(accessed on 20 May 2010).
20. Earth album. 2010. http://www.earthalbum.com.
(accessed on 3 November 2010).
21. Merrill, Duane. Mashups: The new breed of web app:
An introduction to mashups-developer works, 2006.
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/library/xmashups.html (accessed on 16 May 2010).
22. Housingmaps. 2010. http://www.housingmaps.com
(accessed on 3 November 2010).
About the Authors
Mohammad Aqil obtained his Master degree from
Aligarh Muslim University and MPhil in Library Science
from Alagappa University, Tamilnadu, India. He joined the
King Saud University in March 2009 as one of the team
member of Repository Development Project. He is
working in the area of library and information science
since more than six years. His areas of interests are:
Library automation, digital libraries, digital repositories,
web application in libraries, etc.
Mr Parvez Ahmad is working in King Saud University as
a team member of KSU Repository Development Project.
His research interests include: Open access library
tools, blogging, digital library applications, information
retrieval, and IT applications in libraries.
Mohd Asad Siddique obtained his MPhil in Library and
Information Science. He is handling the digital content
development projects at King Saud University. Earlier, he
has worked in Wipro Technology in India.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(5)

