DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 7-14
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access to Scientific Knowledge
Subbiah Arunachalam
M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation
Chennai-600 113
E-mail: arun@mssrf.res.in

ABSTRACT
The open access movement, well known in the domain of journal articles, came
about because of several reasons. These include scholars’ and researchers‘
willingness to share knowledge, and advances in technology which enabled opening
up free access to information. Journal publishers who raised the subscription rates
exorbitantly also forced researchers to look for alternative ways of sustaining
knowledge sharing. The paper discusses two ways of achieving open access (OA)
and argues that sharing knowledge and building partnerships have been recognised as
the best and most optimal means of creating and benefiting from knowledge. It focuses
on various fronts where OA is making good progress, and also deliberates on issues like
OA endeavours in India, OA and sustainable development and what needs to be done in
India to promote OA activities.
Keywords: Open Access, scientific knowledge, Wellcome trust, OA in India

1. INTRODUCTION
Knowledge wants to be free! If, as Newton
said, one can see further by standing upon
the shoulders of giants, free and unfettered
flow of knowledge can help maximise the
creation and growth of knowledge. Knowledge
production is a community activity and is at
once a cooperative and competitive activity—
cooperative in the sense that every scientist
uses the work of many other scientists,
both his contemporaries and those who have
preceded them, and competitive in the sense
that one is constantly trying to be recognised
as the first to discover (or invent) something.
In science, no one can claim to be a selfmade man! One’s thoughts and ideas are

shaped by the literature one is exposed to,
the talks one hears at conferences one attends,
and the discussion one holds with other
scientists in formal and often informal settings.
Although knowledge is essentially a matter
of the intellect, both social organisation and
technology help shape the growth of knowledge.
Higher educational institutions, research
laboratories, professional societies, journals,
conferences, peer review, funding agencies,
etc. are the more visible elements of ‘social
organisation’.
Shiyali R Ranganathan said that a library
is a growing organism, meaning that knowledge
and its use continue to grow all the time.
7

Our understanding of nature and the universe
and what we can do with it has been getting
better and better since ancient times, and
especially since the time of the industrial
revolution. Gutenberg’s ‘reinvention’ of the
Chinese technology of printing with movable
types not only helped herald the Protestant
Revolution but also democratised access to
knowledge and revolutionised the spread of
scientific knowledge and the way scientific
inquiry is conducted. As pointed out by Peter
Drucker, Gutenberg’s technology became the
third major revolution in communication (after
speech and writing), and not only threw hundreds
of monks who earned their living as scribes—
mostly reproducing the Bible copy by copy—
out of job, but also brought in its wake many
revolutionary changes. For example, new
seats of higher learning such as universities
were set up all over Europe. The universities
went beyond religion and theology and started
teaching subjects which were never taught
before. A whole new class of professionals
thus emerged, and some of them such as
the gentlemen printers rose to become part
of the upper echelons of society.
Print-on-paper became the single most
important means of knowledge exchange
and dissemination. The first scientific journal
appeared in 1665 and since then publishing
journals became a key activity of learned
academies and professional societies. With
time, investors saw an opportunity for business
and profit, and publishing STM journals emerged
as a business with very high profit margins.
Many professional societies handed over their
journal publishing activity to commercial
publishing houses, which not only started
levying huge subscription prices for the journals
they produced, but also started ‘bundling’,
a practice by which subscribing libraries are
made to buy a large number of journals not
all of which may be found useful by their
clients. In the past two decades, the average
journal subscription prices have risen three
to four times as fast as the general inflation
rate. There arose a conflict of interests between
free and unfettered dissemination of knowledge
and making profit by restricting access by
levying a toll for access. Unfortunately, even
some professional societies chose profit making
through toll-access journals rather than support
8

the more egalitarian path of supporting open
and unfettered dissemination of knowledge.
Even affluent libraries in the advanced countries
felt the pinch. Faced with rising journal prices
and dwindling or at best constant allocation
of funds for the purchase of books and journals,
most libraries had to cut not only the number
of books they bought but also the number
of journals they subscribed to.
Added to this, copyright which ought to
protect the interests of the ‘creator’—the
scientists who actually perform the research
and write the papers (or the institutions which
employ them)—is actually protecting an
intermediary in the knowledge transfer chain,
viz., the journal publisher. As the copyright
rests with the publisher, scientists who wrote
the papers in the first place have to seek
the permission of the publisher if they want
to make multiple copies of their own papers
for distribution to the students whom they
teach, and to use figures, tables and parts
of the text in their subsequent writing, say
a review article or a chapter in a book. To
be fair, it is not commercial publishers alone
who are exploiting science and scholarship
by exploiting the copyright laws. Even some
professional societies, ostensibly set up to
promote scholarship and knowledge
dissemination, follow similar practices.
Pushed to the wall, enlightened individuals
and institutions wanted to wrest science
and scholarship from vested interests and
give them back to the practitioners. For example,
some scientists who were on the editorial
boards of S&T journals published by commercial
publishers quit the editorial boards en masse
and started new journals in the same subject
at a much lower subscription price. Such
initiatives are being supported by the SPARC
programme of the Association of Research
Libraries (ARL). More importantly, the serials
crisis, as it has come to be known, led to
the birth of the OA movement. The Budapest,
Berlin, Bethesda and Bangalore declarations
and the recent signature campaigns in support
of OA in the European Union and the USA
are ample evidence of the worldwide support
for keeping publicly-funded research in the
open domain.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

Institutions such as the Wellcome Trust
and six of the seven research councils in
the UK have mandated OA for all papers
resulting from their funds. National Institutes
of Health (NIH) in the USA requires, and
may soon mandate, OA to research funded by it.
The OA movement, well known in the
domain of journal articles, came about because
of several reasons:
±

±

±

Scholars and researchers have always
been willing to share knowledge (more
than making money). Indeed it is only
through sharing knowledge and enlarging
their audience can they increase the
impact of their work and thus gain the
recognition they value the most.
Advances in technology enabled opening
up free access. Unlike producing and
distributing print-on-paper journals and
papers, distributing papers and data in
electronic form does not cost much in
terms of money and effort. Also, the
new technologies—especially the Internet,
the World Wide Web and the semantic
web—not only help speed up dissemination
of knowledge at very low costs, but also
facilitate doing research in unforeseen
ways. Data mining, grid computing,
eScience and international collaboration
in virtual space come to mind readily.
The journal publishers became too greedy
and raised the subscription costs sky
high forcing researchers to look for alternative
ways of sustaining knowledge sharing.

sector has recognised the value of knowledge
sharing and multi-stakeholder partnerships.
For example, the Global Knowledge Partnership
(GKP) has adopted “Sharing knowledge through
building partnerships” as its motto. The
Development Gateway set up by the World
Bank and the Solution Exchange set up by
the United Nations Development Programme
share knowledge through electronic discussion
lists that boast thousands of members around
the world. Even a company like Novartis is
willing to release drug-related genome data
into the open domain.
But publishers are still fighting to retain
control of the material they publish in their
journals, although the authors who wrote
the papers give them away free and the
referees review them without charging any
fee. Witness what happened in the last few
months. The journal publishers, including
societies such as the American Chemical
Society (ACS), would not like to yield without
a battle and have launched a war, no holds
barred. They try to maximise the advantages
they currently enjoy.
±

They use the copyright laws to either
not allow archiving of papers published
in their journals or to delay archiving.

±

Most researchers are unconcerned about
the mechanics of knowledge dissemination
and are ready to surrender copyright to
publishers.

±

Publishers win the support of many
scientists by making them members of
editorial boards of journals they publish.

±

They employ public relation (PR) consultants
and ‘Trojan horse OA advocates’ to confuse
scientists and policy makers. For example,
on the advice of one such consultant,
the publishers equate ‘peer review’, which
is valued by scientists and funding agencies,
with toll access publishing, although OA
journals have the same kind of peer
review processes as toll access journals.

±

They have succeeded in confusing many
researchers into believing that self-archiving
is a form of vanity publishing.

2. OPEN ACCESS
Open access can be achieved in two
ways: OA journals (Gold) and OA archives
(Green). Today there are more than 2,700
OA journals [listed in the Directory of Open
Access Journals (DOAJ) maintained at the
Lund University] and over 1000 OA interoperable
archives, most of them institutional and a
few central subject-based ones.
Sharing knowledge and building partnerships
have been recognised as the best and most
optimal means of creating and benefiting
from knowledge. Indeed, the development
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

9

It is here institutions such as the Creative
Commons, Science Commons and the
iCommons, Alliance of Taxpayers and the
Free Culture Movement in the United States,
and the Alternative Law Forum and the Lawyers
Collective in India can play a key role. They
should lend support to enacting legislations
in favour of mandating OA for all publicly
funded research worldwide and in particular
in the USA, UK, European Union and in key
developing countries such as India, China,
Brazil, and South Africa. They should ensure
that universally copyright for research papers
rests with the scientists (or the organisations
they work for), and not surrendered to publishers.
The battle is not an easy one. OA advocates
are spread all over the world and are mostly
individuals. The publishers are corporate entities
with considerable financial and PR muscle
and are fighting for survival! David vs Goliath.
The publishers have been able to stall or
delay legislation in the UK, USA and the
EU. Unless copyright and intellectual property
rights are restored to the rightful owners
through unambiguous reasoning, the battle
cannot be won.
OA is making good progress on another
front, viz., Open Course Ware. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge,
pioneered the movement and virtually every
one of their courses is available on their
OCW programme. Many other universities,
both in the US and elsewhere, have followed
the MIT example. In India, the seven Indian
Institutes of Technology and the Indian Institute
of Science have a programme called NPTEL
under which undergraduate and postgraduate
courses in engineering and science by outstanding
teachers are offered on the web as well as
in the video format. The quality of these
programmes, both in terms of content and
technology, is comparable to the best in the
world.

3. OA BOOKS
Books are different from journals. Both
authors and publishers survive by the income
they receive from books. Even so, many
authors and publishers are willing to make
their books available for free on the public
domain. Authors and publishers of OA books
use alternatives to conventional copyright
10

(such as the Creative Commons licensing).
There is no problem in digitising out-of-copyright
books. But to digitise current or orphan books
one needs to follow the provisions of copyright
laws.
Many books are now available as open
access texts on Internet. Many authors and
publishers have released full or partial versions
of current works. For some this is an advertising
scheme to create demand for print versions.
Others are more interested in presenting
their content to the widest possible audience.
Here is a brief list of sources of OA books.
±

The Online Books Page (http://
digital.library.upenn.edu/books/)

±

Internet Archive: Text Archive (http://
www.archive.org/texts/texts.php)—includes
the Million Book Project and Project
Gutenberg. Searchable by keyword.

±

Project Gutenberg (http://www. gutenberg.
org/catalog)—one of the oldest and most
famous online book collections.

±

Renascence Editions (http://darkwing.
uoregon.edu/~rbear/ren.htm)—works printed
in English, 1477–1799.

±

O’Reilly Open Books Project (http://
www.oreilly.com/openbook)—computer and
technology related books.

±

Literature for Children (http://palmm.
fcla.edu/juv)—a collection of children’s
books published in the US and Great
Britain roughly between 1850 and 1950.

±

eScholarship Editions (http://texts.cdlib.
org/escholarship)—from the University
of California Press. Some are public,
others are for the UC community only.
A public title list is available of only
publicly accessible books.

±

National Academies Press (http://www.
nap.edu)—thousands of books and reports
by the National Academies of the USA.

±

HEARTH: Home Economics Archive:
Research, Tradition, and History (http://
hearth.library.cornell.edu)—over 1,000
volumes on home economics from 1850–
1950. Includes journal articles as well.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

±

±

±

Terrapub e-Library (http://www. terrapub.
co.jp/e-library)—several books in PDF
format from Terra Scientific Publishing
of Japan, on environmental and computer
modelling topics.
Books by CalTech Authors (http://
caltechbook.library.caltech.edu/view/
subjects/)—part of CalTech CODA, full
books by faculty at CalTech, in the sciences
and mathematics. Most would be suitable
for textbooks; some are older editions.
The Assayer (http://theassayer.org)—
very large catalogue of free books (and
reviews).

Both Microsoft and Google have major
digitising programmes in collaboration with
major university libraries in North America
and Europe. The Internet Archive, pioneered
by Brewster Khale, is another major initiative
in bringing books on OA.
Here are some references on OA issues:
Okerson, A.S. & O’Donell, J.J. (1995) (Eds.)
Scholarly Journals at the Crossroads: A
Subversive Proposal for Electronics Publishing.
http://www.arl.org/scomm/subversive/intro.html
Willinsky, J. (2005) The Access Principle: The
case for Open Access to Research and
Scholarship.
http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/ebook.
asp?ttype=2&tid=10611
http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/willinsky/The
AccessPrinciple_TheMITPress_0262232421.pdf
Peter Suber’s blog: Open Access News, and the
open access timeline http://www.earlham.edu/
~peters/fos/timeline.htm

4. OA IN INDIA
±

±

The Million Books Project headed by
Prof. N. Balakrishnan of the Indian Institute
of Science.
More than 100 OA journals—published
by the Indian Academy of Sciences (IASc),
Indian National Science Academy (INSA),
National Informatics Centre (NIC), MedKnow,
Calicut Medical College, etc.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

±

Many newspapers and magazines.

±

Not many current in-copyright books yet!

±

We need to improve our understanding
of copyright laws and opportunities presented
by OA. Legal experts like Lawrence Liang,
Siva Vaidyanathan, and Achal Prabhalaa
can help.

5. OA AND SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Knowledge is becoming increasingly
important. Indeed, the future of food security
may depend less on resource-intensive
agriculture and more on knowledge intensity,
says Prof. M.S. Swaminathan.
How do we ensure that common people
obtain the knowledge they need? How do we
reach the unreached with knowledge that is
relevant to their daily lives, knowledge that
can improve their standards of living? How do
we make development inclusive? How do we
get rid of poverty and disease? How can we
ensure that the benefits of science and technology
percolate to the people at the bottom of the
pyramid?
Said Jawaharlal Nehru “It is science alone
that can solve the problems of hunger and
poverty, insanitation and illiteracy, of superstition
and deadening custom and tradition, of vast
resources running to waste, … Who indeed
could afford to ignore science today? At
every turn we have to seek its aid…the future
belongs to science and to those who make
friends with science”. It is mastery over technology
that enabled the early adopters of industrial
revolution technologies to colonise and exploit
the rest of the world. If the developing countries
do not take to science and technology they
will continue to remain intellectually and
economically dependent.
The advanced countries need to promote
OA as well. Said Bruce Alberts, former president
of the National Academy of Science, USA,
after the 9/11 tragedy, “We now know for
certain that, if our grandchildren are to live
in an open, free society and not inside a
walled fortress, we must devote even more
11

energy to using science and scientific values
to ensure the safety, stability and productive
development of peaceful democratic nations
throughout the world”. Thus OA is of particular
importance not only to the developing world
but also to preserve peace and harmony in
the world as a whole.

1.

The two Academies should recommend
to the Ministry of Science and Technology
(MoST), DAE, DRDO, ISRO, ICAR and
ICMR to come up with an OA policy and
a plan of action for implementing the
policy. Fortunately for these Academies
almost all the Secretaries in the MoST
and heads of other science related
departments are Fellows of either INSA
or IASc or both. The Academies should
recommend that MoST [and its different
agencies such as Department of Science
& Technology (DST), Department of Scientific
& Industrial Research (DSIR), Department
of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of
Earth Sciences] and other science related
departments mandate OA for all research
publications resulting from work performed
in their own laboratories and extramural
projects funded by them. Ideally, each
individual institution, where research is
performed, should also have an OA mandate.
The National Institute of Technology,
Rourkela, is the only Indian institution
to have a mandate for OA. While the
scientists should enjoy the freedom to
choose the journals for publishing their
work, they should be encouraged to publish
in OA journals, and if they choose to
publish in toll-access journals they must
be required to place the full text of the
papers in an interoperable OA repository,
preferably in the researcher’s own
institution’s.

2.

The Academies should also recommend
the gathering of impact metrics (downloads,
citations, co-citations, chronometrics,
semiometrics) via tools like Citebase
and weblogs, so that the enhanced impact
of OA research can be measured. There
is growing evidence for the OA impact,
as can been seen from: http//
opcit.eprints.org/oacitation-biblio.html. For
the many journals self-archiving policies,
please see http://romeo.eprints.org, and
for institutio/funder mandates, http://
www.eprints.org/signup/fullist.php. For a
list of archives that are active, please
see http://roar.eprints.org.

3.

The Academies and the funding agencies
should persuade research laboratories

We are in an ever shrinking world where
SARS and avian flu take just a few days to
spread from East Asia to North America,
and disasters like the Tsunami of December
2004 take just a day or two to wreak havoc
in locations as far away as Indonesia and
eastern coast of Africa. To have even the
slightest chance of dealing with such disasters
it is important for every nation in the world
to have some scientific competence.
As Bruce Alberts says, we need not
only to open up the flow of scientific knowledge,
but also make available the technologies
such as computers and broadband Internet
access to the less developed countries. And
not embargos and restrictive copyright practices.

6. WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE IN
INDIA?
Indian scientists, the rank and file as
well as those who hold high positions, should
take a principled stand on OA. After all OA
to scientific literature benefits them the most.
A few months ago, twenty-six Nobel laureates
in the US signed a letter sent to every member
of the US Congress urging them to support
a bill that would mandate OA to governmentfunded research. About a year ago, when
the Royal Society issued a statement on
OA, obviously without consulting the Fellowship,
more than 45 Fellows of the Society wrote
to the President of the Society expressing
their displeasure and asserting their support
to OA. Not one of them was from India. Till
today, as far as I know, not many leaders
of Indian science have come out in the open
in support of OA.
The major science academies, viz., the
INSA and the IASc, both of which have made
the journals they publish OA journals, should
proactively promote OA in the country.
12

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

and universities (and other institutions
of higher learning) to set up their own
interoperable institutional OA repositories
(similar to the one at the Indian Institue
of Science), and persuade the heads of
these institutions to ensure that the full
text of every research publication from
their institutions is placed in these
repositories. Funding for research should
depend on the applicant’s past papers
being available through OA channels.
Evaluation of individuals could be based
on only papers that are available through
OA channels.
4.

The Academies should recommend to
the government to enact legislation, in
the lines of the Right to Information Act,
that would mandate OA to all publicly
funded research.

5.

DST, DSIR, and DBT should launch a
massive training programme, in partnership
with the National Centre for Science
Information at the Indian Institute of Science,
Documentation Research and Training
Centre (DRTC) of the Indian Statistical
Institute, and the NIC, to help nominees
from different institutions learn to set up
OA institutional archives (using open
source software such as EPrints and
DSpace). To start with DBT can conduct
such programmes for the staff of more
than 60 Bioinformatics Centres they support.
CSIR, ICAR and ICMR can hold such
training programmes for their many
laboratories.

6.

Eminent Indian scientists and leaders
of science should advise Indian researchers
to make their work freely available either
through publishing their work in OA journals
or through placing all their papers in OA
repositories.

7.

Indian researchers should be advised
not to surrender copyright to journal
publishers. It is an irony that the copyright
to the results of research performed by
Indian researchers with Indian taxpayers’
money is being gifted to journal publishers
abroad without batting an eyelid. Indian
researchers should be made aware of
the different addenda to copyright

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

agreements prepared by Creative Commons,
Science Commons, etc. Under the US
laws, research performed in government
laboratories is non-copyrightable. The
Government of India should consider
enacting such a law in India. Fortunately,
the Minister for Science & Technology
is an eminent lawyer. The Principal Scientific
Adviser to the Cabinet and the Chairman
of the Scientific Advisory Council to the
Prime Minister may take the lead.
Indian science policy is notorious for
delayed action and response. A proposal
was made to the DST in the mid-1990s for
setting up an Observatory for Science and
Technology; the Director of IIT, Madras, was
willing to host it. The proposal was accepted
by a senior officer of DST in principle, but
the Observatory never came into being. Now,
more than a decade later, one understands
that an Observatory is likely to be set up
at the Indian Institute of Science with DBT
support. Better late than never. About five or
six years ago, the subject of OA was discussed
at the annual get together of heads of
Bioinformatics Centres held at the University
of Poona and it was decided that DBT would
support setting up institutional OA archives
in all the institutions hosting Bioinformatics
centres. Again two years ago the topic was
discussed at the annual get together held
at Kasaragod. Till this day no action has
been taken. More than five years ago a brief
note in Current Science pointed out, with
ample evidence, that China, South Korea
and to some extent Brazil were racing ahead
in science (as seen from the world share of
research papers indexed in Science Citation
Index, MathSciNet, Chemical Abstracts,
PubMed, etc). It attracted the attention of
leaders of Indian science, but sadly, apart
from the author coming in for some criticism,
it did not lead to any worthwhile action.
Much later the Scientific Advisory Council to
the Prime Minister (SAC-PM) woke up to
the fact that India was lagging behind China
and made a plea for increasing funds for
research. The media gave wide coverage to
the SAC’s statements and requests.
Unfortunately who says is far more important
than the truth of what is said. One hopes,
history does not repeat and that India adopts
13

and reaps the benefit of OA well ahead of
China.

and unfettered, then it is absolutely essential
for all nations to mandate OA to publiclyfunded research.

7. CONCLUSION
OA is not about publishers and profit or
about libraries and budgets. OA is about
increasing access to knowledge, especially
current advances, for scientists and scholars,
teachers and students. OA is about making
the field level playing for scientists and scholars
who cannot afford to pay for accessing information
relevant to their research. It is about increasing
the rate at which new knowledge can be
created and applied to the benefit of humanity.
It is about facilitating exchange of research
publications and data and enabling collaboration
with others located in distant places. It is
about saving the world from poverty and
terrorism.
If science is very important, and if science
can flourish only if knowledge flows freely

Advances in technology have made this
possible but some vested interests and (il)legal
squibbles are holding us to ransom and stalling
progress. Till recently that was a great concern,
but now that students in the American universities
have taken up the cause, through the Free
Culture movement, there is great hope. Of
course, there is considerable indifference
from scientists and scholars themselves,
and in particular in developing countries there
is often inexplicable delays in taking action!
One thing is for sure. Future historians
of Indian science will find it extremely difficult
to explain why Indian researchers and their
science managers failed to adopt and take
full advantage of OA for long after they were
told of its advantages.

About the Author

Subbiah Arunachalam is an information scientist based in Chennai, and has
been associated with the Indian academic and scholarly communities for over
three decades. He also has been an Editor of scientific journals (Indian Journal
of Technology, Journal of Scientific & Industrial Research, Indian Journal of
Chemistry, Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences, and Pramana–
Journal of Physics), a science writer, a researcher in chemistry, a teacher
of information science, a librarian in a national laboratory, the executive secretary
of the Indian Academy of Sciences, and a member of the Editorial Boards of
scientific journals.
Currently he is a Distinguished Fellow in the M.S. Swaminathan Research
Foundation and a Visiting Professor in the National Institute of Advanced Studies,
Bangalore. His research interests include science on the periphery, scientometrics,
and information access. He has recently completed a literature-based study
on mapping science in India. He has more than 50 papers to his credit and
is on the Editorial Boards of six refereed international journals. He has delivered
more than 40 invited talks in international conferences. He is a member of the
Executive Committee of Global Knowledge Partnership, a trustee of the Electronic
Publishing Trust for Development and a member of the International Advisory
Board of IICD, The Hague. He is an Honorary Fellow of CILIP and a life member
of IASLIC.

14

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

