DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 15-24
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access for Indian Scholarship
Alma Swan
Key Perspectives Ltd
48 Old Coach Road
Playing Place, Truro TR3 6ET, UK
E-mail:aswan@keyperspectives.co.uk

ABSTRACT
India’s scholarship has ancient roots and a glorious heritage. Over the last few decades
in particular, due to the way the scholarly communication system overall has developed in
that time, India’s academic output has suffered from low visibility and poor dissemination. At
the moment, global visibility is good for Indian articles that are published in the best ‘western’
journals and in Indian journals indexed by the major abstracting/indexing services, such as
ISI’s Web of Science. Moreover, for Indian articles deposited in open access collections in
India or those that are co-authored with scientists in other parts of the world who have
deposited them in Open Access repositories outside the continent, visibility is maximal. This
still leaves a lot of Indian output—most of it in fact— virtually invisible to the rest of the world.
India’s investment—intellectual, effort and cash—can never hope to gain a good return this
way. The article focuses on how open access can help resolve the problems of maximising
the visibility, and thus the uptake and use, of Indian research outputs. The mechanisms to
provide open access to scholarly communications, impediments to Open Access in India, and
how self archiving can provide a boost to open access movement has been highlighted in
this document. The author argues that it is important to emphasise that only mandatory
policies work well. Policies that just encourage or even request authors to make their work
Open Access do not result in a sizeable level of compliance.
Keywords: Open access, Indian scholarship, JIF, OA repository

1. INDIA’S SCHOLARLY COMMUNICATION PROBLEMS

in that time, India’s academic output has
suffered from low visibility and poor dissemination.

India’s scholarship has ancient roots
and a glorious heritage. India’s top scientific
institutions have worldwide reputations for
excellence and the country’s historic contribution
to cultural and scientific advances are recognised
by all. Yet over the last few decades in
particular, due to the way the scholarly
communication system overall has developed

Much resource and investment goes into
education and research in India but, as I
shall demonstrate, the impact of this is minimised
by the failure to grasp new opportunities
offered by the Web for disseminating research
results. The failure lies largely in the hands
of the research community, from top to bottom,
and it is thus condemning itself to relative
15

obscurity when it could remove all barriers
to visibility for its outputs simply and rapidly.
At the moment, global visibility is good
for Indian articles that are published in the
best ‘western’ journals and in Indian journals
indexed by the major abstracting/indexing
services, such as ISI’s Web of Science.
Moreover, for Indian articles deposited in
open access collections in India or those
that are co-authored with scientists in other
parts of the world who have deposited them
in Open Access repositories outside the
continent, visibility is maximal. This still
leaves a lot of Indian output–most of it in
fact–virtually invisible to the rest of the world.
India’s investment—intellectual, effort and
cash—can never hope to gain a good return
this way.

2. HOW OPEN ACCESS CAN HELP
RESOLVE THESE PROBLEMS
This can be turned around. Open Access
provides the means to maximise the visibility,
and thus the uptake and use, of Indian research
outputs. Open Access is the immediate (upon
or before publication), online, free availability
of research outputs without any of the restrictions
on use commonly imposed by publisher copyright
agreements. It is definitely not vanity publishing
or self-publishing, nor about the literature
that scholars might normally expect to be
paid for, such as books for which they hope
to earn royalty payments. It concerns the
outputs that scholars normally give away
free to be published–journal articles, conference
papers and datasets of various kinds.
Not only scholars benefit from Open Access.
They are the most obvious beneficiaries,
perhaps, because their work gains instant
worldwide visibility, and they also gain as
readers if much more world research is available
on an Open Access basis for them to access
freely and read. But there are many other
beneficiaries, too. Indian research institutions
benefit from having a management information
tool that enables them to assess and monitor
their research programmes, and they have
a marketing tool that enables them to provide
a shop window for their research efforts. The
same advantages apply to external research
16

funders—the Indian Government being the
biggest example—who need to be able to
access and keep track of outputs from their
funding, and measure and assess how effectively
their money has been spent. They also can
ensure that the results of their spending
have had the widest possible dissemination.
It is because Open Access is so much
in the interest of research funders and employers
that an increasing number of them around
the world are introducing Open Access policies
that require their funded researchers to provide
Open Access to their work. I shall return to
this issue later in this article. First, though,
I want to turn attention to the researchers
and their attitudes to Open Access, because
even without any encouragement or coercion
from their funders they have good reason to
provide such access to their work. Do they,
though? Well, not too well, not as yet. But
there are signs of change even amongst
established scientists, and this plus a generational
difference—the ‘Netgen’ (The ‘Netgen’ is a
term used to denote the younger generation
—people who have grown up with the World
Wide Web and its norms) has vastly different
attitudes to information use and sharing—
will ensure Open Access prevails soon.
The advantages of Open Access for science
and scholarship have been laid out in a
recent essay written specifically for the research
community, including administrators and funders1.
In brief, Open Access brings greater visibility
and impact, moves science along faster,
enables better management and assessment
of research, and provides the material on
which the new semantic web tools for datamining and text-mining can work, generating
new knowledge from existing findings: four
very important reasons for striving to achieve
a complete Open Access corpus across the
world as soon as possible. Something for
everyone directly, then, and certainly a very
big advantage for science, scholarship and
society as the investments in research pay
off faster and more effectively.
India spends perhaps 170 billion rupees
of public money annually on science and
technology research. The return on this
investment must be maximised: it is the
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

duty of research administrators to ensure
that is so. Open Access has been demonstrated
to increase citations to published research
on average by over 50 per cent (see later in
this article) and since only 15 per cent of
research is available on this basis, this means
that the remaining 85 per cent stays hidden
away in subscription-based journals that only
a minority of libraries purchase, largely unread
and unused. That 85 per cent could be getting
much better visibility and use if it were all
Open Access. Evidence suggests that the
average increase in citations for Open Access
research is 50 per cent (see later in this
article for further explanation). In other words,
India would have to spend a further 70 billion
rupees on research to get the same impact
on the world stage as it could currently get
for no more money by making all of the
country’s research output Open Access.

deposit a copy of the article in an Open
Access repository. This process is now known
as ‘self-archiving’.

3.1 Open Access Journals
A Directory of Open Access Journals is
maintained at Lund University Library in Sweden
(
www.doaj.org). There are currently more than
2500 journals listed. Some of them charge
a ‘front-end’ publication fee which the author’s
institution or grant normally pays. Others do
not charge a fee but have some other business
model that enables them to run the journal
without charging a subscription. The Web of
Science lists some 200+ Open Access journals
in its service and some of them have very
high impact factors indeed. They operate
peer review in exactly the same way as
other traditional journals and the big Open
Access publishers, the Public Library of Science
(
www.plos.org), BioMed Central (www.biomed
central.com) and Hindawi (www.hindwai.com)
all offer waivers if authors cannot pay the
publication fee but wish to publish in their
journals for the increased visibility that brings
to their work.

3. PROVIDING OPEN ACCESS IN
INDIA
What, then, is India’s research community
doing about Open Access? Not much so far,
is the answer, and this is a shame because
it flies in the face of the primary aim of
researchers when publishing their work, which
is to communicate their results to their peers
(Fig. 1).

In India, MedKnow Publications, the country’s
largest publishing house for scientific and
medical journals, leads the field in innovative
business and the provision of Open Access
(http://www.medknow.com/journals.asp). All
MedKnow journals are Open Access and are
enjoying high visibility and increased impact
as a result of opting for this approach. Their
impact, audience, submissions and subscribers
have all risen because of the Open Access
policy3 . Moreover, MedKnow journals do not

Open Access can be provided in two
ways. Either a researcher can publish in an
Open Access journal, a special kind of journal
that does not charge for a subscription yet
makes its content freely available online for
all to read and use, or a researcher can
publish in any journal of choice as usual but

Financial rew ard
Gain funding
Personal prestige
Advance career
Com m unicate results to peers
0

20

40

60

80

10 0

% respondents
Source: Swan and Brown

2

Figure 1. Reasons researchers consider ‘very important’ when publishing their work.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

17

charge any publication fees at all. Indian
scientists in the fields covered by MedKnow
journals can make their work Open Access,
benefit from the worldwide visibility these
journal bring for their work and support an
Indian publisher by choosing these journals
in which to publish. Current Science India’s
premier scientific journal, now 75 years old,
is also an Open Access publication. So
much does it value this status that in its
recent negotiations with Nature on a publishing
partnership that would have the journal bear
the Nature Publishing Group’s logo for the
first time, remaining Open Access was a
critical issue. Nature does not have Open
Access content on its journals site, but has
made an exception in this case (http://www.
hindu.com/2007/03/stories/20070351832200.
htm).

3.2 Open Access Repositories
Now to the alternative way of making
work Open Access–by self-archiving. Open
Access repositories are either centralised
subject-based depots or are broad-based
institutional depots for electronic articles.
They comply with a set of standards (OAI–
Open Archives Initiative) and are interoperable,
forming in effect a worldwide database of
research. Google and Google Scholar index
Open Access repositories so any articles in
them are assured of the best visibility. In
India at the time of writing there are 24 Open
Access repositories: twelve of them are
institutional and the one with the most articles
in it is the repository at the Indian Institute
of Science in Bangalore, which contains
over 7500 documents. The others have much,
much smaller numbers of documents: far
fewer than there would be if all the outputs
of those institutions were being self-archived.
Three of the repositories collect theses only
and three others are repositories forming
the basis for the publication of Open Access
journals. The repositories can be seen and
sorted by using the facility at the eprints.org
site (http://roar.eprints.org).
The number of repositories in India is
guaranteed to grow. Worldwide, they have
been increasing at the rate of about one per
day over the last year or so and it is anticipated
18

that every research-based (and probably teachingbased, for they are useful for that too) institution
will have one within a few years. These
institutional collections will be useful for
management and marketing purposes as well
as for making research output Open Access
and institutions see the usefulness of having
this tool. In India, this means that there will
eventually be hundreds of Open Access
repositories, each making freely available
the output of their institutions for everyone
to see and use. Beaming India’s scholarship
to the world, in other words.

4. IMPEDIMENTS TO OPEN ACCESS
IN INDIA
But first, there are a few hurdles to
leap. Although Open Access is clearly in
the interests of the research community—
from India’s top research administrators through
the universities and research institutions to
the individual scholar—there is a diffidence
towards Open Access that needs to be swept
aside. It has been a disappointment to those
of us trying to support the adoption of Open
Access in India that the country’s research
community has not more readily grasped
the opportunities it brings. India has suffered
considerably from the scourge of journal impact
factors and the difficulties for Indian scholars
in trying to make their work visible to the
world, which has usually meant publishing
in ‘western’ journals, journals that have always
enjoyed much higher visibility than more
Indian counterparts. The other side of the
coin, getting access to research journals,
has also been a long term problem for India.
Open Access abolishes both of these problems
by giving worldwide visibility and providing
access to the world’s literature for Indian
scholars as more and more of their colleagues
around the globe begin to make their own
work Open Access too.
Partly, the diffidence is based upon a
lack of awareness of the issues and advantages
of Open Access. There must be more effort
put into explaining the concept and how to
achieve it for scholars, administrators and
funders. The latter two categories, indeed,
have a major role to play themselves in
raising awareness of Open Access. A recent
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

study by my company (in press) showed
that in the UK many scholars who are aware
and informed about Open Access learned
about it through their research funder’s policy.
Five of the seven UK Research Councils
have a policy now which aims to ensure that
the work they fund is made Open Access by
the scholars to whom they give grants. This
has had the effect not only of increasing the
amount of Open Access material but of helping
to inform scholars about it. India’s research
funders can play a similar, critical role.
And policy-making by research funders—
and research-based institutions—is not only
critical in informing scholars: it is critical in
another sense, for without such policies the
level of provision of Open Access is very
poor. Scholars—most of them—do not voluntarily
and spontaneously provide Open Access for
their work. As I have said, partly this is a
matter of awareness, but there are other
reasons why authors do not provide Open
Access. Let’s examine these and then return
to the issue of policy.

4.1 Author concerns about Open
Access
First, authors worry about copyright
restrictions imposed by their publishers. It
is important to point out that Open Access
publishers do not have any copyright restrictions
at all: they allow the copyright to remain
with the author of an article and they permit

the author to do anything he or she wants
with the article, including making unlimited
numbers of copies for distribution, using
them for teaching and so forth. This is quite
unlike the restrictions imposed by many
traditional publishers who require the author
to relinquish copyright to the publisher and
lay down strict rules about how the article
may be used by the author and others—and
this is the author’s article, let us remember.
So with respect to self-archiving in repositories,
authors worry that the publisher, who in most
cases holds the copyright, will not permit
this activity. In fact, over 60 per cent of
journals do allow self-archiving of the final,
peer-reviewed version of an article (the ‘postprint’) and a further 28 per cent allow the
author to self-archive the ‘preprint’, the article
before it has been peer reviewed (Fig. 2).
Authors can check these permission
policies by going to the resources maintained
by SHERPA (sherpa.ac.uk/romeo.php) or by
EPrints (http://romeo.eprints.org/publishers.html).
Second, researchers worry about how
easy it might be to deposit an article in their
repository. The process is very simple, consisting
of a series of steps for filling in a form that
the repository software provides. Details required
include the article metadata (authors’ names,
affiliations, title of the article and so on) and
some other information about the type of
article it is and whether it has been peer
reviewed; there is an uploading step where

9%
28%

63%

Perm it postprint archiving

Perm it preprint archiving

Perm it neither (yet)

Figure 2. Journal permissions for self-archiving (http://romeo.eprints.org/publishers.html).
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

19

the article file is sent to the repository; and
there are a few final pieces of information to
fill in. Readers can practice depositing a
paper by going to the EPrints demonstration
site (http://demoprints3.eprints.org/).

its visibility was constrained to those institutions
whose libraries subscribed to the journals
they were published in and having 20,000
article-reads in three months was almost
certainly just a dream.

Researchers who were surveyed about
this told us that they found the process
generally easy (Fig. 3). We also know from
an examination of log files at one large repository
that it takes just a few minutes to do4 .

Several studies have been done on the
increased citation impact that Open Access
can bring6,7,8. Stevan Harnad’s groups in
Southampton and Montreal continue to work
on this and their early results are shown in
Fig. 4, which depicts the increase in citations
of Open Access articles over those for Closed
Access articles in the same issue of the
same journal 7,9. This study is ongoing and
new disciplines will be added to the list, but
the striking finding is that across all disciplines
there is an Open Access advantage for citations.

2

5. ENCOURAGING OPEN ACCESS
So much for the worries that authors
have about Open Access. Since they are
unfounded, authors must be reassured about
them. There is also much that can be done
to actively encourage authors to embrace
Open Access.
Making authors aware of the increased
visibility, usage and impact their work will
receive via Open Access is crucial. Repositories
can provide usage data to show the number
of times articles have been downloaded. The
levels of this type of usage can be surprising.
For example, the University of Otago’s Business
School set up an Open Access repository
in November 2005: by February 2006, with
just 220 articles in it at the time, it had
received almost 20,000 ‘hits’ (downloads) 5 .
No doubt many of these will translate in
time to citations. The authors at Otago are
delighted and so they should be. Until they
made their work Open Access in this way

Very dif ficult
1%

Somew hat difficult
8%

The data above emphasise how far and
how fast we are moving towards a new world
where impact is measured at author level.
Up until now, authors have remained rather
obsessed by the metric known as Journal
Impact Factor (JIF). Readers will no doubt
be familiar with this as the metric developed
by ISI in order to comparatively rate journals
on the basis of the ‘citedness’ of their articles:
essentially, the more articles re cited by
other articles, the higher a journal’s impact
factor. This is a fine measure for the impact
of journals but is only a proxy measure for
the impact of an individual author. Nonetheless,
being all we had until recently, it has rather
ruled the roost and employers and funders
have used the JIF ad absurdum, judging

Article archived by
someone else
6%

Very easy
44%

Neither easy nor
dif ficult
13%

Easy
28%
Figure 3. Ease of depositing an article in an Open Access repository.
20

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

Physics
Sociology
Psychology
Law
Managem ent
Education
Business
Health Sci
Political Sci
Econom ics
Biology
0

50

100

150

200

250

% increase in citations w ith Open Access
Figure 4. Increase in citations as a result of Open Access.

candidates for positions or for tenure on the
JIF of the journals the individual publishes
in. Careers have risen or fallen on the basis
of journal impact factors and the primary
publishing aim of authors–encouraged by
their employers’ and funders’ obsession with
this metric–has been to publish in journals
with as high an impact factor as possible.
Mercifully, this reign of terror is fast coming
to an end. In the Age of the Web, measuring
individual impact, at least in terms equivalent
to measuring a journal’s impact—the amount
an individual’s articles are cited—is now
possible. Google Scholar’s citation counts
are fast gaining ground as one of the new
measures by which authors can be assessed.
It follows, of course, that Open Access maximises
an author’s chance of having a paper read
and used and cited, boosting his or her own
‘impact factor’ as far as possible.
Finally, in respect of what can be done
to encourage Open Access, I want to return
to the issue of Open Access policies, because
these are critical in spreading the word about
Open Access and in securing author involvement.
Policies from funders and employers are
increasing rapidly now. The Wellcome Trust
was the first big funder to formulate an Open
Access policy to ensure that the work it
funds is made Open Access (Wellcome Trust
position statement in support of open and
unrestricted access to published research.
http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/ doc_WTD002766.
HTML), but a lot more funders have followed
suit. In the UK now over 90 per cent of all
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

funded biomedical research is covered by
an Open Access policy as the Medical Research
Council and all the other big medical research
funders, such as Cancer Research UK and
the British Heart Foundation fell into line
behind the Wellcome Trust. Almost all of
the UK Research Councils have a policy
and the remaining two are expected to produce
one shortly. In the US, the NIH has one, as
do many other federal research funders and
a bill is before Senate that would make
Open Access mandatory for all research
funded by federal agencies spending over
100 million dollars a year. This of course
covers agencies like NASA and the EPA and
will ensure that a huge proportion of US
publicly-funded research is freely available
to all. Universities are also jumping on the
bandwagon because they, too, see the
advantages in promoting their research and
having it gain the best impact it can through
Open Access. A list of institutions and funders
with policies is maintained by EPrints
(www.eprints.org/openacess/policysignup).
It is important to emphasise that only
mandatory policies work well. Policies that
just encourage or even request authors to
make their work Open Access do not result
in a sizeable level of compliance. Some
people have questioned the use of mandatory
policies in an academic setting, arguing that
they sit uncomfortably alongside the tradition
of ‘academic freedom’, but this is stretching
the point too far. Academic freedom has
always been about the right and duty of
21

academic ‘neutral minds’ to investigate and
report without shackles and without political
or religious constraints. Open Access is not
about this; it is about the process of carrying
out those academic activities in the best
way and about ensuring that in the interests
of optimal research progress public money
is spent as well as possible. This means
not just hiding results away in journals that
work on the basis of restricting access rather
than maximising it. Academics already have
mandatory policies guiding their behaviour
with respect to carrying out their jobs–they
are normally required to teach and profess
their subject, to do research and to report
it, plus if they are funded by an external
funder then they are required to write up
reports of their funded work at the end of a
project and to publish the findings. Open
Access mandatory policies are merely another
piece of this particular job-process jigsaw.

it is clear that non-mandatory policies just
do not achieve the desired results. The National
Institutes of Health in the US has a nonmandatory policy and the level of compliance
is very low, resulting in just 4 per cent of
articles that should be deposited in the Open
Access repository used by the NIH being
collected. As a result of this failure the NIH
is rethinking its policy and likely to change
it to a mandatory one.

But anyway, the vast majority of academics
happily comply with mandatory Open Access
policies. They do not consider them an imposition
at all. We have asked authors on a number
of occasions how they would behave if their
employer or under required them to make
their work Open Access. The results are
shown in Fig. 5. Over 80 per cent said they
would willingly comply and a further 14 per
cent said they would comply reluctantly.

Other institutions around the world also
bear witness to this. Those that have introduced
a mandatory policy for Open Access see
their repositories filling with articles while
those that have no Open Access mandate
have repositories whose content represents
only a fraction of their total output.
Figure 6 shows the results from a study by
Arthur Sale on the contents of a number of
Australian university repositories and clearly
demonstrates the effect of the recent mandatory
policy on Open Access introduced at Queensland
University of Technology (QUT). The graph
shows the percentage of government (Department
of Education, Science and Training) funded
research articles collected into university
repositories in the years 2004 and 2005.
The mandatory policy resulted in a vastly
greater percentage of articles being collected
at QUT than at the other universities, none
of which have mandatory Open Access policies10.

Why am I belabouring this point about
mandatory policies? Wouldn’t voluntary policies
be just as good? The answer is no. When
the efficacy of Open Access policies is measured

The adoption of Open Access is considerably
dependent, then, upon the actions of research
administrators and funders. Around the world
they are beginning to act. It is in India’s

Would not
com ply

Would com ply
reluctantly

Would com ply
w illingly

0

20

40

60

80

100

% respondents
Figure 5. Author willingness to comply with a self-archiving mandate from their employer or funder.
22

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

% DEST output

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
U
AN

n
rt i
u
C

b
el
M

e
rn
ou

h
as
on
M

2004

Q

d
an
sl
n
e
ue

Q

UT
sm
Ta

ia
an

2005
10

Figure 6. Effect of an institutional self-archiving mandate at Queensland University of Technology

interests that her research output is available
for all the world to see. India needs firm,
well-designed Open Access policies now,
from its research institutions and research
funders. In November 2006 a conference took
place at the Indian Institute of Science in
Bangalore on the future of science publishing
in developing countries. It brought together
Open Access experts and advocates, publishers,
funders, administrators and scientists from
India, China and Brazil to discuss the best
ways forward.

.

for authors is nicely summed up in this
comment provided by one author during one
of our periodic surveys:
“Self-archiving …. has given instant worldwide visibility to my work. As a result, I
was invited to submit papers to refereed
international conferences/journals and got
them accepted.”

The outcome was the drawing up of an
optimally-worded Open Access policy for
institutions and funders to use (http://
www.ncsi.iisc.ernet.in/OAworkshop2006/ pdfs/
NationalOAPolicyDCs.pdf). The implementation
of this Commitment is exactly what India
needs now, before she loses out still further
in the race for visibility and impact. Brazil
is putting the matter before parliament and
China has taken further steps along the
road. Time is being lost.

We hear of new connections and new
collaborations between authors around the
world as a result of self-archiving their work
to make it more visible. Scholars working on
the same or related topics, who previously
never knew of each other’s existence, start
conversations and end up working together.
This is how scholarship should be, but it
has not been possible to have this unimpeded
worldwide communication and discovery until
the World Wide Web arrived. Now that we
have the tools to make global communication
a reality, the research community really should
embrace them.

6. CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

Let me finish by reminding readers that
open Access does make a difference for the
better. The increased visibility of Open Access
articles and the beneficial outcomes of this

1. Swan, A. Open access and the progress
of science. American Scientist, 2007,
95(3), 197-99.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

23

2. Swan, A. & Brown, S. Open access selfarchiving: An author study, Report of a
study for the JISC, UK, 2005, pp.1-104.

6. Kurtz, M. Restrictive access policies
cut readership of electronic research journal
articles by a factor of two. http://opcit.
eprints.org/feb19oa/kurtz.pdf.

3. Sahu, D.K. & Parmar, Ramesh. The position
around the world: Open access in India.
In Open access: Key strategic, technical
and economic aspects. Chandos Publishing
(Oxford) Limited, Oxford, UK, 2006, ISBN
184334 203 0.

7. Brody, T & Harnad, S. Comparing the
impact of open access vs non-OA articles
in the same journals. D-Lib Magazine,
2004, 10(6).

4. Carr, L. & Harnad, S. Keystroke economy:
A study of the time and effort involved
in self-archiving, 2005. http://eprints.ecs.
soton.ac.uk/ 10688/.
5. Stanger, Nigel & McGregor, Graham. Hitting
the ground running: Building New Zealand’s
first publicly available institutional repository.
Discussion paper 2006/07. Department
of Information Science, University of Otago,
Dunedin, New Zealand, 2006. http://
eprints.otago.ac.nz/274/.

8. Antelman, K. Do open-access articles
have a greater research impact? College
& Research Libraries, 2005, 65(1), 37282.
9. Brody, T.; Harnad, S. & Carr, L. Earlier
web usage statistics as predictors of
later citation impact. JASIST, 2005, 57(8),
1060-72.
10. Sale, A. Comparison of IR content policies
in Australia. http://eprints.comp. utas.edu.
au:81/archive/00000264/.

About the Author

Alma Swan obtained a first class honours degree in zoology in 1974 and a
PhD in cell biology in 1978 from Southampton University. After research fellowships
funded by the Cancer Research Campaign at Southampton General Hospital
and St. George’s Hospital Medical School (London), she took a position as
Lecturer in Zoology at the University of Leicester. Her research was in medical
cell biology and she taught a range of courses from vertebrate biology to the
biology of cancer. She also has an MBA from Warwick Buisness School. In
1985, she moved into science publishing as managing editor of a Pergamon
Press (later Elsevier Science) biomedical research indexing service, published
both in print and online. In 1996 she jointly founded Key Perspectives. For
four years Alma Swan was tutor and consultant for the Open University Business
School’s MBA programme and since 1991 has been tutor for two business
strategy courses on Warwick Business School’s MBA programme. She holds
honorary roles as business mentor and teacher for the Institute for Entrepreneurship
(part of the School of Management) at the University of Southampton, is a
Visiting Researcher in the School of Electronics & Computer Science at the
University of Southampton, and Associate Fellow in the Marketing and Strategic
Management Group at Warwick Business School. Alma is a Member of the
Institute of Biology and is an elected member of the Governing Board of Euroscience
(the European Association for the Promotion of Science and Technology).

24

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

