DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 25-34
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access to Electronic Theses and Dissertations
Peter Suber
Research Professor of Philosophy
Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana-47374-4095
E-mail: peter.suber@earlham.edu

ABSTRACT
The paper argues for mandating open access (OA) to electronic theses and
dissertations (ETDs). ETDs are the most invisible form of useful literature and the most
useful form of invisible literature. ETDs should be considered low-hanging fruit for the
OA movement, along with journal articles. Their authors are not paid to write them, and
can consent to OA without losing revenue. Fears that OA for ETDs will prevent future
publication are understandable but groundless. There are easy work-arounds for ETDs
describing patentable discoveries or containing chapters for which copyright has already
been transferred to publishers. An OA requirement will even elicit better work.
Keywords: Open access, electronic theses, dissertations

1. INTRODUCTION
I finished my dissertation in 1977, before
the web, before the internet, and even before
personal computers. I typed it on an Olivetti
typewriter and, when my committee accepted
it, I paid the department secretary a dollar
a page to retype it according to the formatting
specs of the university. I was honoured when
the university made a copy on acid-free
paper, bound it in boards, and put it on the
open stacks in the main library. It even had
a card in the card catalogue. I was also
honoured when I discovered a week later
that someone had stolen the copy from the
library. In addition, I sent a copy to University
Microfilms International (UMI), which produced
priced paper or microfilm copies on-demand.
(UMI is now owned by ProQuest.) As far as
I know it is still accessible for a price from
UMI. I have no idea whether anyone has
ever ordered a copy, let alone how many.

Unlike some other PhDs (the majority?
the minority?), I never mined my dissertation
for publications. I was too eager to get on
to other projects to publish it as a book or
turn any of its chapters into articles. So it
is only accessible today from UMI, on UMI's
terms. If I had the text in digital form, I would
certainly want to make it OA through a suitable
repository, but I honestly could not tell you
whether that would violate the agreement I
signed with UMI back in 1977. I would have
to research that question, and I do not expect
that the research would be easy. But I do
not have a digital copy of the text and am
not likely to make one any time soon.

2. THE QUALITY OF DISSERTATIONS
I know firsthand that dissertation literature
is valuable, and not only because my mother
and I think I wrote a good one. I wrote on
a fairly obscure topic for which there wasn't

The article is based on the keynote address of the author on “Open Access for ETDs” at the 9th International Symposium
on Electronic Thesis and Dissertations. Reprinted with permission from the SPARC Open Access Newsletter, July 2, 2006
(http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/newsletter/07-02-06.htm#etds).

much existing literature—a fairly common
phenomenon, given the assignment. But I
found a handful of dissertations on neighboring
topics in the UMI catalogue and one was
better than every book I found on the same
subject. Unfortunately, I had to buy these
dissertations in order to read them. I had to
buy them even to look at them closely enough
to evaluate their relevance.

to make them good, or to make them worth
disseminating and using, but at the same
time, their review is sufficiently unconventional
(or sufficiently unlike journal review) to carry
no publisher's investment and therefore no
publisher's resistance to OA.

Dissertations are longer than journal articles
and cover their topics more comprehensively.
They are more responsive to past literature
than journal articles and are usually researched,
refined, and revised over a longer period of
time. And they are not yet salami-sliced into
meaningless or trivial snippets. Indeed, they're
a prime brand of the salami itself.

Dissertations are not just good, they
are largely invisible. Libraries rarely hold
dissertations not written by their own students.
Dissertations are not well indexed. They
are available for purchase, but difficult to
evaluate before purchasing. Moreover, many
details from dissertations never make it into
journal articles, and many dissertation topics
are too narrow to justify book publication.

Dissertations are more like preprints than
post-prints in the sense that they are not
formally peer-reviewed. But they undergo a
kind of review that is at least as rigorous.
If you have ever refereed a journal article,
you know that the job can be done in an
afternoon, and often is. Moreover, your name
is rarely associated with the published (or
rejected) work, and rarely known to the authors
or readers. This frees referees to criticise
powerful authors of flawed articles, but it
also frees referees to trash powerless authors
of brilliant articles. It frees referees from
accountability. By contrast, your dissertation
was vetted by your faculty committee for
months or even years. You know who they
are, and so will most readers of the final
product. They feel that their own reputations
are on the line, almost as much as yours
is. That is why they willingly devote time
and care to reviewing a dissertation and why
they rigorously, almost jealously, enforce a
high standard. When they certify that you
have satisfied the university's requirements
for originality, contribution to knowledge, and
mastery of the relevant literature, their judgment
is at least as well-considered, authoritative,
and useful as a thumbs up from a journal
referee.
Instead of devaluing dissertations, because
they are not formally peer-reviewed, we should
see a beautiful win-win situation here. They
undergo a review that is sufficiently rigorous
26

3. THE INVISIBILITY OF
DISSERTATIONS

In short, dissertations are high in quality
and low in accessibility. In fact, I would say
they constitute the most invisible form of
useful literature and the most useful form
of invisible literature. Because of their high
quality, the access problem is worth solving.You
know what I am building up to, but let me
get there step by step.

4. THREE DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY
IN ACHIEVING OPEN ACCESS
Because OA to copyrighted literature
requires the copyright holder's consent, we
can rank different bodies of literature according
to the ease or difficulty of obtaining that
consent. The low-hanging fruit—in the words
of the Budapest Open Access Initiative (BOAI)—
is the literature that "scholars give to the
world without expectation of payment". Let's
say that Phase One of the OA movement
is to provide OA to this kind of royalty-free
literature. Because its authors do not expect
to be paid, and write for impact rather than
money, they can consent to OA without
losing revenue. That makes it much easier
for scholars to consent to OA than musicians
or movie-makers.
Phase Two is to provide OA to royaltyproducing literature like books. This is harder
because the copyright holder must be persuaded
that OA will either increase sales or bring
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

benefits that outweigh the loss of sales. If
you have been following the book-digitizing
wars, you know that some authors are persuaded
and some are not.
Phase Three is to reform copyright law
in order to reduce permission barriers. It
would help to shorten term of copyright,
extend the first-sale doctrine to digital content,
restore fair-use rights, nullify clickwrap licenses
as contracts of adhesion, and safeguard the
public domain from further prospective or
retroactive enclosure. But because these
steps require legislation, and are opposed
by well-funded industries, they are the most
difficult of all. Fortunately, they are merely
desirable and not necessary for OA. We
can get all we need from Phases One and
Two. For cutting-edge research published in
journals, we can get all we need from Phase
One.
First Point: Dissertations are Phase One
literature, just like journal articles. Graduate
students are not paid for their dissertations
and can consent to OA without losing revenue.
Their consent is even easier to obtain than
the consent of faculty members, since
dissertations are already subject to the terms
and conditions of the university.
If there is a difference, it is that authors
of journal articles know they will never be
paid for those texts, but some graduate
students plan to turn their dissertations into
books that generate (or could generate) revenue.
I will return to this possibility. But note that
it is the future book that is Phase Two; the
dissertation is still Phase One.

5. MANDATING OA FOR ETDS
I have read about 30 university web pages
on ETD policies. What is remarkable is the
way they list the benefits of OA (wider visibility
and greater impact) among the benefits of
ETDs as if OA were a natural consequence
of creating the work in digital form.
In principle, universities could require
electronic submission of the dissertation without
requiring deposit in the institutional repository.
They could also require deposit in the repository
without requiring OA. But in practice, most
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

universities do not draw these distinctions.
Most universities that encourage or require
electronic submission also encourage or require
OA. What is remarkable is that for theses
and dissertations, OA is not the hard step.
The hard step is encouraging or requiring
electronic submission.
For dissertations that are born digital
and submitted in digital form, OA is pretty
much the default. I need not tell you that
this is not at all the case with journal literature.
There are two lessons to draw from this.
First, anything that fosters ETDs (as opposed
to paper TDs) fosters OA to ETDs. Second,
the call for OA to ETDs is not new. It has
been part of the ETD movement since the
beginning. If there is anything new here, it
is that I am arguing for an OA mandate, not
just for OA.
Notable, explicit calls for OA to ETDs
have already been made by Edward Fox and
Gail McMillan1, Edinburgh's Theses Alive project
(2004), JISC's Electronic Thesis project (2005),
Richard Jones and Theo Andrew2, and Arthur
Sale3. UNESCO's ETD project called for "equal
access" to ETDs in 1999, but this is just
another way of calling for OA, since priced
access cannot be equal access. The international
Digital Access to Research Theses (DART)
project is committed to OA for ETDs but is
just starting up its advocacy efforts.

6. NINE REASONS TO MANDATE OA
FOR ETDS
1. Nowadays most theses and dissertations
are born digital. They are already ETDs even
if the university only wants to deal with
printouts.
2. ETDs are Phase One, royalty-free works
of research literature. Their authors lose no
revenue by consenting to OA.
3. ETDs are not formally published. Hence
there are no publishers in the picture to
resist or oppose OA. There are no publisher
fears of lost revenue to answer. There are
no publisher permissions to seek. There are
no publisher negotiations to delay or deter
OA archiving.
27

4. Mandates work and exhortations do not.
This is the universal lesson from OA mandates
to date, whether at funding agencies or
universities.
The US National Institutes of Health (NIH)
has encouraged but not required OA to NIHfunded research since May 2005. It hoped
that the increased flexibility would increase
participation, but it had the opposite effect.
In February 2006, the NIH reported to Congress
that the compliance rate by its grantees
was only 3.8 per cent. The low rate led the
agency's own Public Access Working Group
to recommend a mandate (November 2005).
The Board of Regents of the National Library
of Medicine reaffirmed the call for a mandate
in February 2006. And in June 2006, the
House Appropriations Committee instructed
the NIH to adopt a mandate.
By contrast, the Wellcome Trust has
mandated OA to Wellcome-funded research
since October 2005 and has enjoyed a nearly
100 per cent compliance rate.
Australia registers all accepted dissertations,
giving it a good sense of the denominator,
or the number of dissertations eligible for
OA. The OA repositories themselves give a
good sense of the numerator, or the number
that are actually OA at a given time. In April
2006, Arthur Sale summarised the results of
different university policies on OA for ETDs:
"[V]oluntary ETD deposition results in repositories
collecting less than 12 per cent of the available
theses, whereas mandatory policies are well
accepted and cause deposit rates to rise
towards 100 per cent."
5. OA solves the invisibility problem for
ETDs. Without OA, there is almost no access,
visibility, or indexing for dissertations. They
are hard to retrieve even if discovered, and
they are hard to discover. When they are
OA, ETDs are not only searchable by crossarchive search tools that index the ETD
repositories, they are also indexed (in growing
numbers but jerky stages) by Google, Yahoo,
and Microsoft. Scirus already indexes the
ETDs held by the Networked Digital Library
of Theses and Dissertations (NDLTD).

28

By making ETDs visible, OA helps the
readers who wouldn't otherwise have ready
access. But it also helps the ETD authors,
boosting their visibility and impact just as
it does for the authors of journal articles. I
do not believe that anyone has studied the
OA citation advantage for ETDs, but for journal
articles it ranges from 50 per cent to 250
per cent and it is likely to be comparable
(not necessarily identical) for ETDs.
6. Universities are in a good position to
mandate OA. They can make it a simple
condition of submission and acceptance.
In fact, if universities mandate OA for
ETDs, their compliance rates should be higher,
and grumbling lower, than mandating OA for
faculty research articles. Graduate students
are not as anarchical as faculty, or at least
not tenured; graduate students won't be subject
to countervailing pressures from publishers,
at least not as often; and graduate students
more likely to see the benefits of OA and
the obviousness of taking advantage of the
internet to disseminate research.
Universities that do not have institutional
repositories can still mandate OA. The best
way is to launch their own institutional repository.
But they could use a consortial or regional
ETD repository, or they could have their students
submit ETDs directly to NDLTD, which functions
as a universal or fall-back OA repository for
universities without their own. They could
use the universal repository I am setting up
with the Internet Archive (delayed but still
coming). Or they could use ProQuest's UMI,
which will offer OA to ETDs when the authors
or institutions request OA.
7. Mandating OA for ETDs will educate the
next generation of scholars about OA, when
they do not already know about it. Young
scholars are already more familiar with OA
than older ones, at least in the sciences.
But even knowledgeable young scholars may
not have much experience providing OA to
their own work, let alone support and
reinforcement from an important research
institution. An OA mandate will teach new
scholars how easy it is, how beneficial it is,

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

and how routine and expected it ought to
be. It will teach them that OA is not incendiary
and countercultural, but mainstream and simply
useful. It will help create lifelong habits of
self-archiving.
The greatest obstacle to routine selfarchiving is unfamiliarity with the process,
including groundless fears of the time it
takes. Familiarity removes this obstacle.
8.

An OA mandate will elicit better work.

All teachers know that students work
harder and do better work when they know
they are writing for a real audience—large
or small—beyond the teacher. The effect is
amplified if they are writing for the public.
Some teachers try to harness this power by
telling students to write as if their work were
to appear on the front page of the New York
Times. Some arrange to give students a real
audience beyond the teacher. In a law course
in which I conducted moot court, the quality
of student preparation and argument improved
dramatically after I started videotaping them.
I did not even have to put the videos online;
I just put them on reserve in the library for
the rest of the semester. OA gives authors
a real audience beyond the dissertation
committee and real incentives to do original,
impressive work.
I wrote my dissertation on Kierkegaard's
dissertation. The members of my committee
were strong on Kierkegaard in general, but
comparatively weak on his dissertation. There
were many spots in my dissertation where
I could have bluffed if wanted to. But even
when graduate students think it is safe and
easy to fool their committee, it is risky and
difficult to fool the world.
9. Finally, an OA mandate shows that the
university takes the dissertation seriously.
The university asks for a new and significant
work of scholarship and most students deliver
one. But because the university doesn't
disseminate the dissertation publicly, it sends
a subtle signal that it doesn't take it seriously
as a work of scholarship. Of course the
dissertation committee takes it very seriously
as a work of scholarship, but the university
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

itself doesn't do what it normally does when
its scholars produce new and important work:
it doesn't apply its publish-or-perish policy.
This policy not only proclaims that research
good enough for internal recognition is good
enough for external distribution. It also proclaims
the stronger converse that only research
good enough for external distribution is good
enough for internal recognition.
Universities have the same interests in
promulgating excellent research by graduate
students as they have in promulgating excellent
research by faculty, the same reasons for
taking pride in it, and the same reasons for
applying a publish-or-perish policy or public
dissemination mandate. It wants the world
to know about the quality of the work done
there and it wants other researchers to benefit
from it. By adopting a serious public dissemination
mandate for faculty and not for doctoral students,
universities invite students to draw the cynical
inference that the dissertation is not so much
real scholarship as a hoop to jump through,
a final piece of disposable "student work",
an admission ticket to the profession, or a
rite of passage.
Of course the dissertation is also an
admission ticket and a rite of passage. Writing
a dissertation is a lot like entering the wilderness
alone, fasting to delirium, killing a wild animal,
and then returning to civilisation where one
is welcomed as an adult. But universities
should do more to send the signal that it is
an admission ticket and rite of passage
because it is a significant work of scholarship,
not the other way around.
Students may regard the dissertation
as fodder for some truly significant, adult
scholarship they might publish in the future.
But if so, the incentive to make it significant,
adult, and public comes from a future employer,
not from the institution that assigned, supervised,
and approved the research.
Without an OA mandate, the university
is saying that it does not care whether the
dissertation is publicly disseminated. But if
the dissertation is really a new and significant
work of scholarship, then the university should
care. The message should be: If we approve
29

a dissertation, then we think it is good. If
we think it is good, then we want others to
be able to find it, use it, and build on it.
Note that this message is about the
purpose of universities and the value of
scholarship, not about coercion. The school
does not have to say "we are requiring OA
for your sake" or even "we are requiring OA
for our sake". It is saying, "We will do all
we can to help you do good work, and then
we will do all we can to make your good
work available to others." It is about the
mission of a research university.

6. MANDATES, COERCION AND
CONSENT
Our experience in advocating and
implementing OA comes largely from the
world of faculty, not the world of graduate
students. In the world of faculty, the best
rationale for an OA mandate is to get the
attention of authors. Authors control the rate
of OA growth, but they are not paying attention
to OA. We can not appeal to them as a bloc
because they do not act as a bloc. It is not
hard to persuade them, or even excite them,
once we catch their attention, but it is very
hard to catch their attention because they
are so anarchical, overworked, and preoccupied.
So we have to work through the institutions
that have the greatest influence on authors.
These arguments apply even more easily
to graduate students than to faculty: the
benefits are just as valuable and the barriers
much lower.
One objection is that a mandate
paternalistically coerces students for their
own good. If true, this would be a serious
problem for me, though perhaps not for everyone
who defends mandates. I cannot support
paternalism over competent adults, and I
certainly put graduate students in that category.
Fortunately, the paternalism objection misses
the target and is easily answered. (The answer
also applies to faculty mandates but here I'll
elaborate it only for graduate students).
First, I only support mandates that are
conditions on voluntary contracts. They might
30

be funding contracts: if you take our money,
you will have to provide OA to your research;
if this bothers you, then do not take our
money. They might be employment contracts:
if you work here, you will have to provide OA
to your research; if this bothers you, then
do not work here. An OA mandate for ETDs
would belong to the same family. If you
attend this university, you will have to provide
OA to your dissertation; if this bothers you,
then do not attend this university. Students
who see this as a threat will go somewhere
else; students who see it is a promise are
getting the idea.
Second, I only support mandates with
reasonable exceptions. Graduate students
who have good reasons to be exempt from
the mandate should be exempted, not coerced.
(More on the exceptions themselves in the
next section.)
Third, an OA mandate for ETDs advances
the university's interest, not just the student's.
The student interest is greater visibility and
impact. The university interest is that an OA
mandate will elicit better work, better show
students that the university is taking the
dissertation seriously as scholarship, better
fulfill the university mission to share the
knowledge it produces, and better assist
researchers elsewhere who could benefit from
this knowledge.
In short, the paternalism objection does
not apply because the kind of OA mandate
I am talking about is fundamentally consensual,
not coercive, and aims at benefits far beyond
the student-authors themselves.
An OA mandate for ETDs is no more
problematic than other academic requirements
and considerably more mission-critical. Today
universities seem more interested in missiontrivial details like the margins and font sizes
of a dissertation than in its availability to
others who could use it, apply it, or build
on it.
Arthur Sale argues that the OA mandate
should apply to all dissertations submitted
as of a certain date rather than all dissertations
by students who enroll as of a certain date.
The two methods differ because students
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

finish their dissertations at different rates.
The first method jumps instantly to 100 per
cent compliance while the second phases
in compliance over a few years. If the primary
goal is rapid growth in the body of OA ETDs,
then Sale is right to recommend the first
method. The drawback of course is that it
would change the rules for students who are
already enrolled. Hence, if it is important to
preserve a consent or contract basis for the
OA mandate, then it is better to use the
second method, announce the new policy to
all new applicants, and apply it only to those
who choose to enroll. On the other hand,
the possibility of exemptions (see next section)
may introduce a sufficient consent element
to let us take Sale's recommendation as well.

7. SNAGS AND SOLUTIONS
(1) Some students fear that providing OA
for their ETD will disqualify it for future publication.
In the world of journals, the policy to disqualify
works that have already circulated as preprints
is called the Ingelfinger rule. I have not heard
a special name for the analogous rule applied
to ETDs but for convenience I will use the
same name here. Some students fear the
Ingelfinger rule. Some fear it even though for
decades most universities have submitted
dissertations to UMI, which distributed copies
on demand by xerography or microfilm to
paying customers, a process that certainly
counts as "publication" for journals that still
follow the Ingelfinger rule.
The fear is justified in a small number
of cases and unjustified in most. But we
should not harm the students whose fears
are justified or simply override the fears of
the rest. The solution is straightforward.
Universities should require students of approved
dissertations to deposit the full-text and metadata
in the institution's OA repository. This should
take place immediately upon final approval
(say, within a couple of days or a week). The
university should require immediate OA to
the metadata. For the text of the dissertation,
immediate OA is not necessary, although it
should be the default. Students may apply
to the relevant dean for permission to delay
OA to the text. They can seek a delay for
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

the whole dissertation, when they plan to
publish it as a book, or for specific chapters,
if they only plan to publish journal articles.
Deans should approve delays only for the
affected chapters and require immediate OA
for the rest of the dissertation. Deans should
only approve temporary delays and make
them as brief as possible. During the period
of the delay, deans may temporarily block
access to outside users, but they should
not block access to everyone. For example,
access should still be open to the student,
the dissertation committee, the administration,
and perhaps all authenticated users affiliated
with the university.
The OA metadata helps the dissertation
become known to others working in the field
and could even help the author gather citations,
impact, and reputation while submitting chapters
to journals. More critically, most Ingelfinger
fears are groundless. In 2001, Gail McMillan
reviewed the literature and concluded that
“if one looks at the results of the Dalton and
Seaman surveys in combination with Virginia
Tech’s surveys of graduate student alumni,
the ready availability of ETDs on the Internet
does not deter the vast majority of publishers
from publishing articles derived from graduate
research already available on the Internet.”
(2) Some students make patentable discoveries
during their doctoral research and want time
to apply for a patent.
We do not have to force students to
disclose their research before they have had
a chance to patent it. We can use the same
solution that we used for students who fear
the Ingelfinger rule. The only difference may
be the length of the approved delay.
(3) Some sections of the dissertation may
be under copyright by others.
In one kind of case, students quote
extensively from a copyrighted work, or reproduce
a copyrighted illustration, and don't have
permission to redistribute it. In another kind
of case, a student has already published a
chapter as a journal article, has transferred
copyright to the journal, and doesn't have
the journal's permission to redistribute it.
31

Here we can use the solution to the
Ingelfinger problem with a few tweaks. Some
OA delays may have to be permanent rather
than temporary—i.e. for the life of the copyright
rather than for some fairly short period like
six months. Universities could require students
to seek permission to reproduce the copyrighted
material rather than to give up without trying.
They could also require students who publish
articles before finishing their dissertations
either to retain key rights or to give up hope
of using the articles in their dissertations.
Students who would like to use the articles
in their dissertations should retain the right
of OA archiving. Students who try and fail
to retain these rights could be required to
delay journal publication until after their
dissertation is approved. This would not be
as onerous as it may look. Students could
publish and get the rights they need either
by publishing in an OA journal (gold journal)
or in a non-OA journal that permitted postprint archiving (green journal), and about 70
per cent of subscription journals already fall
into the latter category. Or, with the dean's
permission, students could include published
articles in the version of their text used for
internal review and approval, but replace the
articles with citations and links in the version
used for distribution and storage.

articles derived from graduate research already
available on the Internet.")

(4) Finally, a snag of a different kind. The
largest obstacle to mandatory electronic
submission and OA for ETDs seems to be
faculty opposition. When universities give
students the option to submit their dissertation
electronically, well-meaning faculty advisors
often caution students against it. They are
thinking of the Ingelfinger rule and preservation.
They want to protect their student's shot at
future dissertation-based publications and
they want to be sure the student's dissertation
is well-preserved.

BTW, it is because faculty advisors show
themselves so backward on these issues
that I recommend that exemptions from the
OA requirement be sought from a dean rather
than from the dissertation committee.

The best solution here is education for
the faculty advisors. They need to know that
their own Ingelfinger fears are usually groundless.
They need to know that whatever anecdotal
evidence they may have is negated by Gail
McMillan's systematic survey evidence. (I
quoted her above: "...the ready availability
of ETDs on the Internet does not deter the
vast majority of publishers from publishing
32

The preservation objection is equally
groundless. Paper dissertations are not like
published books that exist in hundreds or
thousands of copies (benefiting from the LOCKSS
principle). They are usually unique and therefore
vulnerable—like mine, which was stolen from
the Northwestern University library. Universities
could lock them up in special collections,
but this is exactly the wrong model of
stewardship, as if preservation and access
were incompatible when the purpose of
preservation is precisely to increase, facilitate,
and perpetuate access. Moreover, OA to the
ETD is perfectly compatible with the existence
of paper copies in the university library and
elsewhere and perfectly compatible with microfilm
copies at UMI.
Beyond education, the university can
use its policies to counteract this bad advice.
First, the availability of temporary exemptions
should fully answer the Ingelfinger fear. And
if necessary, universities could require both
electronic and paper submission in order to
satisfy everyone that dissertations will be
no more vulnerable in the digital future than
in the paper past.

8. ADVOCACY AND TACTICS
There are three critical groups who are
thinking about, or ought to be thinking about,
OA for ETDs: (i) those already working for
the spread of ETDs, (ii) those already working
for OA, even if primarily for journal literature,
and (iii) the university administrators, faculty,
and graduate students that both the first two
groups are addressing. The first two groups
should talk to each other more often in order
to talk more effectively to the third group.
It can only help us make progress toward
our related goals. We can share ideas,
arguments, and strategies that work. We
can share allies, such as the names of OADESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

friendly faculty, librarians, and administrators
in given institutions. We can share successes
in two senses: we can share news but we
can also count on infectious victories. Any
university that mandates OA for ETDs is
that much closer to mandating OA for journal
post-prints and vice versa.
We can also work together on specific
goals that would help both groups. For example,
most of the high-end packages of OA archiving
software have special plug-ins for ETDs. They
do not need the plug-ins in order to accept
ETDs for deposit, which they do right out of
the box, but in order to help faculty supervisors
read and comment on drafts, much like peerreview management systems for journals.
For example, DSpace has the TAPIR plugin; Fedora has VALET; Bepress has a tracking
and submission system; and eprints has
some built-in review features. These tools
only work on electronic texts and they only
work on digital repositories. Insofar as they
are useful, they could help persuade universities
to require electronic submission (if they don't
already do so) and help persuade them to
launch an institutional repository (if they
don't already have one). We get the same
dual benefit if the review software is separate
from the institutional repository, not a plugin, provided it can easily or automatically
deposit the approved dissertation in the university
repository at the end of the process.

and benefits are just about the same, and
the students will want to enhance the visibility
and impact of both kinds of work. When we
talk to university administrators, we can make
the case for OA ETDs and OA eprints at the
same time. The two kinds of research output
use a common institutional infrastructure
and serve common institutional interests in
amplifying the visibility and impact of the
institution's research. I would like to see
graduate students and administrators consult,
discover their common interests, and then
announce that they have agreed to mandate
OA for ETDs because it will serve both groups,
the institution as a whole, and researchers
around the world.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to thank Richard Fyffe, Arthur
Sale, Brian Surratt, Scott Walter, and above
all, Sharon Reeves, for answering my many
questions about ETDs.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Ayris, Paul; Pressler, Chris & McLean,
Austin. The DART-Europe Project: Towards
Developing a European Theses Portal,
presented at the 2005 ETD meeting, Sydney,
Australia, 28 September, 2005. http://
adt.caul.edu.au/etd2005/papers/066Ayris.pdf

Another example is the merging of ETD
and eprint repositories. Arthur Sale has argued
for this and pointed out several benefits. The
university need not run two installations of
the archiving software, train two staffs (or
one staff on two systems), or run twice the
number of archival back-ups. It will save
money. With a merged repository, there is
no danger that the ETD repository will become
the poor cousin to the eprint repository, or
vice versa, skimping on features or technical
support. It will improve performance. A merged
repository will have more content than either
one alone and therefore will attract more
users, traffic, links, citations, indexing robots,
and impact. It will deliver greater benefits.

2. Charles W. Bailey, Jr. Electronic Theses
and Dissertations: A Bibliography,
DigitalKoans, 8 July, 2005. http://www.
escholarlypub.com/digitalkoans/2005/07/
08/electronic-theses-and-dissertations-abibliography/

When we talk to graduate students, we
can educate them about OA ETDs and OA
eprints at the same time. The deposit process

5. http://archives.eprints.org/?country
=&version=&type=theses&order=record
count&submit=Filter.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

3. Charles W. Bailey, Jr., ETD Policies and
Procedures at ARL Institutions, DigitalKoans,
21 July, 2005. http://www.escholarlypub.com/
digitalkoans/2005/07/21/etd-policies-andprocedures-at-arl-institutions.
4. Brody, Tim. Registry of Open Access
Repositories (ROAR). http://archives.
eprints.org.

33

6. Fox , Edward A. & McMillan,Gail. Request
for Widespread Access to ETDs, October
1997. h t t p : / / w w w. n d l t d . o r g / i n f o /
pubrequest.en.html.
7. Fox, Edward A. It is easy for universities
to support free culture with digital libraries:
The NDLTD Example, presented at the
MetaScholar Initiative (Emory University),
5 May, 2005. Only the abstract is free
online. http://www.metascholar .org/events/
2005/freeculture/viewabstract.php?id=22.
8. Jones Richard & Andrew, Theo. Open
access, open source and e-theses: the
development of the Edinburgh Research
Archive, Program: electronic library &
information systems, 39, 3, March 2005,
pp. 198-212. http://www. ingentaconnect.com/
content/mcb/280/2005/00000039/00000003/
art00002.
9. OA edition. http:// www. era.lib.ed.ac.uk/
handle/1842/811.
10. Joan K. Lippincott, Institutional Strategies
and Policies for Electronic Theses and
Dissertations, Educause Center for Applied
Research Bulletin, June 20, 2006. http:/
/www.educause.edu/LibraryDetail Page/
666?ID=ERB0613; http://www.earlham. edu/
~peters/fos/2006_06_18_fosblo
garchive.html#115092901136590442.
11. McMillan, Gail. Do ETDs Deter Publishers?
Does Web availability count as prior

publication? College and Research Libraries
News, 2001, 62(6). http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/
staff/gailmac/publications/
pubrsETD2001.html.
12. Sale, Arthur. The impact of mandatory
policies on ETD acquisition. D-Lib Magazine,
2006. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/april06/sale/
04sale.html.
13. Sale, Arthur. Unifying ETD with open
access repositories 2005 edited by Tony
Carneglutti. In Proceedings of 8th
International Electronic Theses and
Dissertations Symposium, Sydney, Australia.
http://eprints.comp.utas. edu.au:81/archive/
00000202/.
14. Seamans, Nancy H. Electronic theses
and dissertations as prior publications:
What the editors say. Library Hi Tech,
2003. http://www.ingentaconnect .com/
content/mcb/238/2003/00000021/00000001/
art00006;jsessionid =4g9lr4xw0wj0.alice.
15. Surratt, Brian. ETD release/access policies
in ARL Libraries: A preliminary study. In
2005 ETD conference in Sydney, Australia,
30 September, 2005. http://adt.caul.edu.au/
etd2005/papers/055Surratt.pdf
16. http://www.besurratt.com/ETDPolicies/
index.htm

About the Author
Peter Suber received a PhD in philosophy in 1978, and a Juris Doctor in 1982,
both from Northwestern University. He is a Senior Research Professor of
Philosophy at Earlham College, the Open Access Project Director at Public
Knowledge, and a Senior Researcher at SPARC (Scholarly Publishing and Academic
Resources Coalition). Suber was the principal drafter of the Budapest Open
Access Initiative. He writes Open Access News and the SPARC Open Access
Newsletter, considered the most authoritative blog and newsletter on open
access. He is the author of The Paradox of Self-Amendment (Lang 1990), the
first book-length study of self-referential paradoxes in law, and The Case of
the Speluncean Explorers: Nine New Opinions (Routledge 1998), the first booklength “rehearing” of Lon Fuller’s classic, fictional case. He has also written
many articles on self-reference, ethics, formal and informal logic, the philosophy
of law, the history of philosophy, and open access to science and scholarship.

34

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

