DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 41-48
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access to Publicly Funded
Research Information: the race is on
Barbara Kirsop
Electronic Publishing Trust for Development
Wilmots, Elmton, Worksop, S80 4LS, UK
E-mail: ept@biostrat.demon.co.uk

ABSTRACT
Without access to current international research information and without the ability
to contribute national research findings, researchers in the developing countries have
struggled to make an impact and to develop a strong and independent national science
infrastructure. The cost of journals has continued to rise and the situation within this
conventional access structure continues to deteriorate. However, a window of
opportunity has opened wide since the establishment of the open access (OA) movement.
The paper outlines the problems facing scholarly communication in developing countries
and describes ways in which OA can provide a solution. The progress in developing
countries regarding adoption of OA is discussed in detail focusing on various parameters.
The current status shows that developing countries are beginning to recognise the
value to their academic communities and to their national economies of free access to
published research articles.
Keywords: Open access, developing countries, BOAI, IRs, DOAJ

1. INTRODUCTION
There is a growing recognition that to
solve the world’s problems such as climate
change, environmental stability and conservation,
agricultural sustainability, infectious diseases,
or HIV/AIDS, research carried out in the
developing nations needs to be part of the
global knowledge base. Yet, without access
to current international research information
and without the ability to contribute national
research findings, researchers in the developing
countries have struggled to make an impact
and to develop a strong and independent
national science infrastructure. Without this,

the economy of a country will remain reliant
on others, dependent on their priorities, and
defenceless against possible exploitation.
A survey1 carried out by the World Health
Organisation in 2003 quantified this problem.
It showed that the medical institutes in the
poorest countries, those located in the 75
countries with GNP/capita/yr less than $1000,
56 per cent had not subscribed to any journals
over the last five years. The situation of the
countries with GNP/capita/yr of $1000-3000,
was little better. In this group, 34 per cent
had not subscribed to any journals and a
further 34 per cent had an average of two
41

subscriptions/year. It is difficult to see how
these organisations could develop any kind
of research vigour under such circumstances.
Since 2003, the cost of journals has continued
to rise and the situation within this conventional
access structure must be further deteriorating.

2. OPEN ACCESS
A window of opportunity has opened with
the establishment of the OA movement and
the recommendations of the Budapest Open
Access Initiative 2 . Throughout the world,
international academic communities are steadily
developing improved mechanisms for the
exchange of research publications and data.
Both the establishment of interoperable
institutional repositories (IRs), which hold
the research output of an organisation, and
new OA journals promise to reform the existing
system and provide equality of access regardless
of ability to pay.
This is an unprecedented opportunity for
developing countries to both access research
publications they have been unable to afford
in the past, and to ensure the incorporation
of their own research output into the global
knowledge base.
Funding organisations, institutes, universities
and information specialists are working in
all parts of the world to take advantage of
the new opportunities offered by the World
Wide Web. About 1000 IRs are already registered
in the Registry of OA Repositories3 , and
some 850 OA journals are listed in the Directory
of Open Access Journals4. Of these, some
20 per cent of OA journals are published in
developing countries and about 16 per cent
of IRs have been established in these regions.
Research information from these resources
is now free for all to use, to copy, and to
build on.
At the same time, governments, institutes,
and universities as well as funding bodies
are asking their fundees and employees to
ensure that the research arising from their
support is made as widely known as possible
in order to make the greatest public impact.
Research organisations are noting that the
wealth of research output from organisations
42

around the world with established IRs are
attracting better academic recognition and
more funding. They wish to see the maximum
benefit, both intellectual and economic, from
their investment and are now recognising
that OA will provide the greatest visibility
and impact 5.
Though this requirement has been broadly
agreed in principle, until recently it has seldom
been enforced. It has been assumed that
academic authors will wish to make their
published results as widely known as possible.
While authors acknowledge this, experience
has shown that they are engaged more in
their next research project than in taking
action to promote their publications by archiving
in their institute’s repository, even though
depositing papers takes only a few minutes,
once familiarisation with the process has
been made.
Studies made by Key Perspectives6 show
that when authors are asked if they would
willingly archive their publications if asked
by their institutes to do so, over 80 per cent
agree that they would comply (see Fig. 5 at
page No. 22).
Encouraged by these findings and the
urge to showcase their institute’s or country’s
research strength, a growing number of
organisations have issued mandates requiring
authors to archive publications arising from
their support in order to gain maximum exposure
and to ensure others build on the work they
have financed. A list of these mandates, as
at September 2007, is cited at Roarmap7
and is summarised below:
Funder mandates: 17 (Australia 2, Belgium 1,
Canada 1, EU 1, and UK 12).
Institute mandates: 12 (Australia 2, Belgium 1,
India 2, Portugal 1, Russia 1, Switzerland 2,
Turkey 1, and UK 2).
Departmental mandates: 3 (Australia 1, France
1, and UK 1).
Proposed mandates: 7 (including NIH mandate,
approved by House of Representatives, still to be
ratified by Senate).
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

The list includes six of the seven UK
Research Councils, the Wellcome Trust, the
European Research Council and many other
significant organisations. A list of academic
organisations supporting OA to publicly-funded
research findings, but who may yet be considering
the development of a mandate, can be found
from the OA petition sponsored at the start
of 2007 by major scholarly European organisations
(DEff, SURF, JISC, SPARC), and signed by
about 26,500 individuals and nearly 1300
academic organisations is available at
http://www.ec-petition.eu/index.php? p=
signatories&show_institute=1/.

3. PROGRESS IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
Developing countries have begun to recognise
the value of free OA to published articles,
and the numbers of OA journals and IRs is
increasing steadily. However, this growth,
particularly in the establishment of low-cost
IRs does not yet reflect the awareness-raising
efforts being carried out in some regions. In
spite of the publication of many papers by
OA advocates, and presentations at conferences
and meetings, institutes are still delaying
the establishment and filling of IRs. It is
important to understand the reasons for this.
It may be because policy makers think
it is a high-cost and difficult activity. But
those that have already established IRs report
that they have used existing resources, or
at most needed to pay for some extra staffing.
Furthermore, online help is available to setup a repository and the software and online
support are free of cost. So it cannot be the
cost that is delaying OA in some countries.
It is perhaps the fear that it is against
publishers’ policies to allow the archiving of
the author’s final version of a published paper?

But over 60 per cent of publishers agree to
authors archiving their final accepted papers,
though sometimes with a restricted access
period of a few months (SHERPA Romeo
database of publishers’ policies)8 . If there
are uncertainties about this, institutes can
require immediate deposit by authors into
their IRs, setting OA to take account of any
embargo period that some publishers may
require. The IR software allows depositors
to insert the date of the end of any embargo
period at the time of deposit, and the article
is automatically converted to full OA after
that date. Even during an embargo period,
interested readers may request an e-mailed
copy of the article by clicking a ‘Request
Copy’ button on the abstract, the activation
of which sends an e-mail copy immediately
on receiving the author’s agreement to do
so. Creative Commons and OA licenses are
now being adopted more widely by authors
so that the whole issue of ownership is
changing.

4. USAGE OF OA RESOURCES BY
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
4.1 Usage of OA Journals published
by Developing Countries
Usage statistics from Bioline International9,
a non-profit Brazil/Canada service that distributes
some 60 journals published in developing
countries on an OA basis, show very high
usage of OA journals by both developing and
developed countries (Table 1), reflecting both
an interest and a need for the information
from these regions. In 2006, 2.5 million requests
for full-text papers were made to Bioline
International. Figure 1, a Geo Map overlay,
shows the extent of usage [of OA] by developing
countries. Statistics from the MedKnow
Publications10 service, Mumbai, India, which

Table 1. Usage of the Brazil/Canada Bioline system since 2002

Year

Total hits
(Adjusted)

TOC

Articles
titles

Abstract
requests

Full-text
requests

Journal info
requests

2002

224137

44548

105189

26961

7682

2003

445679

116364

149211

45944

26315

Search
results

2004

854467

121546

288548

157809

33895

2005

2723472

46859

86097

434935

1100615

34204

33637

2006

5749179

75537

162622

1097370

2496511

79334

66318

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

43

provides publication support for journals from
India and other developing countries, show
an increase in monthly visits and download
of articles from its Journal of Postgraduate
Medicine (JPGM) (Figs. 2 & 3) since providing
open access.

distributes journals published in Latin America
and Caribbean regions, that OA greatly increases
usage of the journals, which benefit in terms
of quality and impact.

Figure 4 shows increased submissions
from Indian and non-Indian authors to MedKnow
journals after they became OA. Figure 5
demonstrates the gradual increase of the
impact factor of MedKnow’s JPGM journal.

Statistics for the usage of material archived
in IRs are only just becoming available, but
it is clear from the information provided by
some of the IRs, that developing countries
are commonly downloading full-text articles.
China and India are listed among the most
frequent users after the USA and the UK,
with Brazil, South Africa and Malaysia also
rated within the top 15 countries. Most other
developing countries are also using the IRs
though to a lesser extent. The usage facility

Figure 6 shows an increase in the number
of subscriptions to MedKnow journals since
becoming OA. It is clear from these statistics,
and similar figures from the Scientific Electronic
Library Online (SciELO) 11 service which

4.2 Usage of Material Archived in IRs

Figure 1. Geo Map showing significant usage by developing countries.

Figure 2. Usage of JPGM.
44

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

Figure 3. Geo Map of usage of the JPGM, showing global interest.

100 %
90 %
80 %
70 %
60 %
50 %
40 %
30 %

Jl of PG
Medicine

Neurology
India

Indian Jl
of Surgery

Indian Jl
of Plastic
Surgery

of Medical
Science

Indian Jl

Indian Jl of
Dermatology
Venereology
& Leprology

Jl of Critical
Medicine

Indian Jl
of Cancer

10 %
0%

Indian Jl of
Pharmacology

20 %

Journals
Figure 4. Submissions from Indian and non-Indian authors
to nine MedKnow journals.

associated with a number of IRs also lists
the most read articles for separate countries,
providing an interesting insight about the
information most frequently sought by
researchers.

4.3 IRs Infrastructure Support
Meanwhile, as the numbers of IRs increase,
regional infrastructure projects and support
services are underway. For example, in Europe,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

the EU has funded the DRIVER programme8
to support and coordinate EU IRs, and in
Australia and the UK other support programmes
are underway. In Brazil, the IBICT teams are
developing a toolbox of software, instruction
manuals, links and other infrastructure
mechanisms to establish IRs in institutes
in Latin America and the Caribbean. Debate
has moved on from ‘whether’ to ‘how’, and
research is being supported to develop improved
search programs and analysis tools.
45

Figure 5. Increased impact factor of JPGM.

700

No. of Subsribers

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Indian Jl
of Cancer

Jl of Critical Indian Jl of
Care
Dermatology
Medicine
Venereology
& Leprology

Indian Jl

Indian Jl
of Medical of Plastic
Surgery
Science

Indian Jl
of Surgery

Neurology
India

Indian Jl of
Jl of PG
Pharmacology Medicine

Journals
Figure 6. Increased subscriptions to MedKnow journals since becoming OA.

The statistics above show that both OA
journals and IRs are receiving significant
usage, and the ‘most aware’ countries such
as India are using this access route to essential
research information almost as much as
developed countries.

5. CONCLUSION
The adoption of OA by prestigious
organisations and Nobel laureates has not
been enough to persuade immediate global
acceptance by all. Certainly, there are large
swathes of unawareness about the reality of
OA, and not only in the developing regions.
So there is an on-going need for focused
advocacy, articles, lectures, blogs, workshops,
and technology transfer about OA.
46

OA is trying to reform a well-established
professional practice that happens to be
past its sell-by date. As the World Wide
Web and global communications are
revolutionising every aspect of people’s lives,
it will take some time for human nature to
adapt and accept new mechanisms. In addition
to natural caution, academic communities
need to assess inaccurate information being
dispersed by sections of the commercial
publishing industry. The recent appointment
of high-paid consultants and the establishment
of commercial lobbying organisations have
lead to the use of inappropriate language
and arguments to try to unhinge the OA
movement.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

This is sad, as the wisest publishers
understand that the establishment of OA journals
can be economic (as MedKnow Publications
is demonstrating—covering costs and increasing
subscriptions to printed copies without charging
authors to publish—and as BioMedCentral and
HINDAWI are also showing, using different
business models). Further, there is evidence
that IRs currently hold no threat to the future
of printed journals—the long-established ArXive
repository has existed in harmony with physics
journals for over a decade, with no apparent
loss of subscriptions; indeed two major physics
journal publishers mirror the ArXive site. The
American Society of Cell Biology has seen no
loss in subscriptions since converting to OA
some six years ago. The gloomy forecasts of
the demise of the serials publishing industry
are currently conjecture and not substantiated
by evidence.
Even if there should be a rocky transition
from the traditional to the digital distribution
of research publications and associated data,
the enormous benefits to the planet greatly
outweigh any difficulties that entrenched members
of the publishing industry may face. The
benefits from OA are not only academic
(accelerated research), but economic, as
access to the information necessary for the
progress of improved health, agriculture,
environmental protection and engineering
developments will lead inevitably to significant
economic growth. Furthermore, it is now
better recognised by development agencies
that if the research output generated in regions
experiencing major health and environmental
problems is missing from the global knowledge
pool, then research information on which
development programmes are based is
incomplete, and inappropriate programmes
may be set-up.
So the race is on! Which country will be
the first to establish a national OA policy (of
the kind agreed at a Bangalore workshop,
attended by participants from China, India,
Brazil and South Africa in 200612)? The transition
to OA is unstoppable. Just as it is impossible
to think of a world without Ipods, mobile

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

phones or satellite communication, the free
exchange of research information will never
return to pre-OA mechanisms and the inequalities
it brought.
I hope this issue of DESIDOC Journal
of Library and Information Technology will
help resolve remaining uncertainties, provide
encouraging statistics about progress in OA,
and accelerate the adoption of institutional
mandates and national policies. Perhaps,
as someone recently said, we need a pandemic
to focus our minds on the urgent need for
free, rapid, reliable exchange of research
information. I do not see any hope of reaching
some of the Millennium Development Goals
(to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger,
improve maternal health and reduce child
mortality, combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other
diseases, ensure environmental stability) without
global sharing of research information.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is greatly indebted to statistics
provided by the MedKnow and Bioline
International services and the helpful comments
by EPT trustee, Subbiah Arunachalam.

REFERENCES AND LINKS
1. WHO survey, Aronson, Barbara Access
to medical information for low-income
countries. New England Journal of Medicine,
2004, 350(10), 966-68.
2. http://www.soros.org/openaccess/
3. http://roar.eprints.org/
4. http://www.doaj.org/
5. http://www.citebase.org/static/isi_study/
6. http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/10999/
7. http://www.eprints.org/openaccess/policy
signup/
8. http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo.php
9. http://www.bioline.org.br

47

10. http://www.medknow.com
11. http://www.scielo.org/index.php?lang=en/

12. http://www.ncsi.iisc.ernet.in/OAworkshop
2006/pdfs/NationalOAPolicyDCs.pdf

About the Author
Dr Barbara Kirsop was the founder of Bioline Publications (now Bioline International
and managed at the University of Toronto) and is the secretary and co-founder of
the Electronic Publishing Trust for Development (EPT), UK, which supports the electronic
distribution of scientific information generated in developing countries. She began
her career as a microbiologist, was President of the World Federation for Culture
Collections, and Executive Director of the Microbial Strain Data Network. Her interest
in electronic publishing grew from her concern at the difficulties experienced by
scientists in the developing world in gaining access to scientific literature and in
making widely known research from their own countries.

48

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

