DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 49-56
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access and Quality
Peter Suber
Research Professor of Philosophy
Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana-47374-4095
E-mail: peter.suber@earlham.edu

ABSTRACT
The paper examines the subtle and indirect ways in which open access (OA) might
affect the quality of articles and the journals in which they appear. The author examines
some publisher arguments that OA will reduce quality, and finds them confused,
groundless, and self-serving. He then offers several arguments that open access will
actually tend to improve quality.
Keywords: Open access, quality, toll access journal, open access repository

1. INTRODUCTION
If an article is published in a toll-access
(TA) journal and then deposited in an openaccess (OA) repository, its quality does
not change. And conversely, if it is first
deposited in an OA repository and then
published in a TA journal, its quality does
not change. That is the sense in which
quality and access are independent. It is
obvious and it is basic. But it is not the
whole story. There are other, subtle ways
in which quality and access intersect. This
is an attempt to disentangle a large tangle
of them.
Most of the ways in which access affects
quality are very indirect. But there is one
family of indirect effects that I will not cover
here: the ways in which OA improves the
quality of published research by improving
the productivity of the researcher. That goes

to the heart of the case for OA, but it is more
familiar, and actually larger, than the topics
I want to explore here.

2. FACTORS AFFECTING QUALITY
±

The main factors that affect the quality
of journal literature are price- and mediumindependent: the quality of authors, the
quality of editors, and the quality of referees.
We know that these key players can be
just as good at OA journals as at TA
journals because they can be the very
same people. An excellent TA journal
can convert to OA and use the same
standards and the same people that it
used before. An excellent newly-launched
OA journal can use the same people as
an excellent TA journal. And of course
two journals do not have to use the same
people to use people of comparable skill
and experience.

Reprinted with permission of the author from SPARC Open Access Newsletter, Issue 102 October 2, 2006 (http://www.
earlham.edu/~peters/fos/newsletter/10-02-06.htm#quality)

±

We have to acknowledge from the start
that there are strong and weak OA journals,
just as there are strong and weak TA
journals.

most of the new hybrid OA journals, authors
don't even communicate their decision on
the OA option until after the paper has been
accepted.

Hence, any analysis focusing on weak
OA journals and strong TA journals (as if to
show the superiority of TA journals) would be
as arbitrary as one focusing on weak TA
journals and strong OA journals (as if to
show the superiority of OA journals). Without
some additional argument showing that the
journals on which they focus are typical of
their breeds, they would be guilty of cherrypicking and generalising from an unrepresentative
sample. Moreover, we know that something
has gone wrong if an argument for the virtues
of either model implies that weak journals
using that model do not exist.

Fourth, just like TA journals, OA journals
know that their submissions and prestige
depend on their quality. Preserving their quality
will always be more valuable to them than
another fee. This is especially true when we
realize that the fees themselves are set at
or near (and sometimes below) the subsistence
level. A journal gains nothing and loses much
if it lowers its quality in order to bring in a
fee that does little more than pay the costs
of bringing in the fee.

±

TA publishers have often charged that
OA journals compromise on peer review.
The allegation is that if a journal accepts
a fee for every paper it publishes, then
it has an incentive to lower its standards
in order to accept more papers. It sounds
plausible but it does not stand up to
scrutiny. (http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/
fos/newsletter/03-02-04.htm#objreply).

First, even if OA journals charging authorside fees have an incentive to accept more
papers, it does not follow that they have an
incentive to lower their standards. If they
have a large number of excellent submissions,
they can increase their acceptance rate without
lowering standards. Unlike TA journals, they
have no space limitations to hem them in.

Fifth, the majority of OA journals charge
no author-side fees at all. (http://www.
earlham.edu/~peters/fos/newsletter/06-0206.htm#facts).
We are hearing less of this objection
now that some of the critics (like Elsevier
and the Royal Society) are offering hybrid
journals and accepting author-side fees
themselves. As full and hybrid OA journals
spread, the objection will continue to fade
away.
±

Second, OA journals charging authorside fees often waive the fees in case of
economic hardship. Not every accepted paper
will create revenue, and some will have the
opposite effect.

Is peer review at OA journals less rigorous
than at TA journals? In October 2005
the Kaufman-Wills report (The Facts
About Open Access) concluded that it
was, based on a finding that TA journals
used external reviewers, or reviewers
outside the journal's editorial staff, more
often than OA journals. However, a
subsequent addendum retracted most
of that conclusion as based on an erroneous
interpretation of peer review practices
at BioMed Central.

±

Third, OA journals charging author-side
fees have editorial firewalls in place to insulate
the peer-review process from business decisions
about fees. For example, it is very common
for editors not to know whether an author
has requested a fee waiver. Many OA journals
ensure that at least one voice in the editorial
decision is not employed by the journal and
has no financial stake in the outcome. At

On the other side, there are reasons to
think that TA journals face stronger incentives
to lower standards than OA journals.

First, the Kaufman-Wills report showed
that more subscription journals charge authorside fees than OA journals. Author-side fees
needn't cause a lowering of standards at
either kind of journal. But insofar as they
have that tendency, TA journals are afflicted
more often than OA journals.(Not only do a

50

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

greater number of TA journals charge authorside fees, but a greater percentage of them
do so as well. Of course, at a TA journal,
author-side fees are laid on top of readerside subscription fees.)
Second, TA journals often justify price
increases by pointing to the growing volume
of published articles. This is the incentive
that critics saw in fee-based OA journals:
the incentive to increase quantity in order to
increase revenue. As with OA journals, this
needn't result in a decrease in quality; but
insofar as it has that tendency, the problem
exists at both kinds of journals. Is it worse
at TA journals? Consider the next factor.
Third, subscription fees at TA journals
include substantial profits or surpluses, often
more than 35 per cent. An EPS report from
July 2006 showed that the average profit
margin at STM publishers in 2005 was 25
per cent. (http://www.econtentmag.com/Articles/
A r t i c l e R e a d e r. a s p x ? A r t i c l e I D = 1 6 9 4 2 &
CategoryID=17; http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/
fos/2006_07_09_fosblogarchive.html#
115288206732578292)
At fee-based OA journals, the incentive
to accept more papers to generate revenue
is small, because the fees barely cover their
costs. At TA journals, the incentive to accept
more papers to justify price increases is
much larger, because subscriptions often
contain significant profits or surpluses. As
I have noted, when a journal has an abundance
of excellent submissions, then it can increase
quantity without decreasing quality. But when
it doesn't have enough excellent submissions,
then it can only accept more papers by
lowering standards.
Not all TA journals have towering profit
margins. Not all are even in the black. However—
though no one has yet done the relevant
studies—I would bet that subscription revenue
exceeds costs more often at TA journals
than fee revenue does at OA journals, and
conversely, that fee revenue falls below costs
more often at OA journals than subscription
revenue does at TA journals. If so, then the
average TA journal using increased quantity
to justify price increases will get a bigger
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

revenue bump from increasing its acceptance
rate than the average OA journal will. Hence,
the incentive to increase the acceptance
rate by lowering standards is stronger at TA
journals than at OA journals. Within the
domain of TA journals, it's stronger at highprofit journals than at low-profit or non-profit
journals.
TA publishers who gloated at the news
in June 2006 that Public Library of Science
(PLoS) would have to supplement fee revenue
with foundation grants did not realize that
the same news showed that PLoS has no
incentive to lower its standards in order to
bring in more insufficient fees. Or at least
TA publishers with any kind of profit margin
have a greater incentive to lower standards,
accept more papers, and justify a price increase.
Are OA journal fees high enough to corrupt
peer review or too low to pay the bills?
Critics can not have it both ways.
Fourth, if TA journals have a shortage of
excellent submissions, they cannot publish
a short issue without shortchanging subscribers.
Hence, to fill an issue they must lower their
standards. Because OA journals do not have
subscribers, they are free to publish short
issues limited to their first-rate submissions.
Fifth, TA journals with lower standards,
lower submission rates, and (consequently)
lower rejection rates have higher profit margins
than journals with higher standards and higher
submission rates. The reason is that journals
with lower rejection rates perform peer review
fewer times per published paper. Hence,
publishers seeking higher margins have an
incentive to lower standards. (This is compatible
of course with the existence of other incentives
pulling in the opposite direction.)
This is the conclusion of financial analysts
at Credit Suisse First Boston, published on
April 6, 2004. The report is not online but
I wrote a summary for SOAN. (http://www.
earlham.edu/~peters/fos/newsletter/05-0304.htm#creditsuisse)
The same Credit Suisse report shows
that bundling can protect weak journals from
cancellation and thereby insulate publishers
51

from the market forces that would ordinarily
punish declining quality.

2006):http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1136/bmj.
38705.490961.55

Note that some of these incentives amplify
one another. For a TA journal, lowering
standards and lowering the rejection rate
not only enlarges the journal and justifies
price increases but also lowers the costs of
peer review and increases profit margins.

Three quarters (159/211) [of surveyed authors]
said the fact that all readers would have
free access to their paper on bmj.com
was very important or important to their
decision to submit to BMJ. Over half (111/
211) said closure of free access to research
articles would make them slightly less
likely to submit research articles to the
BMJ in the future, 14 per cent (29/211)
said they would be much less likely to
submit, and 34 per cent (71/211) said it
would not influence their decision.

±

There is evidence from TA journals that
have shortened their embargoes or converted
to OA that OA increases submissions.
If it increases submissions, then it allows
the journal to increase selectivity and
improve the quality of the accepted articles.

From an interview with Elizabeth Marincola,
then Director of the American Society for
Cell Biology, which publishes Molecular
Biology of the Cell (Open Access Now, 6
October 2003): http://www.biomedcentral.com/
openaccess /archive/?page=features&issue=6
What happened after ASCB decided to
provide OA to all the articles in MBC
after only two months, the shortest embargo
in the industry? "We have not lost subscription
income, our submissions have gone up
and our meeting programs have held strong.
Financially we have been able to have
our cake and eat it".

From D.K. Sahu and Ramesh Parmar (the
Neil Jacobs anthology from Chandos Publishing,
2006): http://openmed.nic.in/1599/
OA has certainly helped the Indian journals
to reach an international audience...The
number of manuscripts submitted to the
journals has increased many fold with
increases in the number of articles coming
from other countries ranging from 12-44
per cent for various journals.
Finally, here's an argument I made in SOAN
for March 2005: http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/
fos/newsletter/03-02-05.htm#coexistence
For authors, the only reason to submit
work to a TA journal is its prestige. In
every other way, TA journals are inferior
to OA journals because they limit an author's
audience and impact. OA journals will
start to draw submissions away from top
TA journals as soon as they approach
them in prestige. And by the time they
equal them in prestige, the best TA journals
will have lost their one remaining competitive
advantage.

From T. Scott Plutchak, Editor of the Journal
of the Medical Library Association (LibLicense,
10 February 2005): http://www.library.yale.edu/
~llicense/ListArchives/0502/msg00172.html
The Journal of the Medical Library Association
(JMLA)...has been open access via PubMed
Central since September 2001. At present,
every article, letter, editorial and feature
of every issue, back to volume 1, issue
1, July 1911, is available. The online version
is generally up within a day or two of the
hard copy arriving on my desk....Benefits?
Although difficult to quantify, I would say
we are seeing greatly increased readership,
a striking increase in manuscript submissions,
particularly from overseas, and vastly
increased value of the older material, since
it is now so easy to get to.
From Sara Schroter (BMJ, February 14,
52

±

There is abundant evidence that OA
increases citation impact. (http://opcit.
eprints.org/oacitation-biblio.html)

I have often argued that citation impact
is not the same thing as quality, and I have
not changed my mind. But I can justify talking
about citation impact here because for many
authors, funding agencies, and university
promotion and tenure committees, citation
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

impact is a crude surrogate for quality. Some
acknowledge its crudity, or its divergence
from a true quality measurement; but at the
same time, some act as if they preferred
impact to quality, insofar as the two diverge.
Some critics have argued that part of
the correlation between OA and citation impact
is due to a quality bias: authors preferentially
self-archive their best work. Studies by Tim
Brody, Chawki Hajjem, Stevan Harnad, and
Gunther Eysenbach show that there is a
substantial OA citation advantage even after
correcting for any effects of this bias. I doubt
that the debate is over, but for present purposes
we needn't decide the question. Either OA
articles have greater impact than TA articles
even after we control for quality, or OA articles
have a higher average impact because they
have a higher average quality.
If self-archiving authors do preferentially
deposit their best work, then the reason
could be called author pride—the quality
filter that costs publishers nothing. All published
articles pass through this filter, of course.
But published and then self-archived articles
pass through it twice.
Just for the record: I am not saying that
author pride suffices; on the contrary, we
still need peer review, sometimes to ratify
author pride but more often to check it. Nor
am I saying that the existence of a selfarchiving bias arising from author pride negates
the evidence for an OA impact advantage;
on the contrary, I accept the evidence that
a significant impact advantage remains even
after subtracting the self-archiving quality bias.
I wrote about one form of quality bias
in BMJ for May 2005 (http://bmj.bmjjournals.com/
cgi/content/full/330/7500/1097). This is an
editorial commenting on a study by Jonathan
Wren, also from BMJ May 2005 (http://
bmj.bmjjournals.com/cgi/content/full/330/7500/
1128)
Note that the OA impact advantage centers
on the citation tally for individual articles,
not the impact factor of whole journals. Insofar
as OA increases the citation tally for articles,
it will tend to increase the impact factor for
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

journals. But other articles from the same
journal might raise or lower the impact factor,
muddying the water. In 2004 Thomson Scientific
did two studies (http://www.isinet.com/media/
presentrep/acropdf/impact-oa-journals.pdf, and
http://www.isinet.com/media/presentrep/
essayspdf/openaccesscitations2.pdf) of the
impact factors of OA journals, and both showed
that OA journals had competitive numbers.
Despite the relative youth of OA journals,
even in 2004 there was at least one OA
journal in the top cohort of impact factors
in nearly every scientific discipline.
±

Journal prices don't correlate with impact
or quality.

In fact, Theodore and Carl Bergstrom
have shown that journal prices are either
unrelated to quality or inversely related to
it. In their analysis of journal prices and
citation impact (Nature, May 20, 2004), they
conclude that "libraries typically must pay
4 to 6 times as much per page for journals
owned by commercial publishers as for journals
owned by non-profit societies. These differences
in price do not reflect differences in the
quality of the journals. In fact the commercial
journals are on average less cited than the
non-profits and the average cost per citation
of commercial journals ranges from 5 to 15
times as high as that of their non-profit
counterparts." (http://www.nature.com/nature/
focus/accessdebate/22.html; http://www.earlham.
edu/~peters/fos/2006_06_25_f osblogarchive
.html#115168252782138224).
Golnessa Galyani Moghaddam confirmed
this conclusion in a subsequent study (Libri,
June 2006). Not only do for-profit journals
cost more than non-profit journals per issue
or per volume, they also cost more per citation
and per point of impact factor. Moreover, of
the top 30 journals by usage at the Indian
Institute of Science, 20 were non-profits and
only 10 were for-profits. (http://www.librijournal.org/
subs/2006-2pp108-116.pdf; http://www.earlham.
edu/~peters/fos/2006_07_09_fosblogarchive.
html# 115298117985056648)
±

By hugely enlarging the audience, OA
makes authors more careful. If you like,
53

consider this another effect of author
pride.
In SOAN for July 2006, I argued that
one reason for graduate schools to mandate
OA for theses and dissertations is to improve
their quality: (http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/
fos/newsletter/07-02-06.htm#etds)
All teachers know that students work harder
and do better work when they know they
are writing for a real audience—large or
small—beyond the teacher. The effect is
amplified if they are writing for the public.
Some teachers try to harness this power
by telling students to write as if their
work were to appear on the front page of
the New York Times. Some arrange to
give students a real audience beyond the
teacher. In a law course in which I conducted
moot court, the quality of student preparation
and argument improved dramatically after
I started videotaping them. I did not even
have to put the videos online; I just put
them on reserve in the library for the rest
of the semester....OA gives authors a
real audience beyond the dissertation
committee and real incentives to do original,
impressive work....[E]ven when grad students
think it's safe and easy to fool their committee,
it's risky and difficult to fool the world.
The Chronicle of Higher Education quoted
a Yale professor to the same effect just last
month: (http://chronicle.com/daily/2006/09/
2006092001t.htm)
Ramamurti Shankar, a professor of physics
who is teaching one of [Yale's new OA]
courses, said knowing that his lecture
might be watched online by a wide audience
keeps him on his toes. "I have to be a
little more careful than I usually am," he
said.
±

Here's a variation on the same theme:
OA keeps authors honest.

Citing OA articles makes it easy for
readers to verify that authors are accurately
summarizing the cited work or data. Citing
TA articles makes this harder (but clearly,
not impossible) and to that extent protects
54

authors who want to blow smoke. The most
detailed case I've seen for this conclusion
is also the most recent: Mark Liberman,
Open-access sex stereotypes, Language Log,
September 10, 2006. (http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/
~myl/languagelog/archives/003565.html; http:/
/www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/2006_09_10_
fosblogarchive.html# 115799535190633252)
±

Here is another variation on the theme:
OA deters plagiarism. In the early days,
some authors worried that OA would
increase the incentive to plagiarise their
work. But this worry made no sense
and has not been borne out. On the
contrary. OA might make plagiarism easier
to commit, for people trolling for text to
cut and paste. But for the same reason,
OA makes plagiarism more hazardous
to commit. Insofar as OA makes plagiarism
easier, it's only for plagiarism from OA
sources. But plagiarism from OA sources
is the easiest kind to detect. Not all
plagiarists are smart, of course, but the
smart ones are steering clear of OA
sources.

For the same reason, they'll avoid OA
dissemination for any of their own works
containing plagiarised passages.
The first tendency improves the average
integrity of work quoting OA literature. The
second improves the average integrity of OA
literature itself.
Because OA will only reduce plagiarism
by smart plagiarists, the effect may be small.
And today the effect is small in any case
because so little of the literature is OA. But
just as we can expect good things from a
pest-resistant strain of wheat, even when
we've just introduced it in one field, we can
expect good things from this plagiarismresistant strain of research literature.
±

The EC's Study on the Economic and
Technical Evolution of the Scientific
Publication Markets in Europe (dated
January 2006 but apparently not released
until late March or early April) recommended
that we widen our concept of a journal's
quality to include quality of access or
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

quality of dissemination. This is an excellent
idea. (http://europa.eu.int/rapid/press
ReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/06/
414&format=HTML&aged=0&language=
EN&guiLanguage=en; http://www.earlham.
edu/~peters/fos/newsletter/05-0206.htm#ecreport)
A critic might object that even if adopted,
this would not change the fact that the OA/
TA status of an individual article is independent
of the article's quality. That's true but beside
the point. The report is not trying redefine
the quality of articles, but to recognize other
kinds of quality. When academic publishers
give awards to good journals, they recognize
many kinds of quality, including (for example)
quality of design. That is the kind of enlargement
of our thinking the EC study recommends,
but it focuses in particular on quality of
access, which publisher award ceremonies
tend to overlook. When libraries decide what
to buy, renew, or cancel, they consider many
kinds of quality, including quality of access.
For example, they take price into account,
as one criterion among many others, and for
TA electronic journals they investigate whether
they will still have access to subscribed
issues after they cancel.
±

Now and then someone will suggest
that OA is fine for second-rate work but
not for first-rate work. This claim is more
sniffed than elaborated, so it is hard to
tell what the argument is.

If it is saying that high-quality, highprestige journals will never or rarely be OA,
or vice versa, then it's a prediction, not a
datum. Moreover, it seems to be a false
prediction. There are already high-quality,
high-prestige OA journals, for example, the
Beilstein Journal of Chemistry, Nucleic Acids
Research, and PLoS Biology. (I pick these
three to show that OA, quality, and prestige
can exist together under a variety of
circumstances: two charge author-side fees
and one doesn't; two are from non-profit
publishers and one from a for-profit; two are
converted TA journals and one was born OA.)
There are more than this list of three,
of course. But one reason there aren't already
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

more than there are is that most OA journals
are new. Even when new journals are excellent
from birth, it takes time for their prestige to
catch up with their quality. Another reason
is that most of the money to pay for peerreviewed journals is still tied up in support
of TA journals. Since neither of these explanations
depends on any intrinsic limitation in the
quality of OA journals, we have good reason
to think that the numbers of high-quality,
high-prestige OA journals will grow as we
remove the barriers to their growth.
I can accept one form of the premise,
namely, that so far most high-quality, highprestige journals are TA. But of course, so
far, most low-quality, low-prestige journals
are also TA. Moreover, the present ratio of
excellent TA journals to excellent OA journals
is just a present fact about a very dynamic,
rapidly changing situation, not a fact about
the intrinsic quality of either kind of journal.
To mistake it for more would be like arguing
in 1980 that more prestigious journals used
typewriters than computers, and therefore
that computers must have some intrinsic
limitation keeping their numbers down.
I can accept another, more important
form of the premise, namely, that most authors
will seek prestige before OA, if they have to
choose. The mistake is to assume that they
have to choose.
There are two reasons why there is no
trade-off here. First, there are already highquality, high-prestige OA journals and their
existence shows that nothing intrinsic to
OA blocks that path. Second, authors can
publish in a prestigious TA journal and then
deposit their postprint in an OA repository.
About 70 per cent of TA journals already give
blanket permission for this and many of the
others will give permission after an individual
request. (http://romeo.eprints.org/stats.php)
±

There is a related argument (related because
it's more sniffed than elaborated) that
the internet is the proper home for crap,
not scholarship.

It's really more prejudice than argument,
and in 2006 it is more dead than alive.
55

Hence, you may think it no longer deserves
a response. But it was common in the early
days of the net, and when it was common
it was also self-fulfilling. It was one (of many)
early obstacles to OA, and we are still struggling
to overcome its effects. Moreover, it is not
completely dead.
It is true that the crap/gold ratio was
very high in the early days of the net. But
even then it didn't follow that there was no
gold, let alone that there shouldn't be. And
today the only people who can still say that
there's no high-quality, peer-reviewed work
in their fields on the Internet are the ones
who aren't paying attention.
Even though scholars generally know
that there is good scholarship online, there
is still a sense in some quarters that quality
work belongs elsewhere, or that good work
online is harmed by its association with
crap. For example, at universities giving grad
students the option to submit dissertations
electronically, and where OA for electronic
submissions is the default, there is evidence
that some professors advise their graduate
students against it. They're trying to preserve
their students' chances of publishing parts
of the dissertation in the future (well-intentioned
but uninformed) and trying to make their
students look like real scholars rather than
camp-followers (ironically more camp-following
than scholarly).

56

The attitude is often accompanied by
mutterings about the dislike of reading long
or difficult works online or the love of printed
books—which I share, by the way, but which
are compatible with taking full advantage of
the benefits online dissemination. Just as
often it's accompanied by mutterings that
"you get what you pay for". And of course
it's still true that the internet is full of crap,
though it's false that that crap/gold ratio
hasn't declined steadily in the past decade
and false that the tools for finding the gold
haven't improved just as steadily. It's true
that putting peer-reviewed scholarship online
puts it in the same bin as a lot of crap, but
the same is true of the bin of print. What's
astonishing is that smart people can forget
that the low quality of the crap online doesn't
affect the high quality of the scholarship
online. More critically, putting peer-reviewed
scholarship online doesn't add to the crap
online; it dilutes the crap online.
If the same squeamishness about online
dissemination had infected print dissemination
in the age of Gutenberg, on the ground that
real scholarship was inscribed by hand on
goatskin, then every kind of knowledge would
have been held back. What's striking is that
those still carrying traces of this prejudice
would rather follow the (literally) hide-bound
customs of their field than take advantage
of new technologies to pursue their own
interests.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

