DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 57-60
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access and Open J-Gate
N.V. Sathyanarayana
Informatics (India) Ltd, Bangalore-560 004.
E-mail: sathya@informindia.co.in

ABSTRACT
The paper highlights Open Access Initiative (OAI), its formal origin at the Budapest
meeting was organised by the Open Society Institute, and its aims to make published
scholarly content freely available on the Web with an intent that the Web would make
it easy to access. Parellel to OAI, it address the issue of bibliographic aggregation. It
also discusses the J-Gate and Open J-Gate open access databases and their salient
features.
Keywords : Open access, open access initiative, OAI-PMH, open access content, J-Gate,
open J-Gate

1. INTRODUCTION
After around fifteen years of vibrant activities
causing ripples in the world of scholarly
journal publishing, OAI as a term found its
formal origin at the meeting organised by
the Open Society Institute (OSI) in Budapest
in 2001. The initiative has signed consents
and passionate commitments from a growing
number of individuals and organisations around
the world who represent researchers,
universities, laboratories, libraries, foundations,
journals, publishers, learned societies, and
kindred open access (OA) initiatives. The
initiative also received $3 million funding
support from George Soros, the founder of
OSI. A well written critical history of OA
movement can be found in Richard Poynder's
two part articles in Information Today1,2. Over
the years, OA movement has driven a large
number of journals, both popular and scholarly
peer-reviewed, to open access domain which
can be estimated to be around 5,000 titles.

Around half of them are estimated to be from
the peer-reviewed domain.

2. ACCESS TO OA JOURNALS
OA aims to make published scholarly
content freely available on the Web with an
intent that the Web would make it easy to
access. However, Web is an ocean of chaos
when it comes to sharp and focussed access.
Effective access needs efficient bibliographic
control and aggreagation. Parellel to OAI,
there has been a strong drive by OAI-PMH
(protocol for metadata haravesting) to address
the issue of bibliographic aggregation. However,
OAI-PMH initiative has largely been limited
to metadata harvesting from the e-print archives
and institutional repositories (IR). This model
of bibliographic aggreagation has largely remained
untouched by the journal publishers and the
traditonal abstracting and indexing (A&I) database
publishers. Though more than 16,000 journals
have kept the metadata of their journal articles
57

in the OA domain, very few journals are OAI
compliant.
Traditional A&I databases are indexing
most of the OA journals without knowing
that they are OA journals. Hence, it is hard
to identify the OA articles from these sources.
Web of Science and Scopus claim to cover
more than 200 and 500 OA journals, respectively.
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ)
is by far the largest directory of OA journals
in the scholarly and peer-reviewed domain.
DOAJ indexes articles from less than onethird of the journals that it lists in its directory3,4.
(Table 1).

3. J-GATE AND OPEN ACCESS
CONTENT
Informatics started J-Gate as a database
tool, and e-journal gateway for searching
and accessing articles in online available
journals. J-Gate currently indexes articles
from more than 16,000 English language journals
of which over 10,000 are in scholarly domain.
It is by far the largest e-journal portal for
English language journals with article-level
links to full text.

provides access to the largest collection of
articles published in OA journals, largely
from 2001 onwards. However, J-Gate is a
subscription product, which restricts access
to OA journals. Realising this limitation,
Informatics, as part of its contribution to OA
movement, decided to create a separate
subset for the OA content indexed in JGate. This subset was launched as Open
J-Gate (OJ) in February 2006.
OJ defines “OA journals as those which
are accessible free with or without registration”.
OJ aims to index articles from all available
e-journals in the OA domain, from both scholarly
and popular domain. OJ provides seamless
access to millions of journal articles available
online by linking to full text on publishers
websites. It covers both peer reviewed as
well as professional journals including industry
and trade journals.OJ also distinguishes itself
from other portals such as Free Journals
Online, DOAJ, etc. which are primarily directory
sources for OA journals. Table 1 illustrates
OJ's claim of access to more OA journals
in comparison to DOAJ.

4. OJ FEATURES AND BENEFITS
When the development of J-Gate project
was initiated in 2001, the project team at
Informatics had not imagined that over the
years they would be building the largest
database for OA journals as part of J-Gate
production process. By the latest count, JGate covers 4, 230 OA journals, drawn from
both scholarly and popular domain. J-Gate

Salient features of OJ are given below:
Portal with the largest number of e-journals:
It indexes articles from 4,350 academic,
research and industry journals in English
language. Around 2,200 of them are peerreviewed scholarly journals.

Table 1. Open J-Gate and DOAJ—Comparative data

S. No.

**

4,350

DOAJ

1

Journals listed

2

Peer-reviewed journals

2,200

2,817

3

Popular & trade-press journals

2,150

0

4

English language journals

4,350

NA

5

Non-English language journals

Nil

NA

6

Journals from which articles are indexed

4,350

860

7

Total number of articles indexed

12,32,000

144,514

Sources: * Informatics, India;

58

*

OJ

Comparative Data

2,817

** http: www.doaj.org (accessed on 31 August 2007)
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

Links to more than one-million open access
articles: This number is growing with more
than 3,00,000 new articles added every year.
Full-text links are regularly validated.

provides for limiting the search to scholarly
(peer-reviewed) or popular journals.
¾

Advanced search: Advanced search
facilitates the options to search by peerreviewed journals, professional and industry
journals, search by title, keywords, author,
abstract, address/institution, etc., and
also limits by the latest updates, publication
year and open J-Gate subject categories.

¾

Browse by journal: Facilitates the option
to search journals by entering the journal
name as well as by their alphabetical
order.

Constant updation: Open J-Gate site is
updated daily.
Well-designed journal classification: All
journals are classified in a three-level hierarchical
system to provide for better relevancy in
search results.
Table of content (TOC) browsing: Users
can browse the TOC from archive as well as
current issues.
Easy-to-use search functionalities: Database
allows following search options for the user's
convenience (Fig. 1):
¾

Quick search: In addition to facilitating
quick search, the quick search box also

4.1 Subject Coverage
OJ covers OA journals from all disciplines.
The advanced search facility in OJ allows
limiting the search to journals from any desired
discipline. Table 2 presents the journal coverage
statistics by subject categories.

Figure 1. Screen shots of quick search and advanced search browse by journal.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

59

Table 2. Subject-spread of journal coverage
in OJ

S. No.

Subjects

Journals

1

Agricultural and biological sciences

618

2

Art and humanities

821

3

Basic sciences

1,151

4

Biomedical sciences

1,480

5

Engineering & technology

1,228

6

Library and information science

7

Social and management sciences

71
1,242

5. FUTURE PLANS

all years of content made available by the
publishers.
Definite indications are emerging about
the increase in impact factor of journals that
are posted for open access. Public Library
of Science (PLoS) Biology and PLoS Medicine,
two of the eight OA journals published by
PLoS, have registered an impressive ISI impact
factor of 14.1 and 13.8 respectively 3 . These
journals are the only online journals with no
print edition. Informatics hopes to build a
citation index to OA journal literature if the
funds are forthcoming from any agency.

REFERENCES

OJ is currently cross subsidised by revenues
from J-Gate and hence offered as free service
to the scholarly and academic community.
Informatics hopes to continue to this model.
One of the limitations of OJ is in its
depth of coverage. As J-Gate project was
initiated in 2000, the coverage for a large
number of OA journals is limited to 2001
onward. Informatics plans to increase the
depth of coverage by capturing metadata for

1. Poynder, Richard. Ten year after. Information
Today, 2004, 21(9), 1.
2. Poynder, Richard. No gain without pain.
Information Today. 2004, 21(10), 1.
3. Open Access journals get impressive impact
factors: Journals published by BioMed
Central get new impact factors from ISI.
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/about/
pr-releases?pr=20050623.

About the Author
N.V. Sathyanarayana is a former librarian, information entrepreneur and
information services and products developer rolled into one. He is the
Founder Director of Informatics India Ltd—a leading Information Products
and Services Company, established in 1980. Currently, he is the Chairman
and Managing Director of Informatics. He started his career as a librarian
and worked in different institutions and agencies such as Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore, HMT, SKF for seven years before promoting his
brainchild Informatics. Sathya is also associated with the many professional/
academic activities in the information profession. He served as a member
on the Working Group on Content Creation and Content Industry of The
National Task Force on Information Technology and Software Development
set-up by the Office of the Prime Minister of India; Member of Programme
Advisory Committee of the NISSAT sponsored project entitled Establishment
of the Vigyan Server and Internet School at Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore; Member of Board of Studies, Information Science, SNDT Women’s
University, Mumbai; Member of Governing Council for Centre for Information
Science and Technology, Mysore; Honorary Visiting Professor in the
Department of Studies in Library and Information Sciences, University
of Mysore, Mysore; and a member of the editorial board of CD-ROMs
in Print (Meckler Publishing, UK) for two years 1990 and 1991. He is
the Recipient of Young Information Scientist award in 1991 by the Society
for Information Science (India). Sathyanarayana organised the International
Information Industry conference, INFOTEX’93, the first of its kind from
India, for the Society for Information Science. He has worked in the
editorial team of two conference proceedings—Database Production
and Distribution Technologies. Infotex ‘93, published by Tata McGrawHill, and Digital Libraries Conference held at IISc, Bangalore published
by New Age Publications.
60

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

