DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 61-66
© 2008, DESIDOC

Global Access to Indian Research: Indian
STM Journals Online
G. Lalitha Kumari
Information Management Area
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
Uppal Road, Hyderabad-500 007
E-mail: lalitha@iict.res.in; laliict@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
India has a strong research and development base, both in the governmental and
private sectors, in science and technology. This has led to an impressive quantity of
research publications. But the Indian scientific community has noted with great concern
that Indian research findings, especially those reported in Indian journals, are under
represented in the global knowledge base. This is of concern not only for India but for
other developing nations as well. A global effort is on the way to make scientific
information affordable by bypassing the profit-making commercial scientific journal
publishers. Internet has created the possibility of establishing alternative models for the
dissemination of information. The above problems may be addressed by facilitating free
access to scientific information in electronic form to users worldwide. In India, many
science, technology, and medical journals are now available online for a global audience
through the initiatives of government and private non-profit publishers. The paper outlines
these international efforts with special focus on Indian initiatives.
Keywords: Indian research, STM journal, J-stage, self-archiving, open access

1. INTRODUCTION
India has a strong institutional science
and technology framework with more than
2,900 research and development (R&D)
organisations including many labs in the
government and private domains, science
agencies in industry, defence, health care,
biotechnology, information technology, space,
and many other centres of learning. India is
now identified as an emerging hub for collaborative
and outsourced R&D in drug development,
biotechnology, and chemicals1. The scientific
output of all these agencies is quite substantial

with India occupying the 13th rank among
the top 146 countries in the world2. Web of
Science indexed around 20,400 Indian
publications (2.09 per cent of the world’s
share) in 2002 of which 5,900 were from 46
Indian S&T journals3. But it is of great concern
to the Indian scientific community and to
developing nations in general, that a great
imbalance exist with regard to participation
in the global information exchange. The escalating
cost of scientific journals has turned into a
stumbling block for easy access to current
information. The phenomenal changes in digital
technology and communication networks have

Paper updated and reproduced from http://www.istl.org/05-spring/article3.html

blurred geographical and time boundaries
and have raised the hopes of the scientific
community of developing nations. Internet
has had a profound impact on scientific
publishing. But there is a wide gap in Internet
usage as revealed by the Science & Engineering
Indicators. In 2000, Internet penetration rate
in North America was 540 times more than
in Africa. Recent statistics show that India,
with its strong fleet of software developers
and IT infrastructure, still has a penetration
rate of 3.7 per cent compared to 75.6 per
cent in Sweden and 69.5 per cent in the USA4.

2. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN
INFORMATION ACCESSIBILITY
The past few years have seen tremendous
developments in information production,
acquisition, and dissemination. During the
period budgetary restrictions in research libraries
have led to a period known as the serial
cutting era. Data compiled by the Association
of Research Libraries (ARL) 5 show that from
1986 to 2001 though the research library
spending increased by 210 per cent but the
purchase of serial titles decreased by 5
per cent. There were apprehensions also
that electronic journals would force small
publishers out of business, and mergers
and high cost of acquisitions would eliminate
the competition. The new millennium has
also ushered the concept of virtual library
with seamless access to an integrated collection
of print, electronic, and multimedia resources
regardless of their physical location or ownership.
Scientists, policy makers, and reference librarians
world over are coming together to introduce
reforms to make scientific knowledge affordable.
The concept of free access to information in
electronic formats is also gaining momentum
for the advancement of scientific knowledge.
The trend is to liberate scientific publishing
from the clutches of commercial profit-making
bodies and make it easily available to the
generators of the knowledge and rightful users.
Leary 6 argued that: “Legislation should be
introduced to make results of federally funded
research available to public” and thus efforts
are afoot around the world to evolve methodologies
to bypass commercial publishers. Several
international groups are now using the power
of Web to disseminate scholarly information
free and with minimal barriers of copyright
62

and licensing, while the cost of publication
being met out of research grants, rather
than subscriptions to scientific journals 7.
Following are some of the approaches that
have been widely accepted:

2.1 Open Archives Opportunities—
E-print Archive
Open archiving (OA) may be defined as
the “deposition of scholarly research papers
into network servers accessible over Internet”8.
OA allows scientists of the developing countries
twin advantage of access to front-line highimpact research from developed nations, and
visibility of their own research by way of
contribution to global knowledge base. One
method of OA is the creation of e-print archives.
This offers open access to the self-archived
refereed research literature online through
author/institution. The pioneering and most
successful self-archiving model is ArXiv, the
e-print archive set-up at Los Alamos National
Research Laboratory, New Mexico9 . It is a
full-text physics archive containing 1,40,000
research papers with more than 15 mirror
sites around the world. ArXiv has removed
the cost barriers and monopoly of priced journals.

2.2 Open Access Journals
With the support and encouragement of
advocates of free information of science and
technology a large number of free full-text
online journals, especially of medical science,
are accessible through the Internet. To track
down these journals easily, the Directory of
Open Access Journals (DOAJ) was created
through the efforts of Lars Bjorshauge of the
University of Lund, Sweden, in 2003 10. To
dispel the misconception that anything distributed
freely over the Web is of low intellectual
value, DOAJ has set very high standards in
compiling its directory. Currently, the list
includes 2,833 journals published by noncommercial agencies such as universities
and R&D centres, the largest being Biomed
Central with 100 journals.

2.3 Free Medical Journals
The Amedeo group serves the needs of
health care professionals by facilitating free
full-text online access to a number of high
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

impact international medical and biomedical
journals 11 . The group believes that “access
to free scientific knowledge will have a major
impact on medical practices and would attract
Internet visitors to these journals. Journals
that restrict access to their websites will
lose popularity”. There are around 1,380 journals
at this site including many Indian medical
journals, with a wide range of policies for
permitting free online access after the print
version of the journals has been published.
For many journals the access is permitted
from six months to three years after print
publication.

This ultimately translates into failure to attract
international funding and collaboration.
Rajshekhar (2003) has explained that India’s
challenge is to reciprocate the information
flow and improve access and thereby the
impact of Indian research 14. To meet this
challenge and to generate a national R&D
resource base, an OA approach in line with
the Budapest Open Access Initiative is being
promoted. To provide free access to scholarly
journal/literature, the initiative has recommended
the complementary strategies of self-archiving
and OA journals15.

4. SELF-ARCHIVING
2.4 J-STAGE
With a view to disseminate outstanding
R&D results electronically and instantaneously
to the global scientific community, the Japan
Science and Technology Corporation (JST)
developed J-STAGE 12 to computerise the
bulletins of academic societies, and current
printed publications of member organisations.
It has set-up the necessary hardware and
software for electronic release of journals
via Internet. J-STAGE includes full-text and
partially full-text of electronic journals,
proceedings, and reports from Japanese scientific
societies in the fields of biology, chemistry,
engineering, medicine, physics, science, and
zoology.

2.5 Highwire Press
Highwire Press at Stanford University is
the largest and fastest growing full-text archive
of journals in the field of life and medical
sciences. These journals offer free online
access to developing countries. Each journal
has its own policy regarding availability of
free access to the online version after publication
of the printed journal. Highwire Press makes
many high impact titles available to the scientific
communities of developing nations 13.

Researchers and scholars need tools
and assistance in order to upload their refereed
articles in open electronic archives, a practice
commonly called self-archiving. This is to
lift these research communications from
obscurity. A model has been proposed to
set-up interoperable institutional digital research
repositories. By self-archiving and by adopting
the interoperability framework, these institutional
repositories (IR) can make themselves available
on Internet.
The first successful endeavor in this
area is e-Prints, an IR of research output
from the premier Indian research institute,
the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore16.
The archive is maintained by the National
Centre for Science Information (NCSI) and
supports self-archiving various file formats
(PDF, MS Word, HTML, etc.). E-Prints facilitates
seamless access and international visibility.
India, with its large R&D base of federally
funded organisations, has a great potential
for OA publishing 14. This activity has now
been initiated in other institutions also. Presently
there are about 20 institutional archives including
that of Council of Scientific & Industrial Research
(CSIR) laboratories.

3. INDIAN INITIATIVES

5. OPEN ACCESS JOURNALS

Citation studies have shown the alarming
fact that research published in Indian sources
is poorly cited compared to research published
in international journals. Low accessibility
and circulation rates lead to obscurity of the
research communicated in the Indian journals.

A number of Indian publishers are taking
advantage of the improved communication
networks and technologies to initiate an OA
policy for their journals. These initiatives are
happening as isolated efforts by both societies
and private publishers. Some of these are:

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

63

5.1 Indian Academy of Sciences
(http://www.ias.ac.in)

India, Indonesia, Kenya, South Africa, Uganda,
and Zimbabwe via Internet.

The learned scientific society with its
aim of promoting progress and upholding
the cause of science in pure and applied
branches is publishing 11 journals in all
front-line scientific disciplines. The academy
has taken the lead in India in providing OA
to Indian research by making available the
electronic versions of its journals over Internet.
It feels that OA to research literature achieves
a quick impact and makes quality articles
much more visible. Unlike the OA journals
of some of international publishers, the Academy
does not charge authors for publishing their
papers, and unlike Biomed Central (where
authors pay article processing charges) the
cost of publishing is met by government
funding and subscriptions to their print journals.

5.4 Indian Medlars Centre (http://
indmed.nic.in/)

5.2 Indian National Science
Academy (http://www.insa.ac.in)

5.5 NISCAIR Journals

In order to strengthen the open archive
movement at the national level, the Indian
National Science Academy (INSA) proposed
a project, Building Digital Resources: Creating
Facilities at INSA for hosting S&T journals
online. The National Information System for
Science & Technology funds the project; it
facilitated digitising S&T journals published
by INSA and hosting them on a web server.
INSA wishes to promote a cadre of OA experts
in Indian higher educational institutions and
federally funded laboratories. It also encourages
other professional societies having their own
websites to get a link on INSA’s site to
facilitate a single-point access.

5.3 BioLine International (http://
www.bioline.org.br)
It is an OA repository and is a collaborative
initiative of scientists and librarians of the
University of Toronto Libraries, Canada, Brazil,
and BioLine, UK. It is a non-profit electronic
publishing service committed to providing
OA to quality bioscience research published
in developing countries.
It makes available published information
from peer-reviewed journals from Brazil, Cuba,
64

This is an initiative by the National Informatics
Centre (NIC) and Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR), two government of India
agencies. NIC has developed indMED, a
bibliographic database of peer-reviewed Indian
biomedical journals. MedIND is a full-text
archive of 28 peer-reviewed Indian biomedical
journals indexed in indMED.
NIC also has an OA international archive
(OpenMED@NIC) for medical and allied
sciences,. Authors/owners can archive their
peer-reviewed documents like pre-prints, refereed
journal papers and accepted theses on the site.

This is an effort by the government-funded
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR). The publication wing of CSIR, NISCAIR,
brings out 16 research journals in different
S&T disciplines. Though full text is not currently
available online, bibliographic information and
abstracts can be accessed and searched.
There are other isolated efforts from learned
societies such as the Indian Statistical
Association which provides full text access
to its journal Sankhya (http://sankhya.isical.ac.in).

6. CONCLUSION
Within India a wide gap exists between
haves and have-nots, and the urban/rural
divide. A large number of developmental projects
are underway to strengthen the infrastructure
backbone of the country to make the fruits
of scientific progress equally available to
all. This will also ensure that the scientific
knowledge need no longer be confined to
economically strong institutions or regions
as electronic dissemination replaces physical
format. The open archives and open access
initiatives in India are sporadic efforts which
have a long way to go and needs consolidation.
Though scientists have some apprehensions
regarding copyright issues and clear
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

understanding of OA, still it is heartening to
see that Indian scientific community with
the active participation of governmental funding
agencies, learned societies, and publishers,
has taken a step in the right direction.

9. http://arxiv.org.

REFERENCES

10. http://www.doaj.org.

1. Rouhi. A.M. Asian competition gathers
strength. Chem Eng. News, 2004, 82(3),
48-50.

11. http://www.freemedicaljournals.com.

2. http://in-cites.com/research/2004.
3. Arunachalam, S. On publication Indicators.
Current Science, 2004, 86(5), 629.
4. http://www.internetWorldstats.com
5. http://www.arl.org
6. Leary, W.E. Measure calls for wider
access to federally financed research.
New York Times, 2003, 25 June, 2003
pp. 22.
7. http://www.scidev.net.
8. Chan L. & Kirsop, B. Open archiving
opportunities for developing countries:

Towards equitable distribution of global
knowledge. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/
issue30/oai-chan/

12. http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp.
13. http://highwire.stanford.edu.
14. Rajshekar, T.B. Improving visibility of Indian
research: An institutional, open access
publishing model. In Indo-US Workshop
on Open Digital Libraries and Interoperability,
June 23-25, 2003.
15. Arunachalam, S. India’s march towards
Open Access. Science and Development
Network (Online). http://www.scidev.net/
Opinions/index.cfm?
fuseaction=
readopinions&itemId=243 &language=1.
16. http://eprints.iisc.ernet.in

About the Author

Dr G Lalitha Kumari has a doctorate in Life Sciences from Panjab University,
Chandigarh. She joined Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Calcutta as Information
Scientist and later shifted to Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad.
Her areas of interest include scientomeric analysis and science policy studies.
She has around 40 publications in these area and presented papers in National
and International conferences..

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

65

Appendix 1

Publisher/Promoter

Content

Web Address

Los Alamos National Research
Laboratory, Nw Mexico

Full-text physics
archive (140,000
research articles

http://arxiv.org

University of Lund, Sweden
Directory of Open Access
Journals

2,833 STM journals

http://www.doaj.org

Amedeo Group

1,380 medical and
biomedical journals

http://www.freemedicaljournals.com

J-STAGE

Contributions of
Japanese scientific
societies from ejournals,
proceedings, and
reports

http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp

Highwire Press

787 full-text life
sciences and
medical research
journals

http://highwire.stanford.edu

Appendix 2

Publisher/Promoter

66

Content

Web Address

Indian Institute of Science (IISc)
Bangalore

Repository of IISc
Publications

http://eprints.iisc.ernet.in

Indian Academy of Sciences,
Bangalore

Full-text of 11 journals
in all disciplines of
science & technology

http://www.ias.ac.in

Indian National Science
Academy, New Delhi

4 S&T journals

http://www.insa.ac.in

Collaboration of University of
Toronto Libraries, Canada, Brazil
and Bioline, UK.

15 medical and
bioscience journals

http://www.bioline.org.br

Indian Medlars CentreCombined efforts of National
Informatics Centre(NIC) and
ICMR

Bibliographic Database
of prominent Indian
biomedical Journals.

http://indmed.nic.in/

Same as above

Full text of 38
biomedical journals

http://medind.nic.in/

National Informatics Centre(NIC)

International archive for
Medical and Allied
Sciences

http://openmed.nic.in/

National Institute of Science
Communication and Information
Resources (NISCAIR), CSIR

16 research journals
(bibliographic only)

http://www.niscair.res.in/ScienceCommunication/
ResearchJournals/rejour/rejour1.htm

Indian Statistical Association
Sankhya

An Indian journal of
statistics

http://sankhya.isical.ac.in

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

