DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 67-71
© 2008, DESIDOC

Open Access: Major Issues and Global Initiatives
Krishan Lal
Former Director, National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi-110 012
President, Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA)
of the International Council of Science

ABSTRACT
Free availability of scientific data, information and knowledge has played a key role
in the phenomenal developments in science. At present, high and ever increasing cost
of scientific literature is a major barrier to access to knowledge, particularly in the
developing world. A number of initiatives like the Budapest Open Access Initiative, ECHO
Charter, Bethesda Statement on Open Access Publishing and Berlin Declaration have
emphasized on open access. Studies by the Wellcome Trust have concluded that it
should be viable to move towards another system and that system should be more
efficient and less expensive. Dissemination of scientific results through Internet and
associated digital technologies is cost effective, efficient and beneficial to producers
and users of knowledge. CODATA has been actively engaged in propagating open
access. Some of its recommendations found place in the Declaration of Principles and
Agenda for Action of the World Summit on Information Society (WSIS). In the second
and final phase of the Summit at Tunis (November 2005) CODATA presented the viewpoint
of scientific stakeholders and a new proposal on Global Information Commons for Science
(GICSI). CODATA recommendations were evolved after in-depth deliberations involving
scientists and technologists, legal experts and noted economists and with the active
participation of organizations like ICSU, UNESCO, ICSTI, INASP, IAP, TWAS and US NAS
and collaboration of OECD. Recently, CODATA at the request of GEOSS successfully
led the task concerning with practical applications of agreed GEOSS Data Sharing
Principles (GEOSS Task DA-06-01).
Keywords: Open access, scientific knowledge, Berlin declaration, ECHO charter,

1. INTRODUCTION
The phenomenal advancements in all
scientific fields in the recent past have
transformed the human society. One of the
key enabling factors in these amazing
achievements has been the free availability
of scientific data and information. In the
pre-digital revolution era, the exchange of
scientific and technological data, information

and knowledge had been exclusively through
published literature. The private enterprises
with the collaboration of scientific and technical
community have played an important role in
efficient distribution of latest developments
among scientists at global level. However,
the costs of the publications have been rising
at a very high rate, making access to scientific
results restrictive. The developing world is
the worst sufferer. At present, even the developed
67

economies are finding it hard to cope with
this situation. As a reaction, in many countries
due to public pressure scientific results generated
through projects funded by public money
are coming in open domain. On the other
hand the fast rate of developments in the
Internet and communication technologies have
opened up new efficient and low cost options.
The use of world wide web and the associated
digital technologies offer opportunities, which
have potential to provide low cost efficient
options. Already, a huge volume of scientific
information is available freely on the web.
However, the information and knowledge that
has not gone through the proper peer review
process is quite injurious to the growth of
science and in spreading awareness about
science among common people.
Several studies have been carried out to
understand the basic issues and possible
solutions. Also, several initiatives have been
taken at global level to find widely acceptable
solutions. There has been a UN Summit on
Information Society (2003 and 2005) in which
CODATA had presented the views of the
scientific community. A new concept evolved
by CODATA and several important organizations
like UNESCO, ICSU, IAP, TWAS, ICSTI,
INASP in the form of Global Information Commons
Science Initiative (GICSI) was presented at

the Summit Plenary Session in November
2005. This paper reviews these developments.

2. HIGH COST OF PUBLISHED
SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE AND
BARRIERS TO ACCESS
SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE
At present most of the research and
development work is carried out in universities,
national laboratories or in research
establishments of industries or other private
organizations. The research papers are prepared
by scientists and submitted for publication
in appropriate journals. These are subjected
to peer review, an exercise carried out by
scientists who are experts in that field. These
are finally published in the journals.
Figure 1 shows the publication cycle. The
journals are accessible to researchers and
others through libraries, which pay ever-increasing
subscriptions to acquire the same. Two groups
are involved in the whole process. These
are:
(i)

Group I comprising of Funding Agencies;
R&D laboratories; active scientists, who
conduct research, produce scientific
literature, are involved in the refereeing
process and proof reading; and Libraries;
and

Figure 1. A schematic diagram depicting the publication of scientific research papers in journals.
68

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. & Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

(ii) Group II comprising of Publishers and
Marketing agencies.
It is obvious that there is a one-way
transfer of funds from Group I to Group II.
The laboratories fund the R&D and scientists
create scientific literature by following steps
mentioned above and finally their laboratories
pay for the final product, in whose production
they had played a vital role. The publishers
have a legitimate right to recover their costs
and make reasonable profit. However, the
prohibitive costs of books and journals are
raising questions about the level of profits
and the technologies of production. Also,
the possibilities of new digital technologies
for dissemination of scientific literature are
being tried globally. Among others the Data
Science Journal of CODATA is one such
example. The Proceedings of Indian National
Science Academy is available on the web
and is also available as a hard copy.
In view of the high cost of publication
of the scientific literature, in particular, scientific
journals, several studies have been conducted
to understand as to how the expenses can
be controlled. The Wellcome Trust, UK
(www.wellcome.ac.uk/publications) has played
an important role in this respect. This Trust
is a leading bio-medical charity, which spends
more than £ 400 million each year for scientific
research. The Trust has stressed that as
sponsors of R&D they have the right to
understand and influence as to how their
funds are utilized and in which way, the
results of research are disseminated. An
Economic and Management Consultancy
Company, SQW was engaged to investigate
the scientific publishing sector. The report
of SQW has provided an in-depth knowledge
about the economics of scientific publishing
industry and the way in which scientific knowledge
is disseminated. This study has shown that
the projections of the production cost of
printed literature are exaggerated. They have
also concluded that sponsors of R&D in
non-commercial and non-strategic sectors
should ensure that the results of important
projects are widely distributed. Therefore,
it is necessary to look at alternative methods
of dissemination of R&D results with due
credit to all the key stakeholders.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. & Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

The second report of Wellcome Trust is
named as Costs and Business Models in
Scientific Research (April 2004). In this study
it has been concluded that Open Access
should be able to deliver high quality peer
reviewed research publications at a cost
that is substantially lower than that in the
traditional model. It will also be beneficial
in other aspects. These reports stressed
that Open Access would allow far wider
dissemination and much higher impact of
the research work. Also, it will reduce the
barriers to access of scientific information
for researchers all over the world. Such an
approach will have significant positive impact
on the R&D organizations in the developing
world. Several international scientific bodies
have also recognized the importance of Internet
as an emerging powerful media for dissemination
of knowledge. It has led to the Budapest
Open Access initiative, ECHO Charter, Bethesda
Statement on Open Access Publishing and
Berlin Declaration.

3. BERLIN DECLARATION
The Berlin Declaration spearheaded by
the Max Planck Society and signed by over
200 leading organizations including Indian
National Science Academy, New Delhi have
given a road map for Open Access materials
(http://www.zim.mpg.de/openaccess-berlin/
signatories.html). Open Access has been
defined as a comprehensive source of knowledge
and cultural heritage that has been approved
by the scientific community.It covers:
(i)

Original scientific research results;

(ii) Raw data and metadata;
(iii) Source materials;
(iv) Digital representation of pictorial and
graphical materials; and
(v) Scholarly multimedia materials.
The authors and right-holders of Open
Access contributions have volunteered free
world wide right of access as well as have
granted license to copy, use, distribute, transmit
and display their work publicly. Further
works can be derived in any digital media
69

for responsible purposes. However, it is
expected that acknowledgement of authorship
will be ensured and only a small number of
printed copies would be made for personal
use.
Open Access contributions including
supplementary materials and a copy of the
permission in electronics format is deposited
in at least one online repository being maintained
by an academic institution or scholarly society
or a government agency or any other established
organization which is committed to the basic
principles of Open Access and long term
archiving.
The Declaration wishes to find solution
that will also improve the existing legal and
financial frameworks to be relevant in the
new paradigm.

4. ROLE OF CODATA IN SUPPORTING AND PROPAGATING OPEN
ACCESS
CODATA, the Committee on Data for
Science and Technology of the International
Council of Science (ICSU) was born at Bombay
in 1966 and has its headquarters at 5 rue
Auguste Vacquerie, 75016 Paris with its
own website–www.codata.org. CODATA
promotes and encourages on a worldwide
basis the compilation, evaluation and
dissemination of reliable numerical data of
importance in all fields of science and technology.
It may be emphasized that CODATA is concerned
with all types of data resulting from experimental
measurements, observations and calculations
in every field of science and technology including
physical sciences, biology, geology, astronomy,
engineering, environmental science, ecology
and others. In fact, the fundamental constants
of science are released every few years
under recommendations of CODATA and are
available freely through Internet.
CODATA organizes biennial International
Conferences, where topics of relevance to
data science and dissemination of data are
discussed. The last Conference was held
in Beijing in October 2006 and the next
Conference will be organized at Kyiv, Ukraine
in October 2008. In addition, specialist
70

meetings of experts are also organized from
time to time. CODATA brings out a free peer
reviewed electronic Data Science Journal,
which can be accessed at http://
dsj.codataweb.org. For specific activities,
CODATA sponsors Task Groups in different
fields including one on Fundamental Constants.
Specialist groups are also working to tackle
the difficult problem of digital divide. Some
details are available at the CODATA website.

5. WORLD SUMMIT FOR INFORMATION SOCIETY
United Nations had organized a World
Summit for Information Society (WSIS) in
two phases. The first phase was organized
in December 2003 at Geneva and the second
and final phase was organized in November
2005 at Tunis. The Summit stressed the
importance of access to information and
knowledge for global welfare. CODATA presented
the input of scientific stakeholders for WSIS
at Geneva as well as at Tunis. In this effort,
CODATA collaborated with ICSU, ICSTI, INASP,
UNESCO, IAP and TWAS. For some of the
activities, OECD also collaborated. CODATA
had organized a Workshop at UNESCO prior
to the Geneva phase. 175 countries adopted
a landmark Declaration of Principles and
Agenda for Action. Paragraph 7 of the Declaration
of Principles states that "Science has a
central role in the development of the Information
Society". Article 10 of the Agenda for Action
recognizes the importance of "Access to
Information and Knowledge", and Article 23
recognizes the important role of "e-Science".
An International Workshop with ~100
experts from 25 countries having diverse
backgrounds ranging from legal expertise to
hard core scientific fields and economics
deliberated upon ways and means of bringing
more and more scientific knowledge and
information in the open domain. A new initiative
on Global Information Commons for Science
(GICSI) was evolved after detailed deliberations
at this meeting. The viewpoint of the scientific
stakeholders was presented by Professor
Shuichi Iwata, President, CODATA at the
Plenary Session of the WSIS at Tunis in
2005. Just prior to the Summit, an editorial
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. & Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

was published in the prestigious journal Science
by Shuichi Iwata and Robert Chen (Iwata, S.
& Chen, R.S. Science and the Digital Divide
(editorial). Science, 2005, 310(5747), 405).
Professor Iwata stressed that GICSI is a
multi-stakeholder undertaking with the following
goals:
1.

Improved understanding and increased
awareness of the societal benefits of
easier access to and use of scientific
data and information, particularly those
resulting from publicly funded research
activities;

2.

Wider adoption of successful methods
and models for providing open availability
on a sustainable basis and facilitating
reuse of publicly-funded scientific data
and information, as well as cooperative
sharing of research materials and tools
among researchers; and

3.

Encouragement and coordination of the
efforts of the many stakeholders in the
world's diverse scientific community who
are engaged in efforts to devise and

implement effective means to achieve
these objectives, with particular attention
to data and knowledge transfer from haves
to not-haves, e.g., next generations, nonexperts, developing countries.

6. CODATA AND GEOSS TASK ON
FURTHERING THE PRACTICAL
APPLICATION OF DATA SHARING
PRINCIPLES
Global Earth Observation System of
Systems (GEOSS) had adopted a 10 years
implementation plan in early 2005. CODATA
was requested to lead the task concerning
with practical applications of agreed GEOSS
Data Sharing Principles (GEOSS Task DA06-01). CODATA constituted a Committee
chaired by Dr Paul Uhlir of US National
Science Academy. The Committee had
prepared a White Paper, which was widely
circulated among experts in this field and
was finally presented at the GEOSS Ministerial
meeting held in Cape Town, South Africa at
the end of November 2007. This effort has
been well appreciated.

About the Author

Dr Krishan Lal, former Director, National Physical Laboratory (NPL), New Delhi is presently
an emeritus scientist at NPL. He is currently President CODATA a multi-disciplinary Committee
on Data for Science and Technology established by International Council of Science (ICSU).
His research area of specialisation is Solid State Physics; Materials Characterisation;
Crystal Growth and Lattice Imperfections, High Resolution X-ray Diffraction, Instrumentation;
Quality Management, Certified Reference Materials and Data for Materials. Dr Krishan Lal
is Honorary Professor, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur. He was IBM India Fellow
at Watson Research Centre, New York; Visiting Professor, University of Tokyo, Tokyo;
Technical University Darmstadt, Darmstadt; and Sr. Visiting Scientist at PhysikalischTechnische Bundesanstalt, Braunschweig. He was also Visiting Professor IIT Delhi and
Jamia Millia Islamia and Adjunct Professor, IIT Kharagpur. Dr Lal has received several honours
and awards that include Honorary Doctorate, Russian Academy of Sciences; Editor,
Zeitschrift für Kristallographie; Member, Asia-Pacific Network on Materials Evaluation
Technology, Korea; Member, Asia-Pacific Academy of Materials; and President, Indian
Crystallography Association. He is Fellow of Indian National Science Academy (INSA), New
Delhi and National Academy of Sciences’ India, Allahabad. Dr Krishan Lal has been Chairman
of six International Symposia/Workshops/Schools. He has delivered more than 100 invited
talks in reputed national/international conferences. He has edited 8 Books/Volumes, published
22 Invited Papers in journals/Chapters in Books, more than 100 research papers in refereed
journals and has seven patents to his credit.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. & Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(1)

71

