DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 5-12
© 2008, DESIDOC

Information Literacy Standards, Guidelines
and their Implementation: An Analysis
Intan Azura Mokhtar and Shaheen Majid
School of Communication and Information
Nanyang Technological University
31, Nanyang Link, Singapore-637 718
E-mail: iam@pmail.ntu.edu.sg; asmajid@ntu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT
The current age of digitised information and networks has created a new demand for proficiencies
and capabilities in information and communication technologies (ICT). However, it is often perceived that
ICT proficiency equates to information literacy (IL), which actually encompasses a more holistic set of
competencies where ICT literacy is only one component of it. Government organisations and research
have recognized that IL is an important requirement in today’s knowledge-based economy, yet there are
still numerous policies and standards concerning information access and use that seem to emphasise
ICT infrastructure and literacy over IL competencies. This paper provides an overview of a number of
documented IL standards and guidelines, and based on the distinct characteristics of these standards
and guidelines, proposes several recommendations for making them more dynamic and which can be
immediately employed for effective outcomes.
Keywords: Information literacy, information standards, ICT, information policy.

1. INTRODUCTION
Digitised information, networked world, and
information communication technologies (ICTs) have
became necessities in order to stay abreast in the
current globalised knowledge-based economy. It is
often perceived that ICT literacy automatically equates
to information literacy (IL), which can be defined as
the ability to search, locate, evaluate and use information1.
However, researchers have recognised that the former
is often a subset of the latter2, 3 and that both are
essential for ensuring that students are equipped
with the most up-to-date competencies that would
enable them to be effective learners and dynamic
knowledge workers who are able to make informed
decisions beyond the school walls.
Despite this recognition, there are policies and
standards concerning information access and use
that seem to emphasise ICT infrastructure and literacy
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

over IL competencies, with some extending to the
extreme of being at the expense of the latter. It is
thus important to explore various information policies
and standards concerning information access and
use as well as IL, to evaluate their strengths and
weaknesses, and ultimately make recommendations
for the development of successful and effective IL
standards and guidelines based on these appraisals.

2. NEED FOR INFORMATION LITERACY
IL is a necessary competency that is utilitarian
in every aspect of a person’s life. For students, IL
competencies would facilitate independent and authentic
learning, rather than dependence on the teacher to
provide answers to questions or problems that they
are faced with. This creates greater responsibility
towards their own learning, which in turn would help
them become self-motivated learners and thinkers
who are creative, analytical and effective. For employees,
5

Standards for Higher Education,7 have both become
de facto standards for IL competencies from kindergarten
to college, both across the US and in many other
nations throughout the world. Elementary and high
schools, and colleges in the US actively implement
IL programmes in their school curricula, with some
schools promoting active collaborations among the
school libraries and teaching staff.8, 9

IL competencies would equip them with abilities to
source for the most up-to-date and authoritative
information that would assist them in doing their
work more effectively. They would then be able to
constantly adapt to changes to keep up with the
demands of ever increasing information requirements
that they encounter. Ultimately, information literate
employees are dynamic and are able to value-add
the organisation that they work in. As for ordinary
citizens, IL competencies would help them effectively
analyse information that they face everyday and
utilise it to their benefit. Information literate individuals
are aware of their personal and consumer rights,
and of how changes in national or foreign policies
affect them. IL is not simply a library competency, 4
nor is it relevant only in schools or research institutions5;
it is also widely practised in businesses specifically
in knowledge management, which is currently an
important aspect of every business organisation. It
is also important to make the distinction between
IL and ICT literacy. IL entails the ability to search,
locate, evaluate and use this information or facts
to create useful knowledge, 1 whereas the ICT
encompasses competencies in utilising technologybased tools effectively. It is therefore reasonable to
consider ICT literacy as one facet of IL. The indispensable
nature of IL generated the development and implementation
of IL standards and guidelines for the integration of
information-related skills in the school curriculum,
where such competencies can be imparted more
effectively to students.

In Canada, a three-year information literacy
research project was conducted across the nation
starting from the year 2000, funded by the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC).10
The focus of the project was to identify instructional
outcomes and characteristics of successful instructions
provided by the librarians to college students in
three Canadian universities. The Canadian Ministry
of Education also presented the essential skills
that individuals need in order to be successful in
their workplace.11 The skills include finding information,
using documents and continuous learning, all of
which are components of information literacy. The
list of skills is targeted at students who are interested
in planning their future careers. Numerous educational
institutions in North America have incorporated these
IL standards within their curriculum or adapted them
for implementation, even on a state-wide basis. 1215
However, it must be realised that these IL standards
are largely US and Western-centric, and may not
necessarily be easily adapted in the Asian context,
with different cultural and linguistic environments.

3. IL—STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES

3.2 The United Kingdom

Schools and institutions of higher education
worldwide have implemented different IL standards
and guidelines. These documents not only list the
information-related competencies that students ought
to possess and exhibit, but also make recommendations
as to how these competencies can be integrated
within school curricula and also the various strategies
that can be implemented in order to effectively
impart these competencies to students. These
information-related competencies range from specific
IL skills to more procedural ICT skills. The following
sections provide an analysis of various IL standards
and guidelines that have been implemented in various
parts of the world.

The UK Standing Committee for National and
University Libraries (SCONUL) first convened and
proposed the Seven Pillars of Information Skills 16
in their position paper in December 1998. The basis
of the paper was the relationship between information
technology skills and information handling skills.

3.1 The United States and Canada
In United States, the American Library Association
(ALA) and Association for Educational Communications
and Technology’s landmark publication Information
Power6, and the Association of College and Research
Libraries’s publication Information Literacy Competency
6

The task force sought to determine the difference
between the two, and the need for information skills,
especially in the UK higher education. Best practices
in the area within the UK higher education sector
and from abroad were explored, and seven core
skills were finally identified, developed and proposed
in October 1999. However, the focus of the seven
core skills was on ICT literacy and information
access and use, and not quite specifically on IL.

3.3 Australia and New Zealand
The Council of Australian University Librarians
(CAUL), made up of representatives of various Australian
and New Zealand universities, the schools sector,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

the Technical and Further Education (TAFE) sector,
and other related organisations in September 2000
reviewed the US Information Literacy Standards for
Higher Education by ACRL for adaptation and
implementation in the Oceanic region. Studies and
practices by Australian researchers in the area
were also taken into consideration while reviewing
the standards of ACRL. CAUL approved the revision
and adaptation of the ACRL standards and named
the revised set of benchmarks Information Literacy
Standards, which were specifically intended for higher
education although they could be applied to other
educational levels as well.17 In 2003, the standards
were further revised based on recommendations
and experiences of academics and librarians who
used the CAUL original set of benchmarks. The
second edition was renamed the Australian and
New Zealand Information Literacy Framework (ANZIIL)
and essentially provided four guiding principles and
more comprehensive details for each of the six core
standards. 18 The ANZIIL IL framework has been
extensively adopted or adapted for use in many
educational institutions throughout the region.19-22
Although the ANZIIL IL framework is an adapted
version of the ACRL standards, and attempts to
improve on it through the inclusion of participative
citizenship, awareness of cultural differences, and
the importance of group cohesion, it is still largely
focused on a non-Asian society. If such a standard
is to be adapted to an Asian context, various cultural
and linguistic nuances need to be considered and
adopted.

3.4 Singapore
The Languages and Library Branch of the Curriculum
Planning and Development Division in the Ministry
of Education (MoE) developed the Information Literacy
Guidelines in 1997. The integral element of the
information literacy initiative was the promotion of
reading as a vital activity for achieving IL. 23 The
guidelines listed eleven learner outcomes and framed
two areas in the IL curriculum, namely the skills
domain and the attitudes domain. The curriculum
was developed to span the primary (ages 7 to 12)
and secondary schools (ages 13 to 17) and the preuniversity levels, across different subjects. Subjectspecific sample lesson plans were also included in
the document.
To complement the guidelines, another document
was produced in the same year. Specifically, the
English Language Unit of the Languages and Library
Branch launched the Extensive Reading and Information
Literacy (ERIL) programme, for implementation in
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

secondary schools. Strategies and measurable outcomes
for monitoring and evaluating the programme were
suggested in the document, accompanied by sample
assignments and templates. However, both documents
have currently ceased to be used in the local schools.
At around the same time, the MOE started formulating
the Masterplan1 for information technology (IT) in
education (MP 1) in the mid-1990s. 24 There were
two foci in the development and execution of MP1.
First was to present an overall blueprint for the use
of IT in schools, and the second was to provide
every school-going child access to an IT-rich curriculum
and school environment. The first masterplan was
implemented from 1997 to 2002.
In the middle of 2002, the MoE unveiled the
Masterplan 2 for IT in Education (MP 2). The main
purpose of MP 2 was to bolster the developments
and achievements of MP 1, and to further stimulate
critical thinking, creativity and independent learning
among students using IT. 25 The second masterplan
was implemented from 2002 to 2007.
The implementation of MP 1 and MP 2 had
reformed the education system in Singapore, for
both students and teachers. New curriculum initiatives
and strategies were planned and proposed, and
new teaching methodologies were designed and
recommended. Overall, these reforms were made
possible through the intensive and extensive support
from both MoE and the management of each school.
MoE provided schools with sufficient funds, training
programmes and freedom to procure computers, to
equip both teachers and students with proper IT
training, and to set up various forms of IT-based
activities and ventures within the school. The school
management was given the autonomy to engage
commercial vendors to help set up their school’s
IT programs or to forge collaborations with various
organisations from within Singapore and the rest of
the world. The MoE launched the Programme for
Rebuilding and Improving Existing’ schools (PRIME)
in May 1999, with the sole objective of upgrading
all schools to current standards, in order to provide
a conducive learning environment for students. 26
Among the new facilities that schools received were
bigger media resource libraries and more technologically
equipped classrooms. PRIME was estimated to
cost around $ 4.5 billion. In addition, all Singapore
school libraries were electronically linked through
the MoE Integrated Library Network System, or
MERLIN, in October 1999.27 This move allowed schools
to share library resources and teachers to have
access to a larger database of information sources.
Within the school, teachers were given the opportunity
to furnish themselves with IT skills and at the same
7

time, share their learning experiences and new
teaching practices based on IT with other teachers.
The MOE’s Online Training Administration System
or TRAISI, allowed teachers to put up courses they
planned to conduct and share with their colleagues,
or sign up for available courses which were relevant
to their teaching needs. Teachers were also encouraged
to upgrade their IT skills through online courses
accessible on the Virtual Institute of Training and
Learning (VITAL).28 In addition, teachers were strongly
encouraged to apportion at least 30 per cent of
their lessons to IT-mediated activities.
All these steps were taken to help ease the
transition to an IT environment in schools for both
teachers and students, with the hope of changing
the learning culture within the education system,
in addition to preparing the future generation to
readily embrace the rapid technological advancements
that are happening everyday. In addition, new learning
initiatives and strategies such as project work, 29
problem-based learning (PBL) and strategies for
active and independent learning (SAIL)30 were also
proposed and introduced by MoE. These learning
initiatives and strategies were to facilitate the use
of IT in teaching and learning, and equip students
with the necessary technological skills that are
required in the work force. It was generally observed
that although there had been several MoE-based
initiatives in promoting and infusing IL competencies
in schools, there was still unawareness and apathy
towards the importance of IL in teaching and learning.31
This probably subsequently led to its diminished
role in the education system. However, ICT initiatives
and skills were more widely accepted and adopted
into the education system due to their more evident
usefulness and immediate applications in this technologydriven era. This disparity came about despite the
fact that both the MoE-based IL and ICT initiatives
were introduced around the same time in 1997.
Recently, the MoE revealed the ‘Baseline ICT Standards
for Pupils’, following the mid-term review of MP 2
in 2005.32 Although the baseline ICT standards focused
largely on ICT skills, efforts were made to incorporate
IL competencies within ICT skills, such as using
search engines to retrieve current information and
the practice of ethical and legal use of information,
even if these are not overtly identified as IL competencies.

3.5 Southeast and South Asia
In a 2003 regional workshop organised by the
International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA)
and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) that involved seven
countries in Southeast Asia, the participants
recommended to UNESCO for Southeast Asian countries
8

to jointly improve IL education in schools. 33 This
spawned a project for the development of IL education
through school libraries in Southeast Asia with financial
assistance under the UNESCO‘s Information for All
Program’ (IFAP) in 2004. A follow-up workshop was
held in end 2004, where experts from seven Southeast
Asian countries (Cambodia, Indonasia, Lao PDR,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam)
convened to decide on a working definition of IL and
draft a questionnaire on IL for surveys that they
would need to conduct in their respective countries.
A subsequent workshop was conducted in the UNESCO
office in Bangkok, Thailand in mid-2005 to share
their findings and make future plans for IL in the region.
Generally, it was found, through the surveys
conducted in the seven Southeast Asian countries,
that only half of the respondents indicated that
their school had a policy statement on IL, although
it was rarely explicitly stated. IL training for educators
was somewhat low across all schools in the region,
whereby most IL training stemmed from external
courses, seminars and user education programs.
There was generally a lack of leadership for IL
standards and implementation in these countries.
Other factors were also cited as contributory to the
low rate of IL implementation in schools such as
low literacy rate, lack of funding, lack of awareness,
shortage of classroom or library space, and insufficient
guidelines on IL integration into the school curriculum,
among others. However, the participants saw opportunities
for IL implementation to be improved in their respective
countries, such as ICT infrastructure in schools
curriculum reforms especially where ICT developments
is concerned, national policies that emphasise the
creation of a knowledge society, and enhanced
regional and international partnerships in IL policy
and implementation. An international workshop to
promote IL in South and Southeast Asia was held
in October 2005 in Punjabi University, India, with
the objectives of improving educators understanding
of the importance of IL in teaching and learning,
developing strategies in educational institutions to
incorporate IL within the curriculum, and generating
appropriate IL standards and guidelines in the respective
countries within the region, among others.34 The
workshop was attended by 65 delegates from the
academic fraternity representing Bangladesh, India,
Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
and Thailand. Although the UNESCO effort has
been instrumental in attempting to develop an Asiancentric set of IL standards, the distinct characteristics
and different socio-economic status of each Asian
nation throughout the region makes it a challenge
to adopt an overarching standard for the region.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

4. THE WAY FORWARD
Although numerous IL standards and guidelines
have been established worldwide, with some countries
collaborating in regional measures to create IL policies,
there is still largely a lack of governmental involvement
in developing state- or institution-specific IL standards
or guidelines that can be immediately employed for
effective outcomes. Albeit international or regional
IL standards are necessary to provide directions in
which IL can be implemented, each country, even
within the same region, is unique and has particular
needs to be addressed. Also, there are still informationrelated policies or standards that place too much
emphasis on ICT skills instead of the all-encompassing
IL competencies. In addition, there currently exists
a dearth of sharing and collaboration amongst countries
and academic or corporate organisations in exchanging
information-related and IL agendas, which is essential
in ensuring currency and relevance. Finally, professional
certification of LIS courses and evaluation of IL
learning outcomes are necessary to ensure that
LIS courses and IL initiatives adhere to certain
minimum acceptable standards that are recognised
internationally.

5. RECOMMENDATIONS
First and foremost, the development of IL policies,
whether for each country, state or institution, should
come about with some form of government involvement33,
35
. Information policies that are backed by the government
or those in power are taken more seriously and
resonate more strongly among users. This in turn
would ensure more efficient and effective implementation,
which is an important first step in integrating informationrelated skills within educational institutions and
the workforce. Second, there are existing informationrelated initiatives that still place too much emphasis
on ICT literacy. It must be realised that both IL and
ICT competencies must bear equal importance in
this current digital and knowledge-based era. 31 In
addition, not all countries or institutions are ICTequipped, thus information-related initiatives must
cater to both ICT- and non-ICT-driven environments.
For instance, such initiatives for ICT-driven environments
should not only include ICT knowledge and skills
such as learning about the design and structure of
systems and databases,36 but should also incorporate
user competencies such as information evaluation
and critical thinking skills.37, 38 On the other hand,
information-related initiatives for non-ICT-driven
environments should focus on advocacy of the learner
such as putting in place appealing user-centered
instruction, and support for alternative information
delivery systems,3 for instance, using artwork, handicraft
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

or cultural pieces that the learning audience can
readily identify with and from which the communication
of IL competencies can stem. In addition, for other
non-ICT-driven environments, such as those in less
developed countries or remote villages, informationrelated initiatives should sanction the establishment
of centralised and ICT-enabled information resource
centers that cater to the specific needs of the
community concerned. 39
Third, IL planning and implementation should
not just be confined to within the discipline of information
studies or library science. Inter-disciplinary research
and strategies for IL should be undertaken to ensure
that the strengths of different discipline areas can
be extracted and synergised when planning IL strategies.
For instance, in the education sector, with the shift
of most education systems towards constructivism
or student-centered and independent learning, education
curricula have started to adopt authentic assessment
approaches, such as problem-based and projectbased learning. Problem and project-based learning
can be described as in-depth investigations of realworld problems that students need to critically analyse
and attempt to solve40. With the process of critical
analysis comes the need for research abilities that
inadvertently point to the application of IL competencies.
As a result, IL research that is intertwined with
problem-based or project-based learning has emerged.4143
This has also spawned research on the collaboration
between educators and school librarians or media
specialists, in a bid to bridge the gap amid what
happens in the classroom and what is really required
of students in the real world of knowledge-based
economies. 44, 45 Research has also shown that the
fusion of pedagogical strategies and IL competencies
have spawned positive impact on students’ research
abilities and academic achievement. 46, 47
Next, there should be increased collaboration
and cooperation among government agencies, academic
institutions and corporate organisations 48 to bring
together their intellectual and entrepreneurial expertise
and experiences in order to develop IL policies that
are current, relevant and address market demands.49
This would ensure that IL or LIS programmes that
are conducted based on established IL policies are
able to respond to global economic forces and
emerging trends. Finally, professional evaluation
and certification of IL programmes and LIS courses
are required 49 in order to bestow more importance
to these programmes and courses, as well as standardise
their requirements and contents. 50 This is necessary
for two reasons: (i) society will attach more significance
and worth to certified IL programmes and LIS courses
that are conducted for students, employees, and
9

citizens in general, and (ii) will ensure that the
competencies learnt from certified IL programmes
and LIS courses are more transferable and recognised
across different educational institutions, organisations,
and even countries. Alternatively, an international
IL or LIS certificate will also be useful in uniting
different professional and educational IL or LIS groups
in a bid to bridge the digital divide between the
haves and have-nots. 36

6. CONCLUSION
There is still a lot of room for improvement in
terms of developing effective IL policies and systems
for information delivery and expertise. Governmental
involvement, equal emphases on both ICT and IL
competencies, synergistic cooperation, and professional
accreditation are just some means in which these
improvements can be made. However, these
recommendations are not a panacea to achieving
the ideal state of being an information society.
Continuous review and evaluation, as well as mutual
consultation are necessary to keep abreast of changes
and remain relevant; yet retaining what is essential
and distinctive for different contexts. The road to
becoming an information society is an arduous one,
but as in most human endeavours, it is a constant
learning and improvement process.

REFERENCES
1. American Library Association. Presidential committee
on information literacy: Final report, 1989.
Washington, DC, January 10, para.3. http://
www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlpubs/whitepapers/
presidential.htm
2. Bruce, C. S. Information literacy: A phenomenography. Unpublished doctoral thesis. Australia:
University of New England, 1996.
3. Stern, C. M. Information literacy unplugged:
Teaching information literacy worldwide without
technology. White Paper prepared for UNESCO,
the U.S. National Commission on Libraries and
Information Science, and the National Forum
on Information Literacy. Information Literacy Meeting
of Experts, Prague, The Czech Republic, July
2002. http://www.nclis.gov/libinter/infolitconf &meet/
papers/stern-fullpaper.pdf
4. Rockman, I. F. Information literacy, a worldwide
priority for the twenty-first century. Reference
Services Review, 2003, 31(3), 209-10.
5. O’Sullivan, C. Is information literacy relevant in
the real world? Reference Services Review. 2002,
30(1), 7-14.
10

6. American Library Association (ALA) and Association
for Educational Communications and Technology
(AECT). Information power: Building partnerships
for learning. Chicago, IL: American Library
Association, 1998. http://www.ala.org/ala/aasl/
aaslproftools/information power/Information Literacy
Standards_final.pdf
7. Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL). Information literacy standards for higher
education. Chicago, IL: American Library Association
(ALA), 2000. http://www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlst
andards/standards.pdf
8. Grimble, B. J. & Williams, T. D. Students’ perceptions
of their information literacy skills in the media
center. Library Media Connection, 2004, 22(4), 26-28.
9. Rader, H. B. Information literacy—An emerging
global priority. White Paper prepared for UNESCO,
the U.S. National Commission on Libraries and
Information Science, and the National Forum
on Information Literacy. Information Literacy Meeting
of Experts, Prague, The Czech Republic, July
2002. http://www.nclis.gov/ libinter/infolitconf &meet/
papers/rader-fullpaper.pdf
10. Julien, H. & Boon, S. From the front line: Information
literacy instruction in Canadian academic libraries.
Reference Services Review, 2002, 30(2), 143-49.
11. Ministry of Education, Government of British
Columbia. Skills for the Future. Career Planning.
Government of British Columbia, 2003. http://
www.bced.gov.bc.ca/careers/planning/work/skills_f
.htm
12. Canadian Association of Research Libraries.
Canadian research libraries information literacy
portal, 2006. http://apps.medialab.uwindsor.ca/
crlil/wiki/FrontPage/
13. Colorado Department of Education. Colorado
information literacy, 2006. http://www.cde.state.co.
us/cdelib/slinfolitindex.htm
14. Mankato Area Public School. Mankato schools
information literacy curriculum guidelines, 2006.
http://www.isd77.k12.mn.us/resources/infocurr/
infolit.html
15. Oregon Educational Media Association. Oregon
information literacy guidelines, 2000. http://
www.oema.net/infolit/infolit.html
16. Society for College, National and University Libraries
(SCONUL). Information skills in higher education:
A SCONUL position paper. London, UK: SCONUL,
1999. http://www.sconul.ac.uk/groups/information_
literacy/publications/papers/Seven_pillars2.pdf
17. Council of Australian University Librarians (CAUL).
Information Literacy Standards. 1st Ed. Canberra:
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

CAUL, 2001. http://www.anu.edu.au /caul/cauldoc/InfoLitStandards2001.doc
18. Australian and New Zealand information literacy
framework—Principles, standards and practice,
2nd Editon, edited by A. Bundy. ANZIIL, Adelaide,
2004. http://www.anziil.org/resources/Infolit2nd
edition.pdf
19. Central Queensland University. Information literacy
@ CQU library, 2006. http://www.library.cqu.edu.au/
services/staffresearch/infolit/index.htm
20. School libraries and information literacy. New
South Wales Department of Education and Training,
2007. http://www.curriculumsupport. education.
nsw.gov.au/schoollibraries/
21. Information literacy. Palmerston District Primary
School, 2005. http://palmdps.act.edu.au/resource_
centre/info_lit/intro.htm
22. Teaching and learning policy. University of Auckland,
2006. http://www.auckland.ac.nz/uoa/fms/default/
uoa/about/teaching/policiesprocedures/docs/
information_literacy.pdf
23. Information literacy guidelines. Singapore School
Libraries Unit, Languages and Library Branch,
Curriculum Planning and Development Division,
Ministry of Education, Singapore, 1997.
24. Launch of masterplan for IT in education. Ministry
of Education, Singapore, 1997. http://www.moe.gov.
sg/press/1997/pr01597.htm
25. Overview of the masterplan II for IT in education.
Ministry of Education, Singapore, 2002. http://
www.moe.gov.sg/edumall/mp2/mp2.htm
26. Programme for rebuilding and improving existing
schools (PRIME). Ministry of Education, Singapore,
1999. http://www.moe.gov.sg/press/1999/pr990511
.htm
27. Library@school conference. Ministry of Education,
Singapore, 1999. http://www.moe.gov.sg/press/
1999/pr 990923. htm

31. Mokhtar, I. A.; Foo, S. & Majid, S. Bridging
between information literacy and information
technology in Singapore schools: An exploratory
study. Education, Knowledge & Economy Journal,
2007,1(2), 185-97.
32. Baseline ICT standards. Ministry of Education,
Singapore, 2007. http://www.moe.gov.sg/edumall/
mp2/base_stds.htm
33. Singh, D.; David, L.; Cheunwattana, A.; Guaysuwan,
P. & Choovong, L. Development of information
literacy through school libraries in Southeast
Asian countries. United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization. Bangkok,
2005. http://www2.unescobkk.org/elib/publications/
06INF/information.pdf
34. Applying a problem-solving model in South and
Southeast Asia to promote information literacy.
In Information skills for learning: Part II. Proceedings
of Empowering 8 International Workshop held
on 3-7 October 2005 at Punjabi University, Patiala.
http://www.universitypunjabi.org/pages/teaching
/e8/e8-main.htm
35. Rudasill, L. Global literacy initiatives: The United
States and developing nations. In The Challenge
to be relevant in the 21st century: Abstracts
and full-text documents of papers and demos
given at the International Association of Technological University Libraries (IATUL) Conference,
1-5 June 1998. Pretoria, South Africa. Available
in ERIC Database, ED 434 681.
36. Johnson, H. Product, process or pre-requisite?
Information literacy as infrastructure for information
networking. The New Review of Information
Networking, 2003, 9(1), 2-20.
37. Darch, C. & Underwood, P. G. Dirt road or
yellow brick superhighway? Information and
communication technology in academic libraries
of South Africa. Library Hi-Tech, 1999, 17(3),
285-97.

28. E-learning @MOE the VITAL way. Ministry of
Education, Singapore, 2001. http://www.moe.gov.sg/
press/2001/pr1307 2001.htm

38. Walton, M. & Archer, A. The web and information
literacy: Scaffolding the use of web sources in
a project-based curriculum. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 2004, 35(2), 173-86.

29. Project work. Ministry of Education, Singapore,
2000. http://www.moe.gov.sg/projectwork/

39. Rao, R. Reaching the unreached through knowledge
centres. Appropriate Technology, 2005, 32(3), 15-16.

30. Launch of monograph on strategies for active
and independent learning (SAIL). Ministry of
Education, Singapore, 2004. http://www.moe.gov.sg/
press/2004/pr2004 0325.htm

40. Chard, S. Project approach in early childhood
and elementary education. Project Approach,
2001. http://www.project-approach.com/foundation/
learning.htm

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

11

41. Lindstrom, J. & Shonrock, D. D. Faculty-librarian
collaboration to achieve integration of information
literacy. Reference & User Services Quarterly,
2006, 46(1), 18-23.
42. Milam, P. The power of reflection in the research
process. School Library Media Activities Monthly,
2005, 21(6), 26-29.
43. Robins, J. Beyond the bird unit. Teacher Librarian,
2005, 33(2), 8-19.
44. Buzzeo, T. Collaborating from the center of the
school universe. Library Media Connection, 2006,
24(4), 18-20.
45. Ruffin, B. Teaching pupils through teaching
partnerships. Texas Library Journal, 2005, 81(2),
54-58.
46. Mokhtar, I. A.; Foo, S. & Majid, S. Guide me,
show me: Personalised coaching as a means
of entrenching information literacy competencies
in students. Accepted to Library and Information
Science Research Electronic Journal (LIBRES),
17(2).

47. Mokhtar, I. A.; Majid, S. & Foo, S. Teaching
information literacy through learning styles:
Application of Gardner’s multiple intelligences.
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science,
40(2).
48. Sridhar, S. E-government: A proactive participant
for e-learning in higher education. Journal of
American Academy of Business, Cambridge,
2005, 7(1), 258-68.
49. Singh, J. & Wijetunge, P. Library and information
science education in South Asia: Challenges
and opportunities, edited by Khoo, D. Singh,
and A. S. Chaudhry In Preparing information
professionals for leadership in the new age.
Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Conference on
Library and Information Education Practice (ALIEP), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
2006, pp. 207-218,
50. Thompson, G. B. Information literacy accreditation
mandates: What they mean for faculty and librarians.
Library Trends, 2002, 51(2), 218-41.

About the Authors

Intan Azura Mokhtar is a lecturer in the Department of Mathematics and Science, Singapore
Polytechnic. She is also a part-time lecturer in the Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and
Information at Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, where she teaches information
literacy to undergraduates. She obtined her MSc in Information Studies from Nanyang Technological
University, where she explored the collaborative relationship between teachers and school librarians
in planning lessons and other academic activities. She taught at a local secondary school for
four years prior to joining the PhD programme. Her research interests include information literacy,
school libraries, ICT in education, open and online learning, pedagogy, and information and educational

Dr Shaheen Majid is an Associate Professor at the Division of Information Studies, Wee Kim
Wee School of Communication and Information, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore.
He is Programme Director for MSc (Knowledge Management) programme. He is also Director of
Asian Communication Resource Centre (ACRC) located in NTU. He did his MSc (Botany) from the
University of the Punjab, Pakistan, MLIS from the University of Western Ontario, Canada, and
PhD from City University, London, UK. He has written over 50 articles in reputable journals and
provided consultancy services in Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam and Pakistan. He has also conducted
more than 30 training courses and workshops in Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei, Kuwait, Vietnam
and Pakistan. His research interests include information literacy, environment scanning, information
and knowledge sharing, and information needs and seeking behaviour.

12

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

