DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 13-17
© 2008, DESIDOC

Sense-making: Information Literacy for Lifelong
Learning and Knowledge Management
Jagtar Singh
Department of Library and Information Science
Punjabi University, Patiala-147 002
E-mail: jagtar.kindu@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The paper emphasises the sense-making approach to the concept and practice of information literacy
(IL). After discussing the meaning and purpose of IL, passing references are made to the IL standards,
models, and rubrics. The information search process is emphasised in this paper. Nature and types of
knowledge and learning have also been discussed. Expectations from INFLIBNET, vision of the National
Knowledge Commission (NKC), and the UNESCO's Education for All, and Information for All Programmes
have also been put into the context of IL. Finally, the paper suggests that IL programmes must be based
upon the complexity and diversity of information communities, and cultural hegemony and intellectual
imperialism should not be allowed to prevail.
Keywords: Information literacy, lifelong learning, knowledge management, Empowering-8 model, digital
inclusion, IFAP.

1. INTRODUCTION
Various approaches to IL have been adopted
since 1974 when Zurkowsky used the term for the
first time. The spectrum of IL is rich in rhetoric but
poor in practice in diverse contexts in the developing
countries. In the Western idiom, IL has been defined
as stake holder's ability to ascertain his information
needs, and then to access, evaluate and use that
information for problem-solving and decision-making
efficiently and effectively. But this definition provides
a very limited view of IL. Libraries, web, and educational
institutions are not the only sites for information,
knowledge and learning. Information comes from
graphic records, physical structures, and socialcultural contexts as well. Hence, the concept, process
and practice of IL must be perceived holistically in
view of the diversity and complexity of formal and
informal settings at home and work. Exploration,
analysis and sense-making of information ecology
and socio-cultural diversity are essential components

of the information literacy process. With the ascent
of digitisation, databases, and networks, information
has become fluid and transcendental. Moreover,
information today is available in variety of formats.
Hence, perception of IL must be based upon media,
computer and network literacies as well. Engagement,
empowerment, enrichment, and embodiment are
the essential attributes of the info-literate stakeholders.
Different people may have different viewpoints
of IL, but it is a hard fact that only info-literates can
stay ahead, in this era of discontinuous change
and fierce competition by developing and using IL
skills to support lifelong learning and knowledge
management. This learning must include: learning
to know, to do, learning to work together, and learning
to be better than the best. Similar views have been
put forward by the UNESCO report entitled Learning:
The Treasure Within. This paper deals with the
hidden contours of IL to sensitise the stakeholders
to think out of the box and look beyond blogging
13

and chatting. The perception that 'one size fits all'
can't be valid in the case of IL. It is true that IL
is a tool for lifelong learning and knowledge management,
but all human beings are not equally intelligent.
Hence, one must learn to take cognizance of individual
information gaps and learning disabilities. Moreover,
the cultural context of learners also plays a pivotal
role in this regard. Dorner and Gorman1 and Hofstede2
have dealt with the cultural contextuality at length
in their writings. The core cultural assumptions
provide lasting bond strength to the norms, values,
and visible behaviour on the one hand, and thinking,
learning, working, and communication styles on
the other. The core assumptions of cultures do not
change easily. Therefore, proper care must be given
to the cultural context before designing, delivering,
and evaluation the IL programmes. Socio-economic
inequalities, self-concept of stakeholders, gender
status, attitude towards information gap, and core
assumptions of given cultures are critical components
to be considered with regard to IL.

2. PURPOSE OF INFORMATION LITERACY
The basic purpose of IL is to develop sensemaking ability among the stakeholders. Once the
information seeker becomes aware of the information
gap and its critical consequences, he would try to
define his information need. Task, time, interest,
and information are some of the other parameters
that influence end-user's information behaviour. The
end-result of the whole exercise is independent
learning and critical thinking. An information literate
person will be a competent person to develop focus,
find right answers, and build personal perspective.
He would be able to convert knowledge into information
and information into knowledge on continuing basis.
IL facilitates sense-making and reduction of vast
quantities of information into fundamental patterns
into a given context. That is also the heart of the
matter in knowledge management. Sustainable
knowledge, in fact, is the end result of data analysis
and information processing in a given context. In
other words, there is symbiosis between knowledge
and information. Information eliminates uncertainty
and knowledge leads to confidence. Therefore, it is
true that less is more and more is less. Valid
knowledge, though less, is always better than
overwhelming amount of unprocessed data and
information. IL ensures confidence and sense-making
among confused and uncertain information-seekers.
But the conflicting information always increases
the existing uncertainty among the stakeholders.
Information overload and ICT instability further lead
to info-stress and techno-stress among the information14

seekers. IL provides elbow support during these
stressful moments. Kuhlthau 3 has done good work
on IL as a process of seeking meaning. People
interested in developing bottom-up information storage
and retrieval systems must read this book.

3. STANDARDS, MODELS AND RUBRICS
Twenty-nine indicators under nine standards
within three categories of IL, independent learning,
and social responsibility have been prepared by the
American Association of School Librarians, and the
Association for Educational Communications and
Technology. These are available as Chapter 2 of the
book entitled Information Power: Building Partnership
for learning. Eisenberg, Lowe and Spitzer 4 have
given very useful information on various standards,
models and rubrics of IL. But because of the constraints
of space and time, it is not possible to discuss
these in this paper. The most important thing is to
avoid intellectual imperialism. IL must be seen in
the context of a given culture. No single definition
of IL will ever be acceptable to all the stakeholders.
It is indeed incumbent upon the information
seekers to take a holistic view of the affective,
cognitive and physical dimensions of information
search process. At affective level, the information
seeker experiences feelings of uncertainty, enthusiasm,
frustration, confusion, disappointment, clarity, confidence,
and satisfaction depending upon the success or
failure of the information search process. At cognitive
level, thoughts can be vague or focused leading to
increase or decrease of interest. At action level,
task will start with definition of information need
and end with review of the outcome of the search
process. This search experience will serve as feedback
for the next round of learning.

4. LEVELS OF MEDIATION
Uniqueness in the context of information search
process means new information, and redundancy
means what is already known to the stakeholder.
Information search process definitely influences the
behaviour of the information seeker in terms of his
feelings, thoughts, and physical actions. Library
and information professionals (LIPs) must take
cognizance of these behavioural changes and intervene
at appropriate stage. Kuhlthau3 describes five levels
of intervention with regard to reference and instruction
services. The five levels of mediation in case of
reference service are that of organiser, locator, identifier,
adviser, and counsellor. The five levels of education
in context of instructional services are that of organiser,
lecturer, instructor, tutor, and counsellor. Leaving
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

aside the explanation of these five levels of intervention
in two different contexts, the message is that LIPs
must be able to identify the appropriate level of
intervention to facilitate the information seeker. According
to Kuhlthau, intervention outside the appropriate
zone can be intrusive and overwhelming, and on
both sides can be inefficient and unnecessary for
the stakeholders.

5. EMPOWERING-8 MODEL
There are many models of IL, but the Empowering8 Model has been developed at an IFLA-ALP sponsored
Information Literacy Workshop hosted by National
Institute of Library and Information Sciences (NILIS),
University of Colombo in 2004 specifically for the
stakeholders in the Asia-Pacific Region. Reference
has specifically been made to this model because
it has not been reported and discussed comprehensively
in the professional literature. Prof. Russell Bowden,
in his keynote address published in the Proceedings
of the Information Skills for Learning: Part II "Empowering8" International Workshop Sponsored by IFLAALP, UNESCO-IFAP5 in 2005 has beautifully described
the eight steps of this model in the following words:
(i)

Identify—subject, audience, keywords and plan
strategy;

(ii)

Explore—resources required, information available;

(iii) Select—relevant information; stages of work,
appropriate citations;
(iv) Organise—information earlier selected, between
fact, fiction and opinion;
(v)

Create—information in your own words, revise
and edit and create bibliography;

(vi) Present—share information with appropriate
audience; display in appropriate format;
(vii) Assess—feedback; self-assessment
assessment with teacher;

and

(viii) Apply—review feedback and apply to next learning
activity.
An information literate person must learn to
know, to do, to be and to work together. He should
be able to make sense, ensure quality, learn
independently, think critically, and use information
ethically and strategically.

6. LIFELONG LEARNING
In view of fierce competition and discontinuous
change, one has to look beyond formal education
and information management. Lifelong learning is
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

the only way to stay ahead of change and competition.
Most important thing today is to be a face in the
crowd. Only lifelong learning can facilitate this.
Learning is a lifelong process for knowing, understanding,
being, working together, decision-making, and problemsolving. IL is a critical link between knowledge
management and lifelong learning. Hence, it is incumbent
upon the learning organisations to promote learning
at all levels. Senge 6 has beautifully explained the
categories of adaptive learning and generative learning.
He has emphasised upon the role of systems thinking,
personal mastery, mental models, shared vision,
and team learning in the context of learning organisations.
IL can go a long way to facilitate both types of
learning among individuals and organisations. Learning
must start from the centre, with learner's interacting
with local sources and then expanding his access
to information sources across the globe. Collaboration,
leadership, and synergy with the techniques of technology
(ICT) are critical for learning to learn, unlearn, and
re-learn for staying ahead of time and competition.

7. NATURE OF KNOWLEDGE
The nature of knowledge is highly complex. It
is a fluid mix of experience, values, beliefs, expert
insight, and contextualised information. Beyond formal
degrees, knowledge management is the main challenge.
That is true not only for the corporate sector, but
for the public domain also. Aristotle's three-fold
classification of disciplines as theoretical, productive,
and practical is echoed in the three categories of
knowledge today. These three categories are explicit
knowledge (recorded information), tacit knowledge,
and embedded knowledge. Managing the tacit knowledge
(TK) is the most difficult thing to do as TK resides
in the minds of people. It is really critical to capture
the TK for the progress of society. Generally knowledge
workers are not ready to share their TK for fear of
idea thieves or lack of motivation. But if we fail to
capture TK, it gets lost with stakeholders departure,
resignation, retirement or death.
The chapters on nature of knowledge, intellectual
capital, and communities of practice by Al-Hawamdeh7
are worth reading for improving one's conceptual
access to the nature of knowledge and learning.
Basically, knowledge is cumulative, multi-dimensional,
and dynamic. According to Nonaka and Takeuchi 8 ,
externalisation, internalisation, combination, and
socialisation are the basic modes for knowledge
management. Therefore, the dynamic symbiosis of
IL, lifelong learning, and knowledge management is
an essential condition for the learning individuals
and organisations.
15

8. DIGITAL INCLUSION
The National Knowledge Commission envisioned
knowledge society in India can be ensured only by
providing massive low cost instant access to quality
information. This society must be based upon the
philosophy of digital inclusion to bridge the widening
digital divide in India. Information seekers must be
trained in the use of ICT to enable them to convert
information into knowledge and vive versa. Only
critical thinkers and independent learners can make
sense of information to create new knowledge and
then use it strategically for innovation, decisionmaking and problem solving. "Simply speaking, the
value of information lies in its use for decisionmaking and problem-solving. To implement the philosophy
behind information commons, it is essential that
the stakeholders are info-literate. They must be
aware of the fact that information is a source of
instant power and it can make or mar future of
anyone depending upon its quality, availability or
non-availability. It facilitates decision-making and
eliminates uncertainty. The quality of our decisions
depends upon the quality of information available
to us. In other words, IL is a tool for lifelong learning
and self-actualisation." 9 The politics of profit by the
commercial domain and the vested interests must
be contained by promoting the concept and practice
of open-source software, hybrid libraries, institutional
repositories, lifelong learning and knowledge management
at all levels.
The success of hybrid libraries is dependent
upon holistic approach to IL. The affective, cognitive,
and physical dimensions of end-users' information
seeking behaviour must be taken into consideration
while designing our information storage and retrieval
systems. These systems must be based upon user
feedback to facilitate the effective use of knowledge
and information. The Government of India must be
impressed upon to take the recommendations of
the NKC to their logical conclusion by implementing
them in a phased manner. INFLIBNET leadership
should take lead in promoting the concept and
practice of IL throughout India. It must also extend
its resources and services to academic and sectoral
grassroots to support lifelong learning and knowledge
management.

9. BOTTOM LINE
We must adopt a holistic approach to IL. It
should start with the learner at the centre stage
interacting with local sites of information and then
extending his reach to the sources of information
available across the globe. IL must include media
literacy, computer literacy and network literacy.
16

Sense-making should be the heart of the matter.
The info-literate persons must be able to attach
meaning to their thoughts and actions. IL standards,
models and rubrics must be culture specific. Learners
and mediators should also be careful about the
zones of intervention. Internal and external factors
affecting learning and IL programmes must be taken
into consideration before passing on value judgments
and initiating innovations.
TK management and its strategic and ethical
use must be facilitated by the concept and practice
of IL. In the formal settings, IL programmes should
become essential components to facilitate lifelong
learning and putting knowledge to work. But IL
must be used to contain the twin perils of "digital
exclusion" and "digital determinism" to bridge the
“info-divide" 11 . UNESCO is celebrating the United
Nations Literacy Decade (2003-12) as well as promoting
the Education for All Programme (EFAP) and the
Information for All Programme (IFAP). Independent
learners and critical thinkers are the expected outcomes
of information literacy. But the success of IFAP is
dependent upon the success of EFAP, because
there can be no information for all without education
for all. In fact, the bottom line is that IL programmes
must be based upon the complexity and diversities
of learning communities; and cultural hegemony
and intellectual imperialism must not be allowed to
prevail in these programmes. IL must serve as backbone
of self-actualisation and learning.

REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Dorner, Daniel G. & Gorman, G.E. Information
literacy education in asian developing countries:
Cultural factors affecting curriculum development
and programme delivery. IFLA Journal, 2006,
32(4), 281-93.
2. Hofstede, G. Culture's consequences: Comparing
values, behaviours, institutions and organisations
across nations, 2nd Ed. Sage Publications,
Thousand Oakes, CA, 2001.
3. Kuhlthau, Carol C. Seeking meaning: A process
approach to library and information services,
2nd Ed. Libraries Unlimited, Westport, CT, 2004.
4. Eisenberg, Michael B; Low, Carrie E. & Spitzer,
Kathleen, L. Information literacy: Essential skills
for information age, 2nd Ed. Libraries Unlimited,
Westport, CT, 2004.
5. Information skills for learning, Part II. In Empowering
8. Proceedings of International Workshop sponsored
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

by IFLA-ALP and UNESCO-IFAP, 03-07 October
2005, Punjabi University, Patiala, p.29.

to be a competent communicator. IL: NTC,
Lincolnwood, 1988.

6. Senge, Peter M. The fifth discipline: The art
and practice of learning organisation. Currency
Doubleday, New York.

13. Gorman, G.E. The digital factor in library and
information services 2002-03. Facet Publishing,
London, 2002.

7. Al-Hawamdeh, Suliman. Knowledge management:
Cultivating knowledge professionals. Chandos
Publishing, Oxford, 2003.
8. Nonaka, I. & Takeuchi, H. The knowledge creating
company: How Japanese companies create the
dynamics of innovation. Oxford University Press,
New York, 1995.
9. Singh, Jagtar. Collection development in college
libraries: Key concerns and consequences.
In Managing college libraries in the digital
environment: Opportunities and challenges, edited
by Jaspal Kaur. Proceedings of UGC Sponsored
National Seminar, 3-4 August 2007, Dev Samaj
College for Women, Chandigarh. p. 7.
10. Director's Report 2006-2007. Delnet, New Delhi,
2007.

14. Gorman, Michael. Our enduring values: Librarianship
in the 21st century, ALA, Chicago, 2000.
15. Gorman, Michael. The enduring library: Technology,
tradition and the quest or balance. ALA,
Chicago, 2003.
16. Report to the nation. National Knowledge
Commission. New Delhi, 2007.
17. Libraries: Gateways to knowledge. National
Knowledge Commission, New Delhi, 2007
18. Information power: building partnership for learning.
AASL and AECT. ALA, Chicago, 1998.
19. Learning for the future: Developing information
services in schools, 2nd Ed. ASLA and ALIA.
Carlton, South Vic. Curriculum Corporation, 2001.
20. Oddy, Pat Future libraries future catalogues.
LA Publishing, London, 1997.

11. Dempsey, Lorcan. Libraries and the long tail:
Some thoughts about libraries in a network
age. D-Lib Magazine, 2006 12(4). http://www.dlib.
org/dlib/april06/dempsey/04dempsey.html.

21. Wallace, Danny P. & Van Fleet, Connie library
evaluation: A casebook and can-do guide. Libraries
Unlimited, Englewood, Colorado, 2001.

12. Galvin, Kathleen M.; Cooper, Pamela J. & Gorden,
Jeanie McKinney. The basics of speech: Learning

22. Wilson, P. Public knowledge, private ignorance:
Towards a library and information policy. Greenwood
Press, Westport, CT, 1977.

About the Author

Dr Jagtar Singh is presently working as a Professor in the Department of Library and
Information Science, Punjabi University, Patiala. He had his professional qualifications from
Panjab University, Chandigarh. During 1992-93, he was awarded the prestigious Commonwealth
Academic Staff Fellowship by the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission, UK to work on
'Electronic Publishing' with Professor A.J. Meadows at Loughborough University, UK. He is
recipient of the Ken Haycock Leadership Development Award 2004 by the International
Association for School Librarianship (IASL). He is also the Regional Director-Asia of the
International Association for School Librarianship (IASL) and Standing Committee Member of
the Information Technology Section of the International Federation of Library Associations and
Institutions (IFLA). He has published about 100 articles and research papers in national and
international professional journals, conferences and seminars. He has been associated with
the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) to prepare the Punjabi Language Version of Dublin
Core, and has also translated the IFLA/UNESCO Guidelines for Development of Public Library
Service in Punjabi Language. He has also served as Convener of the Committee constituted
by the Government of Punjab to prepare the 'Revised Draft Punjab Public Libraries Bill' for
enactment of Public Library Law in Punjab.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

17

