DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 28-38
© 2008, DESIDOC

In Search of Information Literacy Programmes and Practices:
Survey of Selected Institutions at Bangalore
C.R. Karisiddappa and Iqbalahmad U. Rajgoli*
Academic Staff College
Karnatak University, Dharwad-580 003
E-mail: karisiddappa@gmail.com
*ISRO HQ, Department of Space
Antariksh Bhavan, New BEL Road, Bangalore-560 094
E-mail: iqbal786@isro.gov.in
ABSTRACT
Libraries have long been involved in training their users in library use, its services and resources.
Terms such as library instruction, library orientation, user education and bibliographic instruction have
all been used at various times to indicate the process of helping users how to use the library, how to
access information and teaching the various bibliographic tools. These methods are facility specific
instruction, i.e., help users in knowing the physical location of different sections, staff, collections and
services of library. In the digital age, fencing around “library resources” is a daunting task. Moreover,
the instructional needs of users have changed dramatically as new methods for teaching and learning
have emerged. Information literacy has become an important concept since the arrival of the information
age. Research in this area in Asian countries such as India is still in its preliminary stages, as these
countries have only recently become fully immersed in the information culture. The paper is a case study
of selected library and information centres of higher learning and research at Bangalore City.
Keywords: Information literacy, information literacy initiatives, information literacy programmes.

1. INTRODUCTION
Libraries have long been involved in training
their users in library use, its services and resources.
Terms such as library instruction, library orientation,
user education and bibliographic instruction have
all been used at various times to indicate the process
of helping users how to use the library, how to
access information and teaching the various bibliographic
tools. These methods are facility specific instruction,
i.e., helping users in knowing the physical location
of different sections, staff, collections and services
of library 1 . The earliest evidence of instruction is the
librarian lecturing the undergraduates. An early attempt
to explain need for user education was based mainly
on the belief that to know how to use a library was
28

an essential part of the education for life process.
The central idea of user education revolved on the
many sources of information available and not on
the mechanics of using the system. In addition to
teaching how to find information, librarians now
recognise the importance of teaching critical thinking
skills to enable users to evaluate and select the
best information for their needs.
The explosion of knowledge emphasise on the
ability to continue to learn throughout life. The
growth in the number of interdisciplinary courses
is another factor for the development of user instruction.
Academic libraries underwent rapid collection growth
and acquired new techniques of organisation and
retrieval. Specialisations in education also lead to
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

revived interest in library user education. Such courses,
which cut across the traditional boundaries of subjects,
have been a particular feature of the universities
and are becoming increasingly important in all institutions
of higher education. These courses brought with
them greater problems in the location and organisation
of material for study. The quantity of material to be
searched because of the diverse discipline requires
that effective instruction methods should be developed.
It is not just the quantity of the material that makes
help essential but also the diversity of the sources,
and formats. In the digital age, fencing around library
resources is a daunting task. Moreover, the instructional
needs of users have changed dramatically as new
methods for teaching and learning have emerged.
While information sources and methods for finding
information are still a useful component of library
instruction, a broader construct of information literacy
has emerged as a framework for effective information
inquiry2. Infact this practice is going to be an essential
skill in new learning contexts. There are many
possible ways to understand these new dimensions
of learning and associated skills. One of these is
the need for skills to exploit technology to use
information effectively. Another aspect is the need
for a conceptual understanding of information and
knowledge processes.

2. SCOPE OF THE STUDY
Information literacy (IL) has became an important
concept since the arrival of the information age.
Research in this area in Asian countries such as
India is still in its preliminary stages since these
countries have only recently become fully immersed
in the information culture. The scope of this study
is limited to selected library and information centres
of higher learning and research at Bangalore city
only. The results will contribute in knowing the
implementation status of IL programmes in the selected
libraries. It will also provide some insight to the
researchers who would like to do a comprehensive
study on IL in the Indian context. The results might
have implications for librarians to better organise
their IL programmes and for users to better understand
their own skill levels and their need to ask librarians
for help. Faculty members and administrators may
consider incorporating IL instruction in the regular
curriculum after getting the picture of users’ competency
levels and prominent usage patterns.

Ë

Ë

Data is collected using a questionnaire from
the Heads of the libraries selected for survey

Ë

The study is mainly qualitative, using a very
small number of samples

Ë

Data analysis and interpretation are entirely
based on the feedback received from the respondents

Ë

The collection details, technological infrastructure,
services/facilities rendered and implementation
of IL programmes were up-to-date at the time
of collection but this is an ever-changing field,
the probability of new developments should be
taken into account when reading this study and
appropriate adjustments made.

This is a small-scale qualitative study exploring
the planning, designing and delivering of IL programmes
along with the technological gadgets used, methods
adopted and the end impact of such programmes
in productive use of information. This is an exploratory
study that could be used as an initial step in a
subsequent large-scale survey. As will all research
there are limitations in the sampling procedures,
sample size, analysis undertaken and conclusions
made. Whilst the originality of the research remains
unequivocal and hence the limitations are not detrimental
but rather aimed at comprehensively and accurately
describing the scope of the research undertaken.

3. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
Ojectives of the study are to:
Ë

Know the availability of ICT infrastructure in the
libraries selected for study

Ë

Understand the implementation status and
developing trends in IL programmes

Ë

Know how the IL programmes are planned,
designed and delivered

Ë

Know the influence of ICT in planning, designing
and delivering the information literacy programmes

Ë

Know the difficulties faced while planning, designing
and delivering IL programmes

Ë

Know the impact of IL programmes on the utilisation
of library resources

Ë

Know the impact of IL programmes in enhancing
the intellectual output of the organisation.

The parameters of the study are:

4. METHODOLOGY

Data collection confined to library and information
centres of higher learning and research and
development organisations/institutions at Bangalore
City only

A questionnaire was used to collect the data
from the selected library and information centres of
higher learning and research at Bangalore. In all,
questionnaire was circulated to 31 selected libraries

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

29

out of which 29 (93.55 per cent) responded. Among
29 respondents, 6 respondents have indicated that
they do not provide any IL instruction or training to
their users. Hence, these 6 libraries were excluded
and only 23 libraries were considered for data analysis
and interpretation.

5. DATA ANALYSIS
5.1 Information Literacy Programmes
All the 23 libraries selected for survey provide
IL programmes for the purpose of optimum utilisation
of library resources and services. IL training programmes
are quite familiar in academic library environment.
When it comes to R&D sector these programmes
are not conducted at frequent interval (Table 1).
Table 1. Frequency of IL programmes
Frequency

Total

Regular interval

04
(17.40)

When requested

06
(26.10)

Annually

06
(26.10)

For new users

10
(43.48)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

Table 1 shows that 43.48 per cent of respondents
conduct IL programmes only for the new users of
the library followed by 26.10 per cent of respondents
who conduct it when requested and annually, respectively.
Only four (17.40 per cent) respondents conduct
such programmes at a regular interval. Though the
users of R&D libraries have a very specific information
needs and requirements, IL programmes in such an
environment should be conducted as frequently as
possible. The technological, pedagogical and cultural
changes occurring within the higher education and
R&D sector now demand that librarians to be active
educators also. This complex role demands more
than sound pedagogical knowledge, advanced teaching
skills and an ability to develop and deliver effective
learning experiences. It also requires that the teaching
librarians function as an educational professional,
that is as one who can engage in educational debate
and decision-making processes, influence policy,
forge strategic alliance and demonstrate diplomatic
sensitivity. Tabl e 2 shows that the respondents
have understood well their teaching roles. In majority
(78.26 per cent) of libraries, it is the librarian who
conducts IL programmes. Some of the libraries
(13.04 per cent) conduct IL programmes by inviting
guest professionals and with the library staff. Only
30

Table 2. Organisation of IL programmes
IL Programmes
are Conducted by

Total

Librarian

18
(78.26)

Separate staff is available for IL
programmes
Library
staff
professional(s)

and

-

guest

02
(13.04)

Publishers/Representatives/Agents

02
(8.70)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

8.70 per cent of respondents arrange demonstrations
and presentations of the resources procured for the
users from publishers, repres entatives and agents.
With the increasing use of information technology
in disseminating the library services, librarians have
a lot to offer that can be tapped in the digital era.
Librarians have been trained to establish user needs
and to select and evaluate appropriate information.
The extensive multiple-source electronic access
today requires library professionals to be more technology
literate and up-to-date with the latest advances in
the field of technology.
Out of the 23 respondents, 15 (65.22 per cent)
respondents revealed that they did not receive any
technological training which is very essential as
the technology is getting obsolete at a greater
pace. But, it can be taken as a positive indication
that majority of respondents were self learners and
have good technological knowledge and skills. Among
the eight respondents who received technological
training, majority (87.50 per cent) were trained by
the product vendors (Table 3) followed by only one
(12.50 per cent) respondent who received training
from outside trainer/consultants. Some of the respondents
were keeping themselves technologically up-to-date
by attending workshops, seminars, lectures and
training programmes organised by the professional
organisations. Table 4 shows that sizeable percentage,
15 (65.23 per cent) of respondents have developed
Table 3. Technological training received by the
IL programme staff
Training provided by
Product vendor
Programme staff

Total
07
(87.50)
-

Outside trainer/consultant

01
(12.50)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

Table 4. Instructional materials for IL programmes
Instructional materials

Total

Instructional materials including tutorials
or modules

10
(43.48)

Resource help sheets, guides, and
manuals

15
(65.23)

Webpages and Intranet portals

14
(60.87)

Collaborating with other units of the
organisation

06
(26.10)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

Table 5. IL programmes for different
category of users
Category of users
Scientists/Engineers
IT Staff

Total
06
(60.00)
-

Faculty

03
(30.00)

Administrative staff

02
(20.00)
05
(60.00)

Student

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

resource help sheets, guides and manuals for the
products procured in the library for the proper
understanding and utilisation of the resources. Also,
14 (60.87 per cent) of respondents revealed that
they have developed webpages and Intranet portals
for providing IL programmes. Ten (43.48 per cent)
respondents indicated that they have developed
instructional materials including tutorials or modules
where as six (26.10 per cent) respondents are
collaborated with other units of their Organisation
to develop and deliver IL programmes apart from
other methods mentioned. In terms of instructional
design the medium of the Web seems ideally suited
to the task of teaching information skills. Users of
higher learning and R&D libraries are increasingly
using Web for information requirements. Furthermore,
Web is a powerful medium that has the potential
to provide meaningful learning environment. Hence,
developing instructional materials such as tutorials,
resource help sheets, webpages and Intranet portals
will also have greater impact on IL programmes.
With the rapid advances in information technology,
the proliferation of information resources and formats
and the increasing complexities of access and evaluation,
libraries recognise the necessity for dynamic IL
programmes that will address the needs of all categories
of users. A question was asked to know whether
different IL programmes have been developed for
different category of users. Only 10 (43.49 per
cent) respondents have developed IL programmes
for different category of users. Among them six
(60.00 per cent) respondents have developed programmes
suitable for the varied and specific information needs
of scientists/engineers and students (Table 5). Other
respondents, three (30.00 per cent) and two (20.00
per cent) have developed IL programmes that deal
with information wants of faculty and administrative
staff, respectively. It is to be noted here that human
behaviour is a complicated phenomenon, the factors
that affect its implicit objectives need to be studied
thoroughly and carefully. In general, information
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

needs vary from subject to subject and its orientation.
The subsequent use behaviour in selecting a particular
information source by the individuals or user groups
should be given due importance while planning IL
programmes. The rapid development of Web-based
resources requires that library professionals and
others involved in information skills training migrate
programmes centered on library-based resources
to incorporate wider Internet-located sources such
as e-journals, databases and even Internet searching.
Internet searching is very different from information
retrieval as traditionally practiced and researched
in online databases, CD-ROMs and Online Public
Access Catalogues (OPACs). As catalogues represent
the mirror to the library collection, all the 23 (100.00
per cent) respondents offer guidance and training
in using catalogues and 20 (86.95 per cent) respondents
cover a range of topics such as introducing library
websites, Internet search and databases (Tabl e 6).
Internet resources, in particular World Wide Web
resources, continue to proliferate at an astonishing
rate. A great deal of information is posted to the
world everyday but unfortunately very little is of
high quality. Unlike professional journals and commercial
publishers, who employ a system of editorial review
and external referees to ensure the quality of materials
distributed, information can be spread over the Internet
by anyone without regard to accuracy, validity or
bias. It is observed from Table 6 that respondents
are concentrating more on electronic information
access. Large majority, 22 (95.65 per cent) respondents
offer training in accessing e-journals followed by
only 11 (47.83 per cent) respondents who cover the
most important area of evaluation of information
sources both print as well as electronic.
Since the advent of the Internet, the information
highway phenomenon has given access to virtually
anything and everything that has ever been written
or expressed. Enormous information is now available
that there is no wonder that searchers are having
a field day citing from sources that otherwise would
31

Table 6. IL programmes for different
category of users
Areas of IL training

Total

IL Programmes

Total

Guides for citing electronic information

12
(52.17)

Guidelines for searching effectively
different search engines and databases

18
(78.26)

20
(86.95)

Interactive tutorials to teach the users
how to evaluate the quality of information
on the Internet

05
(21.74)

E-journals

22
(95.65)

Organising expert lectures on information
literacy

06
(26.10)

Databases

20
(86.95)

Evaluation of information sources

11
(47.83)

Catalogues

23
(100.00)

Library website

20
(86.95)

Internet search

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

not be available or easily tracked. It’s becoming
quite common for people to use Internet sources
for information for writing papers, reports, theses,
etc. and, therefore, it may be useful to know how
to cite that information. Developing IL programmes
that deal with citing e-mails, websites, citations
and quotations in text, references for specific documents
on a website and references for articles and abstracts
obtained from electronic databases will be of great
use to the library clientele. Searching databases
and search engines is a tedious task. Also the
Internet has affected IL in a number of ways. First
of all it provides access to vast amount of information
from many countries in a variety of languages. So
searching for it requires specific search engines
and/or subject guides. The level of information provided
is not readily apparent through the title, and the
user is left to decide if a given source is relevant
to his/her needs. In addition, user has to evaluate
the information obtained with respect to quality,
accuracy, timeliness and so on. Hence developing
IL programmes for citing electronic information searching
different search engines and databases, and evaluating
the online information sources is the need of the
hour. In this context, the survey reveals that considerable
respondents, 18 (78.26 per cent) have developed
guidelines for searching effectively different search
engines and databases, which is also clear from
the fact that majority of the respondents are covering
areas such as library website, Internet search, ejournals and databases (Table 7). Twelve (52.17 per
cent) respondents have developed guides for citing
electronic information sources. Only five (21.74 per
cent) have prepared interactive tutorials to teach
the users how to evaluate the quality of information
on the Internet. Though 11 respondents revealed
that they provide IL programmes for evaluating information
sources, both print and electronic, but only five
32

Table 7. IL programmes followed in the libraries

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

(21.74 per cent) respondents have prepared interactive
tutorials to evaluate quality of information on the
Internet. Very few six (26.10 per cent) respondents
are organising expert lectures on IL for their clientele.The
library supports the teaching and research needs
of the organisation by developing the collection and
providing access to it through catalogues, electronic
databases and help desk services. The library
professionals should also recognise that teaching
of IL skills requires a campus wide partnership that
combines the expertise of library staff, scientific
and administrative staff, academic staff and other
teaching and learning support services. Library
professionals are uniquely qualified and positioned
to assume an active role in the restructuring of the
teaching-learning environment. Library professionals
are experts in collecting, organising, evaluating and
providing access to information in all formats.
Teaching knowledge and skills must take an
essential rather than desirable place in the library
professionals’ portfolio which is clear from the
Table 8 that quite a sizeable majority, 20 (86.95 per
cent) respondents design, develop and update products
in-house as part of their normal range of duties
where as two (8.70 per cent) respondents have
mixed team of library professionals, IT staff and
administrative people for planning, designing and
delivering IL programmes. Libraries today introduce
many new services, either by converting existing
services into e-services or by developing and implementing
Table 8. IL programmes followed in the
libraries
IL programmes are developed by

Total

In-house
by
team
of
library
professionals–as part of a range of
duties

20
(86.95)

Mixed team of library professionals, IT
staff and administrative people

02
(8.70)

External provider briefed by the IL
programme development team

01
(4.35)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

entirely new services for search, delivery and use
of information, e.g., online delivery, portals, personalised
services, online teaching modules, online reference,
and digitised collections or electronic publishing.
In most cases, introducing new services require
tremendous efforts and skills of the library staff
along with proper funding and future planning. Hence,
an attempt was made to know how the selected
libraries are maintaining support for existing and
new services (Table 9). The time available for library
staff to perform the IL teaching is the major issue
(Table 10). This is expressed by a large number of
respondents, 16 (69.56 per cent). This problem can
be tackled by appointing separate staff for planning,
designing and delivering IL programmes. There is
great opportunity to exploit other expertise available
in the institution in developing and delivering IL
products. Establishing mixed team of library
professionals, educational developers, scientific and
technological staff, etc. may serve to improve IL
products and develop synergies between library
and institution’s developments. The decision to involve
greater expertise in developments could be considered
best practice. Teaching information skills to staff
who are highly intelligent in an organisation oriented
towards using and extending knowledge is a situation
many trainers, quite correctly could envy. Whilst
popular culture may have it that scientists or senior
Table 9. Support for existing and new services
Support for existing and new
services

Total

Existing staff provides updates and
enhanced services

20
(86.95)

Existing staff develops new services

15
(65.22)

Additional staff has been appointed to
support developments

01
(4.35)

Consultants are briefed by staff for
updates and new developments

03
(13.04)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
Table 10. Problems for effective delivery of IL
Problems for effective
delivery of IL programmes

Total

Lack of quality product(s)

04
(17.40)

User resistance

05
(21.74)

Staff time

16
(69.56)

Staff expertise

04
(17.40)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

users would find it difficult to admit they do not
know something. The scientific and senior academic
staff and even some of the senior research students
are experts and so specialised in their field that
most of them are able to recognise that others have
specialised knowledge. There are fewer opportunities
for IL training in these situations as often these
staff especially those with significant administrative
responsibilities find themselves too busy to spend
time acquiring IL skills. This is evident from the fact
that five (51.74 per cent) respondents indicated
that user resistance (user apathy) is also a hurdle
for effective delivery of IL programmes.
The role of library professional in the information
age is to promote access to appropriate and accurate
information to serve the needs of users. This has
been the library professional’s mission for generations.
However, the information age has made this mission
much more challenging and complex. It has also
demanded that the library staff should develop new
technical skills to promote information access and
use. Effective delivery of IL programmes also calls
for proper staff development strategy. It should provide
opportunities for all staff to improve their own IL,
their understanding of the IL education agenda and
their ability to account for that agenda in their own
contexts. In this context four (17.40 per cent) respondents
revealed that staff expertise is one of the serious
problems for effective delivery of IL. This is followed
by four (17.40 per cent) respondents saying lack
of quality products is other prominent problem for
effective delivery of IL programmes.
Among the 23 respondents, 15 (65.22 per cent)
felt that they have all the resources required for IL
training programmes. Out of the remaining, 8 (62.50
per cent) indicated the requirement of additional
staff, and a separate training room for conducting
IL programmes (Table 11). Also, four (50 per cent)
respondents pointed out that education for the staff
(train the trainer) is very important for effective
delivery of IL programmes. In the commercial sector,
training, re-training and client education programmes
are common place for those who work with computers,
networking and software. Staff acquires new technology
skills that enable them to compete effectively in the
workforce and to enrich the work of their organisation.
In library and information centres also, training the
trainer programmes should be given due importance.
Unless the trainer knows the new and emerging
technologies and applications, it is very difficult to
incorporate them into the instructional programmes.
If the new technologies and applications are not
used in the instructional programmes, soon they
will become obsolete and value for nothing. As it
33

Table 11. Resources required for IL training
programmes
Resources required

Total

Additional staff to plan or conduct
training

05
(62.50)

A separate training room, outside
the library

05
(62.50)

Education for the staff in how to
train (train the trainer)

04
(50.00)

Funding

01
(12.50)

Printed training manuals

02
(25.00)

Modern electronic gadgets

03
(37.50)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

is clear from previous discussion that majority of
libraries are concentrating more on electronic information,
three (37.50 per cent) respondents felt the need for
modern electronic gadgets. Very few, two (25 per
cent) respondents indicated the need of printed training
manuals and only one (12.50 per cent) respondent
revealed the lack of funds for IL training programmes.
Additional staff, separate training room and education
for library staff are the most important resources
required by the respondents to plan, design and
deliver IL training more effectively. The need for
additional training skills is very important because
the success of training largely rests on the expertise
of the trainer to plan, design and deliver effective IL
programmes that take into account learning styles,
needs and appropriate methodologies.

5.2 Training Aids used for IL Programmes
Earlier interaction was referred to as face-toface communication or lectures delivered in the
classrooms. But the new technologies have changed
the nature of interaction among people. The rapid
development of computer and Internet technologies
has dramatically increased the ways of teaching
and learning. Tools such as e-mails, text-based
two-way communications (e.g. discussion forums),
webpages, audio and video clips, and voice-andvisual-based two-way communication (voice mail,
instant messaging, video conferencing) have given
new look to the way people interact and learn with
each other. These technologies have also made
their way in the library instruction programmes and
have great potential in adding value to IL programmes.
The emergence of technologies as training aids in
libraries has given new direction to the IL programmes.
Hence a question was asked in the questionnair to
know the techniques used in developing IL programmes
34

(Table 12). Large majority, 20 (86.95 per cent) of
respondents revealed that interaction is the best
technique in developing IL programmes. Ten (43.47
per cent) respondents use screen captures to replicate
the real environment in their IL training products.
Thirteen (56.52 per cent) respondents have used
multimedia techniques into their IL programmes followed
by seven (30.43 per cent) respondents who have
incorporated video technique into their IL programmes.
Very few, six (26.10 per cent) are using audio technique
while developing information literacy programmes.
Educational techniques such as lectures
demonstrations, face-to-face, point-of-contact, Intranet
portals, seminars/workshops and online tutorials can
be adapted for the range of traditional, electronic
and virtual learning environments. In each environment,
it is important to consider what array of approaches
to instruction, such as formalised classes during
the course time, voluntary attendance workshops,
online assistance and one-on-one consultations, provide
the most effective support for learners. Approaches
for the development of effective library assignments,
resources and tutorials in print and online deserves
more concentrated research. It is observed from the
survey (Table 13) that large majority 19 (82.61 per
cent) of respondents have indicated face-to-face as
the most favoured method of delivering IL instructions
which is also evident from the fact that 20 (86.95
per cent) respondents are using interaction as major
component while developing IL instruction programmes.
Considerable majority 14 (60.87 per cent) of respondents
are utilising the latest technology of Intranet portals
for delivering IL programmes followed by 13 (56.52
per cent) respondents revealing just-in-time and lectures/
demonstrations as other favoured alternatives for IL
instruction. Ten (43.48 per cent) respondents have
developed printed training manuals. In manuals it is
important not only to list steps, every action must
Table 12. Techniques used in developing
IL programmes
Techniques used

Total

Interaction as a major component

20
(86.95)

Screen capture

10
(43.47)

Audio

06
(26.10)

Video

07
(30.43)

Multimedia

13
(56.52)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

Table 13. Methods used for IL programmes
Methods used for IL programmes

Total

Just-in-time or point-of-contact

13
(56.52)

Face- to-face (One-to-one)

19
(82.61)

Printed training manuals

10
(43.48)

Intranet portal

14
(60.87)

Lectures/Demonstrations

13
(56.52)

Seminars/Workshops

05
(21.74)

Online tutorials

07
(30.43)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

be described in detail to make sure that a procedure
can be executed correctly. Apart from this, it is
important to describe what the results of any action
should be, to enable the user to check whether he
or she is still on the right course. Seven (30.43 per
cent) respondents have also developed online tutorials
for effective delivery of Il programmes. Very few, five
(21.74 per cent) respondents are organising seminars/
workshops apart from other methods of IL instruction.
Librarians in higher learning will still have the opportunity
to supply instructions that will take users to a
general level of competence but much more of the
instruction will become point-of-use or just-in-time
as the users identify gaps in their knowledge and
seek help either from context-sensitive help pages
or from librarians.
There are many styles and techniques of learning.
Each user has his/her preference. The best approach
for an IL instructor to take is to address a variety
of learning styles with their teaching plan. Some
of the common learning styles are visual, audio and
verbal. The verbal learning style involves both the
written and spoken word. Using this style one can
express easily both in writing and verbally. The
visual learning style includes using images, pictures,
colours and maps to organise information and
communicate with others. Where as the audio learning
style includes sound and music. Designing IL programmes
that include these learning styles to make learning
easy is a real challenge for the library staff. Almost,
20 (86.95 per cent) respondents revealed that they
use verbal learning style for information literacy
instruction (Table 14), which is also evident from
the fact that 86.95 per cent of respondents use
interaction as a major component while developing
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

IL programmes. Fourteen (60.87 paer cent) favoured
learning visual and 34.78 per cent favoured audio
learning style, respectively. Integrating technology
into teaching takes the integration of technology
into the instructional programme one step further.
Individual instructors must make decisions about
which technologies can be used and how.
Internet has proved its potential in the education
sector and the library instruction programmes are
also designed using variety of services provided by
Internet (Table 15). Internet is the electronic resource
that is arguably now having the most significant
impact on library services and operations and on
the professional activities of library professionals.
This strength of impact is due to its multi-faceted
nature since it simultaneously fulfills three important
roles in library services. First, it is a resource that
can be consulted and used like any other reference
tool. Second, it is more dynamic and far-reaching
than any other resource used in library setting.
Finally, it provides a medium of communication that
has extended the potential of library professionals
for interaction beyond the physical library (to users,
colleagues and other professionals), beyond any
previous capacity, and in a host of new ways. In
order to know the use of Internet services while
designing IL programmes, the survey reveals that
large majority, 21 (91.30 per cent) of respondents
indicated that Internet services are used while designing
Table 14. Modes used in IL programmes
Mode used in IL
programmes

Total

Visual

14
(60.87)

Audio

08
(34.78)

Verbal

20
(86.95)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
Table 15. Use of Internet in designing IL
programmes
Use of internet

Total

E-mail

18
(85.71)

Network instruction

10
(47.62)

Database searches

19
(90.48)

Online conferencing

03
(14.30)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

35

IL programmes. Majority, 19 (90.48 per cent) respondents
use the Internet services for database searches
followed by 18 (85.71 per cent) who use the Internet
services for delivering IL programmes through emails. Ten (47.62 per cent) respondents use the
Internet service for network instruction. Very negligible
percentage (14.30 per cent) of respondents use
Internet services for online conferencing. It is seen
from the survey that considerable majority of respondents
says that the access to Internet plays an important
role while designing and delivering IL programmes .

Ë

95.65 per cent respondents either agreed or
strongly agreed that IL programmes should be
evaluated to check use satisfaction.

Ë

91.30 per cent of respondents agreed that IL
programmes helps in increased visits to the
library by the users.

Ë

Nine (47.37 per cent) respondents indicated
that insufficient staff and training to the existing
staff is the biggest barrier for encashing the potential
of Internet services (Table 16) followed by low bandwidth
for Internet access (36.84 per cent). Staff providing
IL services need to develop and maintain knowledge
of how people seek and process information and a
skill in evaluating information resources. It is stated
that there are many technical snags and lack of
computer infrastructure are other prominent barriers
to give increased access to the Internet.

Ë

95.65 per cent of respondents agreed that IL
programmes helps master complex resources
and search skills within the areas of research
interest with majority 52.17 per cent reporting
they strongly agree with the statement.
All (100 per cent) respondents agreed that IL
programmes are necessary for effective utilisation
of library materials with 52.17 per cent reporting
they strongly agree with the statement.

Ë

95.65 per cent of respondents agreed that IL
programmes help in increasing research output
of the individual and the organisation as a whole
with 61 per cent of respondents saying they
agree with the statement.

Ë

91.30 per cent of respondents agreed that IL
programmes helps in understanding economic,
legal and social issues surrounding the use of
information, and 8.70 per cent of respondents
disagree with the statement.

Ë

78.26 per cent of respondents agreed to strongly
agree that it is difficult to organise IL programmes
to the senior users of the library who are highly
learned in using knowledge for productive research.
It is interesting note that 21.74 per cent of
respondents disagree with the statement.

Ë

All (100 per cent) respondents agreed that IL
programmes should be evaluated from time to
time in view of their relevance in the fast technological
and subject developments.
95.65 per cent of respondents agreed that IL
programmes are helpful today as much of the
information is available in electronic formats.

5.3 Information Literacy Programme(s)
Assessment
This section is designed to know the overall
perception of information literacy concept among
the selected sample (Table 17). It is designed in
five-point scale format so as to get understanding
level of information literacy concept among the
respondents through some basic statements available
in the literature. The analysis of this data is
pres ented below:
Ë

All (100 per cent) respondents agreed that to
measure the effectiveness of the IL programmes
relevant research, service reviews or assessments
should be carried out.
Table 16. Access to Internet in designing
IL programmes
Access to Internet

Total

Not enough computers for both computer
application and Internet access

05
(26.31)

Computers are not located conveniently
for Internet use

03
(15.79)

Internet access bandwidth too low

07
(36.84)

Too many technical
existing equipment

difficulties

with

05
(26.31)

Insufficient staff development/training

09
(47.37)

Insufficient funds for Internet charges

02
(10.53)

Note: Figures in parenthesis indicate percentage
36

Ë

To sum up, all the respondents have good
understanding of the concept of IL and its importance
in making user empowered in utilising the information
for productive use in general and development of
the organisation in particular.

6. CONCLUSION
IL is gaining momentum. It is found essential
to make IL programme a regular activity in the
higher learning and R&D institutions. Library professionals
are slowly and steadily acquainting with the technological
gadgets and showing interest in guiding the users
in the information search and accessing the information
through many means. It is advisable to collaborate
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

Table 17. IL programme(s)—Assessment
Statement

Strongly
Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly
Agree

To measure the effectiveness of the IL
programmes, relevant research, service
reviews or assessments should be carried
out.

-

-

18

05

IL programmes should be evaluated to
check user satisfaction.

-

01

14

08

-

IL programmes helps in increased visits to
the library by users.

01

-

15

06

01

IL programmes helps master complex
resources and search skills within the areas
of research interest.

01

-

10

12

-

IL programmes are necessary for effective
utilisation of library materials.

-

-

11

12

-

IL programmes helps in increasing research
output of the users and organisation.

-

01

14

08

-

IL programmes helps in understanding
economic, legal and social issues
surrounding the use of information.

-

02

14

07

-

It is difficult to organise IL programmes to
the senior users of the library who are highly
learned in using knowledge for productive
research.

-

05

12

06

-

IL programmes should be evaluated from
time to time in view of their relevance in the
fast
technological
and
subject
developments.

-

-

15

08

-

IL programmes are helpful today, as much
of the information is available in electronic
format.

-

01

12

10

-

with other units and sections such as computer and
administrative divisions including teaching.
The need of the hour is effective utilisation of
information and communication technologies in planning,
designing and delivering IL programmes. Instructions
should be provided in locating, accessing, evaluating
and effectively using electronic information available
on the Internet. The copyright issues related to
electronic information access and use should also
form part of the IL programmes and accordingly
interactive tutorials and expert lectures be organised.
Library professionals can emerge as the leaders in
motivating the users in the academic and research
environment to become lifelong learners. This clearly
demands that the professionals should master the
critical demands and skills in imparting IL. The
programmes can be successful ventures if they incorporate
screen captures, audio, video and multimedia techniques
and learning styles so as to make them more interesting
and easy to learn and understand. Network technologies
should be used to a maximum extent for effective
delivery of IL programmes. To conclude, the mission
of IL is never ending. To cope-up with the growth of

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

No opinion

knowledge, users and information packages, there
is always a need to master the technologies. Therefore,
discussions, surveys and further intensive researches
becomes inevitable to promote IL movement in any
country. This is more required in a country like India
to keep alive the democratic system by empowering
the citizens with information. In this process the
libraries and information centres become the active
partners in the progress.
“Information literacy is an ongoing journey;
it should not be considered a destination”

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Tiefel, V M. Library user education: examining
its past, projecting its future—The library and
undergraduate education. Library Trends , 1995,
Fall.
2. Lougee, W. P. Diffuse Libraries: Emergent roles
for the research library in the digital age. Washington:
Council on Library and Information Resources,
2002, pp.18.

37

About the Authors

Dr C.R. Karisiddappa obtained BSc from Mysore University, BLISc from Karnatak University,
MLISc from Banaras University, and PhD from Gulbarga University. He served as the Librarian,
JJM Medical College, Davangere and joined the Department of Library and Information Science,
Karnatak University Dharwad as tutor. At present, he is the Dean, Faculty of Social Sciences
and President of Indian Associations of Teachers of Library and Information Sciene (IATLIS).
He has participated in 70 national and international conferences and is associated with more
than 50 universities of the country as a member of various Boards. He has also served as
a Convener of the UGC Subject Panel and is also associated with NAAC Peer Committee. Dr
Karisiddappa has guided 30 PhD students. Recognising his over all contributions to the field
of LIS education and research, the Indian Association of Teachers of Library and Information
Sciences (IATLIS) awarded him the Motiwale Best National Teacher Award for the year
2000. ILA has also honoured him with Dr P.S.G Kumar Lifetime Achievement Award at
the 51 National Convention held at Kurukshetra in December 2005. He is a life member of
all the major national associations of LIS as well as ISSI.

Dr Iqbalahmad U. Rajgoli started his professional career at Indian Institute of Astrophysics,
Bangalore, as Library Trainee where he was involved in the “Digital Library of India” project.
Later he got an opportunity to work in building the Indian Institute of Astrophysics Institutional
Repository. He joined ISRO HQ in 2005 and is involved in cataloguing and classification of
various documents. His areas of interest include information literacy, digital libraries and
institutional repositories. He has contributed 19 articles in national and international journals
and conferences.

38

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

