DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 39-47
© 2008, DESIDOC

Information Literacy: Essential Skills for the Information Age
Michael B. Eisenberg
The Information School of the University of Washington
Roosevelt Commons Building, 4th Floor
Box 352840, Seattle, WA 98195-2840
E-mail:mbe@u.washington.edu
http://www.ischool.washington.edu/mbe

ABSTRACT
Information literacy (IL) is the set of skills and knowledge that allows us to find, evaluate, and use
the information we need, as well as to filter out the information we don’t need. IL skills are the necessary
tools that help us successfully navigate the present and future landscape of information. Information
and technology affects every person in every possible setting—work, education, recreation. This paper
offers an overview of IL focusing on three contexts for successful IL learning and teaching: (i) the
information process itself, (ii) technology in context, and (iii) implementation through real needs in real
situations. The author covers conceptual understandings of IL, the range of IL standards and models,
technology within the IL framework, and practical strategies for effective IL skills learning and instruction
in a range of situations.
Keywords: IL, Big6, information problem-solving, critical thinking, information technology, research skills,
information skills, information process, technology skills.

1.

INFORMATION LITERACY AND
CONTEXT

Information and technology literacy is clearly
the “basic skills set of the 21st century.” This is
widely recognised and accepted for all types of
workers—entry level to top executives. For example,
in 1991 the US Department of Labor’s SCANS report
stated that competencies for all entry level employees
must include the ability to: (i) acquire and use
information, and (ii) work with a variety of technologies.1
This is information and technology literacy for all.
On the top-end, Peter Drucker, well-known
management guru stated that “executives have become
computer-literate...but not many executives are
information literate”. 2 Drucker is saying that being
able to use computers is not enough. Executives
must be able to apply computer skills to real situations
and needs. Executives must be able to identify
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

information problems and be able to locate, use,
synthesise, and evaluate information in relation to
those problems.
Information and technology affects every person
in every possible setting—education, public service,
and business. Education is fundamentally informationbased. That is, every aspect of learning and teaching
requires the gathering, processing, and communication
of information. In the past in education, there was
a reliance on one primary information resource: the
textbook. But this is rapidly changing due in large
part to the explosion in information technology and
networked information. The same is true in public
service—citizens are increasingly turning to webbased, electronic sources and services for information.
And, today’s successful companies are those that
focus on meaningful uses of information and technology
and hire employees who are able to apply technology
to a range of situations.IL services and instruction
39

are essential components of every 21st Century
library and information program. Whether offering
direct instruction to users, providing skills-based
help functions on websites, delivering one-on-one
(physical or virtual) assistance, or even providing
meaningful signage in a physical setting, every
information and library situation requires helping
users to succeed through improving their information
skills or understandings. The purpose of any library
or information organisation is to meet the information
needs of its users. IL, by ensuring that users are
effective in seeking and using information, is an
important part of fulfilling this purpose.
This paper offers specific conceptual and practical
strategies for effective IL skills instruction. In real
estate, they talk about the three key elements:
location, location, and location. In education, we
can say a similar thing about implementing a meaningful
IL program: context, context, and context.
There are three essential contexts for successful
IL learning and teaching:
±

The information process itself

±

Technology in context

±

Real needs—either work, educational, or personal.

These contexts are essential for effective IL
programs at any level or with any age group. The
process provides a structure for applying skills that
can seem disconnected; technology within the process
gives focus and flexibility; and real needs makes
IL relevant and transferable. Individually, when users
are working on a problem, it’s easy to get lost or
confused. People are in a much better position to
succeed if, at any point in time, they can identify
where they are in terms of the three contexts:
Where are they in the information problem-solving
process?
How does technology boost their capabilities in
terms of specific information skills?
What is the professional or personal need being
addressed?
The remainder of this paper will consider IL
within each of these contexts in more detail.

2.

CONTEXT #1: THE PROCESS

Information is a pervasive and essential part of
our society and our lives. Humans are, at their
essence, processors and users of information. This
is not a recent development. Humans have always
40

been dependent upon information to help them make
decisions and guide their actions. Increases in the
sheer volume of information and the complexity of
information systems, have come about largely because
of advances in information technology and the accelerated
rate at which we live our lives.IL is the set of skills
and knowledge that not only allows us to find,
evaluate, and use the information we need, but
perhaps more importantly, allows us to filter out
the information we don’t need. IL skills are the
necessary tools that help us successfully navigate
the present and future landscape of information.
There are a number of different information
skills standards and models that seek to explain
the scope of IL including:
±

Carol Kuhlthau’s information search process 3

±

The Big6 approach of Eisenberg and Berkowitz4

±

AASL/AECT IL Standards 5

±

ACRL IL Competency Standards for Higher
Education. 6

Figure 1 is an updated version of various charts
authored by Eisenberg and others7,8 comparing these
models of IL that were developed through research,
practice, and committee, respectively. This sideby-side view of IL models shows that there are
many similarities among them. In fact, there is
more agreement than disagreement among the models,
as is true of IL research itself. For example, the
driving force behind almost all of the models, and
many of the findings, is “process”—the understanding
that information skills are not isolated incidents,
but rather are connected activities that encompass
a way of thinking about and using information.
My own approach, the Big6, is the most widely
used model in K-12 education, world-wide
(www.big6.com). With six major stages and two
sub-stages under each, the Big6 covers the full
range of information problem-solving actions.
The Big6 is an approach that can be used
whenever people are faced with an information problem
or with making a decision that is based on information.
Students—K-12 through higher education—encounter
many information problems related to course
assignments. However, the Big6 is just as applicable
to professional or personal life.
The Big6 Skills comprise a unified set of information
and technology skills (Fig. 2). Taken together, these
skills form a process. The process encompasses
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

Kuhlthau information
seeking

1.
2.

Eisenberg/Berkowitz
Information Problem-Solving
(The Big6 Skills)

Initiation
Selection

AASL/AECT
Information
Literacy
Standards

1. Determine the nature
and extent of the
information needed

1. Task Definition
1.1 Define the problem
1.2 Identify info requirement

4. Formulation
(of focus)

3. Exploration
(Investiga
-te info
on the
general
topic)

ACRL Information
Literacy Competency
Standards

3. Evaluates sources
critically

5. Collection
(gather
info on the
focussed
topic)

2. Information seeking
strategies
2.1 Determine range
sources
2.2 Prioritize sources

1. Accesses
information
efficiently
and
effectively.

5. Accesses and uses
information
ethically and
legally

3. Location & access
3.1 Locate sources
3.2 Find Info

4. Information use
4.1 Engage (read, view, etc.)
4.2 Extract info
6. Presentation

5. Synthesis
5.1 Organize
5.2 Present

7. Assessment
(of outcome/process)

6. Evaluation
6.1 Judge the product
6.2 Judge the process

2. Accesses needed
information
effectively and
efficiently

2. Evaluates
information
critically
and
competently
3. Uses
information
accurately
and
creatively

3. Evaluates information
critically
5. Understands many of
the economic legal
and social issues
surrounding the use
of info
3. Incorporates selected
info. into his or her
knowledge base and
value system
5. Individually or as a
member of a group
uses information
effectively to
accomplish a specific
purpose

Figure 1. Comparison of information skills process models.

the Big6, people learn how to recognize their information
needs and how to progress through a series of
stages to solve information problems effectively
and efficiently. Many problem-solving models provide
a set of specific activities, or outline of isolated
skills. These models may encourage a lockstep
strategy that forces one specific method for problemsolving and decision-making. Like these others,
the Big6 approach is systematic; however, it differs
in a significant way. Big6 Skills provide a broadbased, logical skill set that can be used as the
structure for developing a curriculum or the framework
for a set of distinct problem-solving skills. These
fundamental skills provide students with a comprehensive
set of powerful skills to conquer the information
age.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

But the Big6 is more than simple a set of
skills—it is also an approach to helping students
learn the information problem-solving process. Learning
more about the Big6 as a process and as an
approach should make it easier and more useful
for any instructors and students. For instructors,
the Big6 provides a definitive set of skills that
students must master in order to be successful in
any learning context. Teachers can integrate instructional
modules or lessons about the Big6 into subject
area content and assignments. For students, the
Big6 provides a guide to dealing with assignments
and tasks as well as a model to fall back on when
they are stuck. The Big6 represents “metacognition”—
an awareness by students of their mental states
and processes.

41

1. Task Definition
1.1 Define the problem
1.2 Identify the information needed
2. Information seeking strategies
2.1 Determine all possible sources
2.2 Select the best sources
3. Location and Access
3.1 Locate sources
3.2 Find information within sources
4. Use of Information
4.1 Engage (e.g., read, hear, view)
4.2 Extract relevant information
5. Synthesis
5.1 Organise information from multiple sources
5.2 Present information
6. Evaluation
6.1 Judge the result (effectiveness)
6.2 Judge the process (efficiently)

information together; and deciding that the task is
in fact completed. However the stages do not need
to be completed in any particular order or in any
set amount of time. A stage can be repeated or
revisited a number of times. Sometimes a stage is
completed with little effort, while at other times a
stage is difficult and time consuming.

Figure 2. The Big6.9

From experience and research, we found that
successful information problem-solving does require
completing each stage at some point in time: defining
the task; selecting, locating, and using appropriate
information sources; pulling the information together;
and deciding that the task is in fact completed.
However, the Big6 is not linear and prescriptive.
It’s not necessary to complete the stages in order,
however all the stages must be completed for overall
success.

From experience and research, we found that
successful Big6 information problem-solving does
require completing each stage at some point in
time: defining the task; selecting, locating, and
using appropriate information sources; pulling the

Figure 3 illustrates that the Big6 is not necessarily
a linear, step-by-step process. For example, imagine
that after a team has defined a task and decided
on their information seeking strategies in terms of
three specific sources, they find them unavailable.

Figure 3. The Big6 as a feedback process.

42

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

In that case, they would loop back to information
seeking strategies to reformulate their plans. Or,
suppose when compiling a report (synthesis), a
manager isn’t sure if he/she has done everything
required. Here, he/she would jump back to task
definition to review the problem and requirements.
The point is to be flexible and able to move back
and forth in the process, but to be able to do what
is essential in each stage.
From a learning perspective, knowing where
you are in a process is very helpful for anyone. It
helps to know what’s been completed and what is
still to do. When working on an assignment, project,
report, or even an information problem of personal
interest, users should be able to identify where
they are in the process. For example, are they
reading an article related to current events? That’s
Use of Information, Big6 #4. Are they searching for
sources using a periodical database or search engine?
That’s Big6 #3, Location & Access.
From a teaching perspective, it’s important to
anchor instructional and learning experiences related
to information and technology skills instruction within
the information process. For example, teaching
PowerPoint for organizing and presenting oral
presentations—that’s Synthesis, Big6 #5. Working
with users to determine the most appropriate and
available sources for a project—that that’s Information
Seeking Strategies, Big6 #2.
Connecting instruction of individual skills or
techniques within the overall Big6 process provides
users with a familiar reference point. They see the
links among seemingly separate skills and are able
to reflect on what came before and anticipate what
comes after.
Therefore, we recommend continually working
with users to help them recognize where they are
in the process. Some ways that educators can do
this is by:
±

Identifying for users the various information process
stages as they go through to complete an
assignment, project, report, or even to make a
personal decision

±

Using a narrative or self-reflection to point out
the Big6 related to the actions of one or more
characters

±

Modeling information process recognition by
pointing out when they themselves are engaging
in a particular information stage

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

±

Asking users, verbally or in writing, to identify
which information stage they are working on

Some would call this a metacognitive approach.
The Big6 (or any other process model) gives students
a vocabulary to describe process and become more
self-aware. By continually emphasizing a “process
context,” users learn to recognize their own styles
as well as their strengths and weaknesses. They
also have a model to fall back on should they get
stuck or have difficulties.

3.

CONTEXT #2: TECHNOLOGY FOR
INFORMATION PROBLEM-SOLVING

There seems to be increasing understanding
among educators as well as in the general public
that technological proficiency is more than simply
knowing particular set of commands or even how
to use a particular type of software. We want students
to use technology flexibly and creatively. We want
them to be able to size up a task, recognize how
technology might help them to fulfill the task, and
then use the technology to do so. People need to
be able to use computers for a purpose.
Helping people—especially students—learn to
apply technology in these ways requires a change
in the way computer skills are traditionally taught.
It means moving from teaching isolated “computer
skills” to teaching integrated information and technology
skills. From an IL perspective, that means integrating
computer skills within the information problem-solving
process. Individual computer skills take on a new
meaning when they are integrated within a process,
and students develop true “computer literacy” because
they have genuinely applied various computer and
technology skills as part of learning.
Moving from teaching isolated computer skills
to helping people learn integrated information and
technology skills is not just a good idea—it’s essential
if we are to put users in a position to succeed in
an increasingly complex and changing world. Drucker’s
point about executives not being information literate
(see endnote 2) is still true today. Being able to
use computers is not enough. Executives all must
be able to apply computer skills to real situations
and needs. Executives must be able to identify
information problems and be able to locate, use,
synthesize, and evaluate information in relation to
those problems. These same needs exist for all
people living in an information society.
There are many good reasons for moving from
teaching isolated computer skills to teaching integrated
43

information and technology skills. Technology is
changing at a breath-taking pace and will continue
to do so for the foreseeable future. Bill Gates once
said (National Educational Computing Conference,
1996) that computing power has increased 1 million
times over the past 20 years and will likely do so
again in the next 20 years!
A million times more powerful. Will learning
isolated specific skills such as word processing,
electronic spreadsheets, and even World Wide Web
searching suffice? Clearly not. Will learning to use
whatever technologies come along to boost our
skills within the overall information problem-solving
process? Absolutely! That’s what it means to look
at technology from an information skills perspective.
Consider a common technology—”a pencil and
paper.” From an information process perspective,
how can a pencil and paper help us to be more
productive? Clearly, a pencil and paper boosts our
ability to present information. In the Big6 process,
this is Big6 #5—synthesis. What are the electronic
equivalents of a pencil and paper—the tools that
help us even more to synthesize? Clearly, there’s
word processing. There’s also desktop publishing,
word processing, desktop publishing, PowerPoint
and other presentation software programs. All these
are used to organize and present information, Big6 #5.

Web pages, electronic reference resources, Q&A
services, are all part of an effective Information
Seeking Strategy (Big6 #2) and when we engage
them and extract relevant information that’s Big6
#4—Use of Information. E-mail, chat, or text messaging
is highly useful for linking students with their teachers
or with other students for Task Definition activities
(Big6 #1), and later for Evaluation (Big6 #6).
When integrated into the information problemsolving process, these technological capabilities
become powerful information tools for students.
Table 1, a summary of how some of today’s technologies
fit within the Big6 process and Table 2 flips it
around—considering technology within the process.
This is the most powerful way to consider technology—
as a boost to people’s abilities—within the information
problem-solving process.

4.

CONTEXT #3: REAL NEEDS

Reflect on another common technology—”a phone
book.” The phone book is a tool for accomplishing
Big6 #3—Location and Access. Electronic equivalents
to the phone book are online library catalogs, periodical
databases, and of course, web search engines.

As noted earlier, information is a pervasive and
essential part of our society and all our lives. Information
is pervasive, and so are information skills. Therefore,
there are many opportunities for teaching and learning
the IL. From research and experience, we know
that the information skills are best learned in the
context of real needs—school or personal. Students
today, more than ever, want to see connections
between what they are learning and their lives.
They want to know how something is relevant. We
need to take advantage of this and emphasize the
applicability of information skills across environments
and situations.

Any technology can be analyzed in this way—
as part of the information problem-solving process.

In school settings, the context for IL instruction
is the curriculum. In K-12, this includes the subject

Table 1. Technological capabilities and the Big6

Technology

Description

Word processing

5
4

Synthesis
Use of information (notetaking)

Spell/grammar checking

6

Evaluation

Presentation/Multimedia software

5

Synthesis

Electronic spreadsheets

5

Synthesis

Online library catalog

3

Location & Access

Search engine

3

Location & Access

Full-text electronic resources

2
4

Information seeking strategies
Use of information

E-mail
Copy-paste (in various programmes)
44

Big6 Stage

1-6
4

All (particularly Task Definition, Evaluation)
Use of information
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

Table 2. The Big6 and Technology

Stage

Big6

Technology

1

Task definition

e-mail, group discussions (listservs, online forums),
brainstorming software, chat, videoconferencing, groupware

2

Information seeking strategies

online catalogs, info retrieval, networked electronic
resources, Intranet), Web resources, digital reference
services, online discussin groups, blogs, wikis

3

Location & Access

online catalogs, electronic indexes, search engines, browsers

4

Use of information

upload/download, word processing, copy-paste, outliners,
spreadsheets, databases (for analysis of data), statistical
packages

5

Synthesis

word
processing,
desktop
publishing,
graphics,
spreadsheets, database management, presentation software,
down/up load, e-journals, blogs, wikis, web-authoring

6

Evaluation

e-mail, group discussions (listservs, online forums),
brainstorming software, chat, videoconferencing, groupware

area units and lessons of study. In higher education,
we focus on courses, class topics, and lectures.
Most importantly in both, the emphasis should be
on the assignments on which students will be evaluated.
Throughout the academic year, teachers and students
engage in a rich range of curriculum subjects, topics,
and assignments. In fact, one of the current problems
we face in education is “curriculum information overload”—
there’s just too much to cover in limited time.
That’s why, in implementing information skills
instruction, we do not promote adding new curriculum
content, units, or topics. There’s plenty going on
in the curriculum already. The last thing that faculty
and students need is more content. Therefore, from
an IL perspective, the challenge is to determine
good opportunities for learning and teaching information
skills within the existing curriculum. To do so involves
the following actions:

±

±

a broad plan, and design specific unit and lesson
plans that integrate the information skills and classroom
content. These educators can also collaborate on
teaching and assessment.
Effective information skills instruction starts
with selecting existing curriculum units which are
best suited to integrated instruction. In the Big6
program, we refer to these units as “big juicies”—
those information-rich curriculum units that are filled
and dripping with Big6 potential. “Big juicy” units
are rich in information needs, resources, and processing.
These are the units that offer particularly good
opportunities for teaching specific Big6 Skills within
the overall Big6 process, for example:
±

Units or topics that involve a report, project, or
product rather than those that rely on a test for
assessment

Analyse the curriculum to

±

Units that require a range of multiple resources
rather than only the textbook

Select topics and assignments which are wellsuited to information skills instruction

±

Units that reach a large number of students
and span a reasonable timeframe.

Determine which skills are particularly relevant
to the selected curriculum topics and assignments.

±

Develop a broad plan that links the information
skills program to various curriculum topics

±

Design integrated topic and lesson plans to
teach information skills in the context of the
subject area curriculum

We strongly advocate a collaborative approach
to information instruction. That is, classroom teachers,
librarians, technology teachers, and other educators
can work together to analyze the curriculum, develop
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

The following is an example of how this might
work in practice. It is on the high school level, but
the same approach can work in elementary or middle
school, higher education, or even in public library,
business, or community situations.
High school biology teacher, Ms Lowe, and
library media specialist, Mr Bennett, meet to discuss
how they might collaborate to help students improve
their information problem-solving skills while they
study biology. They analyze the major units that
Ms Lowe plans to teach during the school year, and
45

agree that there are three key units because they
(i) result in some form or product of project, (ii)
require lots of different types of resources, (iii)
involve the whole class, and (iv) span more than
just a week or two. In other words, these three
units seem to be particularly “information-rich,” and
are perfect candidates for integrated biology—Big6
instruction. These are the big juicies:
The anatomy unit: taught early in the school year,
takes three weeks, involves significant use of the
WWW, results in individual PowerPoint-supported
oral presentations.
The circulatory system unit: taught in the second
marking period, takes two weeks, involves a series
of worksheets that combine to make a study guide,
also requires students to identify structures and
functions, and to analyse the effect of oxygenation
on various other systems (e.g., nervous system,
immune system, digestive system).
The digestive system unit: taught in the third marking
period, results in group presentations on the digestive
process in different animals, and usually involves
extensive information seeking and searching.
What now? Do they select among these units
or do they just integrate the Big6 with all three?
Do they teach all the Big6 Skills with each unit or
focus on specific information skills?
These choices depend upon other factors including
the time available for Big6 instruction and what else
is going on during the school year. We do, however,
recommend that while they review and reinforce the
overall Big6 process with each unit, Ms. Lowe and
Mr. Bennett should provide targeted Big6 Skills
instruction on one or two of the specific skills. For
example:
The anatomy unit relies on PowerPoint and the
Web, so lessons can be taught on both. PowerPoint
is a synthesis tool, so that’s a Big6 #5 lesson
focusing on organising and presenting principles
using PowerPoint. Lessons on the Web might focus
on identifying useful types of websites (Information
Seeking Strategies, Big6 #2), using keyword search
terms (Location & Access, Big6 #3), and recognising
and extracting relevant information, (use of Information,
Big6 #4).
The circulatory system unit might be a good
unit in which to focus on Task Definition, Big6 #1,
since each worksheet has a different focus. There’s
also a great deal of targeted analysis, so Use of
Information, Big6 #4, is again important.
46

The digestive system unit is a group project
and comes later in the school year. This would be
a good opportunity to review the entire Big6 process
while emphasizing defining tasks and dividing up
the work (Big6 #1—Task Definition) and how to put
group presentations together so they make sense
and flow easily (Big6 #5, Synthesis). Evaluation
(Big6 #6) can also play a big role in group projects
as students may be required to judge themselves
and other group members or to assess the final
products of other groups.
In actual school settings, selecting topics for
integrated instruction and overall information skills
planning depends upon the specific needs of the
students as well as the setting and situation. The
ultimate goal is to provide frequent opportunities for
students to learn and practice information problemsolving.
Repetition is crucial. While these skills may
seem to be simple or common sense at first, they
actually are quite involved and can be difficult to
master. This point cannot be overstressed—we learn
through repetition. It’s not enough to teach a skill
or sub-skill once. Students’ proficiency with specific
skills as well as the overall process will improve
over time—if they have regular opportunities to learn
and to apply the information problem-solving process.

5.

CONCLUSION

We live in a very complex and often overwhelming
information world. Information, library, and education
organizations have a responsibility to do our best
to help people succeed. Our job is to meet people’s
information needs. The school librarians say it even
more boldly and directly: “The mission of the school
library media program is to ensure that students…are
effective users of ideas and information.” 10 This is
an audacious and highly ambitious statement—and
it’s right on target.
Providing services, resources, and facilities is
one way that libraries, schools, and other organizations
seek to meet needs. The other way we do so is
to teach and to provide opportunities to learn. If we
truly believe that information and technology skills
are essential for success, then we must make sure
that people have frequent opportunities to learn and
practice these skills. Systematic planning and delivery
of integrated information skills instruction across
settings is essential if we are to make a difference.It’s
not enough to work one-on-one or to offer an isolated
lesson in note taking or Web search engines. People
need lessons in the full range of skills, delivered
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

in the contexts of the overall information process,
including relevant technologies, and based in real,
subject area assignments. Accomplishing comprehensive,
integrated IL instruction requires library and information
professionals in collaboration with others to make
a concerted and systematic effort to plan and deliver
programs in context.

REFERENCES
1. Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary
Skills (SCANS). What work requires of schools:
A SCANS report for America 2000. (US Government
Printing Office) Washington, DC 1991, p. vxii.
2. Drucker, P. Be data literate—know what to know.
Wall Street Journal, 1992, 12(1), A16.
3. Kuhlthau, Carol C. Seeking meaning: A process
approach to library and information services.
Ablex Publishing, Norwood, NJ, 1993.
4. Eisenberg, M. & Berkowitz, R. Information problemsolving: The big six skills approach to library
& information skills instruction. Ablex, Norwood,
NJ, 1990. http://www.big6.com.

5. American Library Association and Association
for Educational Communications and Technology.
Information power: Building partnerships for learning.
American Library Association, Chicago, 1998.
6. Association of College and Research Libraries.
Information literacy competency standards for
higher education. American Library Association,
Chicago, 2000. http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilcomstan.
html.
7. Eisenberg, M. & Brown, M. Current themes
regarding library and information skills instruction:
Research supporting and research lacking. School
Library Media Quarterly, 1992, 20(2), 103-09.
8. Eisenberg, Lowe & Spitzer. Information literacy:
Essential skills for the information age. Libraries
Unlimited, Westport, CT, 2004, pp. 39-42.
9. Eisenberg, M. A Big6™ skills overview, 2006.
http://www.big6.com/showarticle.php?id=16.
10. American Library Association and Association
for Educational Communications and Technology.
Information power: Building partnerships for learning.
American Library Association, Chicago, 1998, p. 1.

About the Author

Dr Mike Eisenberg, a leading scholar in information literacy programme development and
research, is the “founding dean” of the Information School at the University of Washington,
serving from 1998 to 2006. During his tenure, Mike transformed the unit from a single graduate
degree programme into a broad-based information school with a wide range of research and
academic programmes.
Mike is also widely known for his work in information literacy including creating (with Bob
Berkowitz) the Big6 approach. He has worked with thousands of people in education, business,
government, libraries, and communities to improve their information and technology skills.
Mike’s current efforts focus on information literacy, the expanding role of libraries, and
information science education K-20.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

47

