DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 48-55
© 2008, DESIDOC

Information Literacy and Higher Education
Competency Standards
A. Amudhavalli
Department of Information Science
University of Madras, Chennai-600 005
E-mail: amudha75@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
IL is common to all disciplines, to environments, and to all levels of education. Developing lifelong
learners is central to the mission of higher education institutions ensuring that individuals have the
intellectual abilities of reasoning and critical thinking and by helping them construct a framework for
learning how to learn. Incorporating IL across curricula, in all programme and services, and throughout
the administrative life of the university, requires the collaborative efforts of faculty, librarians, and
administrators.
Keywords: Information literacy, information literacy standards, higher education.

1. CONCEPT
IL refers to a set of abilities requiring individuals
to "recognise when information is needed and have
the ability to locate, evaluate and use effectively
the needed information”. It forms the basis for lifelong
learning. It is common to all disciplines, to environments,
and to all levels of education. It enables learners
to master content and investigations, become more
self-directed, and assures greater control over their
own learning process. Since IL augments students'
competency with evaluating, managing, and using
information, it is now considered by several regional
and national accredited associations as a key outcome
for college students. IL is a survival skill in the
Information Age. Hence, this calls for a restructuring
of the learning process itself, rather than the curriculum.
In response to the challenges of incorporating technology
into teaching and learning and the creation of community
at a higher-level education, the primary goal of
Library and Information Professional (LIP) is to create
an electronic community in which communication,
collaboration, and information technologies are integral
48

to teaching and learning; ultimately, the aim is for
IL, which address faculty development, active student
learning, and facilities redesign. In this modern
information environment, IL and Libraries are interlinked
with each other. It is the prime role and responsibility
of the LIP to create adequate awareness, availability
and accessibility to local data for scientific progress
of the country and the world.
To quote American Library Association, "Information
literacy is a set of abilities requiring individuals to
recognise when information is needed and have the
ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the
needed information".

2. SCOPE
IL also is increasingly important in the contemporary
environment of rapid technological change and proliferating
information resources. Because of the escalating
complexity of this environment, individuals are faced
with diverse, abundant information choices—in their
academic studies, in the workplace, and in their
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

personal lives. Information is available through libraries,
community resources, special interest organisations,
media, and the Internet—and increasingly, information
comes to individuals in unfiltered formats, raising
questions about its authenticity, validity, and reliability.
In addition, information is available through multiple
media, including graphical, aural, and textual, and
these pose new challenges for individuals in evaluating
and understanding it. The uncertain quality and
expanding quantity of information pose large challenges
for society. The sheer abundance of information will
not in itself create a more informed citizenry without
a complementary cluster of abilities necessary to
use information effectively. An information literate
individual is able to:
±

Determine the extent of information needed

±

Access the needed information effectively and
efficiently

±

Evaluate information and its sources critically

±

Incorporate selected information into one's knowledge
base

±

Use information effectively to accomplish a specific
purpose

±

Understand the economic, legal, and social
issues surrounding the use of information, and
access and use information ethically and legally.

3. INFORMATION LITERACY AND HIGHER
EDUCATION
Developing lifelong learners is central to the
mission of higher education institutions. By ensuring
that individuals have the intellectual abilities of reasoning
and critical thinking, and by helping them construct
a framework for learning, colleges and universities
should provide the foundation for continued growth
throughout their careers, as well as in their roles
as informed citizens and members of communities.
IL is a key component of, and contributor to,
lifelong learning. IL competency extends learning
beyond formal classroom settings and provides practice
with self-directed investigations as individuals move
into internships, first professional positions, and
increasing responsibilities in all arenas of life. Because
information literacy augments students' competency
with evaluating, managing and using information, it
is now considered by several regional and disciplinebased accreditation associations as a key outcome
for college students.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

For students not on traditional campuses, information
resources are often available through networks and
other channels. Distributed learning technologies
permit teaching and learning to occur when the
teacher and the student are not in the same place
at the same time. The challenge for those promoting
IL in distance education courses is to develop a
comparable range of experiences in learning about
information resources as offered in traditional campuses.
IL competencies for distance learning students should
be comparable to those for "on campus"
students.Incorporating IL across curricula, in all
programmes and services, and throughout the
administrative life of the university, requires the
collaborative efforts of faculty, librarians, and
administrators. Through lectures and by leading
discussions, faculty establishes the context for
learning. Faculty also inspire students to explore
the unknown, offer guidance on how best to fulfill
information needs, and monitor students' progress.
Academic librarians coordinate the evaluation and
selection of intellectual resources for programmes
and services; organise, and maintain collections
and many points of access to information; and
provide instruction to students and faculty who seek
information. Administrators create opportunities for
collaboration and staff development among faculty,
librarians, and other professionals who initiate IL
programmes, lead in planning and budgeting for
those programmes, and provide ongoing resources
to sustain them.IL Competency Standards for Higher
Education provides a framework for assessing the
information literate individual. The competencies
presented here outline the process by which faculty,
librarians and others pinpoint specific indicators
that identify a student as information literate.

4. COMPETENCY STANDARDS FOR
HIGHER EDUCATION
There are five standards and twenty-two performance
indicators for assessing the information literate.
The standards focus upon the needs of students in
higher education at all levels. The standards also
list a range of outcomes for assessing student
progress toward IL.

4.1 Standard One
The information literate student determines the
nature and extent of the information needed.
Performance Indicators
Part 1: The information literate student defines and
articulates the need for information. The outcome
includes:
49

±

±

Confers with instructors and participates in class
discussions, peer workgroups, and electronic
discussions to identify a research topic or other
information need
Develops a thesis statement and formulates
questions based on the information need

based) in order to gather needed information
and to understand its context
±

Defines a realistic overall plan and timeline to
acquire the needed information.

Part 4: The information literate student reevaluates
the nature and extent of the information need. The
outcome includes:

±

Explores general information sources to increase
familiarity with the topic

±

Defines or modifies the information need to
achieve a manageable focus

±

Reviews the initial information need to clarify,
revise or refine the question

±

Identifies key concepts and terms that describe
the information need

±

Describes criteria used to make information
decisions and choices.

±

Recognises that existing information can be
combined with original thought, experimentation,
and/or analysis to produce new information.

4.2 Standard Two

Part 2: The information literate student identifies a
variety of types and formats of potential sources for
information. The outcome includes:
±

Knows how information is formally and informally
produced, organised, and disseminated

±

Recognises that knowledge can be organised
into disciplines that influence the way information
is accessed

±

Identifies the value and differences of potential
resources in a variety of formats (e.g., multimedia,
database, website, data set, audio/visual, book)

±

Identifies the purpose and audience of potential
resources (e.g., popular vs. scholarly, current
vs. historical)

±

±

Differentiates between primary and secondary
sources, recognising how their use and importance
vary with each discipline
Realises that information may need to be constructed
with raw data from primary sources.

Part 3: The information literate student considers
the costs and benefits of acquiring the needed
information. The outcome includes:
±

±

50

Determines the availability of needed information
and makes decisions on broadening the information
seeking process beyond local resources (e.g.,
interlibrary loan; using resources at there locations;
obtaining images, videos, text, or sound)
Considers the feasibility of acquiring a new
language or skill (e.g., foreign or discipline-

The information literate student accesses needed
information effectively and efficiently.
Performance Indicators
Part 1: The information literate student selects the
most appropriate investigative methods or information
retrieval systems for accessing the needed information.
The outcome includes:
±

Identifies appropriate investigative methods (e.g.,
laboratory experiment, simulation, fieldwork)

±

Investigates benefits and applicability of various
investigative methods

±

Investigates the scope, content, and organisation
of information retrieval systems

±

Selects efficient and effective approaches for
accessing the information needed from the
investigative method or information retrieval system.

Part 2: The information literate student constructs
and implements effectively-designed search strategies.
The outcome includes:
±

Develops a research plan appropriate to the
investigative method

±

Identifies keywords, synonyms and related terms
for the information needed

±

Selects controlled vocabulary specific to the
discipline or information retrieval source

±

Constructs a search strategy using appropriate
commands for the information retrieval system
selected (e.g., Boolean operators, truncation,

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

and proximity for search engines; internal organisers
such as indexes for books)
±

±

Implements the search strategy in various information
retrieval systems using different user interfaces
and search engines, with different command
languages, protocols, and search parameters
Implements the search using investigative protocols
appropriate to the discipline.

Part 3: The information literate student retrieves
information online or in person using a variety of
methods. The outcome includes:
±

Uses various search systems to retrieve information
in a variety of formats

±

Uses various classification schemes and other
systems (e.g., call number systems or indexes)
to locate information resources within the library
or to identify specific sites for physical exploration

±

±

Uses specialised online or in person services
available at the institution to retrieve information
needed (e.g., interlibrary loan/document delivery,
professional associations, institutional research
offices, community resources, experts and
practitioners)
Uses surveys, letters, interviews, and other
forms of inquiry to retrieve primary information.

Part 4: The information literate student refines the
search strategy if necessary. The outcome includes:
±

Assesses the quantity, quality, and relevance
of the search results to determine whether alternative
information retrieval systems or investigative
methods should be utilised

±

Identifies gaps in the information retrieved and
determines if the search strategy should be
revised

±

Repeats the search using the revised strategy
as necessary.

Part 5: The information literate student extracts,
records, and manages the information and its sources.
The outcomes include:
±

Selects among various technologies the most
appropriate one for the task of extracting the
needed information (e.g., copy/paste software
functions, photocopier, scanner, audio/visual
equipment, or exploratory instruments)

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

±

Creates a system for organising the information

±

Differentiates between the types of sources
cited and understands the elements and correct
syntax of a citation for a wide range of resources

±

Records all pertinent citation information for
future reference

±

Uses various technologies to manage the information
selected and organised.

4.3 Standard Three
The information literate student evaluates information
and its sources critically and incorporates selected
information into his or her knowledge base and
value system.
Performance Indicators
Part 1: The information literate student summarises
the main ideas to be extracted from the information
gathered. The outcome includes:
±

Reads the text and selects main ideas

±

Restates textual concepts in his/her own words
and selects data accurately

±

Identifies verbatim material that can be then
appropriately quoted.

Part 2: The information literate student articulates
and applies initial criteria for evaluating both the
information and its sources. The outcome includes:
±

Examines and compares information from various
sources in order to evaluate reliability, validity,
accuracy, authority, timeliness, and point of
view or bias

±

Analyses the structure and logic of supporting
arguments or methods

±

Recognises prejudice, deception, or manipulation

±

Recognises the cultural, physical, or other context
within which the information was created and
understands the impact of context on interpreting
the information.

Part 3: The information literate student synthesises
main ideas to construct new concepts. The outcome
includes:
±

Recognises interrelationships among concepts
and combines them into potentially useful primary
statements with supporting evidence

51

±

±

Extends initial synthesis, when possible, at a
higher level of abstraction to construct new
hypotheses that may require additional information
Utilises computer and other technologies (e.g.
spreadsheets, databases, multimedia, and audio
or visual equipment) for studying the interaction
of ideas and other phenomena.

Part 4: The information literate student compares
new knowledge with prior knowledge to determine
the value added, contradictions, or other unique
characteristics of the information. The outcome includes:
±

±

Seeks expert opinion through a variety of
mechanisms (e.g., interviews, email, listservs).

Part 7: The information literate student determines
whether the initial query should be revised. The
outcome includes:
±

Determines if original information need has been
satisfied or if additional information is needed

±

Reviews search strategy and incorporates additional
concepts as necessary

±

Reviews information retrieval sources used and
expands to include others as needed.

Determines whether information satisfies the
research or other information need

4.4 Standard Four

±

Uses consciously selected criteria to determine
whether the information contradicts or verifies
information used from other sources

The information literate student, individually or
as a member of a group, uses information effectively
to accomplish a specific purpose.

±

Draws conclusions based upon information gathered

Performance Indicators

±

Tests theories with discipline-appropriate techniques
(e.g., simulators, experiments)

±

Determines probable accuracy by questioning
the source of the data, the limitations of the
information gathering tools or strategies, and
the reasonableness of the conclusions

Part 1: The information literate student applies new
and prior information to the planning and creation
of a particular product or performance. The outcome
includes:

±

±

Integrates new information with previous information
or knowledge

Organises the content in a manner that supports
the purposes and format of the product or
performance (e.g. outlines, drafts, storyboards)

±

Articulates knowledge and skills transferred
from prior experiences to planning and creating
the product or performance

±

Integrates the new and prior information, including
quotations and paraphrasing, in a manner that
supports the purposes of the product or performance

±

Manipulates digital text, images, and data, as
needed, transferring them from their original
locations and formats to a new context.

Selects information that provides evidence for
the topic.

Part 5: The information literate student determines
whether the new knowledge has an impact on the
individual's value system and takes steps to reconcile
differences. The outcome includes:
±

Investigates differing viewpoints encountered in
the literature

±

Determines whether to incorporate or reject
viewpoints encountered.

Part 6: The information literate student validates
understanding and interpretation of the information
through discourse with other individuals, subjectarea experts, and/or practitioners. The outcome
includes:
±

Participates in classroom and other discussions

±

Participates in class-sponsored electronic
communication forums designed to encourage
discourse on the topic (e.g., email, bulletin
boards, chat rooms)

52

±

Part 2: The information literate student revises the
development process for the product or performance.
The outcome includes:
±

Maintains a journal or log of activities related
to the information seeking, evaluating, and
communicating process

±

Reflects on past successes, failures, and alternative
strategies.

Part 3: The information literate student communicates
the product or performance effectively to others.
The outcome includes:
±

Chooses a communication medium and format
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

plagiarism and does not represent work attributable
to others as his/her own

that best supports the purposes of the product
or performance and the intended audience
±

Uses a range of information technology applications
in creating the product or performance

±

±

Incorporates principles of design and communication

±

Communicates clearly and with a style that
supports the purposes of the intended audience.

Part 3: The information literate student acknowledges
the use of information sources in communicating
the product or performance. The outcome includes:
±

Selects an appropriate documentation style and
uses it consistently to cite sources

±

Posts permission granted notices, as needed,
for copyrighted material.

4.5 Standard Five
The information literate student understands
many of the economic, legal, and social issues
surrounding the use of information and accesses
and uses information ethically and legally.
Performance Indicators
Part 1: The information literate student understands
many of the ethical, legal and socio-economic issues
surrounding information and information technology.
The outcome includes:
±

Identifies and discusses issues related to privacy
and security in both the print and electronic
environments

±

Identifies and discusses issues related to free
vs. fee-based access to information

±

Identifies and discusses issues related to censorship
and freedom of speech

±

Demonstrates an understanding of intellectual
property, copyright, and fair use of copyrighted
material.

Demonstrates an understanding of institutional
policies related to human subjects research.

These outcomes serve as guidelines for faculty,
librarians, and others in developing local methods
for measuring student learning in the context of an
institution's unique mission. In addition to assessing
all students' basic information literacy skills, faculty
and librarians should also work together to develop
assessment instruments and strategies in the context
of particular disciplines, as information literacy manifests
itself in the specific understanding of the knowledge
creation, scholarly activity, and publication processes
found in those disciplines. In implementing these
standards, institutions need to recognise that different
levels of thinking skills are associated with various
learning outcomes—and therefore different instruments
or methods are essential to assess those outcomes.
It is strongly suggested that assessment methods
appropriate to the thinking skills associated with
each outcome be identified as an integral part of
the institution's implementation plan.

5. ROLE OF INFORMATION
PROFESSIONALS IN IL

Part 2: The information literate student follows laws,
regulations, institutional policies, and etiquette related
to the access and use of information resources.
The outcome includes:

The role and responsibilities of the LIP in IL
campaign can be summed as follows:

±

Participates in electronic discussions following
accepted practices (e.g. "Netiquette")

5.1 Understand the Flow of Information

±

Uses approved passwords and other forms of
ID for access to information resources

±

Complies with institutional policies on access
to information resources

±

Preserves the integrity of information resources,
equipment, systems and facilities

±

Have working knowledge of a variety of information
sources

±

Understand how information is gathered, organised,
packaged, and stored

±

Understand the publication cycle and system
of scholarly communication

±

Learn how to articulate information needs

±

Legally obtains, stores, and disseminates text,
data, images, or sound

±

Learn ways to keep current and deal with information
overload

±

Demonstrates an understanding of what constitutes

±

Understand concepts of intellectual property.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

53

±

Assess available sources of information, including
print and electronic

±

Match source of information to information need

practice. There is a clear need for discussion of IL
instruction outside the library field. A more multidisciplinary approach to IL research and instruction
will create opportunities for more substantial, curriculumintegrated and long-lasting instructional experiences
that will benefit students throughout and beyond
their academic careers.

±

Understand the difference between primary and
secondary sources.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

5.2 Assess and Select Appropriate
Resources for Information

5.3 Search and Locate Information
±

Understand structure and content of the resource
being used

±

Know how to build successful search strategies
using Boolean logic, field searching and limiters

±

Know how to alter the search if the first attempt
does not find information or finds too much
information

±

Understand how to interpret citations and use
call numbers to locate print items

±

Know how to obtain materials not available
locally.

1. Information literacy competency standards for
higher education. American Library Association,
2000. http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilcomstan.html
2. ACRL best practices initiative: Characteristics
of programs of information literacy that illustrate
best practices, working edition. American Library
Association. http://www.ala.org/acrl/nili/criteria.html
3. Bawden, D. Information and digital literacies: A
review of concepts. Journal of Documentation,
2001, 57(2), 218-59. (EJ 632 998).
4. Dewald, N. Transporting good library instruction
practices into the Web environment: An analysis
of online tutorials. Journal of Academic Librarianship,
1999, 25(1), 26-31. (EJ 586 379).

5.4 Evaluate and Interpret Information
±

Distinguish relevant from irrelevant information

±

Determine the factual accuracy of a statement

±

Critique for currency, authority, bias, opinions
and assumptions.

5.5 Extract and Organise Information
±

Understand the process of copying, saving,
downloading, e-mailing, or printing search results

±

Know how to extract relevant information and
document its source

±

Know how to organise extracted information for
practical applications.

5.6 Integrate and Document Information
±

Know how to cite sources accurately and completely

±

Understand how to integrate new information
into an existing body of knowledge.

6. CONCLUSION
However, there is much work to be done before
integrated IL across the curriculum is a standard

54

5. Elkins, E.; Ellis, J. A.; Verostek, J. & Williamson,
J. ESF 200, Information literacy: Syllabus and
workforms. 2001. SUNY ESF Moon Library. http://
www.esf.edu/moonlib/ESF200.pdf
6. Frantz, P. A scenario-based approach to credit
course instruction. Reference Services Review,
30(1), 37-42.
7. Kaip, S. It's not just for term papers: Solving
real-life problems in an information literacy course.
College & Research Libraries News, 2001, 62(5),
496-98.
8. Marcum, J. W. Rethinking information literacy.
Library Quarterly, 2002, 72(1), 1-26. (IR 545
423).
9. Orr, D.; Appleton, M. & Wallin, M. Information
literacy and flexible delivery: Creating a conceptual
framework and model. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 2001, 27(6), 457-63. (IR 545 104).
10. Snavely, L. & Cooper, N. Competing agendas
in higher education: Finding a place for information
literacy. Reference & User Services Quarterly
1997, 37(1), 53-62. (EJ 593 504).

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

11. Stoffle, C.J. Literacy 101 for the digital age.
American Libraries, 1998, 29(11), 46-48. (EJ
582 146).
12. University of Washington information literacy
learning. University of Washington, 2001. http://
www.lib.washington.edu/uwill/index.html
13. Veldof, J. & Beavers, K. Tackling mental models

for the online library tutorial. Research Strategies,
2001, 18(1), 3-20.
14. Wilson, L. A. Information literacy: Fluency across
and beyond the university. In Library user education:
Powerful learning, powerful partnerships, edited
by B.I. Dewey, Scarecrow Press, Lanham, MA,
2001.

About the Author
Dr A. Amudhavalli is presently a Professor in the Department of LIS, University of Madras,
Chapauk, Chennai. He was a Visiting Fellow of the Salzburg Fellow-2005 and International
Visitors Programme (IVP) Fellow-USA 1995. Dr Amudhavalli has contributed five publications
in the field of LIS. He has been honoured with Commonwealth Fellowship for the year 19923. He was also the member for various Committees, viz., TN State Library 2007; Editorial
Advisory Committee, SAIS, 2006 and Standing Committee, Greenstone Digital Library Software–
Asian Region. His field of specialisations are scientometrics, communication science, research
methodology & information systems & services. He is also the life member of Indian Library
Association (ILA), Indian Association of Special Libraries and Information Centres (IASLIC),
Indian Association of Teachers of Library and Information Science (IATLIS), and Madras Library
Association (MALA).

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

55

