DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 56-65
© 2008, DESIDOC

Information Literacy—Competency Standards
and Performance Indicators: An Overview
B. Ramesh Babu
Department of Information Science
University of Madras, Chennai-600 005
E-mail: beeraka_r@yahoo.co.uk

ABSTRACT
Information Literacy (IL) is an area of interest to librarians and Information professionals and it is
pivotal to the pursuit of lifelong learning process. The paper explains the concept of IL and brings out
its standards and performance indicators enunciated by IFLA and UNESCO in the context of school
libraries and higher education. The importance of IL for school libraries and public libraries are highlighted.
It also discusses the IL scenario at international level and in India and enumerates the UNESCOs declaration
at Prague towards the Information Literate Society. Finally, it stresses for the development of IL policy
in the Indian education system.
Keywords: Information literacy standards, performance indicators, information society, public libraries,
school libraries, India.

1. INTRODUCTION
IL has been the subject of many studies over
many years. The originating concept of information
literacy is generally attributed to Paul Zurkowski 1
in 1974. Indeed, since 1974 IL has been an area
of increasing interest to librarians and information
professionals and there is a huge amount of literature
on this topic. However, the majority of publications
have come from the industrialised, English-speaking
countries, especially from the United States and
Australia. IL is related to information technology
skills, but has broader implications for the individual,
the educational system, and for society IL is a
natural extension of the concept of literacy. IL education
is the catalyst required to transform the information
society of today into the learning society of tommorrow.
IL is generally seen as pivotal to the pursuit of
lifelong learning, and central to achieving both personal
empowerment and economic development. IL is a
key component and contributor to lifelong learning.
IL competency ensures maximum utilisation of the
56

information resources as well as optimisation of
information handling capabilities. IL competency
extends learning beyond formal classroom settings
and provides practice with self-directed investigations
as individuals move into internships, first professional
positions, and increasing responsibilities in all arenas
of life. Because IL augments students' competency
with evaluating, managing, and using information,
it is now considered by several regional and disciplinebased accreditation associations as a key outcome
for college students and for "on campus" students 2.

2. IL: DEFINITIONS AND MEANING
"Information literacy is an intellectual framework
for recognising the need for understanding, finding,
evaluating, and using information. These are activities
which may be supported in part by fluency with
information technology, in part by sound investigative
methods, but most importantly through critical
discernment and reasoning. IL initiates, sustains,
and extends lifelong learning through abilities that
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

may use technologies but are ultimately independent
of them" 3 .

of IL as experienced by Australian educators in two
universities:

"Information literacy—the ability to find and use
information—is the keystone of lifelong learning."

(i)

Information technology conception—using
information technology for information retrieval
and communication;

(ii)

Information sources conception—finding information;

IL is also the ability to access, evaluate, and
use information from a variety of sources. IL is a
set of abilities requiring individuals to "recognise
when information is needed and have the ability to
locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed
information." IL in terms of a set of competencies
that an informed citizen of an information society
ought to possess and to participate intelligently
and actively in that society. Most current definitions
of IL are built on that issued by ALA's Presidential
Committee on Information Literacy: 'To be information
literate an individual must recognise when information
is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate
and use effectively the information needed... Ultimately
information literate people are those who have learned
how to learn' 4 .
An information literate individual is able to:
±

Determine the extent of information needed

±

Access the needed information effectively and
efficiently

±

Evaluate information and its sources critically

±

Incorporate selected information into one's
knowledge base

±

Use information effectively to accomplish a
specific purpose

±

Understand the economic, legal, and social
issues surrounding the use of information, and
access and use information ethically and legally5.

In nutshell, IL has five broad abilities within the
context of this continuum and a lifelong learning
context:

(iii) Information process conception—executing a
process;
(iv) Information control conception—controlling
information;
(v)

Knowledge construction conception—building
up a personal knowledge base in a new area
of interest;

(vi) Knowledge extension conception—working with
knowledge and personal perspectives adopted
in such a way that novel insights are gained;
and
(vii) Wisdom conception—using information wisely
for the benefit of others.

4. IL—STANDARDS AND PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
IL standards and rubrics provide behavioural
descriptors to guide curriculum design and evaluation
of student learning. The IL standards include three
basic components: access, evaluation and use of
information. These core goals are found in most of
the standards created by library associations, such
as the relevant contributions of AASL, ACRL, SCONUL
and the Australian and New Zealand Institute for IL,
followed by the work of other countries, like Mexico,
and individual educators.

4.1 IFLA IL Standards
The IFLA IL standards are based on these
international experiences and contributions. The
IFLA standards 7,8 are grouped under the three basic
IL components.

±

Recognising the need for information

±

Knowing how to access information

±

Understanding how to evaluate information

±

Knowing how to synthesise information

Definition and articulation of the information
need:

±

Being able to communicate information

– Defines or recognises the need for information

Access
The user access information effectively and efficiently.

3. SEVEN FACES OF IL
In her book Seven Faces of Information Literacy,
Christine Bruce6 has identified following seven categories
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

±

– Decides to do something to find the information
– Express and defines the information need
– Initiates the search process.
57

±

Location of information
– Identifies, and evaluates potential sources of
information
– Develops search strategies
– Accesses the selected information sources
– Selects and retrieves the located information.

Evaluation
The user evaluates information critically and
competently.
±

Assessment of information:

– Uses the relevant acknowledgement style
standards.

4.2 IL Standards, Indicators and School
Libraries
School library is a primary source for information
and curriculum support. School library programme
functions as the information center for the school
by providing access to a full range of information
resources, in both traditional and electronic format,
and opportunities to acquire IL skills and integrated
and interdisciplinary learning activities which support
the curriculum. The mission of school library programme
is to ensure that all students and staff become
literate, lifelong learners and effective and responsible
users of ideas and information.

– Analyses, and examines, extracting information
– Generalises and interprets information
– Selects, and syntheses information
– Evaluates accuracy and relevance of the retrieved
information
±

The following three categories, nine standards,
and twenty-nine indicators describe the content
and processes related to information that students
must master to be considered well educated. 9,10
Category I: Information Literacy
The student who is information literate:

Organisation of information:
– Arranges, and categorises information

Standard 1: Accesses information efficiently and
effectively, as described by the following indicators:

– Groups and organises the retrieved information

(i)

Recognises the need for information

– Determines which is the best and most
useful information.

(ii)

Recognises that accurate and comprehensive
information is the basis for intelligent decision
making

Use
The user applies/uses information accurately
and creatively.
±

Use of information:
– Finds new ways to communicate, present
and use information
– Applies the retrieved information

±

(iv) Identifies a variety of potential sources of information
(v)

Develops and uses successful strategies for
locating information.

Standard 2: Evaluates information critically and
competently, as described by the following indicators:

– Learns, or internalises information as a
personal knowledge

(i)

Determines accuracy, relevance, and comprehensiveness

– Presents the information product

(ii)

Distinguishes among facts, point of view, and
opinion

Communication and ethical use of information:
– Understands ethical use of information

58

(iii) Formulates questions based on information needs

(iii) Identifies inaccurate and misleading information.

– Respects the legal use of information

(iv) Selects information appropriate to the problem
or question at hand.

– Communicates the learning product with
acknowledgement of intellectual property

Standard 3: Uses information effectively and creatively,
as described by the following indicators:
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

(i)

Organises information for practical application

(ii)

Integrates new information into one's own knowledge

(ii) Respects the principle of equitable access to
information.

(iii) Applies information in critical thinking and problem
solving

Standard 8: Practices ethical behaviour in regard
to information and information technology, as described
by the following indicators:

(iv) Produces and communicates information and
ideas in appropriate formats.

(i)

Respects the principles of intellectual freedom

(ii)

Respects intellectual property rights

Category II: Independent Learning
The student who is an independent learner is
information literate and:
Standard 4: Pursues information related to personal
interests, as described by the following indicators:
(i)

Seeks information related to various dimensions
of personal well-being, such as career interests,
community involvement, health matters, and
recreational pursuits

(iii) Uses information technology responsibly.
Standard 9: Participates effectively in groups to
pursue and generate information, as described by
the following indicators:
(i)

Shares knowledge and information with others

(ii)

Respects others' ideas and backgrounds and
acknowledges their contributions

Designs, develops, and evaluates information
products and solutions related to personal interests.

(iii) Collaborates with others, both in person and
through technologies, to identify information
problems and to seek their solutions

Standard 5: Appreciates and enjoys literature and
other creative expressions of information, as described
by the following indicators:

(iv) Collaborates with others, both in person and
through technologies, to design, develop, and
evaluate information products and solutions.

(i)

Is a competent and self-motivated reader

(ii)

Derives meaning from information presented
creatively in a variety of formats

The items related to IL describe the core learning
outcomes that are most obviously related to the
services provided by school library media programs.

(ii)

(iii) Develops creative products in a variety of formats.
Standard 6: Strives for excellence in information
seeking and knowledge generation, as described
by the following indicators:
(i)

Assesses the quality of the process and products
of one's own information seeking

(ii)

Devises strategies for revising, improving, and
updating self-generated knowledge.

Category III: Social Responsibility
The student who contributes positively to the
learning community and to society is information
literate and:

The items related to the other two other areas—
independent learning and social responsibility—are
grounded in information literacy and describe more
general aspects of student learning to which school
library media programmes also make important
contributions.
The latter two categories are build upon the
first so that, taken together and pursued to the
highest levels, the standards and indicators present
a profile of the information literate high-school graduate:
one who has the ability to use information to acquire
both core and advanced knowledge and to become
an independent, lifelong learner who contributes
responsibly and productively to the learning community.

Standard 7: Recognises the importance of information
to a democratic society, as described by the following
indicators:

4.3 IL Competency Standards and
Performance Indicators for Higher
Education

(i) Seeks information from diverse sources, contexts,
disciplines, and cultures

IL Competency Standards for Higher Education
provides a framework for assessing the information

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

59

literate individual. It also extends the work of the
American Association of School Librarians Task
Force on IL Standards, thereby providing higher
education an opportunity to articulate its information
literacy competencies with those of K-12 so that
a continuum of expectations develops for students
at all levels. It comprises five standards and 22
performance indicators.
The competencies presented here outline the
process by which faculty, librarians and others pinpoint
specific indicators that identify a student as information
literate 11 .
Standard One: "The information literate student
determines the nature and extent of the information
needed".

incorporates selected information into his or her
knowledge base and value system".
Performance Indicators
(i)

The information literate student summarises
the main ideas to be extracted from the information
gathered

(ii)

The information literate student articulates and
applies initial criteria for evaluating both the
information and its sources

(iii) The information literate student synthesises
main ideas to construct new concepts

Performance Indicators

(iv) The information literate student compares new
knowledge with prior knowledge to determine
the value added, contradictions, or other unique
characteristics of the information

(i)

The information literate student defines and
articulates the need for information

(v)

(ii)

The information literate student identifies a
variety of types and formats of potential sources
for information

(iii) The information literate student considers the
costs and benefits of acquiring the needed
information

The information literate student determines whether
the new knowledge has an impact on the individual's
value system and takes steps to reconcile
differences

(vi) The information literate student validates
understanding and interpretation of the information
through discourse with other individuals, subjectarea experts, and/or practitioners

(iv) The information literate student reevaluates the
nature and extent of the information need.

(vii) The information literate student determines whether
the initial query should be revised.

Standard Two: "The information literate student
accesses needed information effectively and efficiently".

Standard Four: "The information literate student,
individually or as a member of a group, uses information
effectively to accomplish a specific purpose".

Performance Indicators
Performance Indicators
(i)

(ii)

The information literate student selects the
most appropriate investigative methods or
information retrieval systems for accessing the
needed information
The information literate student constructs and
implements effectively-designed search strategies

(iii) The information literate student retrieves information
online or in person using a variety of methods
(iv) The information literate student refines the search
strategy if necessary
(v)

The information literate student extracts, records,
and manages the information and its sources.

Standard Three: "The information literate student
evaluates information and its sources critically and
60

(i)

The information literate student applies new
and prior information to the planning and creation
of a particular product or performance

(ii)

The information literate student revises the
development process for the product or performance

(iii) The information literate student communicates
the product or performance effectively to others.
Standard Five: "The information literate student
understands many of the economic, legal, and social
issues surrounding the use of information and accesses
and uses information ethically and legally".
Performance Indicators
(i)

The information literate student understands
many of the ethical, legal and socio-economic
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

issues surrounding information and information
technology

5.2 Shift to IL—Advantages to School
Libraries

The information literate student follows laws,
regulations, institutional policies, and etiquette
related to the access and use of information
resources

±

School libraries have a long history of instruction.

±

School libraries have a captive audience.

±

School librarians often enjoy close working
relationships with teachers.

±

School librarians often have a teaching background.

All the above stated standards identify that the
information literate person

±

Schools may have computer classes that ensure
basic technology skills.

±

Recognises the need for information and determines
the nature and extent of the information needed

±

±

Finds needed information effectively and efficiently

Community concerns about Internet use can
be used to encourage a curriculum-wide focus
on evaluation and critical thinking.

±

Critically evaluates information and the information
seeking process

5.3 Shift to IL—Challenges for School
Libraries

±

Manages information collected or generated

±

±

Applies prior and new information to construct
new concepts or create new understandings

School libraries and librarians are in danger of
being seen as "not necessary now that we
have the Internet" by schools under budget
constraints

±

Uses information with understanding and
acknowledges cultural, ethical, economic, legal,
and social issues surrounding the use of
information.12

±

School budgets may not allow for advances in
information technology

±

Community concerns about Internet use can
be used to resist technology and student-driven
Internet use

±

Teachers and computer lab staff may resist
collaboration and change

±

Students tend to resist evaluation when information
is so readily available.

(ii)

(iii) The information literate student acknowledges
the use of information sources in communicating
the product or performance.

5. IL AND SCHOOL LIBRARIES
Information literacy standards for libraries aims
at:
±

±

±

Moving away from "how to use the library"
towards teaching the information process—
recognising a need, meeting it, evaluating the
result
Moving away from limited and discrete library
assignments towards integrated instruction with
classroom teachers
Moving away from basic technology skills towards
information problem-solving skills that may or
may not involve technology. 13

5.1 Why is IL Important for School Libraries?
Students need their own internal navigation system
to manage the information rich environment that
now surrounds them. Without the ability to sift,
process, and evaluate information, students will be
literally unable to function. IL requirements are being
integrated into state and national curriculum standards.
School librarians are the natural in-house experts
for teaching both students and colleagues how to
find, evaluate and use information effectively.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

6. IL AND PUBLIC LIBRARIES
The most pertinent role of the public library is
a supporting one. IL will continue to be a moving
target for public libraries. If the concept of information
literacy is taken to its fullest extent, the challenge
of the public library is to get involved in the knowledge
construction process of school children in collaboration
with school teachers and school librarians. The
challenge for the public library is to consider how
to provide intellectual access and actively support
the construction of knowledge of its target groups.
The public library is one type of library in a
continuum of libraries concerned with IL and lifelong
learning. It has a major part to play, if it decides
not only to provide readymade answers and access
to resources, but takes on an educational role
61

being actively involved in the knowledge construction
processes of its target groups in collaboration with
other stakeholders.
Public library authorities and public librarians
should impart IL competencies to the public library
users. The importance of public libraries would be
felt more strongly, if the public libraries attract
common citizens and younger generations and such
librarians meet the information needs of all walks
of user 14 . Public libraries can be a vital force in
developing and serving information literate citizens.
By responding effectively to ever-changing literacy
needs, public libraries can be a welcoming oasis
in the Information Age.

6.1 Why is IL Important for Public Libraries?
All citizens need their own internal navigation
system to manage the information rich environment
that now surrounds them. Public libraries play a
special role in bridging the "digital divide" between
those with home computers and those without.
Citizens who lack the ability find, evaluate and use
information effectively may be left behind in terms
of job opportunities, lifelong learning, quality of life,
and even access to basic services. Like basic literacy
and reading, IL is a natural fit for public libraries.

6.2 Shift to IL—Advantages to Public
Libraries
±

Public libraries are already key places for information
access.

±

Public librarians know what people want and
can tailor learning to high-interest areas.

±

Public fascination with Internet use can be
used to encourage a district-wide focus on
both technology training and information literacy.

±

Public concern with Internet use can be used
to help government recognize the key role libraries
play in both providing access and teaching
critical thinking and evaluation skills.

6.3 Shift to IL—Challenges for Public
Libraries
±

No captive audience, the audience is diverse
and can be hard to reach

±

Public library patrons expect service, not teaching,
at the reference desk

±

Public library patrons often need technology
literacy as well as IL

±

Instruction is relatively new to public libraries

62

±

Information literacy standards for public libraries
do not exist. 15

7. IFLA'S ROLE IN IL IN THE 21ST
CENTURY
The role of International Federation of Library
Associations (IFLA) in defining IL in the future is
one of balance and inclusiveness. IFLA has a role
in broadening the practical definition to include all
forms of IL for all people. IFLA has included information
literacy statements in many of its policy documents,
including The IFLA Internet Manifesto, The IFLA/
UNESCO School Library Manifesto, and The UNESCO
Public Library Manifesto 16. More recently, one can
see the impact of IFLA's activities in section C4 of
the World Summit of the Information Society Plan
of Action, which reads, "Everyone should have the
necessary skills to benefit from the Information
Society" and goes on to refer to ICT (Information
and Communication Technology) literacy and later
e-literacy. However, there is much more work to be
done in specifying how ITC literacy and e-literacy
will be developed and implemented in tandem with
the delivery of the ICT.
In addition to continuing its IL related lobbying
efforts and partnerships with other organisations,
IFLA has a role in supporting the creation of standards
against which librarians and libraries can evaluate
all forms of IL, in supporting and valuing all forms
of IL, and in continuing to provide various forums
in which all interested parties can share their successes
in defining IL in their own environments.

8. IL SCENARIO AT GLOBAL LEVEL
IL has become a global issue calling for greater
attention. As a result several countries have taken
initiatives in starting National and International
programmes. The UNESCO, IFLA, ALA and host of
other organisations and associations have developed
ample number of plans and strategies. One such
worth mentioning attempt is by the UNESCO. Its
famous Prague declaration entitled, 'Towards an
Information Literate Society,' is an outcome of the
IL Meeting of Experts (20-23 September 2004, Geneva)
that highlights the immediate actions to be taken
for the promotion of IL by all the countries in the
world. The significant aspects listed in the document
are given below:
(i)

The creation of Information Society is key to
social, cultural and economic development of
nations and communities, institutions and individuals
in the 21st century and beyond
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

(ii)

IL encompasses knowledge of one's information
concerns and needs, and ability to identify
locate, evaluate, organise and effectively create,
use and communicate information to address
issues or problems at hand; it is a prerequisite
for participating effectively in the information
society, and is part of the basic human right
of lifelong learning

(iii) IL, in conjunction with access to essential
information and effective use of ICT use of
information and communicating technologies,
plays a leading role in reducing the inequalities
within and among countries and peoples and
in promoting tolerance and natural understanding
through information use in multicultural and
multilingual contexts
(iv) Governments should develop strong inter disciplinary
program to promote IL nationwide as a necessary
step in closing the digital divide through creation
of an information literate citizenry an effective
civil society and a competitive workforce
(v)

IL is a concern to all sectors and should be
tailored by each to its specific needs and
context

(vi) IL should be an integral part of education for
all, which can contribute critically to the achievement
of the United Nations Millennium Development
Goals, and respect for the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. 17,18
In the last decade IL has become a global
issue and many IL initiatives have been documented
throughout the world, with particularly strong efforts
and examples in North America, Australia, South
Africa and Northern Europe. These programmes
addressed many concerns relative to ICT and information
skills. In education, teachers, librarians and others
are working to integrate information skills instruction
within the curricula to achieve relevant learning
outcomes.
In the US and Australia, government recognition
of information competencies has been informed by
high-profile IL led by the profession. Examples
include the ALA Presidential Committee on Information
Literacy (1987), US Forum on Information Literacy
(1989), Association of College and Research Libraries
Institute for Information Literacy (1997) and Information
Literacy Competency Standards (2000), Australian
Library and Information Association Information Literacy
Task Force (1997), Australia and New Zealand Institute
for Information Literacy and Australian Universities
Librarians Information Literacy Standards (2000).
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

There is also a Nordic Information Literacy Institute
and IFLA Sectional Committee on Information Literacy
which is being established. 19

9. IL IN INDIA
In India concept of IL in the library and information
science (LIS) literature is very recent, but related
terms, concepts and services are present in research
and practice in India during the 1990s. IL cuts
across many different disciplines and across professional
and even political agendas: librarians, teachers and
faculty, experts in educational technology, learning
facilitators, all contribute to the training in IL of
citizens, even while unaware of the concept and its
implications. In recent reviews in primary and secondary
compulsory education and the higher education sectors,
all these are related in several ways to the IL
experience.20 Recording the evolution and achievements
of IL in India is not an easy task because of its
great variety, but in recent years LIS institutions in
India have gone through an accelerated pace in
development which certainly has had a strong positive
influence for all IL-related activities and services
and for the widespread acceptance of the concept
itself. A number of seminars and workshops are
being conducted in India, thanks to the generous
grants from UNESCO. In addition to this universities
are conducting seminars and symposia. For example,
the University of Madras has organised a National
seminar on Information Literacy and Higher Education
during 29-30 January 2007.

10. CONCLUSION
IL guidelines can be reviewed, and changed
(adapted) by librarians according to the priorities
of their institution, so that IL elements can be
better suited to local or national needs. Local budget,
policies, procedures, and priorities need to be taken
into account in their application. The guidelines are
a checklist of subjects to keep in mind during the
planning and implementation of IL programme or to
reinforce previous information literacy work.21 Information
professionals must keep in mind that they need to
do whatever they can with the resources that they
may have. It is better to do something than to wait
for the crafting of the perfect IL programme.
IL demands a new way of thinking about learning
and teaching which may be in conflict with cultural
standards and expectations concerning the roles of
students and educators. Incorporating IL across
curricula, services, the collaborative efforts of faculty,
librarians, lectures and by leading discussions. Faculty

63

also inspire students to explore the unknown, best
to fulfill information needs, and monitor students'
programmes and services; organise, of access to
information; who seek information and staff development
among faculty, librarians, initiate IL programmes,
programmes, and provide ongoing resources to sustain
them. IL programme is well positioned to develop
these skills, thanks to its learning-how-to-learn
framework, which is fully articulated in the IL standards
devised by various associations (ACRL, IFLA, ALA,
ALIA, ANZIIL etc.). There is little recognition of the
learning-how-to-learn or the knowledge construction
approaches in the Indian education system, and
these omissions should be addressed through the
development of an IL policy that is embedded in
Indian national learning agenda.

REFERENCES
1. Spitzer, K.L.; Eisenberg, M.B. & Lowe, C.A.
Information literacy: Essential skills for the information
age. Eric Clearinghouse on Information and
Technology, Syracuse, New York, 1998.
2. Karisiddappa, C.R. Information literacy. In National
Seminar on Information Literacy and Higher Education.
University of Madras, 29-30 January 2007, Chennai.
3. Australian and New Zealand information literacy
framework: Principles, standards and practice,
Second edition, edited by A. Bundy. Australian
and New Zealand Institute for Information Literacy,
Adelaide, 2004, p.4.
4. Snavely, L. Information literacy standards for
higher education: An international perspective,
In IFLA Council and General Conference on
Libraries and Librarians: Making a Difference in
the Knowledge Age, Boston, MA, 16-21 August
2001, pp. 1-4.
5. Martin, A. Towards e-literacy. In Information
and IT literacy, edited by A. Martin & H. Rader.
Facet Publishing, London, 2003, pp. 3-23.
6. Bruce, C. Seven Faces of Information Literacy.
ASLIB Press. Adelaide, 1997.
7. IFLA/UNESCO School Library Manifesto, revised.
16 February 2000. http://www.ifla.org/VII/s11/
pubs/manifest.htm.
8. Information literacy standards for student learning.
Prepared by the AASL/AECT National guidelines
vision committee Draft #5 7 October 1996.

64

9. Alaska Association of School Librarians (AkASL).
Library/Information Literacy Standards Board
Approved, 10 December 1999.
10. American Association of School Libraries. The
nine information literacy standards for student
learning. 2003 http://www.ala.org/aaslTemplate.
cfm?Section=Information Power&Template=/Content
Management/ContentDisplay.cfm& Content
ID=19937
11. ACRL. Information Literacy Competency Standards
for Higher Education. Chicago: Association of
College and Research Libraries. http://www.ala.org/
ala/acrl/acrlstandards/standards.pdf
12. Byerly, Greg & Brodie, Carolyn S. Information
literacy skills models: Defining the choices. In
Learning and Libraries in an Information Age
Principles and Practice, edited by K. Barbara.
K Stripling, Littleton CO: Libraries Unlimited,
1999.
13. Cavalier, R. Information literacy: Why worry?
edited by D. Booker. In Information literacy:
The Australian agenda. University of South
Australia, Adelaide, 1993, pp.17-27.
14. UNESCO Public Library Manifesto, 1994. http://
www.ifla.org/documents/libraries/policies/unesco.
htm.
15. IFLA. UNESCO Public Library Manifesto, revised
16 July 1998. http://www.ifla.org/VII/s8/unesco/
eng.htm.
16. Senn, Breivik P. Information Literacy: What's it
all about? In Information literacy: The Australian
Agenda. Proceedings of Conference held at University
of South Australia Library on 2-4 December
1992, Adelaide, p.8.
17. Karisiddappa, C.R. Literacy concepts in LIS
curriculum: Perspective from India. Paper presented
at 70th IFLA World Library and Information Congress
held at Buenos Aires, Argentina, 21-28 August
2004.
18. Karisiddappa, C.R. Information literary and capability
building. In World Social Forum—2004. Proceedings
of International Workshop on Democratisation
of Information: Focus on Libraries organised by
NIGD and TISS, 2004.
19. World Summit on the Information Society: Declaration
of Principles. IFLA Journal, 2004, 30(1), 72.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

20. Thompson, H.M. & Henley, S.A. Fostering information
literacy: Connecting national standards, Goals
2000, and the SCANS Report, Englewood, Colorado:
Libraries Unlimited Inc., 2000.

21. Bruce, C. Information literacy: A framework for
higher education. Australian Library Journal,
1995, 44, 158-69.

About the Author

Dr B Ramesh Babu is working as Professor in the Department of Information Science at
the University of Madras. He has been awarded Dr S.R. Ranganathan Memorial Gold Medal
by the University of Mysore for the first rank in MLISC; C. D. Sharma Best Paper Award
by the Indian Library Association in 1999; and READIT 2001 Best Paper Award by the IIT
Madras, Chennai. He was also awarded Commonwealth Fellowship for Postdoctoral
Research in 1999-2000 and worked on Web OPACs in the UK academic library in the Department
of Information Science, Loughbourough University, UK. Dr Babu has published more than 200
research papers in national and international seminars/workshops on various aspects of LIS.
He is Resource Person at various distance education institutes and has served as UGC Visiting
Fellow at Sambalpur University; Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Marathwada University (four times); and
Andhra University (two times). He is life member of ILA, IASLIC, IATLIS, MALA, APLA, ALSD,
FIC, MULISSA Net and TLA.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

65

