DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 66-72
© 2008, DESIDOC

Information Literacy—Need for an Urgent Action
in India: A Strategic Approach
Ramesha
Department of LIS, Bangalore University
Jhana Bharathi, Bangalore-560 056
E-mail: bramesha@rediffmail.com

ABSTRACT
The paper discusses lagging behind of the developing countries (with special reference to India)
in taking initiatives and carrying out projects for developing, promoting and implementing information
literacy (IL) education and training programmes and projects. Pointing to the IL situation in both academic
and corporate context as well as in the context of business and management education, it emphasises
that without a push of external help through financial aid and professional expertise. India would not
be able to properly address, both the IL issue and the prerequisite issues of upgrading and developing
their information and information systems infrastructure. It proposes strategy for addressing the IL
issues which would help individual institutions to intensify and broaden their existing activities in the field
of IL promotion and implementation and start new ones wherever necessary.
Keywords: Information literacy, ICT, skill-based literacies, information literacy in India.

1. INTRODUCTION
Information literacy (IL) is a set of abilities
requiring individuals to "recognise when information
is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate,
and use effectively the needed information" . 1 IL is
increasingly important in the contemporary environment
of rapid technological change and proliferating information
resources. Because of the escalating complexity
of this environment, individuals are faced with diverse,
abundant information choices—in their academic
studies, in the workplace, and in their personal
lives. Information is available through libraries, community
resources, special interest organisations, media,
and the Internet. Information comes to individuals
in unfiltered formats, raising questions about its
authenticity, validity, and reliability. In addition, information
is available through multiple media, including graphical,
aural, and textual, which pose new challenges for
individuals in evaluating and understanding it. The
uncertain quality and expanding quantity of information
pose large challenges for society.2 The sheer abundance
66

of information will not in itself create a more informed
citizenry without a complementary cluster of abilities
necessary to use information effectively. IL forms
the basis for lifelong learning. It is common to all
disciplines, to all learning environments, and to all
levels of education. It enables learners to master
content and extend their investigations, become
more self-directed, and assume greater control over
their own learning. There is big gap between India
and rest of the developed countries as they have
been striking a asymmetry in the access and use
of the vast repositories of information and knowledge
available in the world.
Despite the widely spread use of the information
and telecommunications technology (ICT) in India,
it seems that the situation has not significantly
ameliorated. India continues to suffer from low utilisation
of the most important resource of the present time:
information and knowledge. One of the reasons for
this is the information illiteracy of all segments of
society. Lack of knowledgeable, skilled and efficient
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

use of information and knowledge causes wastage
of other resources and directly effects the productivity
in all spheres of life and work—in education, research,
business and administration. India is short of the
multiple impact of the efficient use of the information
and knowledge resources. Therefore, urgent and
energetic addressing of the IL issue in India is
necessary so that further widening of the gap between
India and the rest of developed countries be abridged.

2. IL: CONCEPT, MEANING AND
DEFINITIONS
Information is available from many sources and
in many formats, such as printed text, television,
videos, library databases, websites, etc. To be a
information literate, one need to know why, when,
and how to use of all these tools and think critically
about the information they provide. IL is concerned
with teaching and learning about the whole range
of information sources and formats.
IL aims to develop both critical understanding
and active participation. It enables people to interpret
and make informed judgments as users of information
sources; but it also enables them to become producers
of information in their own right, and thereby more
powerful participants in society. IL is about developing
people's critical and creative abilities. Digital media,
particularly the Internet, has significantly increased
the potential for active participation; but it has also
created an environment of bewildering choices. IL
is broadly the skill which allows us to express, to
explore and to understand the flow of ideas among
individuals and groups of people in a vastly changing
technological environment … the process, skills
and habits of accessing and using ideas and information
are undergoing revolutionary changes. IL refers to
this set of complex, integrated, higher-level skills
appropriate to our age 3 .
IL is the ability to access, evaluate, and use
information from a variety of sources. As students
prepare for the 21st century, traditional instruction
in reading, writing, and mathematics needs to be
coupled with practice in communication, critical
thinking, and problem solving skills 4 .
The American Library Association's definition
of the term5 is, 'to be information literate an individual
must recognise when information is needed and
have an ability to locate, evaluate and use effectively
the information needed. Ultimately information literate
people are those who have learned how to learn.
They know how to learn because they know how
information is organised, how to find information
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

and how to use information in such a way that
others can learn from them'.
Hughes and Jackson 6 express it simply, ‘IL
involves knowing your way around in the information
world'. IL has been defined as a set of abilities to
'recognise when information is needed and have the
ability to locate, evaluate, and use needed information
effectively’.7
More specifically, IL can be defined as a set
of abilities to:
±

Determine the extent of information needed

±

Locate and evaluate information

±

Incorporate selected information into one's knowledge
base

±

Use information ethically, legally and with an
understanding of economic and social issues.

3. IMPACT OF ICT
Empowerment of people through IL is an important
prerequisite for harnessing ICTs for education and
fostering equitable access to information and knowledge.
IL enhances the pursuit of knowledge by equipping
individuals with the skills and abilities for critical
reception, assessment and use of information in
their professional and personal lives. IL is related
to information technology skills, but has broader
implications for the individual, the educational system,
and for society. Information technology skills enable
an individual to use computers, software applications,
databases, and other technologies to achieve a
wide variety of academic, work-related, and personal
goals. Information literate individuals necessarily
develop some technology skills. 8
The process of IL requires not only the learning
of a constellation of skills but also a new way of
thinking in order to derive meaning from learning.
Technological storage and sharing of information
has increased the availability of data tremendously.
Much of this information is available only through
telecommunications. IL in telecommunications is
achieved when learners know when to use online
resources, how to access information competently,
how to evaluate information as to accuracy and
pertinence for each need, and how to communicate
this information effectively. Learners who are able
to do this will have lifelong skills they will need in
the Information Age. 9
Since Internet is a common information and
communication tool, IL is often understood as digital
67

literacy. Computer/digital literacy is a first essential,
but beyond that there remains the huge black hole
of information; that is the awareness that information
can be of help, that the resources exist if one can
know where to look, that the skills to use the
resources can be learned, and that once the information
is acquired there is still some critical evaluation yet
to be done.

other, information resources. The term has somewhat
fallen into disrepute as being too much, even exclusively,
centred on library resources, though in practice it
has often encompassed a broader scope: 'good
library instruction has always transcended what its
name implies' . 13

4. SKILL-BASED LITERACIES

This term is used to imply critical thinking in
assessing information gained from the mass media
like television, radio, newspapers and magazines,
and (increasingly) the Internet. 'Media literacy, the
movement to expand notions of literacy to include
the powerful post-print media that dominate our
informational landscape, helps people understand,
produce and negotiate meanings in a culture made
up of powerful images, words and sounds. A media
literate person—and everyone should have the opportunity
to become one—can decode, evaluate, analyse and
produce both print and electronic media' 14 . Media
literacy has an obvious overlap with more general
concepts of information literacy, since the information
gained from these sources often overlaps with, and
complements, that from more formal library sources.

The initial concept of literacy, which goes
considerably beyond simple ability to read and write,
has been complemented in recent decades by 'skillbased literacies', concepts developed to deal with
an information of increasing complexity and developing
technologies.

4.1 Library Literacy
Bawden emphasised self-sufficiency as an essential
part of library literacy, arguing that this allows 'the
ability to make an intelligent decision about the
best way to answer an articulated question, to
pursue a more or less efficient organised search for
the answer, and to know when the intervention of
a specialist is necessary' 10. Gilton regards library
literacy 'not as the presence or absence of skills,
but as progressive stages...the library literate can
follow a systematic path or search strategy to locate
texts and evaluate the relevance of the information'11.
She suggests, by analogy with the progressive stages
of literacy itself, from total illiteracy to full literacy,
there may be several stages of library literacy:
±

Pre-library literacy (library illiteracy)—the individual
cannot find a book on the shelf without assistance.

±

Semi-library literacy—the individual can find
books in a catalogue and on the shelf, and find
articles in simple readers' guides

±

Library literate—the individual can follow a systematic
search strategy to locate and evaluate the most
relevant information on a given topic

±

Library fluent—understands patterns of
communication and publication and is able to
generalise and modify a search strategy to
meet a variety of information needs.

Library literacy is often taken as synonymous
with 'bibliographic instruction', library skills, and
the like. It was one of a number of terms considered
by Snavely 12 as alternatives to IL to best describe
the newer type of formal instruction in library, and
68

4.2 Media Literacy

4.3 Computer/IT Literacy
Computer literacy according to chambers English
Dictionary is competence in the use of computers.
This definition conceals the fact that there is a
spectrum of views as to what this 'competence'
involves, somewhat analogous to the variation in
definition of 'literacy'. Most common has been a
pragmatic skills-based approach. In practice, this
translates to an introduction to the skills required
to operate a variety of computer applications packages—
word processing, databases, spreadsheets, etc.
together with some general IT skills, such as copying
disks and generating hard-copy printout. The text
introduces these skills in a structured format of
overview, build-up exercises, checklist of commands,
self-assessment tests, and assignments.
Kuhlthau advanced the concept of IL further
when she included library skills and computer literacy
in the definition 15. Kuhlthau's work pointed the way
toward the integration of IL with curriculum and
presages the current development of the concept
of IL with the library media center as the starting
platform. Bawden and Robinson 16 also find it helpful
to distinguish between 'skills-based literacies', such
as computer or library literacy, which essentially
indicate a competence in handling information in a
particular setting or context or format, and more
general capabilities 16 . These wider conceptions of
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

IL stress capabilities beyond a simple competence
in retrieving or communicating information. They
highlight that to deal with the complexities of the
current information environment, a complex and
broad form of literacy is required. It must subsume
all the skill-based literacies, but cannot be restricted
to them, nor can it be restricted to any particular
technology or set of technologies, and understanding,
meaning and context must be central to it.
IT literacy as having two clear components 17
skills in the use of tools, which is regarded as very
useful but extremely limited, and an understanding
of how the technological world works. IT literacy,
ability to evaluate critically the benefits and costs
of information technologies, the term information
technology literacy, or IT literacy, may also have
carried with it an initial connotation of a somewhat
broader perspective than computer literacy. However,
in practice the terms have been used largely
synonymously—certainly so in a library/information
context—to indicate a set of basic competencies
with computer and telecommunications systems.
All these skills-based literacies emerged to meet
the needs of a more complex information environment,
with new technologies, and a wider variety of media
and services. Centred around a core of skills, all
of them moved beyond this, showing that, as with
literacy itself, these seemingly simple forms of
literacy require a wide spectrum of skills, knowledge,
understanding and attitudes. This leads to a consideration
of a form of literacy appearing from the outset to
be based on rather wider premises than one or
more skills: IL.

5. INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO DEVELOP
IL
5.1 The USA
Librarians all over the world are teaching people
a variety of library and information skills. Each year
since 1973 the number of publications related to
user instruction and IL are increasing. During the
past decade many librarians are sharing their experiences
and expertise related to information skills at various
national and international conferences.
In the USA some professional organisations
related to education, law, nursing and medicine
have already begin to address lifelong educational
needs for their professionals. In Australia, Bruce
and Christine 18 have expertly defined IL as seven
distinct areas, viz, information technology, information
sources, information process, information control,
information construction, information extension, and
wisdom experience.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

5.2 The UK
During the past three decades academic and
schools librarians in the UK are actively involved in
developing theories and programmes related to user
instruction and IL. The ex-polytechnic universities
and schools in particular have experimented with
and set up a variety of information skills and instruction
programmes. In 1998, SCONUL (Society of College,
National and University Libraries) created a task
force to prepare a statement on information skills
for higher education. SCONUL proposed seven sets
of skills developed from a basic competence in
library and information technology skills. In March
2002, Scotland hosted an international conference
on Information Technology and IL addressing a variety
of topics related to IL teaching and information
technology.

5.3 Australia
Australian Library and Information Association
policies and guidelines reflect the general position
of the Association on issues that have an impact
on the library and information sector, and provide
direction and advice to those who choose to consider
the policies and guidelines for their own use.

5.4 Africa
Librarians in several African countries are working
on global information environment by teaching information
skills. At the University of Botswana, librarians
have integrated information skills instruction throughout
the curriculum. In recent years, South African librarians
and teachers have collaborated to improve learning
instruction for lifelong learning. A noteworthy project
with help from the Ford Foundation and the Readers
Digest Foundation has helped the Western Cape
Librarians develop curriculum-integrated IL programmes
in academic institutions.

5.5 Canada
The information policy of the Canadian government
among many other information concerns promotes
an information-literate population. During the past
three decades, Canadian academic librarians have
been teaching their students library and information
skills. Instructional librarians in academic libraries
are continuing to address the challenge of integrating
information skills instruction into the total curriculum.

6. IL IN INDIA
The National Literacy Mission (NLM) in India
was set up in May 1988, with an objective to assess
69

the strengths and weaknesses of the earlier programmes,
and to accord a new sense of urgency, seriousness
and emphasis with fixed goals, clear time frame
and age-specific target groups. The NLM defines
literacy as acquiring the skills of reading, writing,
and arithmetic, and the ability to apply them to
day-to-day life. In order to address the challenges
of ICT cost of connectivity and IT literacy, Information
Technology Task Force was formed in 1998. Accordingly,
the IT Action Plan for India is also prepared containing
108 recommendations covering both bottleneck areas
and broad promotional measures that are crucial
for boosting IT in India19 The year 2000 saw another
remarkable development in the application of ICTs
in India. In order to boost e-commerce in India, the
government passed the Information Technology Bill
in May 2000. It is considered as the nations' bold
initiative to set up regulatory and legal framework
for e-commerce. It provides a legislation to facilitate
e-commerce and to tackle the growing number of
cyber crimes 20 .
By and large most of the e-Governance and
computerisation initiatives across the country use
ICT as a means to achieve a more effective delivery
of government services and better governance in
general. Government initiatives across the country,
such as computerisation and networking of departments,
call for training the people to become IL.Looking at
the literature published in India; it is observed that
there is very little output. There are no specific
standards, reports and policy guidelines for IL brought
out either by government, professional associations
or the institutes of higher learning.

7. PROPOSED STRATEGY
There is an ongoing need for clear, coherent
and authoritative documents that define IL and provide
a rationale for its implementation in India. National
document or policy statement of this kind will also
need to be followed up with an ongoing process of
monitoring at a national level. In addition to broad
statements of purpose, there is a need for more
specific documentation outlining frameworks for curriculum
development and practice. A document of this kind
would need to include a clear model of learning
progression, details of specific learning outcomes,
expressed in terms of competencies; and criteria
and procedures for evaluation and assessment. Wellintended documents and frameworks are worthless
without trained staff to implement them. Elements
of training in IL should be included in initial and inservice training programmes, and be available as
part of teachers' ongoing professional development.
Distance and Open University learning may be appropriate
70

in many circumstances, but this should be complemented
by sustained opportunities for face-to-face tuition
and through EDUSAT programme.
Despite the changing and sometimes ephemeral
nature of the content of media education, teaching
materials can have a long shelf life if they are
carefully and professionally produced. IL does not
by any means have to be a 'high tech' enterprise,
but it should at least reflect the levels of access
that students and teachers have to technology outside
the campus/school environment.
IL practice should obviously reflect current theoretical
advances in our understanding of people's relationships
with media, and of pedagogy. In terms of pedagogy,
issues that are in need of more systematic and
sustained research might include the nature of student
learning about the course; the relations between
'conceptual' and 'affective' dimensions of course
education; and the relations between 'theory' and
'practice'.
There is a need for international dialogues and
exchanges to be sustained, rather than merely in
the form of one-off conferences taking place every
year. International exchange will be much less superficial
if practitioners have more sustained opportunities
to visit each others countries, e.g., through a system
of longer-term internships.
All the above elements are inter-related. If any
one of these is missing or weakened, it puts the
entire construction at risk. For instance, policy
documentation or curriculum frameworks in the absence
of professional development can be merely a matter
of empty rhetoric. Professional development and
self-organisation by teachers is fairly meaningless
if there are no clear curriculum frameworks for them
to work within. Policy, teaching and research should
be interconnected: development in one area should
support development in the others.

8. CONCLUSION
IL—the ability to access, evaluates, and use
information from a variety of sources—is central to
all successful learning and by extension to all successful
living. IL and digital literacy are central topics for
the information science. They are associated with
issues as varied as information overload, lifelong
learning, knowledge management, and the growth
of the information society. Naturally, they have been
much discussed in the literature, but not perhaps,
as much as their importance deserves; in particular,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

they have not impinged much on the practitioner.
Practical implementation of, and support for, these
sets of skills, understandings and attitudes, apart
from the library instruction setting, has been patchy
at best. This may in part be due to the confusion
caused by the varied terminologies and meanings
as discussed in this paper. The discussion above
is intended to clarify the subject area, and hopefully
lead to greater take-up of these ideas. Two main
points emerge. First, it is possible, and clearly
appealing, for those interested in this area to spend
a great deal of time discussing the finer points of,
usually mutually contradictory, definitions. The best
antidote to this is to adopt a Popperian position of
explaining, rather than defining terms. The labels
attached to these concepts do not matter; the concepts
themselves, and their significance for practice, do.
Second, it is tempting, again as is clear from the
discussion, to express these ideas in terms of sets
of particular skills to be learnt, and competences
to be demonstrated. While this may be valid for
some limited purposes, it is too restrictive overall;
even in the supposed skill-based literacies, broader
considerations soon intrude.
To deal with the complexities of the current
information environment, a complex and broad from
of literacy is required. It must subsume all the skillbased literacies, but cannot be restricted to them,
nor can it be restricted to any particular technology
or set of technologies. Understanding, meaning and
context must be central to it. It is not of importance
whether this is called IL, digital literacy, or simply
literacy for an information age. What is important
is that it should be actively promoted, as a central
core of principles and practice of the information
sciences.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank and gratitude to
Prof. C.R. Karisiddappa, Director, Academic Staff
College, Karnatak University, Dharwad for reading
and commenting on draft of this paper.

3. Sirje, Virkus. Information literacy in Europe: A
literature review. Information Research, 2003, 8(4).
4. Developing minds: A resource book for teaching
thinking, edited by A.L. Costa. VA: Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development,
Alexandria, (ED 262 968), 1985.
5. American Library Association Presidential Committee
on Information Literacy. Final Report. Washington,
DC, 1989.
6. Hughes, S. & Jackson, B.A.. The teacher-librarian
in transformational change. The Canadian School
Executive, 1996, 15(8), 20-21.
7. Association of College and Research Libraries.
Information Literacy Competency Standards for
Higher Education. Chicago: ACRL. 2000. http://
www.ala.org/acrl/ilcomstan.html
8. ACRL.. Characteristics of Programs of Information
Literacy that Illustrate Best Practices: A Guideline.
Retrieved from the American Library Association,
2003. http://www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlstandards/
characteristics.htm.
9. Doyle, C.S. Outcome measures for information
literacy within the national education goals of
1990. Final Report to National forum on Information
Literacy. Summary of findings. (ED 351 033), 1992.
10. Bawden, D. Information and digital literacies:
A review of concepts. Journal of Documentation,
2001, 57(2), 218-59.
11. Gilton, Donna L. A world of difference: Preparing
for information literacy instruction for diverse
groups. Multicultural Review, 1994, 3(3), 38-35.
12. Snavely, Loanne. Information literacy standards
for higher education: An international perspective.
In 67th IFLA Council and General Conference,
16-25 August 2001. IFLA, The Hague. http://
www.ifla.org/IV/ifla67/papers/073-126e.pdf

REFERENCES
1. Bruce, C. The seven faces of information literacy.
Auslib, Blackwood, South Australia, 1997.
2. National Research Council. Commission on Physical
Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications. Committee
on Information Technology Literacy, Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board. In Being
fluent with information technology. National Academy
Press, Washington, DC, 1999. http://www.nap.edu/
catalog/6482.html
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

13. Breivik, P. S. & Gee, E. G. Information literacy:
Revolution in the library New York: American
Council on Education & Macmillan Publishing,
1989.
14. Livingstone, S., Van Couvering, E. & Thumim,
N. Adult media literacy: A review of the research
literature. Office of Communications, 2005. http://
www.ofcom.org.uk/advice/media_literacy/medlitpub/
aml.pdf
71

15. Kuhlthau, C.C. Information skills for an information
society: A review of research. Syracuse, New
York: ERIC clearinghouse on information resources
(ED 297 740), 1987.
16. Bawden, D. & Robinson, L. Training for information
literacy: Diverse approaches. Proceedings of
the International Online Information Meeting,
London, 4-6 December 2001. Learned Information
Europe Ltd, Oxford, 2001, pp. 87-90.
17. Information and IT literacy: Enabling learning in
the 21st Century, edited by Martin & H. Rader.
Facet, London, 2003.

18. Bruce, Christine. Information literacy research:
Dimensions of the emerging collective
consciousness. Australian Academic & Research
Libraries, 2000, pp. 90-109.
19. http://www.alia.org.au/policies/information literacy.
html
20. Bakshi, Prashant. Wired India. Knowledge World,
New Delhi, 2005, pp. 45-71.
21. Joshi, Akshay. Information age and India. Knowledge
World, New Delhi, 2005. pp. 143-81.

"Information literacy is the adoption of appropriate information behaviour to identify,
through whatever channel or medium, information well fitted to information needs,
leading to wise and ethical use of information in society"
Johnston & Webber

About the Author

Dr Ramesha, obtained BLISc and MLISc from Bangalore University, Bangalore and Ph.D. from
Karnatak University, Dharwad. He served as a Librarian in the United Mission Degree College,
Bangalore and joined the Karnatak University Library, Dharwad in 1999 as Asst. Librarian.
Subquently he joined Department of Information Science, University of Madras, Chennai as
a Lecturer. Presently he is working as a Reader in the Department of Library and Information
Science, Bangalore University, Bangalore. He has participated 40 national and international
conferences, seminars, workshops etc., and published more than 45 research papers both
at the national and international journals and conferences. He is a life member of many
professional associations including IATLIS, ILA, IASLIC, FIC, MALA, KALA etc. His area of
interest includes marketing of information, research methods, information literacy programme
and design and development of institutional repositories.

72

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

