DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 86-92
© 2008, DESIDOC

Selected Web Resources on Medical Sciences
Mahabaleshwara Rao,* Mahesh V. Mudhol and Shivananda Bhat K.*
* Health Sciences Library
Kasturba Medical College
Manipal University, Manipal-576 104
E-mail: baikadi@yahoo.com
Department of Library and Information Science
Mangalore University, Mangalore-574 199
E-mail: maheshmudhol@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Web is becoming a major source of health information also. Computer networks in general and the
Internet in particular are likely to play more important roles in many aspects of medicine in the future.
But for the healthcare professional and the health consumer, accessing accurate information on the web
is not easy. There is a growing supply of medical resources for teaching and learning available on the
world wide web. Most large medical centres have put information on public domain and some large
organisations, such as the National Institutes of Health, have extensive databases and services that can
be used by medical researchers, clinicians, and educators. This paper makes an effort to list the selected
web recourses on medical sciences which are useful for learning, teaching, patient care and research
activities of the medical institution.
Keywords: Web resources, medical sciences, medical information, medical libraries.

1. INTRODUCTION
Advances in telecommunications technology have
fostered the development of computer networks that
allow access to vast amounts of information and
services. Of the many computer networks that have
been developed, the most prominent is the Internet.
The amount of information available on the Internet
is already enormous. There is an explosion of literature
on medical sciences on the Internet also.
Today, the medical literature is confronted with
proliferation of knowledge with the exponential growth
of information, eruption of new journals and electronic
databases. The target recipients of health information
are broadly grouped into five main categories;
"researchers, teachers and students, health care
workers, health administrators, and planners and
the public". Medical information is mainly served for
Received 27 August 2007

creating awareness among common people about
health, for providing better medical service through
improved patient care and teaching, and for research
and planning purpose. The web resources have
revolutionised the delivery of medical information.
Medical libraries play a central role in information
dissemination for their institutions by selecting the
most useful and authoritative biomedical publications
and making them available to faculty, students, and
staff to support patient care, research, and education.
Over the last two decades, changes in technology
have transformed the way biomedical information is
created, communicated and accessed. From their
desktops using a web browser and an Internet connection,
medical professionals now have access to data that
include thousands of electronic journals and hundreds
of electronic books. Many medical libraries have
set up remote access to their collections, allowing

medical professionals to use online resources from
their campus office, hospital workstations, and offcampus computers, whether the physical library is
open or closed.

2. OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY
The main objectives of the study are:
±

To list the selected web resources available on
medical sciences, which are useful for learning,
teaching, patient care and research activities.

±

To identify bibliographical and full-text databases,
open access journals and drug information
databases.

±

To provide information on the selected web
resources on medical sciences.

3. METHODOLOGY
The methodology employed in this study is
review of literature to know the various web resources
available on medical sciences. Review of databases
helped to list the selected web resources, which
may be beneficial for doctors, and medical students
and faculty. Medical students and faculty members
of Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, and Kasturba
Medical College, Mangalore as well as literature
review helped in selecting the web resources. Discussions
with faculty members, health professionals and
postgraduate students of these medical colleges
helped in finalising the list of selected web resources
on medical sciences.

4. SELECTED WEB RESOURCES ON
MEDICAL SCIENCES
Following are some of the selected bibliographical
and full-text databases, open access journals and
drug information databases for medical science users
for their teaching and learning activities. These
resources are starting points for librarians and for
the general public searching for health- related
information.

4.1 Bibliographical Databases
4.1.1 PubMed
PubMed(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/
query.fcgi?tool=cdl&otool=cdlotool), a service of the
US National Library of Medicine (NLM) includes
over 16 million citations from MEDLINE and other
life science journals dating back to the 1950s.
PubMed includes links to full-text articles and other
related resources and provide access to citations
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

from MEDLINE, PreMEDLINE, other journals in the
field of medicine and life sciences, and links to
NCBI's (National Centre for Biotechnology Information)
integrated molecular biology databases including
nucleotide sequences, protein sequences, 3-D protein
structure data, population study data sets, and
assemblies of complete genomes in an integrated
system.

4.1.2 Embase.com
Embase.com (http:/www.embase.com/) is an
integrated web-based service providing access to
current, comprehensive and validated biomedical
and pharmacological information. It provides:
±

Comprehensive, timely access to pharmacological,
biomedical literature

±

More than 18 million records

±

More than 11 million Embase records from 1974
and more than 7 million unique Medline records
from 1966 till date

±

The most current version of Embase available
with records online on average within 10 working
days

±

Daily updates with more than 2,000 records
added every working day

±

More than 600,000 records added annually

±

More than 7,000 journals from over 70 countries
indexed; close to 2,000 more journals than
covered by Embase or Medline individually

±

Comprehensive international coverage

±

Easy-to-use interface

±

Select search options that best matches users
requirement include forms, quick search, advanced
search, field search, drug search, disease search,
and article search

±

Organise searches or entire sessions into named
folders for future use

±

Navigate from citations to full text from the
world's leading Science, Technical and Medical
publishers including: Elsevier Science Direct
(including Cell Press), SpringerLink, KargerOnline,
Thieme-connect and CrossRef (via DOI).

4.1.3 BIOSIS Previews
BIOSIS Previews (http:/scientific.thomson. com/
products/bp/), one of the leading abstracting and
indexing databases in the life sciences, serves the
87

need for finding extensive research into the life
sciences and biomedical sciences literature through
complete coverage of traditional biology, interdisciplinary
subjects, and related areas. Researchers, librarians,
and students worldwide use BIOSIS Previews to
stay current on topics from botany to genetic engineering.
BIOSIS Previews currently contains almost 15 million
citations from 1969 onwards, adding some 5,60,000
new citations each year from over 5,500 sources.
BIOSIS Previews on ScienceDirect is updated weekly.
Over 90 per cent of records include author-written
abstracts.

4.1.4 Scopus
Scopus (http://www.scopus.com/scopus/home.url)
is the largest abstract and citation database of
research literature and quality web sources. It is
designed to find the information scientists need.
Quick, easy and comprehensive, Scopus provides
superior support of the literature research process.
Scopus offers over 15,000 peer-reviewed titles from
more than 4,000 publishers, 500 open access journals,
700 conference proceedings, 600 trade publications,
29 million abstracts, 265 million references, added
to all abstracts, Results from 265 million scientific
web pages, 18 million patent records from 4 patent
offices, seamless links to full-text articles and other
library resources, innovative tools that give an ata-glance overview of search results and refine them
to the most relevant hits, alerts to keep users upto-date on new articles matching their search query,
or by favourite author.

4.1.5 Cancerlit
Cancerlit (http://www.cancer.gov/search/cancer_
literature/) is a bibliographic database that contains
more than 1.8 million citations and abstracts from
over 4,000 different sources including biomedical
journals, proceedings, books, reports, and doctoral
theses. The database contains references to cancer
literature published since 1960s.

4.1.6 IndMed
The ICMR-NIC Centre for Biomedical Information
(Indian MEDLARS Centre) has designed and developed
a bibliographic database (http://indmed.nic.in/) from
Indian biomedical literature. To start with 75 prominent
Indian journals have been selected to build up the
database entitled IndMed. The coverage of database
is from 1985. IndMed database covers prominent
peer-reviewed Indian biomedical journals. Database
is designed to provide medical professionals/researchers/
students and the medical library professional quick
and easy access to Indian literature.
88

4.1.7 Union Catalogue of Biomedical Serials in
India
Union Catalogue of Biomedical Periodicals (http://
uncat.nic.in/) has been compiled by India Medical
Council. The catalogue is a database of the Serials
holdings of major medical libraries in the country
and serves as an important information tool for
locating journals of interest in any library in India.
The database of 180 libraries is regularly updated
and can be accessed by users free of cost.

4.2 Full-Text Databases
4.2.1 ScienceDirect
ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com) is one
of the largest online collections of published scientific
research in the world. Elsevier's full-text platform,
ScienceDirect, now offers over a quarter of the
world's STM articles integrated with a growing range
of authoritative books, including reference works,
handbooks and book series. More than 2,000 journals
and hundreds of books from Elsevier Science including
prestigious titles such as The Lancet, Cell, Tetrahedron
Letters, the Handbooks in Economics Series and
the International Encyclopedia of the Social and
Behavioural Sciences are available on ScienceDirect.
Its Backfiles program also offers the ability to search
an electronic archive of millions of articles, back
to Volume 1, Issue 1.

4.2.2 MDConsult
MDConsult (www.mdconsult.com) brings the leading
medical resources together into one integrated online
service to help physicians efficiently find answers
to pressing clinical questions and make better treatment
decisions.
A service of Elsevier, a world leader in health
care and medical science publishing, MDConsult
operates a family of electronic information resources
that meet the clinical content needs of physicians
and other health care professionals. MDConsult
was founded in 1997 through a unique venture of
the world's leading medical publishers that included
Mosby and W.B. Saunders. Elsevier's flagship online
product, the MDConsult Core Service, quickly earned
acclaim for its select content offering and intelligent
design. A favourite of primary care physicians and
specialists alike, MDConsult now serves over 2,80,000
users and is licensed by more than 1,700 health
care organizations worldwide, including nearly 95
per cent of the US medical schools. Subscribers
search extensive contents 1.5 million times per
month and view more than eight million pages of
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

clinical contents, primarily during daytime practice
hours. MDConsult is designed to meet the exacting
needs of clinical practitioners, providing practical
and time-saving features that let them quickly access
the precise information they need. It provides:
±

The complete text of over 50 leading medical
reference books. Users can search the entire
collection simultaneously to pinpoint the specific
information needed. Also, available is over 50,000
high-quality images

±

Full-text articles are available through a powerful
search engine that includes the complete contents
of over 80 journals and Clinics of North America
articles

±

Simultaneously search of the full text of MDConsult
online journals and millions of Medline abstracts

±

Access to collection of more than 1,000 peerreviewed practice guidelines, which are regularly
updated and organised by topic and organisation
for easy browsing

±

Nearly 10,000 customised printable, patient
handouts, be with space to add notes, patient
instructions, and contact information.

4.2.3 EBSCO
EBSCO (http://www.epnet.com; http://www.ebsco.
com) is a worldwide leader in providing access to
information and management solutions through print
and electronic journal subscription services, research
database development and production, online access
to more than 150 databases and thousands of ejournals, a full-featured OpenUrl link resolver, and
e-commerce book procurement. EBSCO provide
interconnected web-based products and services to
allow users seamless access to services from EBSCO's
integrated divisions. Through EBSCO host Web interface,
users can access full-text databases (such as Biomedical
Reference Collection) via EBSCOhost with links to
e-journal subscriptions via the EBSCO host Electronic
Journals Service. Many secondary databases (such
as MEDLINE) are also available via EBSCOhost
with links to full-text articles in e-journals. EBSCO
host now offers more than 100 databases, including
some of the world's best known secondary databases,
such as CINAHL, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, SPORTDiscus
and many more.

4.2.4 Ovid
Ovid Technologies (http://www.ovid.com/site/
index.jsp) is an internationally recognised leader of
electronic medical, scientific, and academic research
information solutions. By providing a customisable
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

suite of contents, tools and services, Ovid supports
the diverse research needs of its 13 million users
worldwide academic, medical, corporate professionals,
and students seeking fast, accurate answers to
important questions. Ovid helps make research smarter,
faster, and more effective by providing powerful information
search and discovery platforms (Ovid Gateway and
SilverPlatter) to access premier electronic content,
including a list of 1,200 journals, over 500 books,
and more than 200 databases, with innovative technology
tools and specialised services to browse, search,
retrieve, and analyze critical information.It is used
across the globe by librarians, researchers, clinicians
and students from leading colleges and universities;
medical schools; academic research libraries and
library consortia; hospitals and healthcare systems;
pharmaceutical, engineering, and biotechnology
companies; and HMOs and clinical practices.

4.2.5 ProQuest Medical Library
ProQuest Medical Library (http://proquest.umi.com/
login) contains full-text articles from more than 600
health science journals, annual reviews, and back
volumes. Abstracts and indexing from MEDLINE
database are also covered in this database. The
journals cover all major health care specialities
including Pharmacology, Neurology, Cardiology, Physical
Therapy, Dentistry, Nursing and others. Topic- wise
and journal-wise search can be made using this
database.

4.2.6 PsycARTICLES
PsycARTICLES (http://psycinfo2.apa.org/
psycarticles/) is an online database containing more
than 26,000 entries from 49 peer-reviewed journals
published by American Psychological Association
and allied organisations since 1988. Full- text articles
covered in it are available for price.

4.2.7 MedIND
MedIND (http://medind.nic.in/) is a single point
resource of peer-reviewed Indian biomedical literature
covering full text of IndMED journals. It has been
designed to provide quick and easy access through
searching or browsing.

4.2.8 Cochrane Library
The Cochrane Library (http://www3.interscience.
wiley.com/cgi-bin/mrwhome/106568753/HOME) contains
high-quality, independent evidence to inform health
care decision-making. It includes reliable evidence
from Cochrane and other systematic reviews, clinical
trials, and more. Cochrane reviews host the combined
results of the world's best medical research studies,
89

and recognised as the gold standard in evidencebased health care. It indexes journal articles, reviews,
and bibliographies that provide evidence-based effects
of health care, as well as a register of economic
evaluations of health care interventions and information
on health care technology assessment from seven
databases such as the Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, Cochrane Controlled Trials Register, and
the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effectiveness.

5. OPEN ACCESS JOURNALS
5.1 Free Medical Journals.com
(http://www. freemedicaljournals.com/)
This site provides links to more than 1,300
medical journals available on the Internet for free.
This collection of medical journals include materials
for the scholarly researcher and for the general
public.

5.2 FreeFulltext.com
(http://www.freefulltext.com/)
FreeFulltext.com provides direct links to over
7,000 scholarly periodicals and some or all of their
online content to be viewed by anyone with Internet
access for free (though some may require free registration).

5.3 Priory Medical Journals
(http://www.priory.com/)
Priory Medical Journals and are the world's first
web-based medical journals. The first of their medical
journals was Psychiatry On-Line. Each medical journal
is available free to all. This is an independent set
of medical journals devoted to research papers,
review papers and other original works.

5.4 Public Library of Science
(http://www.plos.org/)
Public Library of Science is a non-profit organisation
of scientists and physicians committed to making
the world's scientific and medical literature a freely
available public resource.

5.5 BioMed Central
(http://www.biomedcentral.com/)
BioMed Central is an independent publishing
house committed to providing immediate free access
to peer-reviewed biomedical research. All original
research articles published by BioMed Central are
freely and permanently accessible online immediately
upon publication. BioMed Central views open access
to research as essential in order to ensure the rapid
and efficient communication of research findings.
90

5.6 Directory of Open Access Journals
(http://www.doaj.org/)
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) covers
free, full text scientific and scholarly journals. There
are now 2618 journals in the directory. Currently
788 journals are searchable at article level. As of
today 130014 articles are included in the DOAJ
service.

5.7 PubMed Central
(http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/)
PubMed Central (PMC) is free digital archive of
biomedical and life sciences journal of National
Institutes of Health (NIH) of the US. Full-text databases
of biomedical and life sciences are available through
the US National Library of Medicine.

5.8 MEDLARS Databases
(http://www.nlm.nih.gov/databases/)
Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System
(MEDLARS) of the National Library of Medicine
(NLM), US has over 40 databases. The subjects
range from clinical medicine, oncology, population,
dentistry, toxicology to nursing. These databases
are accessible through the Internet, free of cost.
Important amongst these are MEDLINE, AIDSLINE,
AIDSDRUGS, AIDSTRIALS, TOXLINE, CANCERLIT,
POPLINE, BIOETHICS and Clinical Alerts. MEDLINE,
with over 9 million citations from 1966 onwards,
can be accessed through NLM's PubMED or NLM
Gateway. Specialised Information Services of NLM
also provide information on toxicology and environment
health. MEDLINEplus database provides access to
extensive information about specific diseases and
conditions with links to consumer health information.
Latest information on cancer diagnosis, treatment,
prevention can be accessed from the resources
available at the National Cancer Institute (NCI).
Genome analysis, DNA and protein analysis data
can be accessed from the National Centre for
Biotechnology. IMC provides guidance/assistance
in how to retrieve relevant information from the MEDLARS
databases. Information from any of the NLM databases
is also provided on request.

5.9 Bioline International
(http://www.bioline.org.br/)
Bioline International (BI) is a not-for-profit electronic
publishing service committed to providing OA to
quality research journals published in developing
countries. BI's goal of reducing the south to north
knowledge gap is crucial to a global understanding
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

of health (tropical medicine, infectious diseases,
epidemiology, emerging new diseases), biodiversity,
the environment, conservation and international
development. With peer-reviewed journals from Brazil,
Cuba, India, Indonesia, Kenya, South Africa, Uganda
and Zimbabwe, BI provides a unique service by making
bioscience information generated in these countries
available to the international research community
world-wide.

5.10 Medknow Publications
(http://www.medknow.com/journals.asp)
Medknow Publications is the largest publisher
in India for academic and scientific biomedical journals.
Medknow pioneers in 'fee-less-free' model of OA
publishing and provides immediate free access to
the electronic editions of the journals without charging
the author or author's institution for submission,
processing or publication of the articles.Medknow,
with over 40 print and online journals provides immediate
free access to the full text of articles.

5.11 OpenMED
(http://openmed.nic.in/)
OpenMED@NIC is an open access archive for
medical and allied sciences. Authors/owners can
self-archive their scientific and technical documents
in OpenMED. For this they need to register once
in order to obtain a user id in OpenMED system.
However, no registration is required for searching
the archive or viewing the documents.OpenMED is
a discipline-based international archive. It accepts
peer-reviewed documents having relevance to research
in medical and allied sciences including bio-medical,
medical informatics, dental, nursing and pharmaceutical
sciences. These could be peer-reviewed preprints,
post prints (refereed journal paper) and accepted
theses. In case of non-English documents, descriptive
data [author, title, source, etc.], abstract and keywords
must be in English.
Submitted documents will be placed into the
submission buffer and would become part of OpenMED
archive on their acceptance. The aim of OpenMED
is to provide free service to academics, researchers,
and students working in the area of medical sciences.

5.12 Health Books
(http://www.unifesp.br/universi dade/
english/dis/libraries/books.htm)
Health Books provides links to free electronic
books available on different aspects of medical sciences.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

5.13 FreeBooks4Doctors.com
(http://.freebooks4doctors.com/)
Free Books is dedicated to the promotion of
free access to medical books over the Internet.

5.14 World health organisation
(http://www.who.int/)
World Health Organisation is the directing and
coordinating authority for health within the United
Nations system. It is responsible for providing leadership
on global health matters, shaping the health research
agenda, setting norms and standards, articulating
evidence-based policy options, providing technical
support to countries and monitoring and assessing
health trends.

6. DRUG INFORMATION DATABASES
6.1 Iowa Drug Information Service
(http://itsnt14.its.uiowa.edu/)
The Iowa Drug Information Service (IDIS/Web)
is a database of index records of articles about
drugs and drug therapy in humans taken from over
200 peer-reviewed English language journals. Among
the areas covered are pharmacy and pharmacology,
general and internal medicine, infectious disease
and immunology, transplant, cardiovascular,
rheumatology, microbiology, geriatrics, and endocrinology.
The complete articles are also available online (1997
onwards).
This database is designed by the Division of
Drug Information Service (DDIS), University of Iowa,
USA to retrieve specific information concerning a
drug and/or drug treatment of a disease state. Authoritative
publications have been selected to provide broad
coverage of both general and specialty areas of
pharmacy and medicine.

6.2 MICROMEDEX Healthcare Series
(http://www.micromedex.com/products/
hcs/)
Micromedex Healthcare Series is unsurpassed
in terms of scope and reliability when clinical information
is needed. The actionable information provided by
MICROMEDEX spans drugs, diseases, acute care,
toxicology, alternative medicines, as well as a
comprehensive tool to educate patients. Having all
of this in a clutter-free, easy-to-navigate interface
saves clinicians time and promotes best practices.

91

6.3 MedlinePlus
(http://www.medlineplus.gov/)
MedlinePlus from the National Library of Medicine,
the US offers consumers accurate and current medical
information about specific diseases and conditions,
including drug information. Other offerings on this
content rich site include health news, a dictionary,
directories to find doctors, dentists and hospitals,
interactive tutorials, clinical trials and surgery videos.

6.4 MedicinesComplete
(http://www.medicinescomplete.com/mc/)
MedicinesComplete provides online access to
some of the world's leading drug and healthcare
references. This also provides online access to
American Hospital Formulary Service drug information;
British national formulary; BNF for children; Clarke's
analysis of drugs and poisons; dietary supplements;
herbal medicines; Martindale: the complete drug
reference; MeReC bulletins; pharmaceutical excipients;
Stockley's drug interactions; Stockley's interaction
alerts. MedicinesComplete is published by
Pharmaceutical Press, the publications division of
the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.

7. CONCLUSION
With so many web sites available on medical
and health related information, it is impossible for
any user to get the information he/she seeks in the
shortest possible time. The URLs of selected web
resources mentioned in the paper will help in locating
health related information for medical professionals,
students and librarians. However, in most of the
cases, free access to the full text may not be
possible as one has to be a paid individual or
institutional subscriber.

REFERENCES
1. Medical libraries: Keys to health information.
Proceedings of 6th International Congress on
Medical Librarianship and Pre-Congress Seminar,
MLAI, 1990.
2. Ray, Siddartha Shankar. Medical libraries in
third world countries: Their role in awareness,
services and research on health and biomedical
sciences, 363-66

About the Authors

Mahabaleshwara Rao is presently working as a Senior Librarian in the Health Sciences
Library of Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka. His area of interest include health sciences
librarianship. He has presented several papers in national conferences on knowledge management,
digital library, Internet resources and open access.
Dr Mahesh V Mudhol has a Doctorate in Library and Information Science from Sambalpur
University, Orissa. Presently, he is working as a Reader in Department of Library and Information
Science, Mangalore University, Karnataka since 2001. He has published many articles, presented
several papers in national conferences, attended refresher courses in library sciences and
published seven books. At present five Research Scholars are doing Doctorate under him.
He is the member of Board of Studies and Examination of Department of Library and Information
Science and also the member of Science and Technology Faculty in the Mangalore University,,
Karnataka. His area of interest include information technology.
Dr Shivananda Bhat K. has a Doctorate in Library and Information Science from Mysore
University, Karnataka. He joined Kasturba Medical Manipal, Manipal in 1989 and currently
working as Senior Librarian in the Health Sciences Library of Manipal University, Manipal,
Karnataka.

92

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2)

