DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 3, May 2008, pp. 17-35
© 2008, DESIDOC

Application Domain and Functional Classification
of Recommender Systems—A Survey
K. Nageswara Rao
Defence Research & Development Laboratory
Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad- 500 058
E-mail:raokochi@hotmail.com

and
V.G. Talwar
University of Mysore, Mysore-570 005

ABSTRACT
The amount of scientific and technical information is growing exponentially. As a result, the scientific
community has been overwhelmed by the information published in number of new books, journal articles,
and conference proceedings. In addition to increasing number of publications, advances in information
technology have dramatically reduced the barriers in electronic publishing and distribution of information
over networks virtually anywhere in the world. As a result, the scientific community is facing the problem
of locating relevant or interesting information. To address the problem of information overload and to
sift all available information sources for useful information, recommender systems or filtering systems
have emerged. Generally, recommender systems are used online to suggest items that users find interesting,
thereby, benefiting both the user and merchant. Recommender systems benefit the user by making him
suggestions on items that he is likely to purchase and the business by increase of sales. Filtering
information or generation of recommendations by the recommender systems mimic the process of
information retrieval systems by incorporating advanced profile building techniques, item/user
representation techniques, filtering and recommendation techniques, and profile adaptation techniques.
This paper addresses the application domain analysis, functional classification, advantages and
disadvantages of various filtering and recommender systems.
Keywords: Recommender system, filtering system, domain analysis, content-based filtering system.

1. INTRODUCTION
Bibliographic control and information retrieval
mechanisms were established and made available
to the users in many libraries for identifying and
locating relevant books, journal articles, reports,
patents, etc. Ever increasing number of research
scientists and dynamic research activities in multidisciplinary subjects have resulted in the exponential
growth of technical information and publication of
large number of documents in the form of journal
articles, conference proceedings, books, reports,
Received on 8 January 2008

standards, patents, etc. As more and more information
became available electronically, the need for effective
information retrieval and filtering tools became essential
for easy access to relevant information. A poor
information retrieval strategy results in retrieval of
increased non-relevant documents.
A survey of biomedical journals conducted by
K.S. Warren showed that the number of journals
increases by 6-7 per cent every year, doubles every
10-15 years, and increases tenfold every 35-50 years.
At the starting of the 19 century there were roughly
17

1000 biomedical journals, 30 years ago there were
4,000 and 10 years ago 14,000 journals1. The history
shows that scientific community has always found
solution for the problem of information overload by
preparing reviews for books and encyclopedias, indexes
and abstracts for articles, and later computerised
data banks. Explosive growth of information has
resulted in the problem of information overload.
Information overload is a perception that the information
available is greater than can be managed effectively,
and creates a degree of stress for which the coping
strategies are ineffective. Richard Saul Wurman 2
explained the reasons of information overload in his
book titled “Information Anxiety” as: when a person
does not understand available information, feels
overwhelmed by the amount of information to be
understood, does not know if certain information
exists, does not know how to find information and
knows where to find information, but does not have
the key to access it. So, continued efforts by experts
in the field of information technology resulted in
development of technological aids such as information
retrieval systems, information filtering systems, intelligent
agents, ranking algorithms, clustering techniques,
categorisation techniques, data mining techniques,
web mining techniques, personalisation and recommender
systems to tackle the problem of information overload.
The advances in information and entertainment
technologies have accelerated the availability of
various alternative items in each and every domain,
e.g. availability of hundreds of movies, television
and music channels, books, restaurants, etc. In
addition to this, the emergence of World Wide Web
has opened up new possibilities for the users/customers
to know the details/specifications of items seamlessly
without visiting shops or outlets. It is an easy task
for an individual to choose from limited number of
available alternatives. When the collection becomes
large, it is a tedious and time consuming task for
any individual to really evaluate the features of
items/products while purchasing quality, economic,
and useful items. In such circumstances, people
seek suggestions or recommendation from friends,
relatives and experts who have knowledge about
the items/products. The main purpose of the
recommender systems is to provide tools to leverage
the information hunting and gathering activities and
interests of other people or groups of people.
Recommendation systems have been an important
application area and the focus of considerable recent
academic and commercial interest. Generally,
recommender systems are used online to suggest
items that customers find interesting, thereby, benefiting

18

both the customer and merchant. They benefit the
customer by making him suggestions on items that
he is likely to purchase and the business by increase
of sales. In this paper, authors have surveyed, evaluated
and classified recommender/filtering systems based
on their functionality in various application domains.

2. APPLICATION DOMAIN ANALYSIS OF
RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS
We have conducted literature survey to analyse
various filtering and recommender systems falling
under different application domains with brief introduction
and purpose of the systems developed. The analysis
revealed that some recommender systems are purely
research prototypes, some are working on Internet
and some systems provide their services for fee.
All of the recommender/filtering systems were studied
and analysed based on published technical literature
in the form of technical reports, conference paper
and journal articles. It is understood from the literature
survey that majority of filtering/recommender systems
were designed and developed for recommending
Web pages, Netnews articles, personalised newspapers,
music, movies, documents and information.
Research survey was conducted to study and
classify approximately 96 filtering/recommender systems
on various application domains. Out of 96 systems,
21 systems were developed in Web recommendation
application domain, 12 systems in movie/TV
recommendation application domain, 12 systems
in information/document recommendation application
domain, eight systems in Usenet news recommendation
application domain, seven systems in information
filtering and sharing domain, six systems in music
recommendation domain, four systems in restaurant
recommendation application domain, three systems
in organisational expertise recommendation domain,
three in personalised newspaper domain, three in
e-Commerce application domain and software application
domain, two systems each in travel recommendation
application domain and two in electronic catalogue
item recommendation. One system each fall under
the recommender application domains such as learning
resources recommendation, recommending interesting
changes on Web, explanation-sharing recommendation,
research grants recommendation, IT skills
recommendation, similar user recommendation on
P2P network, Web search and filtering, virtual fair
recommendation, jokes recommendation, and image
recommender system. Table 1 details various
recommender systems and their application domain.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

Table 1. Filtering/recommender systems and their application domain
Filtering/Recommender systems
ACR News

3
4

Restaurant Recommender System

Adaptive Place Advisor
5,6

Web Recommender System

Amalthaea

7

Document/Information Recommender Systems

Amazon.com

Anatagonomy

8

Personalized Newspaper Recommender System

9

Information Products Recommender System

ARAS

10

Web Recommender System

11

Movie/TV Recommender System

ArgueNet
AVATAR

12

Information Filtering and Sharing Systems

Beehive

13

Bellcore Video Recommender

Movie/TV Recommender System
14

Book Recommender System (BRS)
CBCF

15

Book Recommender System
Movie/TV Recommender System

16

CinemaScreen Recommender Agent
17

Movie/TV Recommender System
Music Recommender System

CoCoA

18

Learning Resources Recommender System

CoFIND

Community Search Assistant

19

DEMOIR20

Web Recommender System
Organizational Expertise Recommender System

21

Travel Recommender System

22,23

Systems for Recommending Interesting Changes on
Web
Document/Information Recommender System

Dietorecs
Do-I-Care

D-SIFTER

24
25

Online Jokes Recommender System

Eigentaste

26,27

Restaurant Recommender System

Entrée

Expertise Recommender

28

Organizational Expertise Recommender System

29

Explanation Sharing Recommender System

ExplaNet
30,31

Web Recommender System

Fab

32

Virtual Fair Recommender System

FAIRWIS

33

Music Recommender System

Flycasting

Foafing the Music

34

Music Recommender System
35

Foxtrot Recommender System

Document/Information Recommender System

36,37

Usenet News Recommender System

38

Web Rec ommender System

GroupLens

GroupMark
IfWeb

Application domain
Usenet News Recommender System

39

Web Recommender System
40

Document/Information Recommender System

41

Usenet News Recommender System

42

Organizational Expertise Recommender System

InfoFinder
INFOrmer
InfoScout

43

e-Commence Recommender System

InterestMap
INTIMATE

44

Movie/TV Recommender System
45

Krakatoa Chronicle
46

Personalized Newspaper Recommender System

LaboUr

Research Grants Recommender System

Letizia47

Web Recommender System

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

19

47

Web Recommender System

Letizia

48

Web Recommender System

Let's Browse
LIBRA

49

Document/Information Recommender System
50

Travel Recommender System

LifestyleFinder
MetaLens

51,52

METIOREW

e-Commence Recommender System

53

Web Recommender System

54

Movie/TV Recommender System

55

Movie/TV Recommender System

56

Software Recommender System

MovieLens

Movies2Go
MyPYTHIA
57

Information Products Recommender System

MyVU

58

NAUTILUS

Web Recommender System

59

Usenet News Recommender System

News Dude

60

Usenet News Recommender System

NewsWeeder
61

IT Skills Recommender System

OWL

62

Information Filtering and Sharing Systems

PEA

PEFNA

63

Usenet News Recommender System
64

Web Recommender System

Personal WebWatcher
65

Document/Information Recommender System

pFilter

66

Web Recommender System

67

Web Recommender System

PHOAKS
PILGRIM

68

Similar User Recommender System on P2P Network

PipeCF

69

Pocket RestaurantFinder
70,71

Movie/TV Recommender System

PocketLens
PolyLens

72

PORSCHE

Restaurant Recommender System
73

Document/Information Recommender System

74

Web Recommender System

ProfBuilder
75

Usenet News Recommender System

PSUN

P-Tango

76

PYTHIA-II

Personalized Newspaper Recommender System

77

Software Recommender System

78

Web Recommender System

RAAP

RACOFI

79

Music Recommender System

80

Information Filtering and Sharing Systems

Rama

81,82

Software Recommender System

RASCAL

83

Information Filtering and Sharing Systems

Re: Agent

84

Recommendation Explorer
85

Recommender
86

Movie/TV Recommender System
Movie/TV Recommender System
Movie/TV Recommender System

RecTree

87

Document/Information Recommender System

REFEREE
88,89

Music Recommender System

Ringo

90

Document/Information Recommender System

SELECT

91

SIFT Netnews

20

Restaurant Recommender System

Usenet News Recommender System

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

92

Web Recommender System

SiteIF

93,94

Music Recommender System

SmartRadio
95

Web Recommender System

SurlLen

Syskill & Webert

96

Web Recommender System

97

Document/Information Recommender System

TalkMine

98

Information Filtering and Sharing Systems

Tapestry

99

Electronic Catalog Item Recommender System

The MAUT Machine

100

The Wasabi Personal Shopper
101

Electronic Catalog Item Recommender System
Movie/TV Recommender System

TiVo

102

Image Recommender System

VISCORS

103

WebInEssence
104

Document/Information Recommender System
Web Recommender System

WebMate
WebSail

105,106

Web Search and Filtering System

WebSell

107,108

e-Commence Recommender System

WebSIFT

109

Web Recommender System
110,111

WebWatcher

Web Recommender System

3. FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF
RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS

3.1 Content-based Filtering/Recommender
Systems

Recommender systems can be classified broadly
into six categories depending on the information
they uses to recommend items. The systems, which
use data about the items and information regarding
the active user, are called “Content-based Filtering
Systems ”. Other systems that do not use data
about the content of the items but make recommendations
to the active user using information about a set of
users and their relation with the item, are called
“Collaborative Filtering Systems ”. Systems that use
demographic information such as age, gender, education,
etc. of people for identifying types of users like a
certain object and makes recommendations, are
called “Demographic Filtering Systems ”. Another
category of systems, which uses the functional
knowledge to generate recommendations, i.e. knowledge
about how a particular item meets a particular user
need, and can reasoning about the relationship
between a need and a product, are called “Knowledgebased Recommender Systems”. The systems, which
make suggestions based on computation of the
utility of each object for the user, are called “ Utilitybased Recommender Systems ”. Recently, several
authors proposed mixed approaches, attempting to
keep the advantages of the combination of methods,
and to reduce or take out disadvantages and problems.
These systems are called “Hybrid Recommender
Systems ”, which are the most interesting and can
be considered as the state-of-the-art systems. The
paper discusses four types of recommender systems
based on their functionality.

Content-based filtering systems recommend items
based on descriptions or content of items rather
than other user’s ratings of the system. Instead of
deriving a user-to-item correlation and defining
methodologies, they use item-to-item correlation
for generating recommendations. In these systems,
the process of recommendation first starts by gathering
content data about the items. For example, title,
author, descriptors, etc. for the books or the director,
cast, etc. for the movies are some of the common
content information. Most of these systems use
feature extraction techniques and information indexing
to extract the content data. Generally, feature extraction
can be achieved through various approaches which
reduce the number of words, stop words, pruning,
stemming, etc. 112. In the next step, the user is
asked to provide some ratings for the items randomly.
Finally, the systems match un-rated books/items
contents with the compiled user profile and assigns
scores to the items depending on the match between
user profile and item descriptions. The items are
ranked according to their scores and presented to
the user in order as output.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

Consider the example in Table 2 to predict how
recommendations are made for a particular user
based on the relevance ratings provided by that
user. It gives the relevance ratings for eight documents
by four users. Users simply specify whether a particular
document is relevant or not by mentioning ‘Yes’ as
relevant and ‘No’ as non-relevant.
21

Table 2. Relevance ratings given by four users for eight documents
Title of the document

No

No

?

D2

Discovering Knowledge in Data: An Introduction to
Data Mining

Yes

No

No

?

D3

Datawarehousing and Data Mining: Implementing
Strategic Knowledge Management

?

?

No

Yes

D4

Datawarehousing and Data Mining for
Telecommunications

Yes

?

?

?

D5

Semiconductor Physics

No

No

Yes

No

D6

Physics of Semiconductor Devices

No

No

?

?

D7

Knowledge Management in Theory and Practice

No

Yes

?

?

D8

Knowledge Management for the
Telecommunications Industry

No

Yes

No

?

They don’t require data on other users and are
away from new user cold-start and sparsity
problems
These systems are capable of recommending
items to users with unique tastes

Ë

Can provide explanations of recommended items
by explicitly listing content features or descriptions
that caused an item to be recommended and
Do not suffer from first-rater problem, i.e., they
are capable of recommending new and unpopular
items to each and every user.
The systems have the following drawbacks:

22

User-4

Yes

Ë

Ë

User-3

Mastering Data Mining: The Art and Science of
Customer Relationship Management

editors have to manually insert the features for
items that are not machine parsable such as
movies and songs. The activity of human involvement
is highly subjective, expensive, time consuming
and erroneous. Moreover, it is impossible to
define right set of features for some sort of
items such as jokes.
Ë

Content-based filtering techniques have no inherent
method for finding something unexpected and
useful while searching for something else. The
system recommends only more of what the
user has already seen and indicated as “liking”
the item. Hence, the user is restricted to see
items similar to those already rated and these
systems suffer from new-user cold start problem.

Ë

In content-based filtering systems, items are
limited to their initial descriptions or features.
This limitation makes the content-based techniques
dependent on the features that are specified
explicitly.

Content-based filtering systems have the following
advantages:

Ë

User-2

D1

In Table 2 User-1 has specified document D1,
D2, D4 as relevant. The simplest form that the
recommender system uses to recommend documents
is through matching the content of rated document
by the individual user. So, document D3 would be
recommended to User-1 as title of the document
has similarity with that of the rated documents.
Likewise, D3 would be recommended to User-2, D6
would be recommended to User-3 and finally D1,
D2, D4, D7 and D8 would be recommended to the
User-4.

Ë

User-1

The feature extraction and representation can
be achieved automatically for machine parsable
items such as news or papers. But human

3.2 Collaborative Filtering Systems
The term collaborative filtering was coined by
Doug Terry at Xerox PARC in the early nineties. In
its initial conception, collaborative filtering referred
to methods for information filtering based on the
preferences expressed by people about items or
documents. Due to the generality of this definition,
a variety of methods, models, and technologies
have emerged in the past decade that all claim to
address the problem of collaborative filtering. A
pure collaborative filtering system is one which
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

does no analysis of the items at all—in fact, all that
is known about an item is a unique identifier 30 . The
first recommender that used a collaborative approach
was GroupLens 37 , which presented the so-called
neighborhood based approach. Other approaches
were proposed, using Bayesian networks, singular
value decomposition with neural networks classification
and induction rule learning 113 .

similar pattern of ratings with User-X. In this example,
User-2 has rated Doc-2, Doc-4, and Doc-5 with
same or similar ratings as that of User-X. Hence,
Doc-6 is recommended to the User-X or the predicted
rating for Doc-6 by the User-X is 2.
Another approach would be to find the degree
of correlation between User-X and other users. Rather
than relying on just the most similar user with
similar ratings as explained above, a weighted average
of the recommendations of several users can be
found. In such circumstances the weightage to user’ s
rating would be found by degree of correlation between
the two users. The most common measure of correlation
is the Pearson Product Moment Correlation (called
Pearson’s correlation for short). When computed in
a sample, it is designated by the letter “r” and is
sometimes called “Pearson’s r”. Pearson’s correlation
reflects the degree of linear relationship between
two variables. It ranges from +1 to -1. A correlation
of +1 means that there is a perfect positive linear
relationship between variables.

The goal of collaborative filtering systems is to
suggest new items or predict the utility of a certain
item for a particular user based on users past liking
and the opinions of other like-minded users. It is
widely used and perhaps the most familiar
recommendation technique implemented in several
e-Commerce applications. In general, collaborative
filtering systems collect the ratings for a list of
items from a list of users. Opinions can be explicitly
given by the user as a rating score or can be
implicitly derived from the historical data of the
user. When the user does not the rate a particular
item, there is the possibility of having a null set.
The correlation between the user seeking
recommendations and other users are computed
and neighbours or peer groups are created using
different correlation methods. Finally, predictions
or recommendations for the items that the user has
not rated but the neighbours have rated are computed
and presented to the user in decreasing order of
preference. It is important to note that collaborative
filtering systems use the nearest neighbour model
and rely upon the assumption that people who
agreed in the past are likely to agree in the future 37 .

The correlation coefficient of a set of observations

{( x i , y i ) : i = 1,2,3...n} is given by the formula:
n

∑ (x
i =1

r=

n

∑ (x
i =1

i

− x)( yi − y )
n

i

− x) 2 ∑ ( y i − y ) 2
i =1

In collaborative filtering systems all users may
not rate all documents. Here, for the purpose of
calculation, zero value has been given for non-rated
documents. From the above sample data, the Pearson
correlation coefficient between User-X and User-1
for all the document collection is 0.975, User-X and
User-2 is 0.996, User-X and User-3 is 0.933, UserX and User-4 is 0.992 and User-X and User-5 is
0.982, respectively. Mathematically, it is clear that
the correlation between User-X and User-2 is more.
Hence, collaborative filtering system recommends
Doc-6 to User-X as User-2 is more similar and has
rated Doc-6.

Consider the example in Table 3 to predict how
recommendations are made for a particular user. It
shows the ratings for seven documents by six users.
Users specify how relevant a particular document
with the help of 1-5 ratings scale, i.e. 1 representing
low relevant and 5 representing highly relevant.
The simplest way of predicting the ratings that
User-X would give to Doc-6 or to recommend documents
to the User-X based on his ratings to other documents,
it would be reasonable to consider users that have

Table 3. Ratings of six users for seven documents
Doc-1

Doc-2

Doc-3

Doc-4

Doc-5

Doc-6

Doc-7

User-1

1

3

0

1

0

0

2

User-2

0

1

0

4

0

2

5

User-3

5

0

1

0

4

5

0

User-4

0

1

0

3

0

2

3

User-5

0

2

0

4

0

1

1

User-X

0

1

0

4

0

?

5

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

23

express preferences in the beginning stages
when the system cannot yet help them.

Collaborative filtering systems have the following
advantages:
Ë

They do not need a representation of items in
terms of features i.e. genre and actor of the
movie, title and author of the book, but it is
based only on the judgment of participating
user community. Hence, collaborative filtering
can be applied to virtually any kind of item, i.e.,
papers, news, websites, movies, songs, books,
jokes, etc.

Ë

Scalability of the items database can be large
since the technique does not require any human
involvement for tagging descriptions or features

Ë

They can cope with cross-genre recommendations
such as making confident predictions of entirely
different items to the user who have never rated
such items in the past

Ë

They do not require domain-knowledge for tagging
the features to the items, therefore, it is a time
saving activity

Ë

The quality of the recommendations would be
improved over time.

Collaborative filtering systems have the following
disadvantages:
Ë

Cold Start or First Raster Problem: When new
item is added to the database, the item can not
be recommended to any user until the item is
either rated by another user(s) or correlated
with other similar items of the database114,115,116.

Ë

Data Sparseness Problem: Most of the e-Commerce
applications contains millions of users and millions
of items. In practice even active users only rate
a few of the entire set of items and results in
a very sparse matrix in collaborative filtering.
The sparseness of a collaborative filtering matrix
is the percentage of empty cells. Because of
the presence of empty cells, collaborative filtering
systems may not locate successful neighbours
and generate weak recommendations.

Ë

24

Critical Mass Problem: For the recommendations
to be reliable, the filtering system needs a very
large number of people (typically thousands) to
express their preferences about a relatively large
number of options (typically dozens). But developing
such a database for achieving a critical mass
of participants makes collaborative filtering
experiments so expensive and time consuming,
because users will not be very motivated to

Ë

Unusual User Problem: In a small or medium
community of users, there are individuals whose
opinions or tastes are unusual. It means that
an individual do not agree or disagree consistently
with any of existing group of people. So, these
individuals rarely receive accurate collaborative
recommendations even when the critical mass
of users is achieved.

Ë

Popularity Bias: Collaborative filtering systems
cannot recommend items to someone with unique
tastes, but tends to recommend popular items.

3.3 Demographic Filtering Systems
A general technique people use to build models
of other people very quickly is the evocation of
stereotypes or clusters of characteristics. A stereotype
is a collection of frequently occurring characteristics
of users. For example, one might guess that if
someone is a judge, he or she is probably over
forty, well educated, reasonably pro-establishment,
fairly affluent, honest, and well-respected in the
community. Although not all of these attributes are
necessarily true for any particular judge, a person
would tend to assume them until explicitly shown
otherwise. Therefore, a stereotype normally contains
the common knowledge about a group of users.
When a new user enters the system, he will be
assigned into related stereotype(s) if some of his
characteristics match that of a particular stereotype(s).
The same concept is used in demographic recommender
systems by the use of descriptions of people to
learn the relationships between a single item and
the class or type of people who liked it. Demographicbased recommender systems use prior knowledge
on demographic information about the users and
their opinions for the recommended items as basis
for recommendations. Demographic systems are
stereotypical, because they depend on the assumption
that all users belonging to a certain demographic
group have similar taste or preference 117 .
A demographic recommender system, Grundy,
was one of the first book recommender system
developed by Elaine Rich118. Grundy bunds models
of its users, with the aid of stereotypes, and then
exploits those models to guide it in its task, suggesting
novels that people may find interesting. Users enter
keywords describing their personality, not their information
need in order to create a user profile. Grundy then
associates terms used in the users’ self-descriptions
with pre-defined stereotypes. These stereotypes
expand into attribute rating pairs describing the
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

users’ information needs that are aggregated to
form the object ratings when making predictions.
Another recommender system is the LifeStyle
Finder 40 , which suggests items and webpages to
users. It attempts to identify one of pre-existing
clusters of demographic groups to which a user
belongs and tailors recommendations to users based
on information about others in that cluster. Demographic
techniques attempt to form “people-to-people” correlations
like collaborative filtering, but uses different data.
M.J. Pazzani 119 attempted to find regularities
among users, by applying on them Winnow algorithm—
an algorithm originally designed for text classification.
User profiles utilised for similarity calculations had
the form of user demographic vectors.
Demographic filtering systems have the following
advantages:
Ë

The advantage of a demographic approach is
that it does not require a history of user ratings
of the type required by collaborative and contentbased techniques

Ë

Demographic approach is quick and straightforward
method for making assumptions based on limited
observations, and

Ë

Demographic filtering systems could be implemented
quickly and easily.

Demographic filtering systems have the following
disadvantages:
Ë

For the demographic filtering to be effective, it
is necessary to collect complete demographic
information about users. In practice, it is difficult
to collect such information as it involves privacy
issues

Ë

Demographic filtering systems suffer from both
new-user cold-start problem and new-item coldstart problem

Ë

The formation of demographic clusters is based
on a generalisation of the user’s interests. So,
demographic systems try to recommend the
same item to people with similar demographic
profiles and the recommendations are too general.

3.4 Hybrid Recommender Systems
Several recommender systems use a hybrid
approach by combining content-based and collaborative
methods to avoid certain limitations and disadvantages
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

of content-based and collaborative systems. Different
filtering/recommender systems and type of filtering
techniques used for producing recommendations or
predictions have been shown in Appendix 1.

4. CONCLUSION
Queries in information retrieval play an important
role in searching and retrieving relevant information
from static collection of documents. But in the
case of information filtering/recommender systems,
profiles play an important role to filter relevant information
from dynamic stream of incoming data. Every
recommender system needs some sort of input
collected explicitly or implicitly to generate
recommendations. Using this input, the recommender
system builds user profile which represents any of
the IR/profile representation models viz., vector space
model, semantic networks, weighted n-grams, associative
networks etc.
The recommender system matches the user
profile with the descriptions of items or users with
similar taste to recommend items of interest to the
user. There are three matching techniques generally
used by the recommender systems such as: contentbased filtering, collaborative filtering, demographic
filtering or hybrid technique. Finally, these systems
provide Top-N recommendations followed by fine
tuning the user profile with the help of relevance
feedback mechanism to retrieve more relevant items.
All these 96 systems under study have their advantages
and disadvantages in the process of recommending
items to the targeted users. Hybrid recommender
systems are more important and they are going to
play vital role in the next-generation of recommender
systems, because they minimize the disadvantages
and maximize the utility of content-based filtering
systems and collaborative filtering systems.

REFERENCES
1.

Warren, K.S. Selective aspects of the biomedical
literature. In Coping with the biomedical literature:
A primer for scientists and clinicians, edited by
K.S. Warren. 1981. New York, Praeger.

2.

Wurman, R.S. Information Anxiety. 1989. New
York, Doubleday.

3.

Mobasher, B.; Cooley, R. & Srivastava, J. Automatic
personalization based on Web usage mining.
Communications of ACM , 2000, 43(8), 142-151.

4.

Goker, M. & Thompson, C. The Adaptive Place
Advisor: A conversational recommendation system,
25

edited by M. Goker. I n Proceedings of the 8th
German Workshop on Case-based Reasoning,
Lammerbuckel, Germany, 2000. pp.187-198.

Colorado, United States. ACM Press/AddisonWesley Publishing Co., New York, 1995. pp.
194-201.

5.

Moukas, A. & Maes, P. Amalthaea: An evolving
multi-agent information filtering and discovery
system for the WWW. Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems , 1998, 1(1), 59-88.

6.

Moukas, A. Amalthaea: Information discovery
and filtering using a multiagent evolving ecosystem.
Applied Artificial Intelligence: An International
Journal , 1997, 11(5), 437-457.

14. Nageswara Rao, K. & Talwar, V.G. Developing
content-based Book Recommender System (BRS)
using first order keywords. In Proceedings of
the 48th All India Library Conference on Electronic
Information Environment and Library Services:
A Contemporary Paradigm , Bangalore, India,
2002. pp. 346-360.

7.

Linden, G.; Smith, B. & York, J. Amazon.com
recommendations: Item-to-item collaborative filtering.
IEEE Internet Computing , 2003, 7(1), 76-80.

8.

Sakagami, H. & Kamba, T. Learning personal
preferences on online newspaper articles from
user behaviors, edited by P.H. Enslow, M.
Genesereth, & A. Patterson. In Selected Papers
From the Sixth International Conference on World
Wide Web, California, USA, 1997. pp. 1447-1455.

9.

Kilfoil, M.; Xing, W. & Ghorbani, A. ARAS:
Adaptive recommender for academic scheduling.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Communication
Networks and Services Research Conference.
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, 2005, pp.
307-312.

10. Chesñevar, C.I. & Maguitman, A.G. ArgueNet:
An argument-based recommender system for
solving Web search queries. I n Proceeding of
the 2nd International IEEE Conference on Intelligent
Systems, Varna, Bulgaria, 2004. pp. 282-287.
11. Blanco-Fernandez, Y.; Pazos-Arias, J.J.; LopezNores, M.; Gil-Solla, A. & Ramos-Cabrer, M.
AVATAR: An improved solution for personalized
TV based on semantic interface. IEEE Transactions
on Consumer Electronics, 2006, 52(1), 223-231.
12. Huberman, B.A & Kaminsky, M. Beehive: A
system for cooperative filtering and sharing of
information. Technical Report, Dynamics of
Computation Group, Xerox Palo Alto Research
Center, 1996.
13. Hill, W.; Stead, L.; Rosenstein, M. & Furnas,
G. Recommending and evaluating choices in a
virtual community of use, edited by I.R. Katz,
R. Mack, L. Marks, M.B. Rosson, & J. Nielsen.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver,
26

15. Melville, P.; Mooney, R.J. & Nagarajan, R. Contentboosted collaborative filtering for improved
recommendations edited by R. Dechter, M. Kearns,
& R. Sutton. In Proceedings of Eighteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada. American Association for Artificial
Intelligence, Menlo Park, 2002. pp. 187-192.
16. Salter, J. & Antonopoulos, N. CinemaScreen
Recommender Agent: Combining collaborative
and content-based filtering. IEEE Intelligent
Systems , 2006, 21(1), 35-41.
17. Aguzzoli, S.; Avesani, P. & Massa, P. Compositional
recommender systems using case-based reasoning
approach. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR Workshop
on Recommender Systems, New Orleans, Lousiana,
USA, 2001.
18. Dron, J.; Mitchell, R.; Siviter,
CoFIND—An experiment in
collaborative filtering. Journal
Computer Applications , 2003,

P. & Boyne, C.
N-dimensional
of Network and
23(2), 131-142.

19. Glance, N.S. Community search assistant. I n
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces, Santa Fe, New
Mexico, United States. ACM Press, New York,
2001. pp. 91-96.
20. Yimam-Seid, D. & Kobsa, A. Expert finding
systems for organizations: Problem and domain
analysis and the DEMOIR approach. Journal of
Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 2003, 13(1), 1-24.
21. Arslan, B. & Ricci, F. Case-based session
modeling and personalization in a travel advisory
system, edited by F. Ricci & B. Smyth. I n
Proceedings of the AH’2002 Workshop on
Recommendation and Personalization in eCommerce, Malaga, Spain, 2002.
22. Starr, B.; Ackerman, M.S. & Pazzani, M. DoI-Care: A collaborative Web agent, edited by M.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

J. Tauber. In Proceedings of the Companion on
Human Factors in Computing Systems: Common
Ground Conference, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. ACM Press, New York, 1996. pp. 273-274.
23. Ackerman, M.S.; Starr, B. & Pazzani, M. The
Do-I-Care Agent: Effective social discovery and
filtering on the Web. In Proceedings of RIAO’97:
Computer-Assisted Information Searching on
the Internet, Montreal, CA, 1997, pp. 17-31.
24. Raje, R.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; Boyles, M.; Patel,
N. & Mostafa, J. D-SIFTER: A collaborative
information classifier. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Information,
Communications and Signal Processing, Singapore,
1997, 820-824.
25. Goldberg, K.; Roeder, T.; Gupta, D. & Perkins,
C. Eigentaste: A constant time collaborative
filtering algorithm. Information Retrieval , 2001,
4(2), 133-151.
26. Burke, R.; Hammond, K. & Cooper, E. Knowledgebased navigation of complex information spaces.
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Eighth Innovative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference,
Portland, Oregon. AAAI Press/The MIT Press,
1996. pp. 462-468.
27. Burke, R.; Hammond, K. & Young, B. The FindMe
approach to assisted browsing. IEEE Expert ,
1997, 12(4), 32-40.
28. McDonald, D.W. & Ackerman, M.S. Expertise
Recommender: A flexible recommendation system
and architecture. I n Proceedings of the 2000
ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States. ACM Press, New York, 2000.
pp. 231-240.
29. Masters, J.; Madhyastha, T.M. & Shakouri, A.
ExplaNet: A framework to manage and analyze
student-authored course content. In Annual
Proceedings of American Association of Engineering
Education, Nashville, TN, 2003.
30. Balabanovic, M. & Shoham, Y. Fab: Contentbased,
collaborative
recommendation.
Communications of the ACM, 1997, 40(3), 66-72.
31. Balabanovic, M. An adaptive Web page
recommendation service. In Proceedings of 1st
International Conference on Autonomous Agents,

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

Marina del Rey, California, United States. ACM
Press, New York, 1997. pp. 378-385.
32. Buono, P.; Costabile, M.F.; D’Atri, A.; Hemmje,
M.; Jaeschke, G.; Muscogiuri, C.; Pauselli, E.
& Barbini, F. FAIRWIS: A system for improving
online trade fair services. I n E-work and Ecommerce E2001, Venice, 2001, pp. 519-525.
33. Hauver, D. & French, J. Flycasting: Using
collaborative filtering to generate a playlist for
online radio. In Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Web Delivering of Music. IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, 2001, pp. 123-130.
34. Celma, O.; Ramírez, M. & Herrera, P. Foafing
the music: A music recommendation system
based on RSS feeds and user preferences. I n
Proceedings of 6th International Conference on
Music Information Retrieval, London, UK, 2005,
pp. 464-467.
35. Middleton, S.E.; De Roure, D.C. & Shadbolt,
N.R. Foxtrot Recommender System: User profiling,
ontologies and the World Wide Web. In Proceedings
of The Eleventh International World Wide Web
Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2002.
36. Konstan, J.A.; Miller, B.N.; Maltz, D.; Herlocker,
J.L.; Gordon, L.R. & Riedl, J. GroupLens: Applying
collaborative filtering to Usenet news.
Communications of ACM, 1997, 40(3), 77-87.
37. Resnick, P.; Iacovou, N.; Suchak, M.; Bergstrom,
P. & Riedl, J. GroupLens: An open architecture
for collaborative filtering of netnews. In Proceedings
of the 1994 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
United States. ACM Press, New York, 1994.
pp. 175-186.
38. Pemberton, D.; Rodden, T. & Procter, R. GroupMark:
A WWW recommender system combining
collaborative and information filtering, edited by
Emiliani, Pier Luigi & Stephanidis, Constantine.
In Proceedings of the 6th ERCIM Workshop on
‘User Interfaces for All’, Florence, Italy, 2000.
39. Asnicar, F. & Tasso, C. ifWeb: A prototype of
user model-based intelligent agent for documentation
filtering and navigation in the World Wide Web.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on User Modeling, Chia Laguna, Sardinia, 1997.
pp. 3-12.
40. Krulwich, B. Lifestyle Finder: Intelligent user
27

profiling using large-scale demographic data.
Artificial Intelligence Magazine, 1997, 18(2), 37-46.

Digital Libraries, San Antonio, Texas, United
States. ACM Press, New York, 2000. pp. 95-204.

41. Sorensen, H.; O’Riordan, A. & O’Riordan, C.
Profiling with the INFOrmer text filtering agent.
Journal of Universal Computer Science, 1997,
3(8), 988-1006.

50. Krulwich, B. & Burkey, C. The InfoFinder agent:
Learning user interests through heuristic phrase
extraction. IEEE Expert: Intelligent Systems
and Their Applications , 1997, 12(5), 22-27.

42. Nagendra Prasad, M.V. & Anagnost, T.D. InfoScout:
An active recommender agent. In Fifteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Madison,
Wisconsin, 1999.

51. Schafer, J.B. MetaLens: A framework for multisource
recommendations. Doctoral thesis, Department
of Computer Science, University of Northern
Iowa, 2002.

43. Liu, H. & Maes, P. InterestMap: Harvesting
social network profiles for recommendations.
In Proceedings of IUI Beyond Personalization
2005: A Workshop on the Next Stage of
Recommender Systems Research, San Diego,
CA, USA, 2005. pp. 54-59.

52. Schafer, J.B.; Konstan, J.A. & Riedl, J. View
through MetaLens: Usage patterns for a metarecommendation system. Proceedings of IEE
Software, 2004, 151(6), 267-279.

44. Mak, H.; Koprinska, I. & Poon, J. INTIMATE:
A Web-based movie recommender using text
categorization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/
WIC International Conference on Web Intelligence,
Halifax, Canada. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, 2003. pp. 602-605.
45. Kamba T.; Bharat K. & Albers, M.C. The Krakatoa
Chronicle: An interactive personalized newspaper
on the Web. In Proceedings of Fourth International
World Wide Web Conference, Boston, USA,
1995. pp.159-170.
46. Schwab, I.; Pohl, W. & Koychev, I. Learning to
recommend from positive evidence. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces, New Orleans, Louisiana, United
States. ACM Press, New York, 2000. pp. 241-247.
47. Lieberman, H. Letizia: An agent that assists
Web browsing, edited by Chris S. Mellish. I n
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc.: San Mateo, CA, USA, 1995. pp. 924-929.
48. Lieberman, H.; Van Dyke, N.W. & Vivacqua, A.
S. Let’s Browse: A collaborative Web browsing
agent. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, Los
Angeles, California, United States, ACM Press,
New York, 1999. pp. 65-68.
49. Mooney, R.J. & Roy, L. Content-based book
recommending using learning for text categorization.
In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on
28

53. Bueno, D.; Conejo, R. & David, A. METIOREW:
An objective oriented content based and collaborative
recommending system, edited by S. Reich, M.
Tzagarakis & P.D. Bra. In Revised Papers from
the International Workshops Ohs-7, Sc-3, and
Ah-3 on Hypermedia: Openness, Structural
Awareness, and Adaptivity. Springer-Verlag, London,
2001. pp. 310-314.
54. Miller, B.N.; Albert, I.; Lam, S.K.; Konstan,
J.A. & Riedl, J. MovieLens unplugged: Experiences
with an occasionally connected recommender
system. I n Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, Miami,
Florida, USA. ACM Press, New York, 2003. pp.
263-266.
55. Mukherjee, R.; Jonsdottir, G.; Sen, S. & Sarathi,
P. MOVIES2GO: An online voting based movie
recommender system. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Autonomous
Agents, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ACM Press,
New York, 2001. pp. 114-115.
56. Houstis, E.N.; Catlin, A.C.; Dhanjani, N.; Rice,
J.R.; Ramakrishnan, N. & Verykios, V.S.
MyPYTHIA: A recommendation portal for scientific
software and services. Concurrency and
Computation: Practice and Experience, 2002,
14(13-15), 1481-1505.
57. Geyer-Schulz, A.; Hahsler, M. & Jahn, M. myVU:
A next generation recommender system based
on observed consumer behavior and interactive
evolutionary algorithms, edited by Wolfgang Gaul,
Otto Opitz & Martin Schader. In Data Analysis:
Scientific Modeling and Practical Applications,
Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and
Knowledge Organization. Springer Verlag: Heidelberg,
Germany, 2000. pp. 447-457.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

58. Gori, M.; Maggini. M. & Martinelli, E. NAUTILUS:
Navigate Autonomously and Target Interesting
Links for Users. Technical Report RT-DII-20/99,
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione,
Università di Siena, Italy, 1999.
59. Billsus, D. & Pazzani, M.J. A hybrid user model
for news story classification, edited by J. Kay.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on User Modeling, Banff, Canada.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999. pp. 99-108.
60. Lang, K. NewsWeeder: Learning to filter netnews,
edited by Armand Prieditis & Stuart J. Russell.
In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference
on Machine Learning, Tahoe City, California,
USA. Morgan Kaufmann, 1995. pp. 331-339.
61. Linton, F.; Joy, D.; Schaefer, H.P. & Charron,
A. OWL: A recommender system for organizationwide learning. Educational Technology & Society,
2000, 3(1), 62-76.
62. Winiwarter, W. PEA — A personal email assistant
with evolutionary adaptation. International Journal
of Information Technology , 1999, 5(1).
63. Kilander, F.; Fahraeus, E. & Palme, J. PEFNA:
The private filtering news agent. Department of
Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm
University, 1997.
64. Mladenic, D. Personal WebWatcher: Design
and implementation . Technical Report IJS-DP7472, School of Computer Science, CarnegieMellon University, Pittsburgh, USA, 1996.
65. Tang, C. & Xu, Z. pFilter: Global information
filtering and dissemination using structured overlay
networks. In Proceedings of 9th IEEE International
Workshop on Future Trends of Distributed Computing
Systems, San Juan, Puerto Rico. IEEE Computer
Society, 2003. pp. 24-30.
66. Terveen, L.; Hill, W.; Amento, B.; McDonald,
D. & Creter, J. PHOAKS: A system for sharing
recommendations. Communications of the ACM,
1997, 40(3), 59-62.
67. Brunato, M. & Battiti, R. PILGRIM: A location
broker and mobility-aware recommendation system.
In Proceedings of the First IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications, Fort Worth (TX), USA. PERCOM.
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, 2003.
pp. 265-272.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

68. Xie, B.; Han, P. & Shen, R. PipeCF: A scalable
DHT-based collaborative filtering recommendation
system, edited by Stuart I. Feldman, Mike Uretsky,
Marc Najork, & Craig E. Wills. In Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on World
Wide Web—Alternate Track Papers & Posters ,
New York, USA. ACM Press, 2004. pp. 224-225.
69. McCarthy, J.F. Pocket Restaurant Finder: A
situated recommender system for groups. I n
Workshop on Mobile adhoc Communication at
the 2002 ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computer Systems, Minneapolis, 2002.
70. Miller, B.N.; Konstan, J.A. & Riedl, J. PocketLens:
Toward a personal recommender system. ACM
Transactions Information Systems, 2004, 22(3),
2004, 437-476.
71. Miller, B.N. Toward a Personal Recommender
System. Doctoral Thesis. University of Minnesota,
2003.
72. O’Connor, M.; Cosley, D.; Konstan, J.A. & Riedl,
J. PolyLens: A recommender system for groups
of users, edited by Wolfgang Prinz, Matthias
Jarke, Yvonne Rogers, Kjeld Schmidt & Volker
Wulf. In Proceedings of the Seventh European
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work, Bonn, Germany. Kluwer Academic, New
York, 2001. pp. 199-219.
73. Kawashima, H.; Matsushita, T. & Satake, S.
PORSCHE: A physical objects recommender
system for cell phone users. In Proceedings of
the Second International Workshop on Personalized
Context Modeling and Management for UbiComp
Applications, Orange County, California, 2006.
74. Ahmad Wasfi, A.M. Collecting user access patterns
for building user profiles and collaborative filtering.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces, Los Angeles, California,
United States. ACM Press, New York, 1999.
pp. 57-64.
75. Sorensen, H. & M. McElligott. PSUN: A profiling
system for Usenet news. In CIKM’95 Workshop
on Intelligent Information Agents, Baltimore MD,
1995.
76. Claypool, M.; Gokhale, A.; Miranda, T.; Murnikov,
P.; Netes, D. & Sartin, M. Combining contentbased and collaborative filters in an online newspaper.
In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR Workshop on
Recommender Systems, 1999.
29

77. Houstis, E.N.; Catlin, A.C.; Rice, J.R.; Verykios,
V.S.; Ramakrishnan, N. & Houstis, C.E. PYTHIAII: A knowledge/database system for managing
performance data and recommending scientific
software. ACM Transactions on Mathematical
Software, 2000, 26(2), 227-253.
78. Delgado, J.; Ishii, N. & Ura, T. Content-based
collaborative information filtering: Actively learning
to classify and recommend documents, edited
by M. Klusch & G. Weiß. In Proceedings of
the Second International Workshop on Cooperative
Information Agents II, Learning, Mobility and
Electronic Commerce For information Discovery
on the Internet. Springer-Verlag, London, 1998.
pp. 206-215.
79. Anderson, M.; Ball, M.; Boley, H.; Greene, S.;
Howse, N.; McGrath, S. & Lemire, D. RACOFI:
A rule-applying collaborative filtering system.
In International Workshop on Collaboration Agents:
Autonomous Agents for Collaborative Environments,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, 2003. NRC Publication
Number: 46507.
80. Binkley, J. & Young, L. Rama: An architecture
for Internet information filtering. Journal of Intelligent
Information Systems, 1995, 5(2), 81-99.
81. McCarey, F.; Cinneide, M.O. & Kushmerick, N.
RASCAL: A recommender agent for software
components in an agile environment. In Proceedings
of the 15th Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive
Science Conference, Castlebar, Ireland, 2004.
pp. 107-116.
82. McCarey, F.; Cinneide, M.O. & Kushmerick, N.
Rascal: A recommender agent for agile reuse.
Artificial Intelligence Review, 2005, 4(3-4), 253-276.
83. Boone, G. Concept features in Re:Agent, an
intelligent Email agent, edited by K.P. Sycara
& M. Wooldridge. In Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Autonomous Agents,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States. ACM
Press, New York, 1998. pp. 141-148.
84. Efron, M. & Geisler, G. Is it all about connections?
Factors affecting the performance of a linkbased recommender systems. In Proceedings
of ACM SIGIR Workshop on Recommender Systems,
New Orleans, USA, 2001.
85. Basu, C.; Hirsh, H. & Cohen, W. Recommendation
as classification: Using social and contentbased information in recommendation. In Proceedings
30

of the Fifteenth National/Tenth Conference on
Artificial Intelligence/Innovative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, Madison, Wisconsin, United
States. AAAI, Menlo Park, CA, 1998. pp. 714720.
86. Chee, S.H.; Han, J. & Wang, K. RecTree: An
efficient collaborative filtering method, edited
by Y. Kambayashi, W. Winiwarter & M. Arikawa.
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference
on Data Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery.
Springer-Verlag, London, 2001. pp.141-151.
87. Cosley, D.; Lawrence, S. & Pennock, D.M.
REFEREE: An open framework for practical
testing of recommender systems using
ResearchIndex. In Proceedings of 28th International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Hong
Kong, China. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002. pp. 35-46.
88. Shardanand, U. & Maes, P. Social information
filtering: Algorithms for automating “word of mouth”,
edited by I.R. Katz, R. Mack, L. Marks, M. B.
Rosson & J. Nielsen. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, Denver, Colorado, United States. ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley, 1995. pp. 210-217.
89. Shardanand, U. Social information filtering for
music recommendation . M.S Thesis, Program
in Media Arts and Sciences, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1994.
90. Alton-Scheidl, R; Ekhall, J.; van Geloven, O.;
Kovács, L.; Micsik, A.; Lueg, C.; Messnarz,
R.; Nichols, D.; Palme, J.; Tholerus, T.; Mason,
D.; Procter, R.; Stupazzini, E.; Vassali, M. &
Wheeler, R. SELECT: Social and collaborative
filtering of Web documents and news, edited
by A. Kobsa, and C. Stephanidis. In Proceedings
of the Fifth ERCIM Workshop on User Interfaces
for All , Dagstuhl, Germany, 1999. pp. 23-37.
91. Yan, T.W. & Garcia-Molina, H. SIFT—A tool for
wide-area information dissemination. In Proceedings
of USENIX 1995 Technical Conference on UNIX
and Advanced Computing Systems, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA,
USA, 1995. pp. 177-186.
92. Stefani, A. & Strapparava, C. Personalizing access
to Web sites: The SiteIF project. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Adaptive Hypertext
and Hypermedia held in Conjunction with the
Ninth ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia
- HYPERTEXT ‘98, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1998.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

93. Hayes, C. & Cunningham, P. Smart Radio—
Building music radio on the fly, edited by A.
Macintosh, M. Moulton & F. Coenen. In Proceedings
of Expert Systems, 20th SGES Conference on
KBS and Applied AI. Springer Verlag, London,
2000. pp. 129-140.
94. Hayes, C. & Cunningham, P. Smart Radio—
Community-based music radio. Knowledge Based
Systems , 2001, 14(3-4), 197-201.
95. Fu, X.; Budzik, J. & Hammond, K.J. Mining
navigation history for recommendation. I n
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States. ACM Press, New York,
2000. pp. 106-112.
96. Pazzani, J.M. & Billsus, D. Syskill & Webert:
Identifying interesting Web sites. In Proceedings
of the Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Eighth Innovative Applications
of Artificial Intelligence Conference, Portland,
Oregon. AAAI Press/The MIT Press, 1996. pp. 54-61.
97. Rocha, L.M. TalkMine: A soft computing approach
to adaptive knowledge recommendation, edited
by V. Loia & S. Sessa. In Soft Computing
Agents: New Trends For Designing Autonomous
Systems, Springer Studies in Fuzziness and
Soft Computing. Physica-Verlag GmbH, Heidelberg,
Germany, 2002. pp. 89-116.
98. Goldberg, D.; Nichols, D.; Oki, B.M. & Terry,
D. Using collaborative filtering to weave an information
tapestry. Communications of the ACM , 1992,
35(12), 61-70.
99. Schmitt, C.; Dengler, D. & Bauer, M. The MAUT
Machine: An adaptive recommender system. I n
Proceedings of ABIS Workshop, Hannover, Germany,
2002.
100.Burke, R. The Wasabi Personal Shopper: A
case-based recommender system. In Proceedings
of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artificial
intelligence and the Eleventh Innovative Applications
of Artificial Intelligence Conference, Orlando,
Florida, United States. AAAI, Menlo Park, CA,
1999. pp. 844-849.
101.Ali, K. & van Stam, W. TiVo: Making show
recommendations using a distributed collaborative
filtering architecture. In Proceedings of the Tenth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Seattle,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

WA, USA. ACM Press, New York, 2004. pp.
394-401.
102.Kim, C.Y.; Lee, J.K.; Cho, Y.H. & Kim, D.H.
VISCORS: A visual-content recommender for
the mobile Web. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2004,
19(6), 32-39.
103.Radev, D.R.; Fan, W. & Zhang, Z. WebInEssence:
A personalized web-based multi-document
summarization and recommendation system.
In Proceedings of NAACL Workshop on Automatic
Summarization, Pittsburgh, PA, 2001. pp.79-88.
104.Chen, L. & Sycara, K. WebMate: A personal
agent for browsing and searching, edited by
K.P. Sycara & M. Wooldridge. In Proceedings
of the Second International Conference on
Autonomous Agents, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
United States. ACM Press, New York, 1998.
pp. 132-139.
105.Chen, Z.; Meng, X.; Fowler, R.H. & Zhu, B.
WebSail: From online learning to Web search,
edited by Qing Li, Z. Meral Özsoyoglu, Roland
Wagner, Yahiko Kambayashi & Yanchun Zhang.
In Proceedings of the First International Conference
on Web Information Systems Engineering, Hong
Kong, China. IEEE Computer Society, 2000.
pp. 206-213.
106.Chen, Z.; Meng, X.; Zhu, B. & Fowler, R.H.
WebSail: From on-line learning to Web search.
Knowledge and Information Systems, 2002, 4(2),
219-227.
107.Cunningham, P.; Bergmann, R.; Schmitt, S.;
Traphoner, R.; Breen, S. & Smyth, B. WEBSELL:
Intelligent sales assistants for the World Wide
Web. Kunstliche Intelligenz (KI), 2001, 1, 28.
108.Cunningham, P.; Bergmann, R.; Schmitt, S.;
Breen, S.; Smyth, B. & Traphöner, R. Intelligent
support for online sales: The WEBSELL experience,
edited by R. Weber & C.G von Wangenheim.
In Proceedings of the Workshop Programme at
the Fourth International Conference on CaseBased Reasoning, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada, 2001. pp. 104-109.
109.Cooley, R.; Mobasher, B. & Srivastava, J. Web
mining: Information and pattern discovery on
the World Wide Web. In Proceedings of 9th
International Conference on Tools with Artificial
Intelligence, Newport Beach, CA, USA, 1997.
pp. 558-567.
31

110.Armstrong, R.; Freitag, D.; Joachims, T. &
Mitchell, T. WebWatcher: A learning apprentice
for the World Wide Web. In Proceedings of
AAAI Spring Symposium on Information Gathering
from Heterogeneous, Distributed Environments,
Stanford. AAAI Press, 1995.
111. Joachims, T.; Freitag, D. & Mitchell, T. WebWatcher:
A tour guide for the World Wide Web. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, Nagoya, Japan. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1997. pp. 770-775.
112.Salton, G. & McGill, M.J. Introduction to modern
information retrieval. New York: McGraw Hill
Publishing Company, 1983.
113.Herlocker, J.L.; Konstan, J.A.; Borchers, A. &
Riedl, J. An algorithmic framework for performing
collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the
22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, 1999. pp. 230-237.
114.Melville, P.; Mooney, R.J. & Nagarajan, R. Contentboosted collaborative filtering. In Proceedings
of Eighteenth National SIGIR-2001 Workshop
on Recommender Systems, New Orleans, LA,
2001.

115.Schein, A.I.; Popescul, A.; Ungar, L.H. & Pennock,
D.M. Methods and metrics for cold-start
recommendations. In Proceedings of the 25th
Annual international ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in information Retrieval,
Tampere, Finland. ACM Press, New York, 2002.
pp. 253-260.
116.Maltz, D. & Ehrlich, K. Pointing the way: Active
collaborative filtering, edited by I.R. Katz, R.
Mack, L. Marks, M.B. Rosson & J. Nielsen. I n
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, Colorado,
United States. Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. ACM Press/AddisonWesley Publishing Co., New York, 1995. pp.
202-209.
117.Rich, E. Stereotypes and user modeling, edited
by Alfred Kobsa & Wolfgang Wahlster. In User
Models in Dialog Systems. Springer-Verlag: Berlin,
1989. pp. 35-51.
118.Rich, E. User modeling via stereotypes. Cognitive
Science, 1979, 3, 329-354.
119.Pazzani, M.J. A Framework for collaborative,
content-based and demographic filtering. Artificial
Intelligence Review, 1999, 13(5-6), 393-408.

About the Author

Shri K. Nageswara Rao received Masters degree in Physics in 1988 from Sri Venkateswara
University, Tirupati, and Masters degree in Library and Information Science in 1992 from
Annamalai University. From 1993 to 1995, he worked at the National Informatics Centre, Hyderabad.
During 1995 to 1999, he worked as scientist at the Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory,
Kochi. Presently, he is Head, Technical Information Centre, Defence Reseach and Development
Laboratory, Hyderabad. His research interest encompass Internet technologies, web mining,
design and development of digital libraries, and recommender systems. He has published/
presented a number of technical papers in national/international journals/conferences.

32

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

Appendix 1
Filtering/recommender systems and type of filtering
techniques used for producing recommendations
Filtering/Recommender system

CBF

ACR News

X

Adaptive Place Advisor

X

Amalthaea

X

CF

HF

Amazon.com

X

Anatagonomy

X

ARAS

X

ArgueNet

X

AVATAR

X

Beehive

X

Bellcore Video Recommender

X

Book Recommender System (BRS )

X

CBCF

X

CinemaScreen Recommender Agent

X

CoCoA

X

CoFIND

X

Community Search Assistant

X

DEMOIR

X

Case-based Reasoning

Dietorecs

Case-based Reasoning

Do-I-Care

X

D-SIFTER

X

Eigentaste

X

Entrée

X

Expertise Recommender

X

ExplaNet

X

Fab

X

FAIRWIS

X

Flycasting

X

Foafing the Music

X

Foxtrot Recommender System

X

GroupLens

X

GroupMark

X

ifWeb

X

InfoFinder

X

INFOrmer

X

InfoScout

X

InterestMap

X

INTIMATE

X

Krakatoa Chronicle

X

LaboUr

X

Letizia
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

Others

X

33

Letizia

X

Let's Browse

X

LIBRA

X

LifestyleFinder

Demographic Filtering

MetaLens

X

METIOREW

X

MovieLens

X

Movies2Go

X

MyPYTHIA

X

MyVU

X

NAUTILUS

X

News Dude

X

NewsWeeder

X

OWL

X

PEA

X

PEFNA

X

Personal WebWatcher

X

pFilter

X

PHOAKS

X

PILGRIM

X

PipeCF

X

Pocket RestaurantFinder

X

PocketLens

X

PolyLens

X

PORSCHE

X

ProfBuilder
PSUN

X
X

P-Tango
PYTHIA-II

X
X

RAAP

X

RACOFI
Rama

X
X

RASCAL

X

Re: Agent

X

Recommendation Explorer

X

Recommender

X

RecTree

X

REFEREE

X

Ringo

X

SELECT
SIFT Netnews

34

X
X

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

SiteIF

X

SmartRadio

X

SurlLen
Syskill & Webert

X
X

TalkMine

X

Tapestry
The MAUT Machine

X
X

The Wasabi Personal Shopper

Case-based Reasoning

TiVo

X

VISCORS

X

WebInEssence

X

WebMate

X

WebSail

X

WebSell

X

WebSIFT

X

WebWatcher

X

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

35

Invitation to Authors
If you are a library professional/information manager/information scientist/information
specialist/computer professional or a research scholar with a vision for developments
in Information Technology, including software, processors, storage media, and devices
having an impact on library and information systems and services, we invite you to
submit a paper for DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology (DJLIT)
and enjoy the following benefits:

Ò

Expert editorial support: All papers are wetted by the eminent members of the
Editorial Board of DJLIT

Ò

Critical review: All papers are peer-reviewed by the experts in Library and Information
Science

Ò

Extensive abstracting and indexing for greater visibility: DJLIT is covered in major
indexing and abstracting services like LISA, The Informed Librarian, INSPEC
database and Wilson database

Ò

Open Journal System

Ò

Complimentary copies to the contributors

Please send your paper/queries to:

The Editor(s)
DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology
House Bulletin Group
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
e-mail:dbit@drdo.in

