DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 3, May 2008, pp. 60-65
© 2008, DESIDOC

Retrospective Conversion of Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library: Issues and Perspective
Neena Talwar Kanungo
Faculty of Library and Information Science, School of Social Sciences
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), New Delhi-110 068
E-mail: neenakanungo@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
Modern tool like computer has replaced traditional methods of storing and retrieving knowledge.
Retrospective conversion of manual bibliographical records on online mode is considered to be the first
step in the direction of computerisation process in the library. This paper attempts to analyse the
retrospective conversion process undertaken by the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML), New
Delhi, a premier social science research library in India.
Keywords: NMML, retrospective conversion, knowledge retrieval, knowledge epistemology, classification
systems, knowledge storage, knowledge society.

1. INTRODUCTION
The concept of Knowledge Organisation (KO)
is very old. It can be traced back to ancient Greece,
when Plato and his disciple Aristotle made efforts
to organise all available knowledge of that time.
Aristotle is known as the father of encyclopaedia
as he put together his entire treatise at one place.
There has been a sea change in the tools and
techniques of organising knowledge since the days
of ancient Greece.
KO is core to all library and information related
work. There is no any single definition which is
universally accepted, precise and useful to the library
and information science profession community. Satija1
has defined knowledge organisation as "conglomeration
of activities to sort and order knowledge to acquire,
utilise, evaluate, represent and communicate knowledge
for problem solving". Going by this crisp and carefully
worded definition one can suggest that the sphere
of KO encompasses a wide array of concepts, like
knowledge epistemology, classification systems,
Received on 14 August 2007; Revised on 10 October 2007

subject analysis, use of classification in online
systems and on the web, automatic classification
including subject cataloguing, subject headings,
descriptive cataloguing, OPAC, etc. KO tools and
techniques basically provide control to the user as
well as the librarian/information scientist to run and
use the information storage and retrieval system
efficiently.
As an old saying goes, "Library is a store
house of knowledge". But it has no meaning unless
desired documents/information can be disseminated
to the users through an efficient storage and retrieval
system. This requires that library and information
science professionals must possess sound knowledge
of the tools and systems of KO.
One of the main features of the information
society, which is now inching towards knowledgebased society, is the collection, storage, repackaging,
transmission and dissemination of knowledge. Libraries,
which are catering to the research needs of academics
and researchers, are facing tremendous challenges.

Information and communication technologies (ICTs)
in the past decade have transformed the nature of
library and information services. The concept of
knowledge society has further bearing on these
services. For equitable disbursement and utilisation
of knowledge, the library and information services
have to keep pace with the technological changes
and innovations as well as the knowledge component.
In the developing countries, the challenge appears
to be more acute as libraries, as the first step, have
to go for retrospective conversion of the manually
prepared bibliographic records to the machine-readable
ones.

2. EVOLUTION OF RETROSPECTIVE
CONVERSION PROCESS: INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONAL SCENARIO
Retrospective conversion means conversion of
manually prepared or printed catalogue records of
a library into a machine-readable form. According
to Bryant Philip 2 : "retrospective conversion is one
such area where once money has been invested,
a permanent benefit is assured." Though the process
is expensive, laborious and time-consuming, but all
these can be justified in relation to the benefits it
generates for the researchers community.
During the 1980s, retrospective conversion generated
considerable interest at the international level. Henriette
Avram of Library of Congress argued that "complete
conversion of our retrospective catalogues has become
not so much as ideal as a necessity". Philip Bryant
considered it a topic of vital importance to the
national and international library community. David
Stoker3 observed that "retrospective catalogue conversion
is a one-off cost which will ultimately result in
savings in staff’s time and efforts in the libraries
concerned and will also convey tangible benefits to
the library community as a whole." During 1995-96,
Philip Bryant, with a group of specialists, conducted
two studies: first on higher education sector and
second on other types of libraries in Britain. They
basically studied the logistical and financial issues
involving the retrospective cataloguing programme.
In the higher education sector, British academic
libraries had 28 million under-catalogued items awaiting
retrospective conversion. The study on other types
of libraries, financed by British Library Research
and Innovations Centre, estimated that public library
authorities had about 12 million records for retrospective
conversion. The report of these studies addressed
the complexity of the task and recommended the
need for having a coordinated national programme
to complete the task of retrospective conversion.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

One must mention here the emergence of
retrospective conversion services rendered by Online
Computer Library Centre (OCLC) during this period.
OCLC made retrospective conversion easy and quick.
Further, it provided conversion services with OCLC
MARC records. This helped many libraries to convert
their manual bibliographical records into machinereadable format. OCLC has greatly facilitated searching
of the entire collection, and improvement in the
circulation of all types of records, thereby making
possible for the users to find hidden sources in
their respective libraries.
In the Indian context, libraries have started
gearing themselves to retrospective conversion to
give the boost to more and more resource sharing
among libraries, though in laggardly manner the
challenges put forward by information and communication
technologies, networking, electronic information, etc.
In India there are more than 65,000 libraries (all
types). Out of these, an overwhelming 97 per cent
are traditional libraries, not even 3 per cent are
automated; there are only 300 electronic libraries.
So inspite of all the hype, India is still very slow
in embrcing the benefits of modernisation. The University
Grants Commission (UGC) has initiated efforts in
this direction through its INFLIBNET Project. This
project has made the beginning of computerisation
of academic libraries in India. The focus is to access
information from anywhere and boost the concept
of resource sharing among libraries. Under this
Programme 142 university libraries 4 have already
been computerised so far.

3. NMML: A PROFILE
The NMML, popularly known as Teen Murti Library
has three divisions: a memorial museum, a library
on modern India, and a centre for contemporary
studies.
The library with its rich resources on modern
Indian history and contemporary India has occupied
a distinct position in the academic world of scholars
in social sciences. Besides in English language,
the library has a collection of books in some forty
odd foreign languages. Except National Library, Kolkata,
perhaps no other library in India possesses books
on so many languages. The collection of this library
also includes some of the very rare books like,
"Charyapada", the first book written in Bengali language
in 10th or 12th century A.D (the library has photocopy
of this book). The NMML also has in its collection
the lectures delivered by Swami Vivekananda in the
World's Parliament of Religions held at Chicago
61

during 1893. Eminent social science researchers
from India and abroad frequent this institution. A
study conducted by Kanungo5 reveals that the NMML
is the top ranked library which is frequently used
by the social scientists. It is also ranked first with
regard to its collection in the area of social sciences.
Its holdings include documentary and non-documentary
sources as shown in Table 1.
Table1. NMML holdings
Sources

Number

Books

2,32,521

Maps

914

Periodicals

497

Periodicals Bound

30,000 approx.

Private and Institutional Papers

1000

Oral History Transcripts

More than 1000

Photographs

1,11,000

CD-ROMs

114

Microfilms

18,000

Microfiche

51,000

Thesis on Microfilm

1287

The NMML has computerised bibliographical
records of its holdings (books, manuscripts and
maps) by outsourcing the job to two agencies,
which started the job in September 2003 and took
three years to complete the assignment in December
2006. The total number of documents converted
retrospective are 1,83,000 approximately. The same
number of documents have been reclassified,
recatalogued and assigned subject headings. Besides
retrospective conversion, the agencies also put barcode
labels on the books and did the processing and
shelving work. The library has been continuously
creating computerised bibliographical records of books
since October 2003 and so far 2,43,521 bibliographical
records of books have been put in machine readable
format 6 .

4. METHODOLOGY
The retrospective conversion was undertaken
subject-wise. Subject headings to the books were
assigned according to Library of Congress Subject
Heading (LCSH) 26th edition. Dewey Decimal
Classification (DDC) 21st edition was used for
classification and AACR-II for cataloguing. The agencies,
in consultation with the NMML staff developed a
suitable format for inputting the data in UNIMARC
version 3 format. The data input sheets prepared by
the project staff was checked by the supervisors for
62

correctness of data with regard to cataloguing,
classification, subject heading and UNIMARC format.
Then these sheets were randomly checked by the
NMML staff members. The agencies then rectified
the errors and omissions detected during checking.
The NMML uses LibSys version 4 on Windows 98
operating system. The processed data was downloaded
into LibSys Version 4 (UNIMARC version 3 format)
on Windows 98 through ISO 2709 exchange format.
The NMML decided September 2003 as cut off
period; books acquired before this period were taken
for retrospective conversion by the library staff. The
work on retrospective conversion was started
simultaneously by the outsourcing agencies as well
as by the NMML staff. This decision helped in the
smooth running of the library without having backlog
work for the staff. The library staff was also given
training and orientation to carry forward this job.

5. LIBRARY STAFF’S PERSPECTIVE
The NMML was using Colon Classification (6th
edition) for classification and Classified Catalogue
Code (5th edition) for cataloguing of documents.
These two indigenous schemes were used uninterruptedly
since the inception of NMML. With the emergence
of new disciplines and multidisciplinary nature of
the documents the library staff was compelled to
use local variation for assigning class numbers
quite often. Hence, it felt the need for retrospective
conversion of library catalogue records, reclassification
and recataloguing of library holdings in order to
keep pace with the changing time. However, for
more than three decades, the library had been using
the Colon Classification (CC) and the Classified
Catalogue Code (CCC) for classifying and cataloguing
its holdings; hence the switch over to DDC 21st
edition and AACR-II was not an easy option initially.

5.1 Reclassification of Documents
Initially, the NMML staff faced difficulty in assigning
class numbers to books according to the DDC scheme.
They found it hard to find specific class numbers
for books relating to Indian themes, especially in
the case of government documents, like gazetteers,
etc. So, very often they were forced to assign only
broad class numbers. It clearly indicates the inherent
limitation in the DDC with regard to the Indian
themes. To illustrate this point, it so happened that
the books classified according to the CC under the
main class 'History' have gone to class 'Political
Science' in the DDC. While the classes 'History'
(V) and 'Political Science' (W) were arranged in
close proximity in the CC, these subjects are placed
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

far from each other (900 and 320 respectively) in
the DDC.
In a research library broad class numbers do
not help much in the fruitful organisation of documents.
The staff was of the view that the DDC numbers
alone cannot be assigned to maintain specificity of
the collection, and hence, they mix both the schemes;
this has resulted in strange class numbers. For
example, documents on Indian political parties, works
on Indira Gandhi (Indirana), Nehru (Nehruana), and
Gandhi (Gandhiana) and biographies are given class
numbers which are a mix of DDC 21st edition and
CC 6th edition and book numbers are solely assigned
according to CC 6th edition. Some of the examples
from the library catalogue illustrate this very explicitly.
I) Biography
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad: A Biographical Memoir
by Mahadev Desai
DDC 21st Ed. Call Number CC 6th Ed.Call Number
923.254M88A

HI

w2,M88A

H1

II) Generalia
Gandhiana
O8G

zG

Nehruana
O8N

zN

zI

III) Political Parties
The Congress Splits by Basant Chatterjee
324.254M85

Most importantly, in the international horizon
the sharing of information is adhered to on the
basis of some norms and standards; non-adherence
will adversely affect resource sharing. In order to
get effective and powerful organisation of large amounts
of documents and information in all possible forms,
the library and information specialists need to synthesize
traditional library concepts and computerise knowledge
storage and retrieval tools such as computer -based
indexing and storage and retrieval. However, whatever
classification and cataloguing standards one chooses,
it should be followed in totality.

5.2 Recataloguing of Documents

Indirana
O8I

to Ranganathan in 1932: "You say you write in your
book that the DC has been mangled by the … Let
me know the addresses of the libraries. I am going
to sue them in a court of law" 7 . During the Indian
Library Conference (1944) when some of the friends
of Ranganathan devised a schedule for some of the
Indian classics for the DC scheme and wanted to
adopt it, at that time Ranganathan cautioned : "You
don't know what you are in for! If you, although
Melvil Dewey is no longer living, you don't know
what kind of legal successors he has left and if you
begin to mangle it again with your own numbers,
you may have to face a court of law". Further Ranganathan
expressed that Dewey wanted to collaborate with
him by putting Indian classics, literature and culture
schedules in the DC to curtail the American bias.
But this could not happen due to Dewey's death.

L01

V2,4M85'N69

L01

Government publications and private collections
segregated from other collections by the use of
alphabetical device. For example, class numbers of
all the government publications prefixed by capital
'G' alphabet and class numbers of all the private
collections are prefixed by the first capital letter of
the person's name to whom the collection belongs.
This raises an important question that under
which rules the library has made such deviation in
the scheme. This reminds what Melvil Dewey wrote

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

The library also recatalogued books according
to the AACR II (earlier library was following CCC 5th
Ed.). The staff gradually learnt the rules, but initially
lack of knowledge of the AACR II rules and proper
training to use the code were the bottlenecks. Library
staff was also not acquainted with assigning subject
headings using LCSH list to the documents but
they gradually overcome the problem.

5.3 Ranganathan's Fourth Law of
Library Science and Retrospective
Conversion Process
Retrospective conversion of bibliographical records
into machine-readable form fulfils the objective of
Ranganathan's fourth law of library science, i.e.
Save the time of the reader. Online catalogue will
speed up the reader's search for required information.
It not only helps users find information quickly but
also ensures that the data should be structured in
the online mode in such a way that it can be
retrieved by the users easily. Retrospective conversion

63

process has definitely saved the time of the reader
by creating a user-friendly and useful online catalogue
of library records. The other laws of library science
devised by Ranganathan also go in consonance
with the retrospective conversion process. Ranganathan8
categorically stated: "The computer in library activities
is one of the versatile forms in which electronics
can help mankind. We must accept the computers.
We must derive all the benefits it is capable of
giving to us. It can relive us of much of repetitive
routine work; and thus, it can release man to high
kinds of work with creative element". Gnoli9 observes
that "computers exist to manage and process labelled
data, so they are the perfect ally of knowledge
organisation systems."
Though library staff of the NMML agreed that
computerised access to library holdings has given
the users easy and prompt access to required information,
they were of the view that Indian tools for knowledge
organisation are still better to organise Indian themes
and can be used in the era of networked society.

6. USER'S PERSPECTIVE
The NMML has made online the bibliographical
details of its holdings comprising books and maps
in the first phase of computerisation. In the second
phase, the library is planning to make online
bibliographical records of other holdings which include
periodicals, photographs, private and institutional
papers, oral history transcripts, microfilms, microfiches,
theses on microfilms and CD-ROMs. The users of
this library are getting used to searching books on
the Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC). A
random survey of the OPAC users of the NMML
revealed satisfactory findings. A structured questionnaire
was given to 21 regular users of the library; 81 per
cent of the respondents belonged to the university
faculties and 19 per cent were the NMML research
fellows. And 81 per cent of the users were using
the library for more than five years and the 19 per
cent using it for more than one year. All the respondents
were aware that the library has shifted to the online
catalogue from the traditional card catalogue. While
67 per cent felt the need for assistance by the

library staff in while using the OPAC, 33 per cent
did not needed any assistance. Eighty-six per cent
of the users have not received any training in using
the OPAC and were interested in getting the same
to use it effectively in their research. Forty-three
per cent (43%) of the users also expressed that
they made use of the card catalogue along with the
OPAC. The reason was that they were not able to
search or were not getting full details of the required
book in OPAC.
Respondents were asked about the preference
on their approach to OPAC. The first preference
was given to author followed by title, subject and
class number (Table 2). The users are less interested
in class numbers because they may not be familiar
with the classification scheme, author and title
approaches received the first and second ranks
respectively. This indicates that the users were
serious researchers and were well-versed with the
literature published in their field. Subject approach
was not much used by the target group perhaps
because of their less familiarity with the subject
headings. One must keep in mind that the NMML
is a research library and its clientele is highly
knowledgeable researchers.
The users compared the traditional card catalogue
with computerised catalogue and all the respondents
said that in comparison to card catalogue computerised
catalogue is less time consuming. Seventy-six per
cent felt that it (OPAC) is easy to operate, 71 per
cent found it more systematic, for 67 per cent of
the respondents it provided better subject approach
in comparison to card catalogue and 62 per cent
found it more user-friendly (Table 3).

7. CONCLUSION
The merger of traditional tools with modern
technologies has made the beginning where libraries
are no longer considered being the dark rooms
filled with book shelves. Collaborative efforts of library
professionals, management personnel, and ICT experts
have converted traditional libraries into electronic
libraries to digital and virtual libraries. In order to

Table 2. Approaches of the users to browse OPAC
Approaches of the Users to Browse OPAC

64

Weighted Index (WI*)

Rank

By Name of the Author

4.90

1

By Title of the Book

3.66

2

By Subject of the Book

2.95

3

By Class Number of the Book

1.09

4

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

Table 3. Comparison of card catalogue with OPAC by users
Comparison between Card Catalogue and OPAC

Percentage

Rank

OPAC is less time consuming

100%

1

OPAC is easy to operate

76%

2

OPAC is more systematic

71%

3

OPAC provides better subject approach

67%

4

OPAC is more user friendly

62%

5

OPAC makes it easy to locate books on the shelves

48%

6

meet the challenges set by the ever changing technologyoriented environment the research libraries must
adhere to changes. This will help in rendering efficient
and specialised library services to its patrons facilitating
resource sharing. For this, the librarians have to
use the latest technology and upgrade their professional
skills by undergoing technology-oriented training
periodically. Concepts, like metadata, Internet
cataloguing, knowledge management, knowledge
organisation, Z39.50, digital library, virtual library
have become very common in the profession. Library
professionals should not only understand these concepts
but also take steps to implement them. Libraries
in India are far behind due to paucity of resources,
lack of knowledge or skilled labour, but surely a
beginning has been made and much has to be
accomplished. In India, millions of records are available
in the varied traditional forms; if they became accessible
online to the users community they will definitely
prove to be of immense value for research.
Retrospective conversion process of the NMML
is a right step in this direction. However, the National
Library of India, which is one of the depository
libraries, should take the lead by converting all
bibliographical records of its holdings into machinereadable ones. The database created of all these
records should be made accessible to all types of
libraries in India to match and download the records.
This can reduce the time, money and man hours
spent individually by the libraries in going for online
catalogues in India.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author thanks Prof. B.K.Sen for his generous
suggestions and the staff of the NMML for their
valuable cooperation.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

REFERENCES
1. Satija, M. P. A dictionary of knowledge organisation.
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 2004.
2. Bryant, Philip. Making most of our libraries: the
report of two studies on retrospective conversion
of library catalogues in the United Kingdom with
recommendations for national strategy. British
Library Research and Innovation Report 53.BLRIC.
http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/services/papers/bl/blri053/
3. Stoker, David. Computer cataloguing in retrospect.
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science,1997,
29(4), 175.
4. Prem Chand, et al. Retrospective conversion
tool for academic libraries in India: a initiative
by INFLIBNET. CALIBER-2003, INFLIBNET,
Ahmedabad.
5. Kanungo, N. T. Information seeking behaviour of
researchers in history and political science in
Delhi,1997,University of Delhi, Delhi. (Unpublished
thesis)
6. Interview with the NMML staff on 29-11-2006.
7. Ranganathan`s monologue on Melvil Dewey. http:/
/www.hyperorg.com/misc/ranganathan_on_dewey
_transcript.html
8. Ranganathan,S.R. Prolegomena to library
classification. Vol.1. 3rd Ed., 1967, SRELS,
Bangalore,.
9. Gnoli, Claudio. Is there a role for traditional
knowledge organisation systems in the digital
age? http://eprints.rclis.org/archives/00001415/
01/kos-role.htm

65

