DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 3, May 2008, pp. 66-68
© 2008, DESIDOC

SHORT COMMUNICATION

Copyright Protection of Performers Rights
Shweta S. Deshpande
PG Department of Studies in Law
Karnataka University, Dharwad-580 003
E-mail: Shweta_shurpali@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
The paper deals with copyright protection of performers rights. It defines the term performers rights
and discusses the provisions of copyright law which deal with the protection of performers rights.
Keywords: Performers rights, copyright, intellectual property, sound recording, visual recording, broadcast,
injunction, Anton Pillar order.

1. INTRODUCTION
Copyright is a form of intellectual property protection
granted under the law to the creators of the original
works of authorship. 1 It is an exclusive right given
by law for a certain term of years to an author,
composer, etc., (or his assignee) to print, publish
and sell copies of his original work.
In India the first Copyright Act was passed in
1914. It was a replica of English Copyright Act of
1911 suitably modified to make it applicable to the
then British India. The Act, presently in force was
legislated in the year 1957 and is known as Copyright
Act, 1957 as amended by Copyright (Amendment)
Act, 1999.
The Indian Copyright Act for a very long time
did not recognised the rights of performers like
musicians, singers, actors, acrobats, etc. It was
only recently when the technological changes threatened
the livelihood of performers that the law intervened
to protect performers. In the year 1994, the Copyright
Act was amended. The amendment introduced the
recognition of the rights of the performer. These
rights are called performers rights. Section 38 of
the Copyright Act confers rights to performers like
actors, dancers, jugglers, acrobats etc. Under section
2 (gg) of the Act, “performer” includes an acrobat,
Received on 23 August 2007

musician, singer, actor, juggler, snake charmer, a
person delivering lecture, or any other person who
makes a performance. “Performance” in relation to
performers’ right means any visual or asoutic presentation
made by one or more performers. For example,
student performing in a school play is a performer
within the meaning of section 2(gg) and his rights
are well within the scope of protection accorded by
Section 38. 2

2. RIGHTS OF A PERFORMER UNDER THE
COPYRIGHT PROTECTION ACT
The performer has the exclusive right to do the
following under the Copyright Protection Act:

2.1 Right to Make Sound Recording or Visual
Recording of the Performance
A performer has the right to make sound recording
or visual recording of his performance under Section
1 (xx) of the Copyright Protection Act. He also has
the right to authorise the recording of a live performance,
and the exclusive right to make sound recording
from which such sounds may be produced regardless
of the medium on which such recording is made or
method by which the sounds are reproduced. Copyright
will subsist in a sound recording only if it is lawfully

made. If the recording includes any material which
is an infringement of any literary, dramatic or musical
work, copyright will not subsist in the sound recording.
Musical works and sound recordings embodying
the music are considered separate subject-matter
for copyright. The copyright in the recording of
music is separate from the copyright in the music.
Copyright in the music vests in the composer and
the copyright in the music recorded vests in the
producer of the sound recording. Where the song
has not been written down and the composer who
is also the performer records the song two copyrights
come into existence simultaneously, one for the
music and one for the sound recording. 3

2.4 To communicate the Work to the Public
otherwise than by Broadcast
Any other means to communicate the work to
the public, other than the broadcast.

3. INFRINGEMENT OF PERFORMERS
RIGHTS
Section 38 of the Copyright Protection Act
strengthens the rights of the performers by making
certain provisions. Under this if any person without
the consent of the performer, does any of the following
acts, he will be deemed to have infringed performers
rights. These acts includes :

2.2 Right to Produce a Sound Recording or
Visual Recording of the Performance

(a) Sound recording or visual recording of the
performance; or

A performer has a right to produce sound recording
or visual recording of his performance. He has the
right to make copies of the recording, the right to
issue copies of the recording to the pubic, the right
to rent or lend copies. However, the recording must
display following particulars:

(b) Reproduction of the sound recording or visual
recording or reproduction for the purposes different
from those for which performer gave his consent

(a) A copy of the certificate granted by the Board
of Film Certification
(b) The name and address of the person who has
made the video film and a declaration that he
has obtained the necessary license or consent
of the owner of the copyright in the work for
making the video film, and
(c) The name and address of the owner of the
copyright in such work.
Failure to comply with the above is a punishable
offence. This is done with a view to check and
detect piracy.

2.3. Right to Broadcast the Performance
Performers also have the right to prevent their
live performances being broadcast.
‘Broadcast’ means communication to the public,
(i) by any means of wireless diffusion, whether in
any one or more of the forms of signs, sounds, and
visual image, (ii) or by wire, and includes a rebroadcast.4
In case of programme broadcast, which includes
literary, dramatic or musical works or records in
which independent copyright may subsist, broadcasting
organisation should obtain the consent or license
of the copyright owners in the work in question.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

(c) Broadcasts the performance, and
(d) Communicate the performance to the public
otherwise than by broadcast.
However, the above Acts are said to be infringed
by a person only when these Acts are committed
during the continuance of the performers rights.
When a performer has consented to the incorporation
of his performance in a cinematograph film the
performer losses the right to complain of infringement
of that performance which means he assigned his
entire rights and that performance to the producer
of the cinematograph film.

4. ACTS NOT CONSTITUTING INFRINGEMENT OF A PERFORMERS RIGHTS
Under Section 39, the following acts do not
constitute infringement of a performer’s right:
(a) Making of any sound recording of or visual
recording for private use of the person making
such recording or society for the purpose of
bonafide teaching or research
(b) Fair dealing of excerpts of a performance in
reporting of current events or for bonafide review,
teaching or research or
(c) Other acts with any necessary adaptations and
modifications which do not constitute infringement
67

of copyright under Section 52. These acts are
reproduction for the use of judicial proceeding
—Section 52(1) (c), reproduction for the use of
members of a legislature—Section 52(1) (d),
and the use in a certified copy in accordance
with any law in force—Section 52(1) (e).
(d) Use of sound recording or visual recording of
the performance in the course of the activities
of an educational institution if the audience are
limited to the students, and parents and guardians
of the students and person directly connected
with the activities of the institution—Section 52
(1) (i).
The aforesaid can be done only with the sound
recording or visual recording of the performance.
Accordingly the making of a sound recording or
visual recording for the aforesaid purposes cannot
also be an infringement.
Where copyright or performer’s right subsists
in respect of any work or performance that has
been broadcast, a license to reproduce such broadcast
will require the consent of the owner of rights or
performer, as the case may be, or both of them.

5. REMEDIES AGAINST INFRINGEMENT OF
PERFORMERS RIGHTS
The following remedies may be availed in a suit
against infringement of performers rights under Sections
55 and 63 to 70 of the Copyright Protection Act.
(i)

Civil remedies: Under civil remedies, the owner
of the copyright, or his assignee or his exclusive
licensee or a legatee may obtain (a) injunction
or (b) claim damages

(ii) Criminal remedies: In addition to civil remedy
the Copyright Act enables the owner of the
copyright to take criminal proceedings against
the infringer. The offence of infringement of copyright
is punishable with imprisonment which may

extend from a minimum period of six months
to a maximum period of three years or with a
fine of the order of Rs 50,000/- to Rs 2.00 lakhs
(iii) Anton Pillar order: In appropriate cases the
court may on an application by the plaintiff
pass an exparte order requiring the defendant
to permit the plaintiff accompanied by solicitor
or attorney to enter his premises and take
inspection of relevant documents and articles
and take copies thereof or remove them for
safe custody. The necessity of such an order
arises where there is a grave danger of relevant
documents and infringing articles are being removed
or destroyed so that ends of justice will not be
defeated.

6. CONCLUSION
The above discussion reveals that copyright is
a form of intellectual property protection granted
under the law to the creators of the original works
of authorship. Copyright law confers exclusive right
to performers like actors, musicians, jugglers, snake
charmers, etc. to do certain acts. These rights
conferred on the performers are a positive step in
encouraging their creativity.

REFERENCES
1.

Chattejee, Sumitra Kumar. Law of copyright:
An overview. I n Law of Intellectual Property
Rights, edited by Dr Sukanta K.Nanda. Orissa
Law Reviews , Cuttak, 2003, p.136.

2.

Wadhera, B. L. Law relating to patents, trademarks,
copyright, designs and geographical indications,
2nd Ed., Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt Ltd.,
Delhi, 2000, p.393.

3.

Narayanan, P. Intellectual property law, 3rd Ed.
Eastern Law House, Kolkata, p.270.

4.

Annual Survey of Indian Law, Vol.XXV. 1989,
p.196.

About the Author
S h w e t a D e s h a p a n d e obtained LLM from Karnatak University, Dharwad. She has submitted
the doctrinal research on Problems and Perspective of Waste Management in India under the
guidance of Dr C.Rajashekhar, Dean, Faculty of Law, Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka.

68

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(3)

