DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 7-21
© 2008, DESIDOC

An Overview of Online Exhibitions
Leong Chee Khoon and Chennupati K. Ramaiah2
Institute of Technical Education Headquarters, 10 Diver Drive, Singapore 138683
E-mail: leonghub@hotmail.com
2

Muffakham Jah College of Engineering & Technology
Road No. 3, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad-500 036
E-mail: chennupati_kramaiah@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
To save our culture and heritage collections, online exhibitions are good conviction. Apart from
saving and propagating the knowledge they play a vital role as communications link between highly
valuable collections and the general public. This paper gives an overview of online exhibitions, their need,
types, benefits and drawbacks. It also describes various authoring tools to create user interfaces and
such online exhibitions. Some of the historical online exhibitions have also been discussed. The paper
conclude that online museums have consequently reduced the distance between visitor and historical
monuments and also the demand for original work has increased because of repeated exposure on World
Wide Web.
Keywords: Online exhibitions, virtual exhibitions, physical exhibitions, authoring tools, SCARN.

1. INTRODUCTION
In this digital era, technological advances are
rapidly changing the environment in which we live.
The impact of technology can be felt in many areas,
one of which is heritage information delivery. Today,
a large percentage of children grow up in cities
around the world, where old and culturally significant
architectural structures often have to give way to
modern buildings due to land scarcity. The loss of
such heritage icons and reduced interaction between
children and their parents who spend increasingly
long hours at work, has resulted in many school
children not being well informed of the historical
richness of the ancestors in their society. This is
quite unfortunate, because the way leading to nationhood
for many countries is often paved with interesting
and noteworthy events. Such events form an important
part of a country's heritage. This information has to
be passed to school children, so that they can
better understand the efforts and sacrifices of the
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

people who built the nation, understand the cultural
diversity in modern society, and contribute productively
to foster unity.
This is where heritage exhibitions enter into the
picture. During the sixties, the new and emerging
educational role of museums and other such archival
centres, e.g. galleries 1 was introduced. Such
establishments hold carefully developed information
resources of immense breadth and depth, which is
continuously refreshed by ongoing research studies.
They have a vital role to play as communications
link between their highly valuable collections and
the general public, in sharing and propagating the
knowledge in their collections.

2. EXHIBITIONS
Exhibitions are public display of industrial or
commercial products or artifacts. There are three
major types of exhibitions: industrial, regional and
7

universal. Industrial exhibitions are devoted to the
stimulation and progress of a specific industry or
group of industries in a particular geographical region.
An example is the Singapore Food Festival, which
promotes local Singaporean food. The second type
is regional in scope and is used to commemorate
a historical event. An example is the 25 Years of
Nation Building 1959-1984 exhibition, which
commemorated the 25th anniversary of Singapore's
independence. The last type of exhibition is the
universal exposition, which is international in scope
and is usually sponsored by a national government;
it displays a wide variety of products from many
countries in the world. An example is COMDEX,
which is an annual American exhibition that showcases
innovations in the computer, telecommunications
and consumer electronics industries from around
the world.

2.1 The Need for Exhibitions
Dudley defines an exhibition to be essentially
a promotional event that is designed to communicate
with the targeted audiences some form of information,
products or services 2 . The primary objective of an
exhibition is to provide a communication opportunity
for achieving marketing objectives, mostly involving
buyer/seller transactions. Visitors attend exhibitions
for various reasons such as: see new products and
developments; obtain product and technical information;
talk with and compare potential suppliers; gain new
ideas and information; find suppliers for whom they
can become distributors; and for social reasons.
According to Dudley exhibitions serve to: maximum
exploitation of events and occasions; reach-out to
the desired audience; opportunities to create a dialogue
with its target audiences on a personal basis; and
achievement of communications objectives for a wide
range of organisations 2 .

2.2 Physical Exhibitions
Physical exhibitions are found in traditional museums
wherein the line of communication is direct and the
curator communicates directly with the visitors 3 .
These exhibitions have to employ much more subtle
means to reach so many different types of visitors.
Physical museums 4 have been a source of traditional
information; drawing and interpreting their collections
in carefully designed architectural spaces for their
visitors like schools, public, tourists, scholars, etc.
According to Teather 5 , there are a number of factors
normally considered in actual traditional exhibitions.
These include international boundaries, customs
procedures for the movement of works of art, design
8

of exhibition space, loan agreements, insurance
policies, conservation work, transportation time for
works of art, fixed hours of operation, and number
of visitors that can be handled simultaneously.
Physical museums 6 choose cultural artifacts
for display in such a way that they incorporate the
narratives about history, nature, technology, culture
and science. One of the most important visible statements
that museums make is the selection, labelling and
physical arrangement of individual items and whole
collections. Physical museums tend to carry out a
range of activities and produce a variety of resources.
The purpose is to make visitors aware of what is
available in the collections, to guide visitors through
the collections in numerous ways, and increase
their understanding and enjoyment of these collections.
Physical museums give visitors a real sense of the
artifacts on exhibit. People visit art museums to
enjoy, explore and understand cultural backgrounds
of the physical exhibitions that operate on the real
space that can communicate directly with the public.

2.3 Limitations of Physical Exhibitions
The limitations of physical exhibitions lie in
their size and bulk1. Although they have some degree
of mobility (hence called as "travelling exhibitions"),
they are in a fixed location for most of the time. This
limits the demographic reach of their target audience:
while students in one area are viewing the exhibition,
their counterparts in other areas have to wait for the
exhibition to be unpacked, moved and re-installed
at their respective sites-processes that are expensive
in terms of costs, manpower and time. Besides,
physical museums need extensive efforts to implement
the ideas in addition to facing a few constraints like
manpower-heavy operations, costs and space. Every
initiative has to be planned in advance and suffers
from many limitations in terms of space, cost and
reachable audience. Furthermore, physical exhibition
space can never provide as much information as the
virtual space of the Internet. Static representations
are not efficient for portraying real life events, as we
need to provide dynamism and interactivity of cultural
artifacts. Moreover, these exhibitions are open to
public access at certain times of the day only, being
manned by humans, with their limited working hours.
Visitors have to visit the museums physically in
person to gather information. Furthermore, given
that most of the information is presented in a physical
format, teacher may find it difficult to obtain takeaway copies of the materials to incorporate into
their teaching.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

2.4 The Shift from Physical to Online
Exhibitions

group of users, still they have paved the way for
future developments in online museum exhibitions.

The move from physical to virtual form of exhibition
is not a new phenomenon. Long before the terms
'interactive' and 'multimedia' became technological
buzzwords in the 1990s, museums were presenting
multimedia displays and exhibitions to their visitors
and encouraging interaction between the visitor and
the exhibit objects7 . Interactive multimedia computer
technology, in the form of kiosks, was recognised
as a way of allowing a greater degree of public
participation and involvement in the learning experience.

2.5 Online vs Physical Exhibitions

Multimedia kiosks are workstations designed
specifically for public access 8. They may be standalone or belong to a larger computer system. Information
is presented in various forms, e.g. text, images,
animations, sound and video. In applications where
information is to be delivered to a wide audience,
a kiosk with just a screen for user interaction is a
robust, attractive and economic solution. While some
kiosks have a keypad or keyboard for user input, the
majority employ a touch screen for human interaction.
Kiosks present a wealth of information in an interesting
and user-friendly fashion, bringing otherwise dull
texts to life with multimedia. In many exhibitions,
kiosks are used to complement the physical exhibits,
providing an alternative and more proactive experience
for the visitor. The problem of kiosks is their static
location; the user still must walk up to the kiosk to
access its information base, and the fact that their
accessibility is constrained by the operating hours
of the building in which they are located in. Sometimes
kiosks are located in pre-designated positions far
from the works they are describing, hence they do
not support the opportunity for the visitors to see,
compare, and verify the information received against
the actual objects. Moreover, due to their design,
kiosks do not allow the visitor to save portions of
their information base for use in school projects.
Another innovation to add multimedia experience
to physical exhibitions is museum wearables 9 where
they are real time storytelling devices. They evaluate
the visitor's preferences by observing his/her path
and length of stops along the museum's exhibit
space, and select content for the wearer from a
large database of available movie clips, audio, and
animations. These devices offer a new type of entertainment
and experience of informative museum, similar to
mobile immersive cinema 9 , offering museums an
opportunity to augment their perception/memory/
experience of their exhibits to the visitors. Although
museum wearable are not able to cater for wide

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Online exhibitions present a practical and costeffective solution to the limitations of physical exhibitions.
They are no longer limited in time, distance and
space. Instead of being open to the public at certain
times of the day, they are available round the clock
via the Internet. An additional advantage is that
students need not travel all the way to the exhibition
site to see it. The exhibition is delivered right to
their homes and classrooms via the Internet. The
storage of artifacts in digital form also helps to
reduce maintenance costs. There is no longer the
need to dismantle and re-build the exhibition to
make it available to new audiences. New materials
can be added easily, while existing material can be
updated with less effort too. This dramatically reduces
the lead time and eliminates costly physical space
required to mount an exhibition.
In fact, once the exhibition is put online, it
becomes immediately available to students all over
the world, forming part of the global cultural exchange.
Teachers will also find it easy to download the
digital materials for integration into their teaching
syllabi. Students can also use the online information
for their school projects, i.e. create new information
products. This provides a different kind of learning
experience, as students gather information, organise
it, create meaning, reach insight, and present their
findings online. In fact, by the last act, they invite
a global audience to share the experience 10 . Online
exhibitions also offer better flexibility, encourages
experimentation and dynamism compared to their
physical counterparts. Visitors can select the level
of information they wish to consult, thereby offering
something to audiences of all ages and experiences.
The fact that online exhibitions can link to relevant
and complementary information available at other
websites further underlines the flexibility and possibilities
of this new online medium 11 .

2.6 Benefits of Online Exhibitions
Online exhibitions provide many benefits to
institution: 12 (i) enhance learning and scholarship
by providing more detailed information on cultural
and heritage issues of a country, to meet the needs
of different categories and levels of visitors; (ii) broaden
access to the content as the exhibition materials
can be used for teaching and learning, stimulating
and enriching the experience of visitors; (iii) teachers
9

can combine the online resources in their curriculum,
while students can use the resources for their assignments
or project work; (iv) widen the reach of the visitor
population as online exhibitions can be seen by
many people, including those who could not visit the
museum in person; (v) expand the content and context
to provide various levels of information that are often
hard to present in a physical exhibition such as
information collection or conservation; (vi) the boundaries
of the traditional interpretive spaces are limitless as
visitors click and navigate around the website according
to their personal information needs; (vii) increase
information comprehensiveness, by connecting to
other sites with additional information; and (viii) protect
priceless collections from the wear and tear of the
physical exhibition process.
Myers 13 also sees many advantages of webbased exhibitions in education: (i) enhancement of
the learner's motivation through novelty and excitement,
which is sustained as electronic exhibitions move
from stand-alone kiosks to the Internet; (ii) increased
access to information-students learn how to manage
and acquire new knowledge at blistering speed.
Students now obtain a view of the wider world previously
only possible through travel. They are also using a
technology which will ultimately become a part of
their adult working life; (iii) offers information in a
variety of ways and forms which students can access
and manipulate at their own pace, without being
restricted by conventional teaching syllabus time
periods; (iv) enhanced interactivity features over the
passivity of classroom learning-multimedia technology
provide an expanded representation of ideas in a
lively and interactive environment; (v) increased
collaboration opportunities, even with students from
other countries, as the Internet reshapes class rooms
into inter-connected self-sufficient workshops; and
(vi) increased productivity in the students' preparation
of assignments, since the materials are available
just a few clicks away instead of a few kilometers
away, so they can concentrate on absorbing and
analysing the content rather than be unnecessarily
burdened by the means of getting it.

sees, hears, and sometimes touches the exhibits.
When all these experiential senses are taken away
in online exhibitions, the experience is not memorable
anymore; (iv) poor representation of objects-textures,
fine detail, mass and exact colour cannot be faithfully
translated when displayed on the web; (v) electronic
images of historical photographs are definitely inferior
than the actual objects, due to the need for smaller
sizes needed for online viewing. Image quality is
still quite poor when compared to real art objects;
(vi) expensive and time-consuming to produce (same
as a physical exhibition); (vii) users must be
connected to the Internet (for web-based exhibitions);
and (viii) Internet connection speeds also affect the
experience of the visitors (users with a slow connection
will not have an enjoyable visit, especially if the site
contains media-rich resources that take time to
download and display).
Myers 13 also found the following potential pitfalls
of web-based exhibitions in education: (i) reduced
critical thinking skills-the ease of downloading information
from the Internet may result in thoughtless information
harvesting without attention to the critical issues of
bias, accuracy and quality control; (ii) reduced
development in reading skills-especially among
the impressionable young student population,
since the web is primarily a image-based medium;
(iii) diminished writing skills-students cut and paste
information into impressive first drafts and resist the
need to refine their work. Research skills will be
neglected as students take the easy path,
preferring to point and click rather than plan and
think; (iv) distortion of teaching curricula-some teachers
may change their curriculum to fit widely and readily
available resources on the Internet, when faced with
time schedule pressures; (v) lack of real life
experience—most of what the students know
or understand come as files downloaded from
the web; and (vi) reduced direct interaction with
society as a whole-due to the students' immersion
in the virtual world of the web, they may not learn
to build up the proper social skills for their adult
working life.

2.7 Drawbacks of Online Exhibitions

2.8 Virtual Exhibitions

Despite the attractiveness and great potential
of online exhibitions, there are a number of drawbacks
in terms of visitor experience: 12 (i) It is not a real
museum experience; (ii) online exhibitions do not
allow truly hands-on manipulations, which is very
important for the kinesthetic learner, who may
not feel like he/she really knows what is going on;
(iii) effective exhibits are strongly "experiential", i.e.
when a visitor walks through them, he/she also

Virtual exhibition is the collection of digital replicas
of real events or objects developed with the help of
multimedia and virtual reality tools which produce a
simulated environment in a computer, and delivered
through web so that users will get the same satisfaction
as they are seeing or using the physical objects in
different areas. The difference between online and
virtual exhibition is marginal. All virtual exhibitions
are online exhibitions but not vice versa. Normally

10

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

all virtual exhibitions will provide a simulated real
environment using virtual reality tools which is a bit
more difficult, expensive and time consuming to
develop than a simple online exhibition. Unlike traditional
exhibitions, these exhibitions could be viewed free
of cost, at own convenience and in own time zone.
Hong Kong Observatory's Exhibition Hall is an example
to virtual exhibition to tour the visitors around and
inside to see various exhibitions in virtual mode
(www.hko.gov.hk/ education/cyber_exh_hall/exhibition.
htm?flash=1). Other examples include Lithuania's
Cultural Heritage (alka.mch.mii.lt/foje.en.htm), and
Art virtual exhibitions (expositions.bnf.fr/usindex.htm,
www.virex.dk).

2.9 Web-based Exhibitions as Educational
Tools
The current trend shifts the focus of electronic
exhibitions from static kiosks to the web. The web
presents an active learning environment where users
are empowered to make decisions about the tasks,
content, navigation, presentation and assessment
activities that they make in the course of learning 14 .
Six active learning paradigms may be associated
with web-based exhibitions:
(i)

As education meta-centres, web-based exhibitions
are resources that allow students to explore,
investigate, compare and evaluate textual and
pictorial information from archive collections.
The students develop learning outcomes built
around their own interests, which result in deeper
conceptual understanding and affinity with the
subject.

(ii) As creative play resources, web-based exhibitions
cater to very young children. Creative play is
important to this group of users' learning experience,
as it encourages them to explore and test ideas
through the process of learning. To them, drawing
and painting activities are most effective, as
these activities excite them into listening, talking,
designing, constructing, asking questions, reading
and writing. An example application is to provide
them with a downloadable Java applet that acts
as a digital palette, which can be used to draw
portraits of a favourite animal.
(iii) As electronic field trips, web-based exhibitions
use audio-visual materials and interactive technologies
(e.g. virtual reality) to transport the students
through time, space or imagination to explore
realistic but virtual historic or imaginary sites.
They can be used with anchored instruction
activities, which use sets of interconnected problems

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

to sharpen the students' reasoning, deductive
and investigative faculties.
(iv) Using video conferencing, web-based exhibitions
connect students and teachers to the real exhibition
in real time. Unlike electronic field trips, the
micro-worlds created are not simulated, but make
use of the 'scenery' of the real exhibit objects
and the performances of the exhibit staff.
(v) As learning networks, web-based exhibitions
can be linked through their parent organisations
to encourage international collaboration in learning
or research projects. Such online communities
can be facilitated via real meetings, chat rooms
or listservs, within which the process of creating
a joint product is negotiated.
(vi) As expository teaching resources, web-based
exhibitions provide highly-structured computerdirected activities, to present a set of principles,
laws or theories. These are usually implemented
in science and technology online exhibitions.
They may make use of multimedia puzzles,
activities and laboratories where students can
conduct web-based experiments.

3. DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF
USER INTERFACES
Kalfatovic 15 emphasises three main issues in
mounting a physical exhibition online. While a gallery
offers visitors passive absorption of the contents of
the exhibition, the visitor to the online exhibition has
to actively participate by clicking and scrolling on
the computer screen. Furthermore, while the designer
of the gallery can be certain that all visitors will see
the artifacts in the same presentation format, the
same does not apply to online exhibitions, since
different types of computers can be used by online
visitors, which correspondingly affects their individual
experience of the same exhibition site. Most importantly,
in a gallery, there are curators and security staff to
assist visitors who are lost, but visitors who lost
themselves in an online exhibition often end their
journey by simply clicking to leave the site.
The user interface of online exhibitions is the
web browser, so interface considerations for online
exhibitions are similar to those of a website. Kalfatovic
stressed on the need to prevent horizontal scrolling
of the screen layout 15. Horizontal scrolling is caused
by monitor resolution, the size of images used on
the site, the tiling of images and tables; these can
be minimised with the use of style sheets and the
careful choice of image sizes.

11

Colour, an important design element, is another
major consideration. The colours that can be displayed
on a computer screen depend on the video display
card, the monitor and the processor of the computer.
Though millions of colours are available for design,
only 216 "browser-safe" colours have been identified
by Weinman that would be displayed accurately by
most browsers on various types of computers 16 .
While this limitation does not seriously affects
photographs, it is recommended that these 216 colours
be used for simple graphics such as decorative
titles and backgrounds, so as to achieve a consistent
design across browsers.

hyperlinks may cause confusion as the visitor wanders
away to visit the other site.

When displaying text on-screen, the two main
factors are typeface and size. Boumphrey 17 notes
that due to the landscape orientation and the lower
resolution of computer screens, reading web pages
is 30 per cent slower than reading printed pages.
Hence, finely detailed fonts are not practical for use
in online exhibitions. Also, readers tend to scan
rather than read, and the retention is about half that
of reading the printed page, so text should be of
appropriate length to avoid fatigue. Kalfatovic recommends
the use of style sheets to achieve consistency in
typeface and size 15 . Sans serif fonts are preferred
over serif fonts for accessibility reasons, while bold
formatting should be used appropriately and italics
formatting should be used sparingly as it is difficult
to read on screen. Underlining text is not commonly
used on web pages to avoid confusion with hyperlinks
which are displayed by browsers as underlined text.
Colours can be used creatively for text, with proper
contrast with the background colour for readability.

Besides generic metadata frameworks such as
the Dublin Core, there are also metadata standards
that are designed for museums and archives-CDWA
(Categories for the Description of Works of Art),
CIMI (Consortium for the Computer Interchange of
Museum Information), CIDOC Information Categories,
Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting,
etc. Metadata such as Dublin Core are often embedded
in the home pages of online exhibitions to make
them more visible to Internet search engines.

Online exhibitions are often designed around a
narrative theme that provides visitors with interesting
information and images from archival collections. To
prevent the visitor from leaving the site due to scrolling
of lengthy text pages, Kalfatovic suggests the division
of the theme into smaller sub-themes with shorter
sections 15 . With the help of hyperlinks, navigational
structures that are used in gallery exhibitions can
be replicated in online exhibitions, e.g. the arterial
pattern, whereby visitors browse the collections in
a linear fashion. Despite the myriad of navigation
strategies available, it is important to keep the narrative
of the online exhibition in mind so that the theme
fits the design of the exhibition. To the visitor, their
first experience with an online exhibition is that it
tells a story. Hence, unless absolutely necessary,
hyperlinks that bring the visitor to another site should
be placed in the list of suggested links for further
study at the end of the exhibition, the misuse of
12

4. METADATA IN ONLINE EXHIBITIONS
Online exhibitions are used by museums or
archives to showcase their collections on the World
Wide Web. There is a need to classify the works
or artifacts using structured information that describe
their attributes 18 . This is where metadata is useful
in annotating artifacts or collections so that they
can be accessed to gain more information and repurposed to produce new knowledge.

A major challenge is the development of metadata
to describe multimedia content (images, audio, video,
virtual reality, etc.). Glushko highlights two potential
problems in the form of sensory gaps and semantic
gaps 19 . There is a limit in the computer's ability to
sense and describe the object, as an object to
generate infinite representations-this is the sensory
gap. The semantic gap arises due to the fact that
instruments (e.g. digital cameras) tend to capture
and encode data in a way that is optimised for
automated processing, but results in semantically
opaque content cannot be easily processed to understand
the meaning of the object. Hence there is a need
to develop metadata to describe multimedia content.
Besides the traditional metadata standards, Trant
has carried out an experiment that allows social
tagging of resources by visitors to an online museum,
i.e. when browsing the online exhibitions, visitors
have the facility to input words that reflect their
interpretation of the artifacts viewed 20. The study
found that such "social" metadata improve upon the
existing museum documentation by providing unique
access points not found in traditional cataloguing.
These "folksonomic" terms represent the actual interests,
perspectives and passions of visitors, further narrowing
the semantic gap between the curators and the
public.
With metadata, the casual visitor will be able
to appreciate better the artifacts, while information
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

interchange standards that facilitate exchange of
information between cultural institutions will help to
foster research and collaborations in the study of
their respective collections.

5. AUTHORING TOOLS
Since online exhibitions are essentially multimedia
websites, the authoring tools used for creating websites
can also be used to create online exhibition sites.
However, digital archive collections have special information
management and delivery requirements, which have
resulted in the development of specialist tools. Generally,
these tools have features that streamline the creation
of metadata for the collections, search engines with
flexible options, support for the standard digital file
formats, and integration with other systems via information
storage and interchange standards.
CONTENTdm is a digital collection management
software used by archival organisations to develop,
manage and deliver their digital items through web
browsers 21 . It supports most common file types like
images, audio, video, portable document format (PDF)
and web links, and can store and index efficiently.
Adding an item and its metadata is simplified through
the use of wizards, templates and batch processes.
Metadata is stored in XML format using Dublin Core
fields, which can be mapped for searching by other
systems, e.g. digital libraries. Items can be searched
with a text-based search engine with advanced options,
and interoperability with other archival information
systems is supported via standards such as Open
Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting,
XML, etc. The metadata collection is extensive and
pertinent keywords can be added to provide more
access points to the collection. Customised interfaces
can be designed for online exhibition sites, with
good user interface features such as cool colours
and a comfortable layout.
Multi MIMSY 2000 is a museum management
system. The interface is based on item catalogue
cards, which have detailed activity history and expanded
content, and can be linked to form a knowledge
management system. A master catalogue provides
standard data entry templates to simplify data creation
and accuracy. The items in several collections can
be linked to form a theme for an exhibition. The
integrated Internet interface provides the capability
to quickly publish collections to the web as online
exhibitions. Compliance with standards such as Dublin
Core and MDA's SPECTRUM allows the interchange
of metadata with other compatible museum information
systems.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Re:discovery Proficio is a system for the management
of archival collections implemented on a relational
database. It has tools to simplify data entry, management
and retrieval, create forms and generate reports,
export data for use by other applications, and provide
user access to its collections. A web interface called
Re:discovery for Internet (RFI) allows visitors to browse
and view the collections stored in the Re:discovery
Proficio system through the Internet. Standard template
forms with style sheet support help users to easily
enter their search terms and retrieve the information
needed, via the use of the search engine provided
by the Re:discovery Proficio system 22 .

6. TYPES OF ONLINE EXHIBITIONS
Kalfatovic has classified online exhibitions into
five major types 15 :
(i)

Notable events: Major events are perfect topics
for online exhibitions. Libraries and archives
often hold substantial materials related to significant,
interesting, or entertaining events. An eventcentric exhibition allows the library or archives
to draw on a range of materials and collaborate
with other institutions such as historical societies,
museums, or businesses to develop this type
of exhibition. One such example is The Great
Chicago Fire that is put up by the Chicago
Historical Society with the Northwestern University.

(ii) Anniversaries: Centennials, bicentennials, and
jubilees can be the impetus for an online exhibition.
An exhibition created around an anniversary will
allow visitors to revisit the past, highlight current
collections or programs, and look forward to the
next few years. From Smithson to Smithsonian:
The Birth of an Institution an exhibition by the
Smithsonian Institution Libraries, is a prime example.
(iii) Themes: Perhaps the most common exhibition
idea is a theme. Themes can include individuals,
professions, poetry, social movements or phenomena,
collections, and media. Dr Seuss Went to War:
A Catalogue of Political Cartoons by Dr Seuss
from the Mandeville Special Collections Library,
University of California, San Diego, is a very
specific theme-based exhibition.
(iv) Treasures: Texas A&M's Cushing Library took
a unique approach to the "treasures" concept.
In its exhibition Fruits of a Research Collection,
the uses of a special collection for non-traditional
research are highlighted. Steven E. Smith, special
collections librarian, noted that the "collections...have
also been used by many people for many other
13

purposes, for example, journalists writing articles
for national magazines, film producers creating
documentaries, student groups making T-shirts,
and book editors in search of cover art."

This is actually an image map with clickable areas
representing the various types of can labels (Fig.1).

(v) Special Collections: Though all of the above
types make wonderful topics for online exhibitions,
sometimes it is the odd and the unusual that
will both educate and entertain visitors. For examples,
Los Vegas could come the exhibition "Dino at
the Sands: Dean Martin, 1917-1995" an exploration
of the life and career of Martin from the Sands
Hotel Collection in the Special Collections of
the University of Nevada, Las Vegas Libraries.

Geographic online exhibitions cover both regional
cultures including Quilts and Quiltmaking in America
and Scottish Cultural Resources Access Network,
and geographic regions such as The Illustrating
Traveller: Adventure and Illustration in North America
and the Caribbean 1760-1895 and the Old Fort Lowell
Neighborhood, and Traders: Voices from the Trading
Post.

7.2 Geographic Online Exhibitions

7.1 Commercial Online Exhibitions

Quilts and Quiltmaking in America (http://memory.
loc.gov/ammem/qlthtml/qlthome.html) provides a glimpse
into America's diverse quilting traditions. It showcases
materials from two American Folklife Center collections,
the Blue Ridge Parkway Folklife Project Collection
(1978) and the "All-American Quilt Contest" sponsored
by Coming Home, a division of Lands' End and Good
Housekeeping. These materials document quilts and
quilting within the context of daily life and reflect a
range of backgrounds, motivations, and aesthetic
sensibilities. This site is more like a directory site
for browsing rather than an exhibition site. Users
can browse by quiltmaker names, by quiltmaking
subjects, or by sound recordings of oral interviews.
(Fig. 2)

Commercial art is celebrated with the exhibitions,
for example, Salmon Label Art (http://www.library.ubc.ca/
spcoll/displays/salmon.html) is an exhibition of salmon
can labels originally mounted in the 5th floor display
case (outside Ridington Room) of the main library
of the University of British Columbia (during 1 February
1996 and 30 April 1996). This is the simplest online
exhibition in this review. It consists of just a central
picture, which shows a selection of assorted British
Columbia salmon cans on and around an old gill net.

Scottish Cultural Resources Access Network (http:/
/www.scran.ac.uk) is an online multimedia resource
base for the teaching and celebration of the history
and culture of Scotland 23. SCRAN has a summary
feature called PathFinders short introductions to
five categories of Scottish culture and heritage (people,
places, things, events and ideas). Each section has
links to more detailed resources. There are two
types of educational resources-Resource Packs and
Teaching Packs. Resource Packs are compilations

Figure 1. British Columbia salmon can labels online
exhibition.

Figure 2. Quilts and quiltmaking in America 1978-96 online
exhibition.

7. REVIEW OF ONLINE EXHIBITIONS
The following is a review of online exhibitions
that are available on the Internet. They cover a wide
range of topics, ranging from art, geography, history,
literature and science in general. Most of them were
created by libraries, archives and historical societies
to commemorate notable events, celebrate anniversaries,
feature periodic themes, or to showcase treasures
or special collections. The online exhibitions reviewed
in this study cover many different areas in the fields
of art, geography, history, literature and science.

14

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

of records packaged for a subject area that is
downloadable by licensed users to create new information
resources (i.e. resource re-usability). Teaching Packs
contain teacher guides, background notes and student
worksheets. SCRAN is a good site to visit for finding
information on Scottish culture and heritage. However,
despite the use of Internet technology, access to
SCRAN is limited to Scottish schools and companies
only (Fig. 3).
The Illustrating Traveller: Adventure and Illustration
in North America and the Caribbean 1760-1895
(http://www.library.yale.edu/beinecke/illus.htm) is a
rare book and manuscript library exhibition organised
by William S. Reese and George Miles in 1996. The
story of travellers and migrants in North America
and the Caribbean in the 17th century is told through
the books and illustrations of the collections. This
exhibition provides a convenient resource for students
doing research on migration and travelling in North
and Latin America in the 17th century.
The Old Fort Lowell Neighbourhood (http://
parentseyes.arizona.edu/ftlowell/) examines the history
of the Old Fort Lowell Neighbourhood in terms of the
various ethnic groups that have lived in the district
since 300 A.D. The exhibition covers the Hohokam
Indians, the Settlers between the years 1500-1850,
the establishment of the Fort Lowell Military Camp,
the Mexican settlers of El Fuerte (the Fort), the
Anglo families who moved to the area after the
1920s, and Fort Lowell as it is today. This site
would be useful for those visitors who need great
amounts of text information; although the lack of
suitable graphics may mean that the visitor would
have to go to the host library for picture resources.

Traders: Voices from the Trading Post (http://
www.nau.edu/library/speccoll/exhibits/traders) is an
online exhibition organised by the Northern Arizona
University Cline Library, in co-operation with the
United Indian Traders Association (UITA). It focuses
on late nineteenth-century and twentieth-century trading
posts in the Four Corners region, encompassing the
Navajo and Hopi Reservations, and is the web companion
to the CD-ROM version of the same name. This site
contains a good mix of multimedia and text elements,
although some of the paragraphs are too long for
easy on-screen reading. The inclusion of text transcripts
for the oral interviews is a thoughtful gesture for
visitors who are aurally handicapped (Fig. 4).

7.3 Historical Online Exhibitions
Online exhibition sites are often designed as
history narratives, covering symbolic events, such
as The Great Chicago Fire; maritime history such
as Life Along the Manitou Passage and Voyage of
the St Louis; nation building such as Forging The
Nation and Hearts at Home: Southern Women in the
Civil War; oral history such as JUKEBOX; public
infrastructure such as Down the Drain, Chicago's
Sewers: The Historic Development of an Urban
Infrastructure and Make the Dirt Fly; public services,
such as Putting Out Fires; and sports events, such
as 1956 Melbourne Olympics.
The Great Chicago Fire and the Web of Memory
(http://www.chicagohs.org/fire) is organised by the
Chicago Historical Society. Through the use of journalistic
essays of that period, this exhibition provides a vivid
description of the historic fire at Chicago.

Figure 3. SCRAN—an online learning resource exhibition.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

15

where the visitor can do something, e.g. trace the
steps of particular passengers, and learn about the
subject background at the same time, possibly without
being aware that learning is taking place (Fig. 6).
Forging the Nation (http://www.awm.gov.au/forging)
is an online exhibition set up by the Australian War
Memorial to celebrate the first twenty years of Australia's
independence. This site is helpful for studies in
Australian nationhood with interesting resources,
e.g. cartoon illustrations from early Australian newspapers
(Fig. 7).

Figure 4. Traders: Voices from the trading post online
exhibition.

Life Along the Manitou Passage (http://www.
schoolship.org/maritime/) is about the history of the
Great Lakes in Michigan in the era of schooners.
The website was created using a National Maritime
Heritage Grant provided by the Michigan Department
of State and the State Historic Preservation Office.
This is a good site to visit for students doing research
on maritime history during the age of schooners. In
particular, the detailed glossary in which terms are
cross-linked to where they were used in the main
text is a valuable hypertext resource in its own right
(Fig. 5).
Voyage of the St Louis (http://www.ushmm.org/
stlouis/index.htm) is an online exhibition of the United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum to commemorate
the journey of the ill-fated refugee ship, the St Louis,
during the Second World War. Various information
sources have been provided to help users to reach
their conclusions. The Teacher Resources section
contains tips and steps and pointers to resources
on the website and how to incorporate them into
their teaching syllabus. This is a hands-on site

Hearts at Home: Southern Women in the Civil War
(http://www.lib.virginia.edu/exhibits/hearts/) is an exhibition
held in the Tracy W. McGregor Room from 2 August
1997 to 15 October 1997. The story is told through
archival papers, and personal and special collections.
However, the pictures appear to be more for illustrating
the social life of the period rather than for reinforcing
the text. For a better view of the books and other
manuscripts, visitors would still have to visit the
physical exhibition.
Fønss-Jørgensen24 described an online audio archive
prototype system code-named Jukebox (which was
active between 1993 and 1996). Project Jukebox
allowed public library users to gain online access
to historical sound recordings held in European national
archives. The test libraries were located in Denmark,
Italy and the United Kingdom, with technological
support from Norway. Streaming audio technology
was used to prevent downloading of the digitised
sounds in public access computer terminals in the
test libraries. Some rather extreme precautionary
measures were also taken, e.g. the soldering of
audio plugs to the sound card connectors to prevent
illegal recording via Walkmans. Jukebox demonstrated
aptly that with technological advances, audio recordings
can be delivered from the dusty corners of archives
to reach a wider audience. This applies to other
historical materials too.
Down the Drain, Chicago's Sewers: The Historic
Development of an Urban Infrastructure (http://
www.chipublib.org/digital/sewers/sewers.html) describes
the history of the Chicago sewer system, and is
maintained by the Chicago Public Library. This exhibition
has managed to turn a mundane and socially disagreeable
(but very essential) part of public service into an
interesting presentation by its innovative use of multimedia,
especially in the use of QuickTime movies for the
sewer cam clip (Fig. 8).

Figure 5. Life along the Manitou passage online exhibtion.
16

Make the Dirt Fly (http://www.sil.si.edu/Exhibitions/
make-the-Dirt-Fly/) is a Smithsonian Institution Libraries
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 6. Voyage of the St Louis online exhibition.

Figure 7. Forging the nation online exhibition.

exhibition on the building of the Panama Canal that
links the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. The exhibition
starts with a series of stylised photographs with
fade filters and descriptive text incorporated into the
corners of the feathered images, which subsequently
move on to the more conventional main exhibition
pages.

1956 Melbourne Olympics (http://pandora.nla.gov.au/
pan/42638/20040611-0000/www.statelibrary.vic.gov. au/
slv/exhibitions/olympics/index.html) is the State Library
of Victoria's exhibition site on the 1956 Melbourne
Olympic Games. This site explores the history of
Australia's first experience of hosting the Olympic
Games in 1956, and the impact it had on Australia
as a nation. This exhibition would be very useful for
students doing projects about the 1956 Melbourne
Olympics because of the copious amount of textual
information available. Moreover, it has a well-annotated
bibliography with links to more detailed information.

This exhibition shows the experience of the
Smithsonian Institution in putting up engaging exhibitions
(whether virtual or physical). The design and content
(e.g. the trivial pursuit section) of the site appeal
to both scholarly research as well as casual
browsing (Fig. 9).

7.4 Literary Online Exhibitions

Putting Out Fires (http://www.saskatoon.ca/org/
clerks_office/archives/gallery/exhibit/fire/fireintro.htm)
is an online exhibition put up by the City of Saskatoon
Archives to commemorate the city's fire fighting
service. The history section showcases the history
of the major fire fighting equipment companies in
Saskatoon. This exhibition is a good site to visit,
especially for students doing research in the history
of fire fighting equipment, since there is a fairly
large collection of photographs of vintage fire engines.

Literature is another area where online exhibitions
can be used to reach out to the public. Some examples
are Anthem for Doomed Youth: Writers and Literature
of the Great War 1914-1918 covering period literature,
and social commentaries such as Elderberry Wine:
Selected Radio Commentaries by Peter Wotton.

Figure 8. Down the drain, Chicago’s sewers online
exhibition.

Figure 9. Make the dirt fly online exhibition.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Anthem for Doomed Youth: Writers and Literature
of the Great War, 1914-1918 (http://net.lib.byu.edu/
english/WWI/main.html) is an exhibit commemorating

17

the 80th anniversary of the Armistice (11 November
1918), which signaled the end of World War I. This
website complements the physical exhibit held at
the Special Collections Reading Room, Harold B.
Lee Library, Brigham Young University from 1 September
1998 to 31 December 1998. This exhibition is great
for doing research in the literature of the First World
War period. The social mood of that turbulent period
is captured succinctly in the words of the featured
poets and writers (Fig. 10).
Elderberry Wine: Selected Radio Commentaries
by Peter Wotton (http://www.lanecc.edu/archives/
Wotton.html) is a tribute to Peter Wotton, who broadcast
over 700 weekly commentaries on KLCC-FM radio
in Eugene, Oregon, from 1982 until his death in
1996. His commentaries focused on different issues
of interest to older people, such as health and
recreation, as well as national political, environmental,
and social issues. This exhibition offers Wotton's
philosophical views on general social issues, which
is useful for social science research but may not
attract junior students due to its heavily textual
layout.

7.5 Scientific Online Exhibitions
Science is one of the most popular topics for
online exhibitions. There are online exhibitions about
general science, such as The Virtual Smithsonian
and The Year 1000; information science, such as
Keeping Our Word: Preserving Information Across
the Ages and ZYX: An Exhibition of Selected ABC
Books from the Jean Trebbi Collection; medicine,
such as Needles in Medical History; and naval science,
such as Fast Attacks and Boomers: Submarines in
the Cold War.
The Virtual Smithsonian (http://2k.si.edu) is an
online exhibition that displays more than 360 artifacts
from 14 of the 16 Smithsonian museums 25 . The
website is based on the travelling exhibit, Celebrating

150 Years, America's Smithsonian. Some of the
exhibition features are images, digital video, sound
clips, and objects which can be manipulated and
transformed into other objects. Most of the exhibits
are based on web multimedia technologies that are
designed for visitors with high connection speeds.
There is also a version for low bandwidth users, with
less of the digital bells and whistles. This site is
good for students doing research in general history
(e.g. human inventions) and natural history (e.g.
dinosaurs). The exhibits are very engaging if the
visitor has the bandwidth to access them.
The Year 1000 (http://www.lindahall.org/events_exhib/
exhibit/exhibits/y1k/) is an online exhibition organised
by the Linda Hall Library of Science and Technology.
It traces the development of selected scientific inventions
from 1000 A.D. to the present day, e.g. the use of
the horse collar from early applications in agriculture
to industrial uses today. This is a simple exhibition
that can be useful for students researching on the
history of selected human inventions since 1000
A.D.
Keeping Our Word: Preserving Information Across
the Ages (http://www.lib.Uiowa.edu/exhibits/keeping/
contents.htm) is the virtual version of the University
Libraries', University of Iowa exhibition, "Keeping
our Word: Preserving Information Across the Ages"
(from October 1998 to January 1999). The virtual
exhibit forms a continuing research page for the
study of library preservation. This exhibition is a
good resource not only for information studies students
(from the point of view of library preservation) but
also for the general public, because it provides interesting
snippets on the history of writing methods and instruments.
ZYX: An Exhibition of Selected ABC Books from
the Jean Trebbi Collection (http://www.broward.org/
library/bienes/lii03700.htm) brings to the public's
attention an area of book collecting that is seldom
seen and infrequently appreciated: alphabet books.
It begins by briefly exploring the history of the alphabet,
moves on to children's ABC books, shifts to alphabet
books for adults, and concludes with pop-up and
movable titles. This exhibition provides an alternative
glimpse into alphabet books; some visitors may be
surprised to learn that alphabet books are not just
for children alone there are versions for adults too.
Needles in Medical History (http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/
en/old/MISexhHOMnee.html) takes an eclectic look
at the role of needles in medicine and at their
psychological and cultural contexts. The information
provided in this exhibition may be too short for

Figure 10. Anthem for doomed youth online exhibition.
18

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

student school project work, although the still images
are still useful. Nevertheless, the designer has managed
to present an intimidating medical instrument in
ways that may not be directly apparent to the visitor,
such as the use of needles in acupuncture.
Fast Attacks and Boomers: Submarines in the
Cold War (http://americanhistory.si.edu/subs/) is
the companion website of the fast attacks and boomers
exhibition at the National Museum of American History.
It showcases the development of the nuclear submarine
in the US Navy. This exhibition has something appealing
for every visitor: for the technically inclined, there
are details of how submarines work; for casual visitors,
there is information on life aboard the submarines
and life onshore (Fig. 11).

8. FUTURE TRENDS IN ONLINE
EXHIBITIONS
As technology becomes ubiquitous, reliable, cheap
and easier to maintain, more museums are expected
to exploit them to provide information to provide a
better service and content especially for researchers,
academics and museums information seekers.
Multi-modal and multimedia systems integrate
a number of modes and media such as hypertext,
audio, video etc., into higher-bandwidth communication
interfaces. These are used for virtual reality, interfaces
for users with special needs, etc. Virtual reality is
an example of non-command based interface, which
can immerse the user in a simulated highly interactive
world in which the user can move about in the same
way as in the physical world. Visitors are immersed
in a virtual environment through the use of 3-D realtime computer graphics and advanced display devices
such as head mounted displays. Visitors (particularly
young students) can learn by active participation in
performing some tasks with the system, such as
manipulating objects in a scene. In this way, the

Figure 11. Fast attacks and boomers.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

subject being taught will be better absorbed by the
learners since they have played an active role in
acquiring it 13 .
Speech-based interfaces that apply non-speech
objects (such as auditory icons, ear icons), gesture
recognition, and eye tracking technology are some
of the scientific advances that may be also used by
museums to focus on users with special needs 26 .
Eye tracking has traditionally been considered an
esoteric and very expensive technique, but is now
becoming more affordable and practical. Embedded
help is another area that next generation interfaces
are focusing on that may provide true embedded
help via the use of animated and auditory icons,
making the computer interface easier to use.
Wireless computing and handheld devices are
other technologies that have penetrated into the
museum galleries space. Tools such as electronic
guidebooks (portable devices that use a wireless
web-based network) help to extend the museum
experience. As these devices become smaller, more
affordable and more capable, museums will soon be
able to count on them to facilitate the delivery of
complex multimedia information to their visitors.

9. CONCLUSION
With the convergence of multimedia computing
and broadband digital telecommunications, the two
major barriers to the accessibility of archival collections
have eliminated-physical distance and the walls (i.e.
opening hours) of the archival institution 7 .
Museums viewers may be less likely to make
a special trip to museum to see the original object
when facilities are available to see a quite reasonable
facsimile at their homework station. But Anderson
feels that the demand for the original work will increase
rather than decrease, following repeated exposure
at an institutionally authorised site on the worldwide
web. And "the growth of wired museums of all kinds
may provide a younger generation steeped in this
technology with more reasons to connect to us. It
seems likely that it will contribute less to our eclipse
as institutions than our transformation" 5 .
Galani, et al. 27 observed that the number of
digital visitors is steadily growing and in some cases,
outstripping the number of visitors to the corresponding
physical museums. This helps to encourage a
geographically distant digital visitor to become a
physical visitor, and encourage physical visitors to
maintain a relationship with the museums after they
walk out of its doors.
19

The rise of community-oriented web-based tools
that promote information sharing, such as blogs,
wikis and photo-sharing services will be of interest
to museums. These so-called 'Web 2.0' tools 28 can
help to broaden the communication channels for
online exhibitions. For example, the museum can
put up an online version of an existing physical
exhibition quickly as a wiki website, with multimedia
resources such as videos, pictures and links to
other sites with additional information. Online visitors
will be able to share their experiences with others
by writing about their visits in their personal weblogs (blogs), e.g. as a class assignment if the
visitors are school children, highlighting to other
visitors which are the more interesting exhibits.
Physical exhibition visitors who visit the actual exhibition
may also share their experiences with the online
exhibition visitors through the use of online photosharing services such as Flickr. These tools will
open up more exciting communication opportunities
for the museum and bring its collections closer to
its visitors, making their visits more personal and
memorable.

REFERENCES
1. Galler, S.R. et al. Museums today. Science,
1968, 161(3841), 548-51.
2. Dudley, J.W. Successful exhibiting. Kogan Page
Limited, London, 1990.

9. Sparacino, F. The museum wearable: Real-time
sensor-driven understanding of visitor's interests
for personalized visually augmented museum
experiences. http://www.archimuse.com/mw2002/
papers/sparacino/sparacino.html
10. McKenzie, Jamie. Digital nativism, digital delusions
and digital deprivation learning authentically in
the language arts classroom. From now on the
educational technology journal, 2007, 17(2).
http://fno.org/nov07/cov.html
11. Semper, R. & Spasojevic, M. The electronic
guidebook: Using portable devices and a wireless
web-based network to extend the museum experience,
2002. http://www.archimuse.com/mw2002/pap ers/
semper/semperfig6.html
12. Ramaiah, Chennupati K. Case for virtual Salar
Jung museum. Deccan Chronicle , 5 Nov 2007,
p 9.
13. Myers, J. Heritage, classrooms and the World
Wide Web: A teacher educator's perspective on
the Gateway to Learning Materials Project, 2000.
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2000/papers/myers/
myers.html
14. Sumption, K. Beyond museums walls— A critical
analysis of emerging approaches to museum
web-based education, 2001. http://www.archimuse.
com/mw2001/papers/sumption/sumption.html

3. Velarde, G. Designing exhibitions. The Design
Council, London,1988.

15. Kalfatovic, Martin R. Creating a winning online
exhibition. American Library Association, Chicago,
2002.

4. Bowen, J.P.; Bennett, J. & Johnson, J. Virtual
visits to virtual museums. Museums and the
web. In Archives and museuminformatics, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada, 1998. http://www. archimuse.com/
mw98/papers/bowen/bowen_ paper.html

16. Weinman, Linda. Designing web graphics, 3rd
Edition. New Riders Publishing, Indianapolis,
1999.

5. Teather, L. A museum is a museum is a museum.
Or is it? Exploring museology and the web,
2000. http://www.archimuse.com/mw98/papers/
teather/teather_paper.html
6. Rayward, W. B. & Twidale, Michael B. From
docent to cyberdocent: Education and guidance
in the virtual museum. Archives and Museum
Informatics , 1999, 13, 23-53.
7. Kassay, M. Interactive multimedia in museums.
http://online.anu.edu.au/CNASI/pubs/On Disc95/
docs/ONL21.html
8. Rowley, J. Multimedia kiosks in retailing. International
Journal of Retail and Distribution Management ,
1995, 23(5), 32-40.
20

17. Boumphrey, Frank. Typography on the web. http://
www.Hypermedic.com/style/typog/typindex.htm
18. Chen, Arthur & Chen, Sophy. Metadata for works
of art—The application of CDWA. PNC-2002,
Osaka, Japan. http://pnclink.org/annual/annual2002/
pdf/0921/9/m210902.pdf
19. Glushko, Bob. Metadata for multimedia, 2007.
http://www2.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is202/f05/
Lecture Notes/202-20050929.pdf
20. Trant, Jennifer. Social classification and folksonomy
in art museums: Early data from the steve. Museum
Tagger Prototype, 2006. http:// www.archimuse.com/
papers/asist-CR-steve-0611.pdf
21. CONTENTdm. Overview. 2007, http://www.contentdm.
com/products/overview.html
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

22. Re:discovery software. Collections Management,
2007. http://www.rediscoverysoftware.com/default.
aspx?include=proficio.htm
23. SCRAN guide, 2000. http://www.scran.ac.uk/help/
scran_ guide.pdf
24. Fønss-Jørgensen, E. Network access to the
audiovisual cultural heritage-possibilities and
problems. Inter lending and Document Supply,
1998, 26(4), 171-74.
25. Smithsonian. The virtual Smithsonian home, 2000.
http://2k.si.edu

26. Dix, A. J.; Finlay, J. E.; Abowd, G.D. & Beale,
R. Human-computer interaction, Second Edition.
Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, England,
1998.
27. Galani, Areti & Chalmers, Matthew. Can you see
me? Exploring co-visiting between physical and
virtual visitors. I n Museums and the Web, 2002.
http://www.Archimuse.com/mw2002/papers/galani/
galani.html
28. O'Reilly, Tim. What is web 2.0? http://www.
oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/ 09/
30/what-is-web-20.html

About the Authors

Leong Chee Khoon is a Systems Analyst with the Educational Design and Technology Division
of Institute of Technical Education (ITE) Headquarters. He supports users of the e-learning
system used by ITE campuses in Singapore. His formal education includes a Master's degree
in Information Studies from the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

Dr Chennupati K. Ramaiah is working as Professor and Head, MJCET Central Library, Muffakham
Jah College of Engineering & Technology, Hyderabad. Prior to joining the college, he worked
as Professor and Director, Centre for Information Science, and Librarian of MGNIRSA, Hyderabad.
Before that Ramaiah worked as an Assistant Professor, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore for 6 years from 1999 to 2005. Prior to that Dr Ramaiah was Deputy Director at
DESIDOC, a national information centre in Defence Science and Technology in India. He has
worked for 14 years in the Defence Research & Development Organisation, India, as Scientist,
and worked in various areas including conducting research, heading A-V division and Defence
Science Library. He was a Commonwealth Scholar for PhD in Information Science in 1989.
Soon after obtaining his PhD, he set up a multimedia lab and worked several years in designing
multimedia applications, presentation and training materials. His formal education includes
Master’s degrees in Chemistry and in Library and Information Science. He is a member of
many international professional bodies/societies such as the Institute of Information Scientists,
LA, ASIST, and ACM. Dr Ramaiah's research interests include multimedia and hypertext technologies,
human-computer interaction, user interfaces, e-books and e-publishing, archival informatics
and bibliometrics.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

21

