DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 22-34
© 2008, DESIDOC

Online Virtual Exhibitions: Concepts and Design Considerations
Schubert Foo
College of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences
Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang Link, Singapore
E-mail: sfoo@pmail.ntu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT
Online virtual exhibitions (VEs) are acknowledged as important complimentary counterparts to physical
exhibitions. It overcomes space, time and location restrictions and allows global visitors to access these
priceless and exciting treasures that are stored in museums, archives and other institutions on a 24/
7/365 basis. Well constructed VEs can offer alternative experiences to the "real thing" and open up
other opportunities that include learning, more content beyond physical exhibits, active participation and
contribution by visitors through forums and uploads, online shopping, and others. This paper provides
a state-of-the-art review, and illustrates concepts and design considerations for the development of VEs
that can be highly effective and efficient with minimal technological knowledge. By considering the
important issues of metadata, system architecture design and development techniques, it becomes possible
to generate a series of VEs to meet the needs of different user groups and at the same time cater to
the constraints of the client computers, thereby providing the users the best possible experience in
engaging with the VEs.
Keywords: Online virtual exhibitions, VE concepts, VE design.

1. INTRODUCTION
An early definition of virtual exhibition (VE) is
defined as an online Web-based hyper-textual dynamic
collections devoted to a specific theme, topic, concept
or idea 1. Most virtual exhibitions are attributed to
museums and archives to make visible their collections
to end users, generally the public or specialised
user groups 2. Original artifacts are digitally captured
and rendered into 2-D or 3-D objects which are
packaged together and linked by hyperlinks to allow
non-linearity or multiple-linearity by users (exhibition
visitors). Virtual exhibitions are viewed as dynamic
as they often undergo ongoing change in terms of
design, activity and content, including encouraging
users to contribute towards it, thereby adding to its
dynamism. Many early VEs are undertaken as distinct
projects and packaged as stand-alone exhibits with
little regard on the reusability of objects, adoption
of standards to support interoperability, extensible
and scalable system architectures to support growth
22

and pervasiveness of exhibitions. Some examples
of early VEs include Building a National Collection:
150 Years of Print Collecting at the Smithsonian by
the National Museum of American History (americanhistory.
si.edu/prints/index.htm); American History Documents
(www.indiana.edu/~liblilly/history/history.html); Birds:
A Virtual Exhibition by Canadian Heritage Information
Network (www.virtualmuseum.ca/Exhibitions/Birds/
Birds/); Colours of the Wind by the National Archives
of Singapore (www.a2o.com.sg/a2o/public/html/
online_exhibit/misas/exhibit/index2.html)3 , 4 and others.
Over the last decade, improvements to these
areas have been seen and VEs have reached a
stage of sophistication although a number of fundamental
challenges remain. While the basic tenets of VE
have not changed, it is helpful to provide an updated
definition of VE:
A VE is a Web-based hypermedia collection of
captured or rendered multi-dimensional information
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

objects, possibly stored in distributed networks,
designed around a specific theme, topic, concept or
idea, and harnessed with state-of-art technology
and architecture to deliver a user-centered and engaging
experience of discovery, learning, contributing and
being entertained through its nature of its dynamic
product and service offerings.
The case for investing in the design and development
of VE has been well documented5 , 6. First and foremost
is the recognition that hosting VEs provides a gateway
to showcase museum or archive (hereafter referred
to as institution) collections that are not bound by
time (temporal), distance (spatial) and space (spatial)
constraints unlike physical exhibitions. This addresses
the important issue to make valuable artifacts available
to the masses while playing the role of custodianship
of national and international treasures.
Users are unlikely to pay visits to these institutions
unless they are aware of its collections and holdings.
VEs coupled with educational functionality can promote
the institution as a centre for learning and encourage
users to visit and access more artifacts via information
objects. Such demonstration of the institutional relevance
and societal value through a strong public profile
and high usage figures can be used to help secure
adequate funding and resources for survival, sustainability
and growth into the future. As such, outreach through
VEs is seen to be an important strategic activity
that needs to be properly planned and executed.
Other forms of outreach activities like publications,
websites, tours, talks, demonstrations and other
activities can be undertaken alongside VEs to create
the impact and yield the desired outcomes.
Online strategies (VEs and websites) have particular
advantages: it is relatively easy to add new products
and services or revamp existing ones in the form of
adding new materials, updating and reusing existing
materials, adding new learning and edutainment
components, online shopping, online forums, users'
contributions, to name just a few. VEs, through
digitisation and rendering, also have the distinct
advantage to create and use electronic surrogates
of original fragile or sensitive records, or priceless
artifacts which might otherwise be damaged in physical
consultation. Established institutions such as
Smithsonian Institute (www.si.edu), Auckland Art
Museum (www.ackland.org/index.php), and most national
heritage boards and museums around the world
have a permanent and rich set of VEs hosted on
their servers. Collectively, they are able to display
and make available a significant amount of "treasures"
held by the institution which is by far much than
what physical exhibitions can display and achieve
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

at any one time. This means of extending outreach
has significant long term returns of investment once
these VEs are curated and implemented for public
access and use.
While VEs have been critiqued in the past for
their inability to provide the experience of the real
thing, VEs can allow users to understand, discover,
learn and do far more than physical exhibitions. By
adopting a carefully researched user-centered design,
VEs through hyper-linking supports both linear and
non-linear discovery and learning pathways, creating
learning opportunities that are difficult to replicate
in physical exhibitions. The ability to engage in
multiple forms of media (text, image, audio, sound,
video, augmented reality and virtual reality components)
on one page, having the ability to reverse, revisit,
translate and read text tailored for different user
groups, proficiencies and requirements, immersion
in well crafted theme-games, etc. collective helps
to establish a deeper sense of understanding, awareness,
and learning of contents than physical exhibits.
VEs are therefore no longer viewed as passing fads
but an important logical companion and extension
to physical exhibitions.
Beth Hatefutsoth, the Nahum Goldmann Museum
of the Jewish Diaspora (http://www.bh.org.il/index.html)
site has many VEs on Jewish people in various
places available in both in English and Hebrew.
British Library VEs on various topics (http://www.
collectbritain.co.uk/galleries/); National Gallery of
Art's VEs (http://www.nga.gov/exhibitions/webtours.
shtm) based on Apple QuickTime VT; VE of Canadian
birds(http://www.virtualmuseum.ca/Exhibitions/Birds/
Birds/); Cabaret Mechanical Theatre's VE (http://
www.cabaret.co.uk/vrexs.htm); Everyone's VE (http:
//billdouglas.ex.ac.uk/eve/ exhibitions.asp); International
Institute of Social History's VEs (http://www.iisg.nl/
exhibitions/); Water and the Sacred, a photographic
exhibition by Claude Renault available at Charnwood
Museum VEs site (http://www.kalakahani.co.uk/
crenault/); National Library Board of Singapore's
VEs (http://exhibitions.nlb.gov.sg/); Musee McCord
Museum's VEs (http://www.mccord-museum.qc.ca/
en/keys/virtualexhibits/); and Museum and Art Gallery
of the Northern Territory (http://www.nt.gov.au/nreta/
museums/virtual/index.html). These are some of the
important VEs, but there are obviously many more
that are meant for general public and available on
Internet. Some of the developers of these exhibitions
added virtual reality or Flash movies but most of
them are designed using images with some animation,
and adequate textual information to relay the content
and support the explanation of the objects and events
in the exhibits.
23

While the discussion of VEs has so far being
related to non-profit institutions such as museums
and archives, it should be borne in mind that the
ideas put forth subsequently are equally applicable
to profit organisations for the marketing of its products
and services.
While some functionality and features are no
longer slanted towards the social responsibility aspects,
these VEs still relies on similar characteristics such
as the ability to deliver attractive, interesting, engaging,
and intriguing "exhibits" through user-friendly interfaces
to encourage users (buyers) to visit and access the
site, and ultimately become customers of the organisation.
These sites typically have the common features of
hyper-animated graphics, brief exhibitions and high
interactivity zones to showcase products and services,
online areas for mailing list sign-ups and online
stores to order and make purchases. These VEs
are often associated with biased education in an
attempt to gain competitive advantage over other
competitors' VE sites. On the other hand, VEs developed
by non-profit organisations and government agencies
are constructed with different objectives in mind:
archival, preservation, discovery, education, and others.
They are deemed more authoritative; contain better
researched and trusted resources, and higher educational
value.
Nonetheless, a similar set of user-centered design
paradigms, use of technological tools, well designed
system architectures to high level of automation
with minimal human intervention and effort to create
new versions of VEs are equally applicable for profit
organisations as for non-profit organisations where
VEs are becoming pervasive. At a higher abstract
level, we may consider VEs as digital libraries (DLs)
that contain a set of information objects that can be
accessed individually, or packaged together by
applications supported by the DLs. The Digital
Library Federation defines digital libraries as "organisations
that provide the resources, including the specialised
staff, to select, structure, offer intellectual access
to, interpret, distribute, preserve the integrity of,
and ensure the persistence over time of collections
of digital works so that they are readily available for
use by a defined community or set of communities"
(www.diglib.org/about/dldefinition.htm). This effectively
parallels what VEs attempt to provide to users through
its contents, features and services.
The importance of educational digital libraries
such as Alexandria Digital Library (www. alexandria.
ucsb.edu/), National Science Digital Library
(http://nsdl.org/), the eGranary Digital Library (www.
widernet.org/digitalLibrary/), Second Life (http://
24

secondlife.com/) and other similar online virtual
communities have also demonstrated the use of
virtual worlds for learning. Recently, Giunti Labs,
one of Europe's leading vendor of elearning and
mobile learning content solutions proposed a new
system, eXact VLW (virtual Learning Worlds) that
encompass an authoring environment, to create,
manage and deliver 3-D objects, artifacts and scenes
within collaborative virtual learning worlds compatible
with SCORM (an eLearning standard). No technical
knowledge of VRML, X3D or any other 3-D programming
language are needed to create virtual learning experiences
that can be integrated into existing LMS (Learning
Management Systems) or VLE (virtual learning
environment) through SCORM. Originally developed
for education in digital heritage, the system allows
2-D images, videos, text and any standard SCO
learning objects (all adhering to open standards and
tracking protocols) to be used to create VEs and
virtual learning worlds 7 .
The aim of this conceptual paper is to treat VEs
from this generic angle of varying applicability to
examine a number of pertinent issues in the design
and delivery of online exhibitions. This includes addressing
the stakeholders of VEs, the important role of metadata,
system architectural design, and research advances
of techniques and tools. This is done by drawing
upon relevant literature of DL and VE researches.
A deliberate omission of this paper is a detailed
treatise of exhibition content (selection, organisation,
and packaging) which is an area in its own right.

2. STAKEHOLDERS OF VIRTUAL
EXHIBITIONS
A first cursory thought on stakeholders of VEs
might perhaps result in the thinking that only two
groups exist: that of the exhibition designer and end
users. This is in fact quite contrary to reality. Patel,
et al. suggested that there are actually six groups
of stakeholders involved in the process of creating
and using the VE, with each group playing different
roles8 . The stakeholders are (i) curator who is
knowledgeable of the information objections and
primarily responsible for artifact selection (i.e. identifying
and selecting the artifacts for the VE); (ii) photographer
who is responsible for digital acquisition to create
the information objects to be stored in the digital
repository; (iii) cataloguer who is responsible for
data management to describe, catalogue and group
individual objects together; (iv) modeller who is responsible
for model refinement to create and describe object
interpretations and/or refinements; (v) curator exhibition
designer who is responsible for exhibition building;
and (vi) end user who is consumer of the final VE 8 .
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

The first five categories of stakeholders are typically
part of the VE team, each with a different set of
knowledge, expertise and skill sets and differing
metadata requirements. VE teams can be large and
can comprise professional writers, artists, archivists,
graphic designers, multimedia technicians, technical
specialists and curators. External advisory and
editorial committees may also be roped in the VE
design and construction to create a more balanced
and effective exhibition.
End users, on the other hand, can evolve from
a myriad of different user groups: children and adults,
students and teachers, academics and researchers,
novice and expert users, tourists and casual Internet
surfers, the general public and professional users
(such as archivists, librarians and information
professionals).
This big range of stakeholders collectively translates
into a huge set of differing requirements and expectations
throughout the process of designing, developing and
using the exhibition. A one size fits all paradigm
is almost certain to fail to meet these expectations.
There is a need for good metadata design and
management, novel and effective ways to generate
different versions of VEs at least or acceptable
costs and high productivity in order to satisfy the
needs of different user groups. With this, we can
expect to find the requirement to tailor varying levels
of content generation and online media types to
cater to the needs of different types of users; contents
would typically include multimedia elements, 2-D,
3-D, augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR)9,10.

3. METADATA REQUIREMENTS
Metadata has always been an extremely crucial
aspect for describing and managing artifacts in the
collection. When these are digitally acquired and
transformed into information objects, a new set of
corresponding metadata becomes necessary. When
new applications such as VEs are developed, more
metadata is required to describe and manage the
exhibition, page contents, access information, and
so on. The different stakeholder groups in the previous
section provide an idea of the wide ranging metadata
requirements needed by various constituents of the
cultural heritage industry. The active researches
done on metadata and continuing developments of
standards such as SPECTRUM, EAD, Dublin Core
and other metadata schemes attest to the importance
of having relevant metadata to support a variety of
needs. Metadata can typically be classified as descriptive
metadata, technical metadata, presentation metadata,
preservation metadata, administrative metadata, and
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

resource discovery metadata. It should be noted
that while Dublin Core is an important, well-established
metadata standard for descriptive and resource discovery
across domains and used by almost all the systems,
but it does not specifically deals with museum,
archive and education requirements that have their
own set of detailed metadata elements.
This overwhelming amount of metadata has prompted
the proposal for having a system for authoring, maintaining
and managing metadata to support the development
of the Augmented Representation of Cultural Objects
(ARCO) system for museums to create, manipulate,
manage and present small to medium artifacts in
VEs for both internally within museums and externally
on the Web 8 . They envisaged the creation of digital
artifacts providing opportunities to develop virtual
learning environments (VLEs) which in turn entail
creating new additional metadata such as those
defined by ADL Sharable Content Object Reference
Model (SCORM) or IEEE Learning Object Metadata
(LOM) standards to support eLearning. Furthermore,
they envisage commercial exploitation by institutions
in the form of virtual loans for VEs (through information
objects) that requires the support of a digital rights
management system (DRMS). All this translates
into more and more need for metadata.
Two issues are particularly important for metadata
in the context of VEs. First is the highly recommended
use of standards to support interoperability. When
this becomes not possible for whatever reasons, the
exchange of metadata information across systems
becomes more costly due to the need for validation,
optimisation and mapping. In terms of metadata
definition and storage, XML has turned out to be the
de-facto emerging preferred means to manage information
objects and VEs. VE exhibition pages contain a
series of exhibition objects that can be neatly encapsulated
in a XML-based conceptual hypermedia document
model. Such a document typically includes different
types of information: text, data, graphics, images,
hyperlinks and other elements. Likewise, the information
object's metadata can be neatly based on the XML
structure. Effectively, an XML-based solution exhibits
the advantages such as platform independence, clear
structuring and encapsulation, modularity, and so
on.
The second issue pertains to the need to create
a range of representations for one same original
artifact. As an example, an image can be captured
at different resolutions and sizes. They can be used
as thumbnails, medium resolution for browsing, and
very high resolution for zooming and detailed analysis.
These different versions of content basically share
25

the same metadata except for those entities that
are distinct and different.
Figure 1 shows an example of a photograph
metadata set in XML format 9. In this example, the
Accession ID is used to uniquely identify a photograph
artifact while the location element is used to define
the repository directory where all the images are
stored. As indicated previously, the image element
can be defined more than once to cater to the
different available versions of the same original photograph.
These versions may contain resized, enhanced, or
digitally-manipulated variations (e.g. colour, addition
of borders) of the original photograph.
The same approach can be adopted for textual
artifact metadata to incorporate the standard Dublin
Core elements plus text specific elements. For example,
the "content_version" element can be used for the
support layering of information through different descriptive
layers of a textual artifact. These text descriptions
can range from summarised abstract information to
detailed information, or specially text written for
children or adults, and so on. Likewise we can
adopt the same approach for different audio, video
and other artifacts to cater for different network

conditions, resolutions, and the like. In doing so, we
have one associated metadata record across different
content versions that can be drawn by the VE to
create a series of VEs for different users.

4. CREATION OF MULTIPLE VERSIONS
OF VES EFFECTIVELY AND
EFFICIENTLY
By using this approach of layering metadata
and use of style-sheets, Lim and Foo 9 developed a
VE authoring system to interface with the National
Archives of Singapore digital archive to support the
creation of VEs. The XML-based digital archive provides
different artifact types that form the contents in the
exhibition through the reference and reuse model.
This means that only one copy of information object
resides in the repository which is in turn referenced
and used by more than one VE as necessary. Information
objects and exhibitions are endowed with rich metadata
that include the Dublin Core elements and other new
attributes to support enhanced search support for
field and free text searches. An authoring tool using
a grid-layout approach is used to define and layout
the exhibition contents. XML's Cascading Style Sheet

<?xml version = “1.0” encoding = “UTF-8”>
<!DOCTYPE photo [
<!ELEMENT photo (title*, creator*, subject*, description*, contributor*, date*, type*, format, accession_id, source*,
language*, relation*, coverage*, copyright*, identifier*, location, image+)>
<!ELEMENT title (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT creator (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT subject (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT description (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT contributor (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT date (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT type (#PCDATA)>
Standard Dublin Core 15 metadata
<!ELEMENT format (#PCDATA)>
elements
<!ELEMENT accession_id (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT source (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT language (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT relation (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT coverage (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT copyright (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT identifier (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT location (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT image (img_id, img_height?, img_width?, img_file_size?, img_description?,
reproduction_date?, photoCD?, photoCD_imgno?)
<!ELEMENT img_no (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT photo_size (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT img_height (#PCDATA)>
Additional metadata
<!ELEMENT img_width (#PCDATA)>
for photograph artifact
<!ELEMENT img_file_size (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT img_description (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT reproduction_date (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT photoCD (#PCDATA)>
<!ELEMENT photoCD_imgno(#PCDATA)>
]>
Figure 1. Example of photograph metadata document type definition9.
26

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

(CSS) and Extended Style Sheets (XSL) are then
selected from a range of predefined templates and
applied to the XML documents to yield the final VE
in HTML format. By adopting the notion of information
layering in the descriptors or different editions of the
information objects, and the application of different
style sheets, it becomes possible to create multiple
versions of the same exhibition that varies in content,
layout and interface to create different versions of
VEs for different user groups. The use of style
sheets is particularly useful as it allows content and
structure to be separated cleanly so that the information
can rendered to yield different look-and-feel interface
versions of VEs, thereby enhancing the productivity
of creating VEs and updating existing VEs. A second
version of this system was subsequently developed 11
to enhance the authoring aspect by supporting a
WYSIWYG interface for VE content layout and addition
of different information objects types.
A similar approach was also adopted by CruzLara, et al. 12 in the development of a distributed
content management framework for digital museums
based on XML and XSL techniques. Using this framework,
they developed a Lanyu Digital Museum for the
Lanyu Island and its Yami inhabitants, and a Lanyu
Virtual Exhibition Hall. In a related article Hong,
et al.13 proposed an intelligent styling system to
help museums efficiently and effectively produce
and publish attractive VEs through the use of loosely
coupled fine-grained style modules (FGSM) to present
specific content fragments coupled with a hypermedia
authoring system.

5. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURES FOR VES
At the formative stages of VE development, we
witness the emergence of different stand-alone proprietary
systems as one would expect. Over a period of
time, there is a growing emergence of acceptance
of standards and techniques, notably in the areas
of metadata definition for VE artifacts, XML for storing
metadata and exhibition data, utilisation of style
templates for generating versions of VEs, and inclusion
of eLearning functionality in VEs.
Examples of different system architectures have
been report in literature. Figures 2 to 5 show the
system architecture for Virtual Exhibition System
(VES) by Lim and Foo 9 , Virtual Archive Exhibition
System (VAES) by Yang, Chennupati and Foo 11 , the
Lanyu Digital Museum architecture and proposed
framework for an integrated digital museum system
by Hong, et al. 1 4

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

In VES (Fig. 2), an Artifact Metadata Tool is
provided for the exhibition team to re-use or create
and store the different artifact objects used in the
exhibition. Different repositories are used to store
different artifact types and indexed via the XML
server to facilitate searching and retrieval of artifacts
and exhibition data by the information retrieval engine
that is actually part of the functionality of the XML
server. After determining the content of the exhibition,
the exhibition team organises and lays out the various
exhibition pages and defines the objects in each
page using the Virtual Exhibition Authoring Tool.
This tool is used to create the exhibition metadata
and HTML exhibition pages. The exhibition page
content includes references to the different artifacts.
In VES, the exhibition content is kept separate from
page formatting and layout. Exhibitions content is
described using XML while formatting, and layout
templates in the form of CSS and XSL are used.
CSS provide display related information such as
table height and width, font definitions, colours for
web pages, and so on. XSL is used to format the
artifact and exhibition's XML documents into HTML
pages for display in Web browsers. Formatting is
also applied to each retrieved artifact, which provides
exhibition visitors detailed information of an artifact
upon demand.
As mentioned earlier, the separation of content
and format facilitates the reusability of exhibition's
content. Multiple exhibitions may make reference to
the same content and since content is separated
from the formatting information, the reused content
remains intact. New formatting templates may be
applied to the reused content creating exhibitions
with the same or similar content but different presentation
style. Information layering is also possible with the
use of XSL templates. The XSL template applied to
the XML document may determine which specific
information to pull and display based on the needs
of the visitors thereby creating exhibitions with different
levels of information been displayed. In interacting
with virtual exhibits, visitors can also optionally utilise
the Exhibition Search Tool to search for information
in these exhibitions. The search tool is actually a
stand-alone application that allows searching for all
the indexed information via the XML server. Searches
can be done for specific occurrence of particular
artifacts in the exhibitions, as well as exhibition and
artifact related information that are stored in the
repositories. The matching search results are retrieved
from the different repositories and formatted for display.
The search output makes direct reference to the
exhibition's HTML pages and artifact detailed HTML

27

Figure 2. Virtual exhibition system processes and architecture9.

pages. The later caters to the same artifact being
used across a number of different exhibitions.
The VAES (Fig. 3) is an improved version of the
original VES (Fig. 2). VAES inherited all the features
and provisions of VES and provides a number of
enhancements and new features. It extends the
artifact types by supporting audio and video. In order
to accommodate different resource constraints (Internet
connections and available bandwidths), the content
28

of each audio/video is stored in three versions with
varying compression rates. An optimised metadata
creation tool, comprising metadata creation, editing
and extracting functionality, allows user to define
and save the exhibition metadata into the database
through a few entry forms. A user-type element is
used to identify the unique version for different user
groups. The Virtual Exhibition Authoring Tool in VAES
supports direct WYSIWYG manipulation for authoring
in comparison to using a grid layout definition in the
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 3. Virtual archive exhibition system architecture11.

original VES. VAES facilitates the creation of multiple
versions of the same exhibition with customised
information and in adaptive presentation to support
different user profiles to accommodate diverse user
groups.
In the Lanyu Digital Museum (Fig. 4), the digital
archives contain the various digitised information
objects that are described using metadata based on
Dublin Core. A database management system (DMS)
is used to support creating, viewing, editing, storing
and retrieving information objects. A VE is achieved
through using the set of XML Exhibition Element
Authoring and XSL Authoring tools. The authoring
tool is integrated with the digital archive for ease of
accessing information objects for use in the VE. In
order to facilitate the design and use of XSL templates,
exhibition pages were simplified to contain the title,
descriptive text, and linkages of sequence of information
objects. The Navigation Path Authoring tool defines
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

the hyperlinks that represent ancestor nodes, descendant
nodes, and collateral nodes for each exhibition page
that are subsequently assembled to yield the VE
navigation map. Using this approach, exhibition pages
can be assembled into different exhibition navigation
maps without having to modify the exhibition page
contents. The XSL authoring allows the exhibition
team to define various background music, image
and media effects for the exhibition pages. These
are then rendered by the XSLT processor to yield
the final VE pages.
End users interact with the
system via the navigation maps that lead them to
the various VE pages. Different XSL documents were
manually authored in the system and classified under
three categories: high-bandwidth adult version; high
bandwidth child version; and low bandwidth version.
The high-bandwidth adult VE usually take the form
of narrated multimedia online slides shows. The
high-bandwidth child uses more interesting graphical
29

Figure 4. Lanyu digital museum architecture14.

interfaces with larger fonts and more amusing narrations.
Both these versions provide an auto navigation function
to automatically run through the VE pages. Finally,
the low-bandwidth version uses still pages with little
visual elements to reduce.
In the same paper Hong, et al. 14 (Fig. 5) proposed
an integrated architecture to support the authoring
of hypermedia exhibitions, online courses, and educative
games, all with a certain level of adaptabilities. The
main motivation for development of such a system
was to reduce construction and maintenance costs
of digital museum websites. The metadata of the
information objects are based on CIDOC CRM (Conceptual
Reference Model, http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/) that acts
as ontology in cultural heritage applications. For the
online learning environment in the system, the authors
aim to incorporate adaptive mechanisms for navigation,
content, and presentation.
Exhibition and assessment pages will be serialised
in XML based on the respective documents logical
structure models. Learning objects metadata, based
on LOM, will be used to describe primitive learning
objects that will serve as building blocks for online
courses, and to be used in different learning contexts.
30

Different user profiles are processed by an adaptive
engine to create pages that are customised in style,
navigation and contents.
Although these and many current VE applications
have adopted different system architecture for their
systems, they tend to share a number of basic
components to support VE functionality. Figure 6
attempts to encapsulate a generic system architecture
derived from existing literature that can be used as
a useful platform for the development of VE systems
in future. The architecture aims to support effectiveness
and efficiency in generating, maintaining and managing
VEs. It attempts to provide VE exhibition teams'
useful tool sets to generate different versions of the
same VEs for end users' consumption, taking into
account user needs and a system constraint of the
client's set up in accessing the exhibition.
The primitive data level contains all the information
objects that can be used for VEs: text, image,
audio, video, 3-D graphics, interactive media, and
so on. These information objects can be different
versions of digitised artifacts or born digital objects.
When eLearning is considered, this can also include
questions for quizzes for assessment, and other
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 5. Proposed framework for an integrated digital museum

Figure 5. Proposed frameworks for an integrated digital museum system 14.

learning activities. These primitive learning and information
objects can be combined to form larger learning
entities through the Learning Management System
(LMS) or eLearning authoring system (which can
either be stand-alone or an integral part of the LMS)
to generate stand-alone learning objects which in
turn can be aggregated to form larger learning modules.
These variations of learning content can be incorporated
into VEs as necessary.
Each primitive information object is defined by
a set of appropriate metadata (see previous section)
which is created, updated and maintained through
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

a DMS. If necessary, a Metadata Management System
(MMS) can be used to provide an interface to the
DMS to support various metadata operations. This
system is not confined to managing primitive information
objects: it can also be used to manage metadata
for the exhibition, presentation templates and other
metadata which the system uses.
The exhibition authoring system forms the crux
of VEs authoring. The VE exhibition team uses the
system to define the exhibition framework, select
information objects (including learning objects if these
are present in the VE) for page contents, and create
31

Figure 6. Generic system architecture for VE development.

the layout and look-and-feel of the exhibition pages.
This functionality can be integrated as one system,
or split into different modules for exhibition page
definition, page element selection and presentation
definition. This latter approach attempts to clearly
separate data from structure and layout. Using an
Information Object Manager, exhibition pages can
incorporate background music or background image,
use a specific layer of information, select different
layout setting, font setting during the authoring stage.
Different presentations are usually achieved through
different presentation or style templates selected
during this authoring stage.
These templates can be predefined for selection,
or created and managed by a more sophisticated
presentation template manager. The Exhibition Manager
defines and manages the whole exhibition and combines
these various pages together to form the exhibition
whose metadata can be stored in the exhibition
repository for future reference, editing or updates.
The internally generated VE definition can be stored
in a suitable data exchange format that is used by
the Presentation Manager, whose role is to render
and generate the VE into its final form for use by
users.
Depending on the way the Exhibition Authoring
System is designed, all the necessary information
32

can be made available for the Presentation Manager
to complete the work so that VEs can be generated
offline. Alternatively, VEs can be generated on-thefly to take into account client system characteristics
and end-users characteristics or preferences. As
such, the Presentation Manager may be interfaced
with a User Profile Manager to manage these aspects
of system and user requirements. System requirements
would typically consider client computer processing
capability, network bandwidth, and so on, in order
for the content to be adapted as necessary. For
example, different resolution image, sound and video
may be used as necessary to attain an acceptable
quality of service for the VEs with different constraints;
and resource intensive 3-D graphics may be eliminated
if they cannot be adequately supported by the client
computer. User characteristics would typically consider
age, literacy level, motive for using VE, kind of
experience desired, and so on in order for the VE
to be adapted as necessary. As such, the User
Profile Manager may require some form of interaction
and inputs from the user to complete the information
necessary for the VEs to be generated.
Another component that might be interfaced to
the Presentation Manager might be a Digital Rights
Manager to support a Digital Rights Management
System in the case where VEs are loaned out to
other institutions and where constraints are placed
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

on the information objects' use. Such a system
may allow other VEs from other institutions to have
access to the primitive information objects as content
for these VEs. Such an attempt to either provide
free or fee-paying access can help promote reusability
and sharing, and potentially enhance the quality of
the final VEs.
Through the Presentation Manager and these
other interfaces, a stand-alone single or many different
versions of the same exhibition may be generated
at one pass. Ultimately, the aim is to generate
different versions of VEs to meet the needs of different
user groups, and to user technology to support VE
authoring efficiently and effectively, thereby minimising
human effort and intervention.
In terms of implementation, a number of
common data types, standards and techniques
have been utilised in most systems for VEs as
shown in Table 1. The table also shows the desirable
contents, characteristics and features that have been
suggested in literature for successful VEs.
Finally, it is worth note two interesting researches
and work-in-progress in the development in VEs.
Lu, et al.15 proposed a resource-driven content adoption
approach to augment content with metadata in order
to display or render content based on available
resources. By considering display resolution, bandwidth,
processing speed, quality of service and energy,
content adaptation may add or remove information
based on available resources. Metadata in this case
not only contains multi-level content description but
also important information and geometric information
for computer generated images and animation. As
such, their proposed approach does not necessary
only use pixel manipulation to change resolution,
but aim to represent the information object differently
if necessary but yet allow the user to perceive the
original intended content. Hong, et al. 13 proposed
using self-contained fine-grained style modules that
can be selected and combined together into a styling
system to support creation of different versions of
VEs using the same content. It aims to make the
work of shaping presentation styles easier and to
support the creation of VEs without technology specialists.

update of the exhibition. This paper has presented
the case for VEs, surfaced the myriad of stakeholders
of VEs, and demonstrated the need for good metadata.
Using generic system architecture, the various
components and salient points of VE system design
and development are highlighted. A list of desirable
VE contents and features are articulated. The continuing
developments of Web 2.0, VE research, wireless
and other technological advances are likely to change
the form and capability of future VEs. Nonetheless,
virtual exhibitions can, and are expected to, survive
and grow as they stand to yield a rich set of both
tangible and intangible for institutions that fully embrace
the idea of both the physical and virtual operating
environment in this Internet age.

REFERENCES
1. Silver, D. Interfacing American culture: The perils
and potentials of virtual exhibitions. American
Quarterly, 1997, 49(4), 825-50.
2. Hunt, L.; Lundberg, M. & Zuckerman, B. InscriptiFact:
A virtual archive of ancient inscriptions from the
Near East. International Journal of Digital Libraries,
2005, 5, 153-66.
3. Leong, C.K.; Chennupati, K.R. & Foo, S. The
design and development of an online exhibition
for heritage information awareness. Museums
and the Web, 2002, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. http://www.archimuse.com/mw2002/papers/
ramaiah/ramaiah.html
4. Leong, C.K.; Chennupati, K.R. & Foo, S. The
design and development of an online exhibition
for heritage information awareness in Singapore.
Program , 2003, 37(2), 85-93.
5. Chennupati, K.R. Case for virtual Salar Jung
museum. Deccan Chronicle , 5 December 2007,
p 9.
6. Lester, P. Is the virtual exhibition the natural
successor to the physical? Journal of the Society
of Archivists , 2006, 27(1), 5-101.

6. CONCLUSION

7. Giunti Labs. Training press release, 13 August
2007. http://www.trainingpressreleases.com/
newsstory.asp?NewsID=3073.

Well designed virtual exhibitions are important
extensions to physical exhibitions, providing discovery,
learning and other opportunities beyond what the
physical exhibitions can offer. Users can be captivated,
engaged and even contribute towards the continual

8. Patel, M.; White, M.; Mourkoussis, N.; Walczak,
K.; Wojciechowski, R. & Chmielewski, J. Metadata
requirements for digital museums environment.
International Journal of Digital Libraries , 2005,
5, 179-92.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

33

9. Lim, J.C. & Foo, S. Creating virtual exhibitions
from an XML-based digital archive. Journal of
Information Science, 2003, 29(3), 143-58.

Network Conference, Tampere, Finland, 14-15
November 2002. http://www.acten.org/cgi-bin/
WebGUI/www/index.pl/sc_ announcements.

10. Gotz, D. & Mayer-Patel, K. A framework for
scalable delivery of digitised spaces. International
Journal on Digital Libraries , 2005, 5(3), 205-18.

13. Hong, J.S.; Chen, B.H. & Hung, S.H. Toward
intelligent styling for digital museum exhibitions:
Modularization framework for aesthetic hypermedia
presentations, International Journal on Digital
Libraries , 2004, 4, 64-68.

11. Yang, R.; Chennupati, K.R. & Foo, S. Virtual
archival exhibition system: An authoring tool for
developing web-based virtual exhibitions. I n
Proceedings of International Conference on Dublin
Core and Metadata Applications (DC-2007), 2731 August 2007, Singapore. pp. 96-105.
12. Cruz-Lara, S.; Chen, B.H. & Hong, J.S. Distributed
content management framework for digital museum
exhibitions. In Proceedings of EUROPIX Scholars

14. Hong, J.S.; Chen, B.H.; Hung, S.H. & Hsiang,
J. Toward an integrated digital museum systemthe Chi Nan experiences. International Journal
on Digital Libraries , 2005, 5(3), 231-51.
15. Lu, Y.H.; Ebert, D.S. & Delp, E.J. Resourcedriven content adaptation, 2006. http://cobweb.
ecn.purdue.edu/~yunglu/papers/06istspie2.pdf.

About the Author

Schubert Foo is Professor and Associate Dean, College of Humanities, Arts and Social
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BSc (Hons), MBA and
PhD from the University of Strathclyde, UK. He is a Chartered Engineer, Chartered IT Professional,
Fellow of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and Fellow of the British Computer Society.
He is also a board member of the National Library Board, and an Advisor of the National
Archives of Singapore Board. He has published more than 170 publications in the areas of
multimedia technology, Internet technology, multilingual information retrieval, digital libraries and
knowledge management. He is a member of the Editorial Advisory Board of the Journal of
Information Science, Journal of Information and Knowledge Management, and International
Yearbook of Library and Information Management, among others. He has co-authored a book
Knowledge Management: Tools and Techniques with Ravi Sharma and Alton Chua, and coedited a book Social Information Retrieval Systems: Emerging Technologies and Applications
for Searching the Web Effectively with Dion Goh in 2007.

34

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

