DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 35-42
© 2008, DESIDOC

Online Exhibition Authoring System with Intelligent
Affective Background Image Composition
Pai-Hsun Chen1, Jen-Shin Hong 2, * and Sheng-Wen Shih2
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Nai Kai Institute of Technology, Taiwan

1

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Chi Nan University, Taiwan
*
E-mail:jshong@ncnu.edu.tw

2

ABSTRACT
This study addresses the development of an online authoring system that can be integrated into a
typical digital archive system to facilitate the construction of online exhibitions. One common approach
for the efficient online authoring is based on a principle that decomposes a hypermedia presentation into
a “content document” and a “style template.” This study proposes a layer-based architecture to further
decompose a style template into a number of presentation layers. The approach eases the burden for
implementing large-scale style templates in digital museum projects demanding versatile presentation
styles. Particular attention has been focused on the mechanism for affective background image composition
that incorporates the concerns of the affective colour scheme and the page layout. A system implementation
has been successfully applied in real world digital museum projects for constructing aesthetic online
exhibitions.
Keywords : Virtual exhibition, online authoring, affective presentation, colour schemes.

1. INTRODUCTION
Online exhibitions provide a low-barrier mechanism
for users to easily access and appreciate the precious
artifacts archived in a digital museum. Conventionally,
online exhibitions are developed by joint efforts of
content experts, graphic designers and computer
technicians. Such a typical development process
is laborious and time-consuming. For a large-scale
digital museum project, an effective hypermedia
authoring system to facilitate the development of
online exhibitions is crucial. One common approach
for the online authoring system is based on a principle
that decomposes a hypermedia presentation into a
“content document” and a “style template.” A typical
workflow includes three steps, namely (i) determine
a practical common logical structure of the exhibition
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

pages, (ii) use a content authoring interface to fill
in the contents of the exhibition pages and the
inter-page structures, and (iii) select a pre-fabricated
style template for each page for the final presentations.
With such an approach, the workflow for developing
the online exhibition improves significantly since
the styling process is separated from the content
authoring process.
In the current Web environment, a common
way to realise the principle of separating the content
authoring and styling processes is to use the “XSLbased” approach1,2. The approach uses an Extra
Markup Language (XML) document for describing
the content and its structure. In the presentation
stage, a corresponding Extended Style Sheet (XSL)
document is used as the style template to transform
35

the XML-based content into HTML-based presentations.
In such an approach, the presentation style is limited
to that can be expressed in HTML and Javascripts
supported in a typical browser. In addition, usually
an XSL document needs to be prefabricated in its
entirety. A minimal variation in a desired presentation
style (such as a slight change in the title font
setting, the content image size, or the number of
paragraphs) requires a different XSL template. In a
large-scale exhibition that demands significantly
number of different presentation styles, the XSLbased approach requires laborious implementations
and management of considerable prefabricated XSL
documents and is therefore unpractical. Currently,
for developing large-scale exhibitions emphasising
on the aesthetic and affective dimensions of the
presentation so as to stimulate the contemplations
of the artistic works therein, there is still a thirst
for a really sophisticated authoring system that
significantly facilitates the authoring process while
provides high quality presentations.
Overall speaking, the design of an optimal hypermedia
authoring workflow needs to consider a balance
between like (i) the complexities of the authoring
process, (ii) the aesthetic qualities of final hypermedia
presentations, and (iii) the efforts for large-scale
implementations of the style templates. In this study,
we present a system based on a “layer-based”
style template architecture. Our goal is to implement
a system that allows the content providers to efficiently
develop large-scale media-centric and animationbased presentations. A particular focus in this study
is on the mechanism for intelligently composing the
affective background images that accounting for the
page layout and colour combination schemes for
the presentation. An implementation will be presented.

2. A LAYER-BASED ARCHITECTURE
FOR HYPERMEDIA AUTHORING
SYSTEM
A typical hypermedia exhibition contains numerous
interlinked hypermedia pages, which contains “content
elements” as well as “style elements” (e.g. background
animations, decorating graphics, interactive patterns,
functional scripts, audio-loops, layout settings, font
typesetting, etc.). In our layer-based framework
(Fig. 1), a typical hypermedia presentation is decomposed
into number of “content layers,” including the title,
texts, and images. Each content layer is presented
by a corresponding “content layer presenter” which
is the style module responsible for the stylization
and animation of the content in the layer. A content
layer presenter is essentially a module in which the
content formatting, interactions and decorative graphics,
all encapsulated in a self-contained document. The
36

Figure 1. The layer-based architecture for the
hypermedia presentation system.

presentation in each content layer can be regarded
as a building block, which can be assembled into
a hypermedia presentation. Beyond the content layer
presenters, a style template includes styling layers
presenters, namely, the background image, background
audio, and special effects (such as animations of
raining, snowing, thunder, fireworks, etc.), that are
used to help to create a particular style or affective
states desired for the presentation.
In the framework, a style template describes all
the layer presenters for a content document. By
switching the layer presenters in the style template,
the content document can then be presented in
different fashions based on the combination of the
layer presenters. In addition, the position, size,
rotation angle, transparency, and the dynamic movement
of each layer presenter can be adjusted to create
complex layouts and animation styles. The temporal
behaviours of the presentation can also be assigned
by adjusting the temporal schedules of each layer
presenter in the style template. This modularization
framework significantly improves the reusability of
the style elements in a project. Our implementation
has verified the applicability of such a framework
in current Web environments. In the following, we
elaborate our design of the intelligent background
image composition module based on page layouts
and colour combination schemes.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

3. THE BACKGROUND IMAGE
COMPOSITION MODULE
Style and affection aspects are important design
factors of multimedia presentations such as webpages3 . Through emotion and style, a presentation
grabs the attention of the audience. The colour
scheme in the page is one key design factor that
professional designers frequently use in their attempts
to develop emotion evoking multimedia presentations.
A colour scheme is the combination of colours used
in a multimedia presentation. For example, the use
of a blue background with white text is an example
of a widely applied colour scheme for web pages
of high-tech companies. In the graphic design
communities, various heuristic principles have been
proposed for developing colour schemes that tend
to invoke a particular style or emotion 4. A number
of systems have been reported to automate the
design of colour schemes. For example, Tokoumaru,
et al.5 proposed a system that automatically composes
affective colour schemes mainly based on principle
of colour harmony. A more easily accessible resource
for the colour schemes is the colour charts that
explicitly enumerate the colour schemes to different
styles or affective states 6 .
To provide a better visual structure of a multimedia
page, in practice, a direct way for applying the
colour schemes is to segment the page canvas,
based on a layout design, into multiple coloured
regions each one with a particular colour in the
desired colour scheme. Alternatively, for applications
that emphasise the aesthetics of the presentation,
a more appealing way is to incorporate a background
image design based on the concerns of both the
layout and colour schemes. Usually, an exhibition
author would select background images that are
pertaining to the major theme of the exhibition content.

For example, an exhibition regarding an artifact of
ancient Chinese culture would typically apply images
such as Chinese landscape paintings as the background.
Often, in a common practice in multimedia design
communities, the image would be manipulated offline
in priori to incorporate certain layout design and
colour schemes to create desired aesthetic or emotional
effects. Our interest is to develop an intelligent
system with which an exhibition author could facilitate
the background image manipulation online with ease.
The following describes a computationally efficient
approach to achieve such a goal. The concern here
is to transform the colour profiles of an image with
a balance between the original visual characteristics
of the image and the target colour scheme that is
associated to a particular style or affective state.
Roughly speaking, our approach first transforms
the input image to grayscale. Then, based on the
colour assigned for each region in the page layout,
the colour tone of an output pixel is changed to that
of the target colour, while the saturation and brightness
of the pixel are changed based on the brightness
of the input pixels according to a number of heuristic
rules. These heuristic rules were manually tuned
mainly to achieve an optimal contrast of the manipulated
image. Figure 2 illustrates a typical colour manipulation
process in the proposed intelligent background image
composition module. The detail colour transformation
algorithm is elaborated in Table 1.
In a bitmap image, the colour of an image pixel
is represented by a colour vector representing values
in a corresponding constitutes of a certain colour
models. The HSB (Hue, Saturation, Brightness) model
is commonly used in computer graphics applications7 .
The HSB colour space was designed to approximate
the way humans perceive and interpret colour. The
model defines a colour space in terms of three

Figure 2. The colour manipulation process in the background composition module.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

37

Table 1. Algorithms for the colour transformation
Step1:

Transform each pixel in the input image from RGB colour to grayscale with the luminance Bin given as 5

Step 2

Perform
Gamma
correction
on grayscale
the grayscale
Perform Gamma
correction
on the
pixel. pixel.

Bin = 0.299
R+0.577 G +0.144
BB
Βin = 0.299R+0.577
G+0.144
γ
Bγ Bγ
=B
= inBin γ

Step 3

whereγ?is set to 0.5 for presentations to be shown in typical LCD monitors.

Based on the target colour (Htarget, Starget, Btarget), perform colour transformation according to the following heuristic
rules.
(H) The hue of all the pixels is set the target hue.
Hout = Htarget
(S) The saturation of pixels with the gamma-corrected brightness less than 0.5 is set to the target saturation.
Others are linearly decayed (Figure 3a).

 Starget,
Sout =  2S − 2S × B
target − 2S
target
γ γ,
target × B
2 Starget

0<0<B
Bγ ≤
0.5 
γ <0.5

0<BB
0.5<
γ γ<1
≤ 1

(B) The brightness of a pixel is linearly mapped based on the target brightness ( Btarget ) and a given contrast span

(∆Β )

( ? B ).

= Btarget
+ ∆Β
BBout
−0.5∆Β
0.5? B+
? B×× Bγγ
out =
target−

constituent components, namely, hue, saturation,
and brightness. Table 1 lists a computationallyefficient algorithm based on the HSB colour models
for manipulating the colours of a background image
to better fit to a target colour scheme.
Based on the above principles, Fig. 3 illustrates
the framework of the background image composition
module which includes the following core elements.
Image Bank: The layout bank contains a collection
of colour images to be used as the background of
a multimedia presentation.
Affective Colour Scheme Generator: The colour
schemes for a particular style or affective state can
be dynamically calculated using various colour
combination heuristic rules, or simple based on
colour scheme charts.
Image
Bank
Layout
Bank
Color
Scheme
Generator

Color
Manipulation
Module

input image,
select layout, style, hue

Figure 3. Framework of the background image
composition module .
38

Layout Bank: The layout bank contains a collection
of layout designs each one with a particular arrangement
of sub-page regions for the presentation. The layout
schemes need to be pre-fabricated by graphic designers.
Colour Manipulation Module: This module handles
the computation for the on-the-fly image manipulation.
The image manipulation could be implemented either
in the server-side or in the player-side, depending
on the image processing capabilities of the player.
User Interface: The user interface allows a user
to select the target style or affective state, layout,
colour schemes, and background image.

4. IMPLEMENTATIONS
Based on the proposed framework, we have
implemented a prototype system. We applied the
Macromedia Flash technology for implementing the
layer presenters. Each layer presenter is essentially
a self-contained Flash document, in which the formatting,
interactions and decorative graphics are all encapsulated.
Flash provides a layer-based architecture with which
a presentation with different graphic elements can
be easily superimposed one upon one seamlessly.
Particular, since the plug-ins for Flash player have
been extremely widely installed, a user would not
have to download additional plug-ins to view the
developed exhibitions. For the server-side content
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

management and on-the-fly image manipulations,
we applied the Microsoft ASP.net and SQL database
technologies. In our design, the system provides a
“PowerPoint-like” interface, with which a typical
content author with basic computer skills can operate
easily. Figure 4 shows snapshots of the interfaces,
with which a user can organise the content structure
of an exhibition page, input text (HTML or plain
text), select the animation parameters, adjust the
position and transparency of each layer, and preview
the presentation. Figure 5 shows a snapshot of the
interface for the background image composition module.
Figure 6 shows a snapshot of exhibition pages for
a content document with three different presentation
styles.
The system adopted the colour combination
schemes listed by Colour Research Institute, Korea6 .
About a dozen of common style or affective states,
each one with five colour schemes were applied.
Dozens of different layouts were designed. A typical
process for generating a colour-transformed background
image includes the following steps:

Figure 4. Snapshots of the system interfaces: (1) content
structure; (2) preview of the presentation;
(T1) HTML-based interface for content texts; (T2)
interface for setting the parameters of the text
layer presenter; (I1) WYSIWYG interface for
adjusting the size, position, and transparency of
the image layer presenter.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Step 1.

Select a background image and a layout.

Step 2.

Select a target style or affective state.

Step 3.

Select a colour scheme associated with
the target style or affective state.

Step 4.

Based on the selected colour scheme and
layout, the final background image is
dynamically composed.

Step 5.

Finally, the content layers are superimposed
on top of the composed background using
corresponding layer presenters. The position,
rotation, and transparency of each layer
can then be adjusted to fit to the selected
background layout.

5. A CASE STUDY ON THE SYSTEM
USABILITY
The implemented system has been used in two
of our digital museum projects for construction of
the exhibition websites of the Lanyu Digital Museum
and the National Repository of Cultural Heritage.
Each exhibition website contains hundreds of exhibitions,
which are constantly updated from time to time.
The exhibitions were authored alone by a professional
graphic designer skilled in Photoshop and PowerPoint
but not in Macromedia Flash or programming. He
found that the system interfaces resemble that of
the PowerPoint and is rather easy to learn and
operate. It took a number of hours to get familiar
with the interfaces. Overall speaking, the quality of
authored animation-based presentations is rather
satisfactory. Figure 7 shows a snapshot of the
exhibitions for the two projects (note that animation
of the presentation could not be captured in these
steady shots).
Nevertheless, observations on the authoring
processes of the author pointed out a main problem
that is related to the usability of the system. Aiming
to provide versatile presentation styles, we devoted
a significant amount of resources to develop huge
amount of layer presenters, audio loops, and together
many presentation parameters that a user can select
and adjust. It appeared that there were many good
layer presenters that have never been used throughout
the projects. How to develop interfaces to help
content authors to efficiently locate the appropriate
layer presenters in such a large pool to give a
desired target style to be explored. In the long run,
given a system with such complex functionalities
supported, there are several dimensions along which
this system should be evaluated. It would require
39

Figure 5. A snapshot of the interface for the intelligent background image composer. (1) content structure;
(2) affective colour schemes; (3) layout; (4) images; (5) preview of the composed background.

Figure 6. A snapshot of exhibition pages for a content document with three different presentation styles.

Figure 7. A snapshot of the exhibition website for the Lanyu Digital Museum (left), and a snapshot of the
exhibition website for the National Repository of Cultural Heritage (right).
40

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

a full-fledged usability test to justify various aspects
of the system such as functionality, user interface,
aesthetic and affective performances, and potential
applications. The more serious study on the usability
is current under our research agenda.

REFERENCES
1.

Hong, J.S.; Chen, P.H. & Hsiang, J. XSL-based
content management for multi-presentation digital
museum exhibitions. In ECDL2001: 5th European
Conference on Research and Advanced Technology
for Digital Libraries, Darmstat, Germany, September
2001.

2.

Yang, R.; Ramaiah, C.K. & Foo, S. Virtual
archival exhibition system: An authoring tool for
developing web-based virtual exhibitions. I n
Proceedings of the International Conference on
Dublin Core and Metadata Applications , 2007,
pp. 96-105.

3.

Kim, J.; Lee, J. & Choi, D. Designing emotionally
evocative homepages: An empirical study of the
quantitative relations between design factors
and emotional dimensions. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies , 2003, 59(6), 899940.

4.

Itten, J. The art of colour: The subjective experience
and objective rationale of colour. John Wiley &
Sons Inc, 1997, ISBN-13: 978-0471289289.

5.

Tokumaru, M.; Muranaka, N. & Imanishi, S.
Colour design support system considering colour
harmony. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems .
IEEE Press, Honolulu, 2002, pp. 378-383.

6.

I.R.I. Colour Research Institute, Korea. Colour
Combination. Youngjin.com & Co., ISBN: 89314-2368-3, 2003.

7.

Jain, A. Fundamentals of digital image processing.
Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall, N.J., p.67. ISBN:
0-13-332578-4, 1989.

6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study addresses the development of an
online authoring system that can be integrated into
a digital archive system to help the content author
to facilitate the construction of online exhibitions.
The system is build upon a layer-based hypermedia
presentation architecture, which decomposes a style
template into several independent layer presenters.
Particular attention has been focused on the approach
for a background composition module that incorporates
the concerns of affective colour schemes and page
layout.
The proposed layer-based approach appears to
be practical in current web environments for authoring
large-scale aesthetic and affective exhibitions.
Nevertheless, while the proposed system could be
widely applied in authoring scenario where human
intervention is available, our optimal goal is to develop
an intelligent-styling system that can create an
affective exhibition based on properties of a content
document in a more automated way. The relevant
research is currently under study in our research
group.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the National Science
Council of Taiwan, under grant NSC-94-2422-H-260002.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

41

About the Authors
Dr Pai-Hsun Chen received her MS degree and the PhD degree in computer science and
information engineering from the National Chi Nan University in 2001 and 2005, respectively.
In August 2005, she joined the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering,
Nan Kai Institute of Technology, Taiwan, as an assistant professor. Her research interests
include digital museum, hypermedia, affective computing and aesthetic computing.

Dr Jen-Shin Hong received his PhD degree from the University of California at Berkeley in
1993 with bioengineering/mechanical engineering major. He is currently an associate professor
in the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering at National ChiNan University,
Taiwan. He has served in the editorial board of the International Journal on Digital libraries
since 2002. His research interests are in digital library systems, hypermedia authoring, affective
computing and affective computing.
Dr Sheng-Wen Shih received his MS and PhD degree in electrical engineering from the
National Taiwan University in 1990 and 1996, respectively. From January to July 1997, he
worked as a postdoctoral associate at the Image Formation and Processing Laboratory, Beckman
Institute, University of Illinois. In August 1997, he joined the Department of Computer Science
and Information Engineering, National Chi Nan University, Taiwan, as an assistant professor,
and became an associate professor in 2003. His research interests include computer vision,
biometrics, and human-computer interaction.

42

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

