DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 43-54
© 2008, DESIDOC

Comparative Study of HTML and Animated
User Interfaces of an Online Exhibition
Nagarajan Viralingam1 and Chennupati K. Ramaiah2
CITI Bank
8th Floor, Millenia Tower, Singapore.
E-mail: vvvgithi@hotmail.com
1

Muffakham Jah College of Engineering & Technology
Road No. 3, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad-500 036
E-mail: chennupati_kramaiah@yahoo.com

2

ABSTRACT
The advancements in computer and telecommunication technologies have made the World Wide Web
a vibrant place. Museums worldwide have recognised this phenomenon and are tapping the multimedia
and interface technologies to present their contents online and in a more interesting manner. First priority
to this is the user interface design and appropriate technologies to represent the contents. The paper
discusses an animated interface created for an online exhibition with the Macromedia Flash software
and compared the same with HTML user interface. The system evaluation results shows that only less
than half of the users were satisfied with the animated version because of its inflexibility in terms of
reusing and customising of information. Therefore, a HTML version was developed for the same system
and compared for strengths and weaknesses in terms of user interfaces. The results showed that the
respondents, especially those with lower bandwidth connections, were very comfortable with the HTML
interface but aesthetically a few more percentage of respondents rated high to animated interface. The
paper conclude that a balanced combination of HTML and animated interfaces will provide both aesthetics
and functionality required for an online exhibition.
Keywords: Online exhibition, user interface, animated user interface, interface design.

1. INTRODUCTION
The virtual space of World Wide Web (WWW)
is being well utilised by many museums for putting
their collections online so as people from all over
the world can use them. The multimedia and other
interactive technologies have provided new ways to
museums to improve the communication with the
public and to attract even the visitors at far of
places to their collections in a virtual environment.
The shift from the physical exhibition to the online
format has also provided the visitors an altogether
different experience that is not possible in the physical
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

medium. Such a virtual form is now becoming the
preferred medium, especially where research is
concerned. Studies have shown that the number of
visitors to the museums is dwindling and the online
visitors are rising rapidly 1 . The paper is mainly
targeted to a broad spectrum of people including
school students, tourists, academics, and researchers.
Online exhibition is a boon for those who can not
visit museums, such as disabled, large families
and elderly people. The most important is that the
remote visitors (people not geographically close to
the museums) can also visit the online exhibition
from various parts of the world.
43

The paper compares the strengths and weaknesses
of HTML and animated user interfaces of an online
exhibition system. For this “Colours in the Wind—
Old Hill Street Police Station in Retrospect ” online
exhibition system was chosen. Two versions for the
same content were produced. The objectives of the
study are: (i) to examine various technologies and
authoring tools that are needed for the development
of an online exhibition system; (ii) to design and
develop an online exhibition system for disseminating
cultural and heritage information; (iii) to compare
HTML and animation-based interfaces of the same
online exhibition system and find out their strengths
and weaknesses; and (iv) to study the problems
faced by the users of HTML and animated user
interfaces.

2. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
It is evident from the literature that Internetbased online exhibitions offer better flexibility in all
respects compared to their physical counterparts 2 .
Online exhibitions allow visitors to select the level
of information they wish to consult, thereby offering
something useful to the users of all ages and experience.
Studies show that the museum viewers would less
likely to make a special trip to museum to see the
original artifacts when the facility is available to see
a similar digital copy at their computer. But Freedman
states that the demand for the original work will
increase rather than decrease, following repeated
exposure at an institutionally authorised site on the
W W W3 .
Present technologies are helping in the growth
of wired museums of all kinds to younger generations
and providing both education and entertainment 4
and the number of digital visitors are steadily growing
and in some cases, outstripping the number of
visitors to the corresponding physical museums. 5 , 6
This encourages geographically distant digital visitors
to become a physical visitor to all types of exhibitions,
and to encourage physical visitors to maintain contact
with the museums through online after they walk
out of their doors.

2.1 What makes a Good Online
Exhibition?
A good virtual/online exhibition should make its
collection and knowledge accessible to the general
public as well as specialist audiences 7 . The main
requisites of a good online exhibition are good content,
a narrative theme, intuitive navigation, and inviting
graphics. Visitors respond favourably to an online
exhibition website that possesses a lot of narrative
44

guidance simultaneously with great ease of navigation8 .
The exhibition should encourage people to learn
about the museum and the activities it provides and
also should be updated on a regular basis to attract
visitors. Thomas, et al. stated that a good museum
exhibition should provide opportunities for people to
visit the museum website more than once, allowing
for surprises and wonders7. So, a dedicated museum
website obviously has the potential to provide the
most comprehensive, correct and latest information
on the museum concerned. It should incorporate
interactive functionalities like JavaScript, Flash, streaming
media, DHTML and dynamically interfacing with serverside databases to provide access to their collections.
It should make each page as self-sufficient, with
interpretative text to bring out the salient points to
the reader, while leaving the image to speak out as
much as possible. 9

2.2 Design Considerations for an Online
Exhibition
All art museums, small or large, share the
same mission to communicate to the public about
their collections. The strengths of the Internet should
be exploited to enhance the visitor’s virtual experience
and by avoiding creating the traditional museum
experience. Design of ‘Home Page’ should be done
with utmost care, as this sets the ‘scene and tone’
for the rest of the exhibition site, and gives an
overall impression to visitors about the physical
exhibition or a real museum. Bowen, et al. suggest
that the technicalities and tricks of trade should be
followed to improve the apparent downloading speed
of web pages 10 . Online exhibitions are websites
where people can access information directly, rather
than just knowing where the information is held 9 .
They should help them (visitors) by saving a great
deal of their time and efforts and provide information
they are looking for. Each web page containing an
image should be self-explanatory and self-sufficient,
so that it carries all the information that the reader
needs to make it intelligible.
A museum’s online website should be brief,
logical, provide equivalent alternatives to auditory
and visual content, and ensure that user interface
follows principles of accessible design 1 . Wallace
pointed out that logo, theme line, typeface, layout
format, design motifs, colour, icons and tone of
voice are among the features that must be deployed
at the same levels throughout the website to make
it coherent, easy to navigate and fun for young
people 11 . He feels that a well constructed and easily
navigable website will never compromise in its design.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

2.3 Types of Interfaces for Online
Exhibitions
2.3.1 Hypertext-based User Interfaces
Hypertext-based interfaces are non-animated
pages mainly focusing on text-based content. Hypertext
interfaces overcome the limitation of displaying text
by structuring information into a network rather than
presented in a linear mode. There are many ways
of reading a hypertext document; the intention is
that the user is able to read it in the way that suits
him/her best. Some museum websites provide hypertext
interfaces, especially for researchers and academics.
According to Lehman, hypertext pages allow learners
to have more control on how the information is
presented and it is an important requirement for an
effective learning which made it widely acceptable
to the education community12 . Unlike Flash (animated)
interface, HTML interface allows easy copying,
reproduction, modification, searching, classification
and reclassification.

2.3.2 Animated User Interfaces
Animated user interfaces make use of abundant
desktop computing power and present information
in an animated mode along with exciting effects.
Animated interfaces consume more time for the
content to display. The average time spent by a
user on most of the web pages is only a few seconds
because much of their time is spent in following
links from page to page in order to arrive at a page
where the content may be of actual interest to the
visitor. This process should be made as painless
and as fast as possible to ensure that the visitor
is not discouraged. Bogomazova discussed the special
problems faced by museum websites in using stateof-art web technologies such as use of proprietary
design and software13 . He stated that the web resource
should provide information and documentation in a
way that favours the learning process and stimulates
users’ enquiries and practical experiments. Kennedy
suggested that Flash websites should avoid overloading
of web graphics, audio and video content because
vector material cannot be searchable and takes
long time to download 14 . Since the design tools
are of propitiatory nature, a Flash player is required
to view the content. They should use non-Flashbased solution for those who do not have a Flash
player or broadband capability. Online museum exhibits
developed with too much animation might lead to
disastrous results due to low speed, and lack of
searchability and flexibility in the content. So, proper
balance between these interfaces is always better
for users to satisfy their requirements.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

2.3.3 Other User Interfaces
With the developments in user interface
technologies and the fifth generation languages,
new user interfaces will not require the user to
control computer through commands but will let the
computer to adapt the dialogue the user needs
based on its inferences from observing the user. A
good example of creating animated interfaces without
much hassle is using Pavlov, a programming-bydemonstration (PBD) system that allows even nonprogrammers to create animated interfaces (http://
www.acm.org/sigchi/chi95/Electronic/documnts/demos/
dww_bdy.htm). The next generation of user interfaces
may move beyond the standard WIMP (window,
icon, menu, and pointing device) paradigm to involve
elements like virtual realities, head-mounted displays,
sound and speech, pen and gesture recognition,
animation and multimedia, limited artificial intelligence,
and highly portable computers with cellular or other
wireless communication capabilities. It may focus
more on the user-oriented and task-oriented approach,
rather than the present standard object-oriented
approach. The object-oriented approach in this context
means the way the user interacts with the objects
such as text box, buttons and menus. Gesturebased interfaces such as pen computing, which
simulates paper-like interface can be an alternative
to printed material.

2.4 Suitable User Interfaces for Online
Exhibitions
Users interact with museum application interfaces
for many reasons 15 . Thus, it is important to have
such user interfaces that are able to adapt to different
user’s requirements to facilitate the accomplishment
of the desired goals. Mixture of both animated and
non-animated interfaces produce better results in
browsing and navigation. Purely animated interfaces
might cause inconvenience to the users. Bowen,
et al. suggest avoiding high quality graphical images,
which results in slower downloading of web pages,
unless or until it is really required for the website 10 .
Milekic’s study found that “the general interface
guidelines for the design of web-based art education
sites is to minimise the dependences on technology
during pedagogical activities 16 . The major technical
difficulty for most of the users is the narrow-bandwidth
and undependable telephone connection. These could
be avoided by off-line browsing of pre-loaded content,
and creation of hybrid pre-loaded and interactive
sites.
It is important to provide users with a variety
of easy-to-use and understandable navigational buttons
45

to prevent them from getting lost and to minimise
cognitive overhead problems 12 . Consistency in all
respects including design, colours, graphics, etc.
can help the users in accomplishing their tasks
quickly. Wallace11 suggests that an online exhibition
should have the following basic requisites: (i) it
should present visuals and text in easy-to-absorbable
portions; (ii) its links should allow people to explore
and learn at their own pace; (iii) it should not force
the users to navigate rather allow the users to
achieve their purpose of visit; and (iv) it should load
quickly and no single page in a site should try to
show or tell too much.
Dierkind and Falk states that the visitors would
like media options in museums to be more ‘userfriendly’ to assist them in knowing what options
are available. And once an appropriate choice of
interest has been made, they are able to successfully
experience that option 17. They also stated that
‘one can create the most wonderful website in the
world, but if users do not know about its availability,
understand how to use it effectively, or cannot
make sense of the content presented, all that effort
has been wasted’. So, the overall website development
process should focus attention on understanding
users and acknowledging their demographic diversity18 .

3. METHODOLOGY
An appropriate development model may be chosen
by taking into account the nature of the software
project and the strategies needed to meet the users’
expectations and needs. A few important software
development models existing in the software engineering
are: (i) hacking model; (ii) linear sequential model;
(iii) prototyping model; (iv) incremental model;
(v) spiral model; (vi) component-based model; and
(vii) the clean room model 19 .
The prototyping model was used to develop
this online exhibition system. The advantages of
prototyping model are: (i) high user emphasis, (ii)
teamwork promoting, (iii) waste reduction, and (iv)
flexibility20. Prototyping is an excellent way to analyse
and define a website’s requirements 21 . Since users
were not clear about their requirements so designing
multiple prototypes, may be time consuming, was
useful process in this context. The valid reason for
choosing this methodology for the project was the
unavailability and unspecific user requirements. However,
the user requirements gathered by Leong, et al.
were used for the development of HTML version of
the exhibition 22 .
Macromedia Dreamweaver 4, a web design tool,
was used to build a quick mockup prototype, which
46

was tested with the real users. The mockup prototype
provided better interactivity, and also helped the
users to express their ideas more clearly. Regular
interaction and collection of feedback from the users
was used to modify the prototype. The process
continued in a cycle and helped in developing a
successful implementation. Heuristic evaluation technique
was used for design evaluation phase of this online
exhibition because it helps to find out many usability
problems 19 . Survey method and questionnaire tool
were used for evaluating the final online exhibition.
The main reason for choosing this methodology
was to get the user’s viewpoints directly and to
reveal issues, which have not been considered during
the design phase apart from its relatively cheap
and simple administering advantages. The questionnaire
covered a mixed set of general, open- ended, multichoice and ranked questions but priority was given
to closed-ended questions such as scalar, ranked
or multi-choice to reduce the burden on the respondents
and to encourage a high response rate. It also have
an advantage of being easier to analyse.

4. DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF
ONLINE EXHIBITION
4.1 Design of the Online Exhibition
The design of the online exhibition was carried
out based on the user requirements. Initially a
prototype was developed and presented to its real
users, based on their feedback, full-fledged system
was developed.

4.1.1 Interface Design Issues
The HTML-based online exhibition system was
developed and uploaded on to the Information Studies
Laboratory’s Windows NT-based Web Server. 1024
x 768 pixel screen resolution was used, on the
belief that most computer monitors nowadays have
a higher resolution. As desired by most of the
users, a highly interactive HTML web interface with
a balanced mix of multimedia elements and interactions
was provided. Thumbnail images (each image could
be enlarged by a click on it) were provided in the
web pages to reduce the downloading time. This
is in line with the dialog design in the Systems
Application Architecture (IBM developed architecture),
wherein a series of requests and responses between
the user and the application takes place 23 . The
online exhibition contains more than 200 still images
along with a good number of web pages.
To facilitate better readability, Verdana font
size 12 points was used with justified texts blocks.
Simple white colour screen interface with linear
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

gradient effect was provided using Macromedia Fireworks
for the title. Visual consistency was maintained
throughout the website by using the top navigational
panel as part of the template for all the web pages.
Animated images of the Macromedia Fireworks 4
version were used for most of the navigational dropdown menus, left navigational panel and the right
top most icons (for search, help, print and e-mail)
to enhance interactivity. Figures 1 and 2 shows
HTML and animated interface homepages of the
same online exhibition, respectively.

(i)

4.1.2 Information Organisation

(v) The Wind Beneath a Nation’ s Wings comprising
eight sub-panels.

Information in the website should be organised
in a structured manner to facilitate ease of navigation.
To ensure that the website is properly structured,
the system used an intuitive site structure that is
transparent to users. Clear and consistent navigational
methods should be used to enable users to know
where they are and where they can go 21 . This online
exhibition uses many organisation structures such
as sequential, hierarchical and associative. Menus
provided in all the web pages, are hierarchical and
yet sequential in the order of importance, and with
hyperlinks to other web pages, following the associative
structure.
The ‘Home Page’ contains windows, which are
individually clickable and take users to the different
sections of the exhibition. The main navigational
structure of the ‘Home page’ is shown in the
Fig. 3. There are six functional sub-panel links and
five supporting panel links on the ‘Home page’. The
six functional sub-panels are further divided into
various sub-sub-panels. The sub-panels can be found
through the drop-down menu. The left navigational
links and the text links can be found at the bottom
of each web page. The window panels are organised
as:

Figure 1. HTML interface home page.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

A Time and a Place comprising five sub-panels,
which describe the contents by years.

(ii) Here, There & Everywhere comprising three
sub-panels further divided into 22 sub-sub-panels.
(iii) Memories in the Shell of Time comprising three
sub-panels further divided into 10 sub-sub-panels.
(iv) A Present and the Past comprising three subpanels, further divided into eight sub -sub-panels.

(vi) Contact Us is comprising three sub-panel and
five sub-sub-panels.
There are supporting panels to allow users to
print, search for content, send e-mail and get help
which is placed at the top right hand corner of the
window. The ‘H elp Page’ can be reached either
through the image icon or the ‘Contact Us’ page.
To avoid problems to the naïve users, these icons
display its functionality below them once when users’
moves mouse over the icons 24. The ‘Site Map’ provides
the users with a complete structure of the website
along with brief explanation of the contents of each
sub-exhibit.

4.1.3

Screen Layout

Lengthier pages have been avoided by splitting
the screens into screen-sized chunks wherever possible.
All web pages comprise consistent top navigational
panel throughout the website. Drop- down menus
in hierarchical structure avoid users getting lost
problem. Icons such as ‘Help’, ‘Print’, ‘Search’ and
‘E-mail’ have been provided at the top navigational
panel. Navigational icons have been provided at the

Figure 2. Animated interface home page.
47

top most right of each page to get proper attention
(Figs 3 and 4).

4.2 Development of the Online
Exhibition System
The system was developed based on the users’
requirements collected from a previous study conducted
by Chee Khoon. Presenting the prototypes iteratively
to the real users and improving the interface and
functionality of the system, a total system was
developed. Testable goals, early and continuous
user testing were performed through simulations,
prototypes and mock-ups. The aim was to address
design difficulties such as too much information,
impatience of web readers, limited short-term memory
and tendency to get lost.
The content was considered first, the navigation
second, and the appearance last. The developer
also kept in mind the problems and drawbacks of
the Animated Flash interface including lack of
customisation, reusability, search capabilities and
the time taken for downloading, and then tried to
use the strengths of the HTML interface to find
solutions to satisfy the users needs.

4.2.1

Development Tools

Macromedia’s Dreamweaver 4 is the main authoring
tool used to develop this exhibition. Other tools
used in building this system included Macromedia’s
Fireworks 4, Adobe’s Photoshop, Microsoft GIF Animator
and Front Page 2000.

4.2.2

Macromedia Dreamweaver 4

Macromedia Dreamweaver 4 is a web authoring
tool used for creating and managing website and
web pages because it is easier for creating and

Figure 3. HTML drop-down menus.
48

editing cross-platform and cross-browser pages. It
has advanced design and layout tools that allow
any one to use Dynamic HTML features such as
animated layers and behaviours without having to
write a line of code. Dreamweaver 4 enables designers
to visually develop sophisticated page layouts in an
intuitive approachable environment. It is fully customisable
and does not require any special software additions
to the server on which the designed system has to
be installed.

4.2.3

Macromedia Fireworks 4

It is a graphics design tool used to develop
sophisticated navigation with multi-level pop-up menus
in a step-by-step visual environment. Fireworks 4
also has facilities to produce enhanced graphics
interactivity, live animations, drag and drop rollovers,
object masks (both vector and bitmap) and a new
batch-processing environment. Integration between
the two applications, i.e. Dreamweaver and Fireworks
creates a seamless environment for the web content
production. The Fireworks new pop-up menu creator
was used for creating the main navigational dropdown menus. Basically the image is a .png file,
exported into a GIF file with HTML and images
options. The HTML page created using Fireworks
is the basic template for this website. Radical changes
to the document layout were made in the Fireworks
before being exported into the Dreamweaver’s web
pages.

4.2.4

Adobe’s Photoshop

It is an image processing tool used to capture
and edit the images required for this exhibition.

4.2.5

Microsoft GIF Animator

It is used for creating animated GIF files for
highlighting the images occurring in various panels.

Figure 4. Animated interface zooming tool.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

The GIF animation was provided to add attractiveness
to the website.

4.2.6

Microsoft FrontPage 2000

It is also a web authoring tool used to create
web pages to complement the features and facilities
missing in the Dreamweaver 4.

4.3 Implementation of the Online
Exhibition
As per user’s requirements, a similar and most
appropriate HTML interface was developed for the
existing animated version without many variations
in content. Design considerations were made with
the consent of end-users through repetitive prototyping
technique. The HTML version of this online exhibition
was uploaded on to the Information Studies Lab
Web Server at http://islab2.sas.ntu.edu.sg:8000/projects/
virralingam/index.html. Then Information Studies students
and others were encouraged to evaluate both the
interfaces of the same system and provide their
feedback through questionnaire supplied to them.

animated version of the online exhibition system
(Fig. 5).

4.4.2

Help Page

It provides assistance to the users on how to
use the website and to reduce their browsing time.
It can be reached either through the navigational
icon on the top right hand corner of the web page
or through one of the sub drop-down menus under
the ‘Contact Us’ web page (Fig. 6).

4.4.3

Print Facility

Print facility is to print any web page of the
exhibition. This is especially useful for academics,
students, and researchers.

4.4.4

E-mail Facility

The facility is provided as a navigational icon
at the top right hand corner of all the web pages
to enable the user to contact the staff members of
the National Archives of Singapore.

4.4 Other Features of the Online
Exhibition System

5. EVALUATION OF THE ONLINE
EXHIBITION

4.4.1 Search Facility

To evaluate both the interfaces of this online
exhibition system, a questionnaire was designed
and sent to 75 students to find out the strengths
and weaknesses of these two interfaces. Of the
total, 50 people provided their responses and the
same were analysed.

Search page uses the client side search engine
in JavaScript. The page allows the users to search
the entire website. As the search engine is client
side one, the speed at which the search page
displays mainly depends on the number of records
matching to the keyword and the user’s Internet
connection. Search engine displays results as a
hyperlink, which can be clickable to reach the specific
web page. Subject headings have not been used for
search terms, instead any word in the title of the
page can be used. This is an additional feature
added to HTML interface and is not available in the

Figure 5. The search page.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

5.1 Personal Profile
Of the total, 62 per cent of the respondents
were males and 38 per cent females. The majority
(68 per cent) were between 26-30 years age group,
20 per cent of 31-35 years, 10 per cent below 25
years and the remaining 2 per cent above 36 years

Figure 6. The help page.
49

old. Nearly half (48 per cent) of them were undergraduates,
over a quarter (28 per cent) were graduates, a fifth
(20 per cent) were polytechnic diploma holders and
a small percentage (4 per cent) ‘O’/’A‘ level. These
respondents were a mix of Singaporeans, Malaysians,
Indians, and Philippines. The majority of the respondents
were from Sciences (52 per cent), less than a third
(30 per cent) from Engineering and a small percentage
from Social Science (8 per cent), Library Science
(7 per cent), and Humanities (3 per cent) backgrounds.
These people though varying in their races and
subject backgrounds, had similar computer experience.
About two-third (64 per cent) of them were having
6-10 years computer experience. Advanced computer
users varied in their experience from 11-25 years
(16 per cent had 11-20 years, 8 per cent had 2125 years), and a small percentage (12 per cent)
with less than five years computer experience. While
evaluating a project, especially an online exhibition
system, personal profile of the users plays a vital
role.

5.2 Interface Design
The various factors that an interface design
contains are the readability of text, appropriate use
of colours, the navigational icon buttons and attractiveness
of the exhibition and visual consistency of the website.
User’s ratings for the ‘interface design’ is presented
in the Table 1.
Overall, the majority of them (84 per cent) rated
the design as ‘Good’ for the text readability because
they were comfortable with the Verdana font with
12 points size. They opined that the text was very
clear and readable. Most of the respondents were
very comfortable with the appropriate use of background
colour (white background was used for most of the
screen space but a different background colour for
the top navigational panel). They felt that the colours
were used consistently and efficiently, so they could
easily keep track of the colours and their meanings.
Some respondents appreciated the reverse video
technique used to present the text on the web page
and the colours chosen in contrast for every navigational
drop-down menus.

The navigational icons were meaningful and
acceptable to most of the respondents. About 80
per cent of them rated “Good” or “Very Good” and
a small percentage (6 per cent) only rated as acceptable.
The hierarchical structure of the drop-down menus
with mouse over events, reverse video techniques
attracted them along with their interactiveness. The
majority of the respondents were also satisfied with
the text clarity on the navigational icons (80 per
cent), menus and left hand navigational panel. The
most liked part of the exhibition by the respondents
was the ‘site map’ with links directly to the individual
web pages. Most (96 per cent) of the respondents
felt that they never encountered any problems with
the navigational buttons. However, a few were not
comfortable with the ‘Print’, ‘E-mail’, and navigational
icons. Some felt that the text links at the bottom
of every panel were redundant, but many of the
users were concerned about the same so the links
were not removed from the screen/system design.
The majority (88 per cent) of the users were satisfied
with the visual consistency and most (96 per cent)
of them were satisfied with the consistent use of
the supporting functional icons like Help, Search,
Print and E-mail, which were placed at the top right
hand corner of the website.

5.3 Ease of Use
In addition to ease of use, other features like
user friendliness, easy to learn, easy to understand,
information search and the help facility were evaluated
(Table 2). Most of the respondents (96 per cent) felt
that the system was good because of its user
friendly and simple interface. They felt that the
overall architecture of the site was attractive, however,
a small percentage (4 per cent) of them felt that
the search capability was not comprehensive. More
than three-fourth (78 per cent) of them felt that the
online exhibition was easy to use, due to its good
navigational aids, help guidelines and proper labelling
of the contents. The majority of the respondents
were able to understand the system with ease,
though a few (7 per cent) found it difficult because
of its information overload. Of the total, more than
a third (40 per cent) felt that it was ‘easy or very

Table 1. Users’ ratings for interface design
Rating
Design Issue

50

Very
Poor

Poor

Acceptable

Good

Very Good

Readability of text

-

2%

14%

76%

8%

Colours used in the website

-

4%

30%

60%

6%

Appropriate use of navigational icons

-

6%

14%

66%

14%

Visual consistency

-

4%

18%

66%

12%

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Table 2. Ease of use of the interface
Very Hard

Hard

Average

Easy

Very
Easy

-

4%

4%

6%

-

Information search facility

2%

4%

14%

2%

-

Easy to learn

2%

4%

54%

34%

6%

-

4%

58%

36%

2%

Issue

Rating

Easy to u nderstand

Help section provided

easy’ to learn the system. Overall, half (58 per
cent) of the respondents rated the ‘Help’ screens
as average and about 38 per cent considered as
‘easy to use’ compared to a small percentage (4
per cent) who felt these “hard to understand”. Most
of the users felt the system is easy to understand
and without going through the ‘Help Section’ they
can use the system.

5.4 Content Coverage and Organisation
The majority of the respondents (82 per cent)
felt good about the content coverage. These respondents
found the website intuitive because the contents
were clear, very precise, consistent and easily accessible.
They also felt that the related contents were linked
and labelled properly. Some of the respondents felt
that the metadata corresponding to the images should
be available both in enlarged and thumbnails versions
of the images. Since this option would increase the
content size, the metadata for the thumbnail images
was dropped. However, the majority of the respondents
(60-80 per cent) were still happy with the present
form.
Table 3 shows that most (94 per cent) of the
respondents were satisfied or very much satisfied
with the ‘information organisation’. Almost all the
respondents felt that the information was well organised
as it followed a pattern which normally a web reader
would look for. They appreciated the well-organised
content in the consistent layout.

5.5 HTML vs Flash Interface
The users were requested to compare both the
interfaces (HTML and Flash versions) in terms of
the time taken for downloading, information retrieval
and the navigation. Their ratings are presented in

Figs. 7 and 8. Of the total, 86 per cent of them felt
that the downloading time taken by the HTML version
was considerably lower compared to 30 per cent
who felt the same way with the Flash version. The
majority (82 per cent) of them were satisfied with
the HTML version because of its good information
retrieval, search capabilities and intuitive navigational
aids. On the other hand, more than 80 per cent of
respondents rated the Flash version as above average.
Overall, 92 per cent felt that the navigation was
much faster in the HTML version compared to 80
per cent who felt the same with the Flash version.
Secondary issues including the information coverage,
information organisation, ease of use, easy to learn,
easy to understand and the attractiveness of user
interface were tested. In terms of the ‘information
coverage’, 84 per cent of them rated the HTML
version above average compared to slightly higher
percentage (88 per cent) of the respondents rated
the same to the Flash version. For the ‘information
organisation’, most of the respondents (94 per cent)
rated very high for HTML version and almost the
same (92 per cent) for the Flash version. Regarding
‘ease of use’, more than three-fourth of the respondents
(78 per cent) felt that the HTML version was above
average, but only two-third (66 per cent) felt the
same for the Flash version. For the ‘easy to learn’,
94 per cent rated the HTML version as above average,
against 72 per cent for the Flash version. For the
‘easy to understand’, the rating (95 per cent) for
HTML version was more than for the Flash version
(89 per cent).
For the ‘attractiveness’ of user interface, 82 per
cent of the respondents rated high to Flash version
compared to 68 per cent who liked HTML version.
So, overall Flash interface was attractive in terms
of appearance but got comparatively lower ratings

Table 3. Content coverage and information organisation
Very Hard

Hard

Average

Easy

Very
Easy

-

4%

4%

10%

-

2%

4%

54%

34%

6%

Rating
Issue
Content Coverage
Information Organisation

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

51

Design Issues

Flash version
80%

Navigation

92%

HTML version

80%
82%

Information Retrieval

Downloading
DownloadingTime
Time

86%

30%

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

No. of Respondents

Figure 7. Comparison of navigation, information retrieval and downloading time on HTML vs Flash interfaces.

Design Issues

Attractiveness

82%

68%

89%
95%

Easy to Understand
72%

Easy to Learn

66%

Ease of Use

94%

Flash version
HTML version

78%
92%
94%
88%
84%

Information Organisation
Information Coverage
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

No. of Respondents

Figure 8. Comparison of easy to understand, ease of use and information coverage on HTML vs Flash interfaces.

in ‘ease of use’, ‘ease to learn’ and ‘easy to understand’.
People cannot search and use information in terms
of copying for their work. However, HTML interface
has much more advantages including searching,
updating the content, and reusing of information for
various purposes. So, many designers are now using
Flash interface for introduction of the website and
rest of the site in HTML interface so that users will
get the benefit of both the interfaces.

5.6 Problems Encountered
One-fifth (20 per cent) of the respondents were
not happy with the information search as not being
indexed according to subject terms. Similarly, a
few respondents (8 per cent) felt that the text links
provided at the bottom of the web pages were redundant.
As each and every web page has a template on the
top navigational pane, a few respondents (12 per
cent) felt the downloading time for the HTML version
is a little bit longer, but certainly faster than the
Flash version. Since the entire left navigational panel
is made of images, the respondents (about 86 per
cent) felt satisfied with its appearance and downloading
time. Some (4 per cent) felt that the content organisation
is a bit confusing, especially on the Flash version,
where the windows have to be clicked to navigate
to individual panels. On the other part, they felt that
52

there is too much of text and very few images in
the system. A few also felt quite uneasy about the
downloading time on Flash. One of the respondents
appreciated the navigational bar, which is a good
idea to provide a better navigation in the online
exhibition. Overall they did not face any serious
problems while using both the interfaces except a
few minor problems.

6. CONCLUSION
The popularity of the physical exhibition has
dropped in comparison to the online exhibition. As
the cost of maintaining traditional museums is
increaseing, perhaps due to higher cost of artifacts
or skilled manpower or maintenance costs of artifacts,
the trend is moving towards online exhibitions steeply.
However, museums of the future should continuously
strive to capitalise on the availability of the latest
technologies including virtual reality, multi-model,
higher bandwidth communication interfaces, 3-D realtime computer graphics, advanced display devices,
auditory icons, etc. in order to entice surfers to
take the first step into their physical museums.
The evaluation results show that the HTML version
was a better option for lower bandwidth because of
content downloading time was lower (86 per cent
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

for HTML vs 30 per cent for Flash version). It was
also rated favourably for its other features like information
retrieval (82 per cent for HTML vs 80 per cent for
Flash interface), navigation (92 per cent for HTML
vs 80 per cent for Flash version), easy to understand
(95 per cent for HTML vs 89 per cent for Flash),
easy to learn (94 per cent for HTML vs 72 per cent
for Flash), easy to use (78 per cent for HTML vs
66 per cent for Flash version) and information organisation
(94 per cent for HTML vs 92 per cent for Flash).
However, for attractiveness (68 per cent for HTML
vs 82 per cent for Flash), and information coverage
(84 per cent for HTML vs 88 per cent for Flash)
HTML version was rated poorly.
In brief, the HTML version of the online exhibition
performed relatively well in most of the aspects.
The major limitation of this system is its search
capability. This is primarily due to the cost factor
as well as time constraint. Attempt must be made
to rectify their limitations in order to provide a total
integrated system that supports users. Though the
search utility was not comprehensive in HTML version,
it was compensated with common terms to help the
users to search the system. Suggestions were provided
by the respondents to enhance the search facility
by indexing the subject terms. Overall, there is a
need to improve the relevancy of search results and
the speed of retrieval of information. The drawback
of online exhibitions compared to its physical cousin,
is the lack of touch and feelings capability. This
can easily be substituted with simulations using
the latest technologies such as virtual reality, 3-D
models, etc. Additional research should be done to
develop advanced tools and techniques for developing
online museums, which can be a real boom for
heritage and museums industries.

REFERENCES
1.

Anable, S. Accessibility techniques for museum
web-sites. Springer/Heidelberg, Berlin, 2001.
pp. 110. http://www.archimuse.com/mw2001/papers/
anable/anable.html

2.

Gesualdo, Donna. Integrating a web component
into the classroom. Paper presented at the
Museum and the Web, 2002. http://
www.archimuse.com/mw2000/papers/gesualdo/
gesualdo.html

3.

Freedman, Michael. Think different: Combining
online exhibitions and offline components to
gain new understandings of museum permanent
collections. Paper presented at the Museums

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

and the Web, 2003. http://www.archimuse.com/
mw2003/papers/freedman/ freedman.html
4.

Teather, L. A museum is a museum is a museum.
Or is it? Exploring museology and the web,
2000. http://www.archimuse.com/mw98/papers/
teather/teather_paper.html

5.

de Bruine Annelies. Digital city Bristol: A case
study. In Digital cities: Technologies, experiences,
and future perspectives, 2000.

6

Galani, Areti & Chalmers, Matthew. Can you
see me? Exploring co-visiting between physical
and virtual visitors. Paper presented at the Museums
and the Web, 2002. http://www.archimuse.com/
mw2002/papers/galani/galani.html

7.

Thomas, W. & and Boily, D. Virtual exhibition
production: A reference guide, 2000. http://
www.archimuse.com/mw98/papers/boily/
boily_paper.html

8.

Douma, Michael. Lessons learned from web
exhibits: Practical suggestions for good design,
2000 http://www.webexhibits.org/

9.

Reid, Gordon. A Digital exhibition: The Powys
digital history project, 1996-2001. Journal of
the Society of Archivists , 2001, 22(2), 161-76.

10. Bowen, J.P.; Bennett, J. & Johnson, J. Virtual
visits to virtual museums. http://www.archimuse.com/
mw98/papers/ bowen/bowen_paper.html
11. Wallace, M. Building museum brands for the
next generation: Websites that reach and keep
young people. 2000. http://cui.unige.ch/isi
12. Lehman, D. Designing hypertext multimedia
educational software, 2000. http://www.aln.org/
alnweb/magazine/Vol4_issue2/Lehman.htm
13. Bogomazova, T. G. Applying high technology to
a museum website. The Amber Room Project.
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2001/papers/
bogomazova/bogomazova.html
14. Kennedy, T. Repent from flash sins, 2000.
http: //smw.internet.com/symm/voices/flashsins/
15. Paternò, F. Model-based design and evaluation
of interactive applications. Springer, 2000.
16. Milekic, S.; Moreno, C. & Kazee, A. Museums
and WWW-based art education, 1998. http://
www.archimuse.com/mw98/papers/milekic/
milekic_paper.html
53

17. Dierkind, L.D. & Falk J.H. Understanding freechoice learning: A review of the research and
its application to museum websites. http://
www.archimuse.com/mw98/papers/dierking/
dierking_paper.html
18. Marcus, A. & Gould, E.W. Crosscurrents: Cultural
dimensions and global web user-interface design.
Interactions: New Visions of Human-computer
Interactions , 2002, 7(4), 33-45.
19. Dix, A.; Finlay, J.; Abowd, G. & Beale, R.
Human-computer interaction, Second Edition.
Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, England,
1997.
20. Gupta. Information systems success in the 21st
century . Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 2000.

21. Lyons, C.J. Essential design for web professionals.
Prentice Hall PTR, New Jersey, 2003.
22. Leong, C.K.; Ramaiah, C.K. & Foo, S. The
design and development of an online exhibition
for heritage information awareness in Singapore.
Program: Electronic Library & Information Systems,
2003, 37(2), 85-93.
23. Martin, J.; Chapman, K.K. & Leben, J. Systems
application architecture, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey,
1992.
24. Ramaiah, C.K. Problems encountered by naïve
users while using hypertext . Singapore Journal
of Library & Information Management , 1999,
28, 34-47.

About the Author

Viralingam is working as Manager (Development), CITI Bank, Singapore. He is leading a project
team that handles a credit card processing software called Vision Plus on Mainframe. His
formal education includes a Master’s Degree in Information Studies from the Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore.

54

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

