DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 55-62
© 2008, DESIDOC

Presence-Centered Assessment of Virtual Museums’ Technologies
Styliani Sylaiou, Athanasis Karoulis1, Yiannis Stavropoulos2 and Petros Patias3
Interdepartmental Postgraduate Program in
Protection, Conservation and Restoration of Cultural Monuments
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, University Box 473, GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece
E-mail:ssylaiou@topo.auth.gr
Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece

1

2

Aerosol and Particle Technology Laboratory of Centre for Research and Technology
Hellas/Chemical Process Engineering Research Institute, Thessaloniki, Greece

3

Faculty of Rural & Surveying Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece

ABSTRACT
The sense of Presence is a crucial issue in virtual environments and can provide effectiveness and
user engagement. A research undertaken in virtual museum websites investigated the level of Presence,
the sense of being in the virtual environment and their interconnections with the various technologies
they use for presenting their cultural exhibits. The main aim of the study was to explore the differences
in Presence experience according to the IT tools they use.
Keywords: Virtual reality, virtual museums, virtual environments, virtual exhibitions, augmented reality.

1. INTRODUCTION
Virtual environments (VE) are applied in many
scientific areas such as medicine, entertainment,
transport, culture, etc. More and more are being
adopted by cultural institutions such as museums
to help them meet their scopes. Virtual exhibitions
allow museums to easily exhibit vast collections of
objects and overcome limitations of objects’ fragility,
exhibition space and cost. A research 1 , 2 and an
extensive survey of the European museum sector 3
have shown that technologies such as the World
Wide Web (www) enhanced by 3-D visualisation
tools, virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR),
and Web3D systems in conjunction with database
technology may facilitate the preservation, dissemination
and presentation of cultural artifacts in museums’
collections. Such technologies could also educate
the wide public in an innovative and interactive
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

manner. The virtual museums provide opportunity to
people that live far away from the “brick and mortar”
museums and do not have the possibility to travel
and to people with disabilities to visit their exhibitions
and have an interactive, engaging, educative and at
the same time a fun and satisfying museum experience.
While immersed in virtual environment (VE)
simulations, users can receive a number of distinct
multi-sensory stimuli (i.e. visual, auditory, haptic)
which are intended to provide a sensation of ‘natural’
interaction with the virtual world and, consequently,
an illusion of being ‘present’ in a VE 4 . VE that
engender a high degree of presence are thought to
be more enjoyable and effective for training 5 . I n a
virtual museum environment, the cultural content
should be engaging and legible so as to be correctly
interpreted and to stimulate thought, trigger enjoyment,
inspiration and creativity, and reflect human curiosity
55

and emotions. The study presented in this article
explored users’ level of ‘p resence’ o r ‘sense of
being there ’, in the virtual museum environment
according to the technologies used by virtual museum
websites.

based navigation 14 . In this case, the visitor from a
certain virtual point can rotate and pan, as well as
zoom in/out the panorama.

2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND
PROBLEM STATEMENT

A simple webpage can use image formats that
permit scalability and provide to the user the opportunity
to examine the museum artifacts in detail. Photographs
can be organised in a sequence reminding of a
virtual tour through the museum.

2.1 Presence in Virtual Environments
The goal of a VE is the ability to mislead one’s
senses so well that the illusion of being somewhere
other than one’s physical location is created. The
sense of presence is the design aim of a VE. A VE
such as a virtual museum is an artificial world,
created by computers, which can give the observer
a sense of ‘being there’ (presence), in virtual environment.
‘Presence’ generally, refers to the subjective perception
of being immersed and present in time or space in
a particular location 6 , the sense of “being there” in
a mediated environment 7, the ‘perceptual illusion of
non-mediation’8, “the observer’s subjective sensation
of ‘being there’ in a remote environment”9. Presence
is “the extent to which the VE becomes the dominant
one, i.e. that participants will tend to respond to
events in the VE rather than in the real world, the
extent to which participants, after the VE experience,
remember it as having visited a place rather than
just having seen images generated by a computer…they
had an experience of being in a place, just like any
other place they had been earlier in the day 10 . ”
Presence has been identified as the subjective perception
of being immersed in and surrounded by a virtual
world rather than the physical world one is currently
situated in 7. This impression can be created via a
host of technologies starting from traditional desktop
PCs and ending to a more sophisticated and more
immersive displays such as CAVE 11 .
Assessment of presence has primarily focused
on measuring the effects of VE technologies on a
person’s sense of presence12 via questionnaires 10,13.
This study examined if the users’ level of ‘ presence’
or ‘sense of being there ’ in virtual museum web
pages is affected by the various technologies used.

2.2 Categories of Virtual Museums used
for the Study
2.2.1 Webpage with Panoramic Images
Panoramic images based on the QuickTime
VR (QTVR) technology, allow users to get the feeling
of a real museum visitor in a 3-D space. The most
popular museums on the www offer a Quicktime56

2.2.2 Webpage with Scalable Images

2.2.3 Webpage with a Searchable Database
This is the case of a 2-D presentation of image
collection with a small preview with a hyperlink to
a higher resolution image. It is typically represented
by web collections of 2-D exhibits like paintings or
a set of photographs of 3-D objects. Such collections
are often called virtual galleries. This does not correspond
to the term virtual reality, but highlights the difference
between real and digital world. Virtual galleries made
from images are the most frequently used technique
for the museum presentations on the www.

2.2.4 Webpage with Web3D Environment
This kind of webpage permits free and interactive
real-time navigation in 3-D space. It permits the
exploration of virtual rooms/galleries and of museum
artifacts can also be presented in 3-D with layers
of information by the users that can freely walk or
fly through the space.

2.2.5 Webpage with Flash Technologies
and Videos
There are virtual museum web pages that are
created completely or partially by Macromedia Flash
and may create and deliver dynamic and interactive
web content with embedded sound and video.

3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.1 Apparatus and Visual Content
The experiments took place in an HP workstation
with two 2.4 GHz Xeon processors and 2048 MB
of memory. Standard display technology, such as
PC 19’ monitor has been used.

3.2 Participants
A total of 46 volunteers (males and females
with ages from 19-37) mainly undergraduate and
postgraduate students from the Aristotle University
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

of Thessaloniki, Greece, participated in the experiment.
Participants in all conditions were naive as to the
purpose of the experiment. After they navigated the
virtual museums environments and performed the
assigned tasks, were subsequently asked to fill in
perceived presence questionnaire. All the participants
reported to have at least a basic knowledge of
computers.

3.3 Experimental Procedure
Emphasis was placed in using experimental
settings which were as realistic as possible with
respect to those in practice. Four steps were undertaken
including: goal setting (users start with a plan of
the tasks to be accomplished), exploration (users
explore the interface and discover useful actions),
selection (users select the most appropriate actions
for accomplishing their task) and assessment (users
interpret the system’s responses and assess its
progression). The participants had been informed
about the scope of the study and were interviewed
in private. The evaluation and the interviews took
place in the laboratory of Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Greece, with no visitors allowed during the study
so that the users could concentrate on the completion
of the questionnaire administered.
The evaluation involved only one participant at
a time and assistants instructed the end-users if
they needed help. The evaluation used cued testing,
which involves explaining to the users what the
program is about and asking them to perform specific
tasks or to answer questions. The users were provided
with written instructions concerning sets of predetermined tasks which guided them to navigate in
the virtual museum exhibitions described bellow.
This stage was concerned with the user’s ability to
move through the contents of an interactive program
in an intentional manner.
The virtual museums that correspond to the
categories defined in Section 2.2 and were used for
the study are:

( i) National Gallery of Art, USA (http://www.nga.
gov/): The tasks that the virtual visitors have
to perform were to freely navigate and search
for the presentation of the painter Van Gogh
and extract information about his work with the
help of zoomable images, sounds and Quicktime
VR files.
(ii) Metropolitan Museum of New York (http://www.
metmuseum.org/): In this virtual museum that
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

is an online catalogue of the real museum, the
virtual visitors should navigate the museum
collections, to locate exhibits of their interest
and take as much information as possible via
zoomable images and detailed textual exhibit
information. Furthermore, they could pick and
choose exhibits they like and create a personal
virtual museum gallery.
(iii) The Museum of Modern Art (http://www.moma.org/):
In this case the participants could also have a
free navigation to the various thematical areas
of the museum and search by period, artist, or
by title museum exhibits.
(iv) Van Ghogh Virtual Museum (http://www.
vangoghmuseum.nl/ ): The 3-D environment of
the museum permits 3-D navigation to a standalone
application with keyboard arrows. The users
could explore the virtual museum using the
various possibilities provided (zoom image, taking
info from hot points, “making photos” of the
virtual space and exhibits and send them by email). Also, a 2-D tourist map was provided to
facilitate the navigation in the 3-D environment,
allowing a transition to a virtual museum room
or to a specific exhibit.
(v) Virtual Silver Screen, Cinema Virtual Museum
(http://www.collectionscanada.ca/silver
screen/): The participants have to explore the
virtual museum that uses Flash technologies
and consists of Canadian films of the early 20th
century. Additionally, they have to chose and
watch a black and white movie and extract
information about it by sounds and texts .

4.

INSTRUMENTATION

‘Many interactive systems have a good look
but a poor feel’ 15. In order to measure the feel of
presence of ARCO system, a Virtual Reality Presence
Questionnaire16 was used. It provided users participating
in the evaluation a series of questions that provided
opportunity to decide from a range of answers on
a numeric Likert scale from one to seven. The
questionnaire needed five to ten minutes to be completed.
The VR Presence questionnaire was modified
since it was originally constructed to assess presence
in immersive environments. Its first two questions
concerned the extend to which the participants
used computers in their daily activities and the
extent they were familiar with VR, AR and computer
games, respectively. The next eight questions assessed
the sense of being there and more specifically the
57

degree to which individuals experience presence
while interacting with a virtual museum exhibition.
The virtual visitors were asked to describe their
experience in virtual museums as compared with
their experience in traditional museums. Firstly,
their sense of being there has been rated on a
scale from 1 to 7, where 7 represented the normal
experience of being in a physical museum environment.
In addition to this, the participants were asked to
assess the degree of the virtual museum environment
consistency with the real world; whether the virtual
museum that they visited seemed as a group of
images that they have seen, or more as a gallery
that they have visited. After their navigation to the
virtual museum website they were asked to evaluate
the intuitiveness of the system and the naturalness
of control and interaction and the degree to which
they felt present in the virtual museum galleries.
Finally, the interviewers assessed the degree of
their involvement in the virtual museum experimental
task to the extent that they lost the track of time.
How well they achieved the virtual museum experimental
task was also assessed. The last question was
asked to assess how well they achieved the experimental
task.

(i.e. the total number of PM indices that lie in each
bin range) are then divided by the total number of
counts (i.e. the total number of questionnaires)
and multiplied by 100 to produce the per cent
frequency of counts per bin. These graphs provide
a picture of the distribution of the ratings among
the participants. Furthermore, by adding the frequencies
of each subsequent bin a “cumulative frequency
histogram” is produced (Fig. 6).

4.1 Data

(iv) Conclusions are drawn based on the frequency
of bad scores (< 3) and high scores (> 5).

The data was summarised by calculating the
average of each group of questions per questionnaire
and museum. In this respect, a “virtual presence”
index (denoted PM) was calculated by averaging
the results of the respective questions per questionnaire
and museum. The resulting PM data are then plotted
in the form of a histogram for visual inspection of
differences in the data distribution for the five museums.
The resulting frequency histograms of the PM index
for the five museums are shown in Figs 1-5.
In these graphs, the rating scale is divided
into 6 bins of size 1. The total counts in each bin

The error bars shown in the Fig. 7 correspond
to the standard deviation of each distribution. The
elaboration methodology adheres to following four
steps:
(i)

(ii) It is assumed that this is directly related to
the method used by each museum to enhance
the virtual tour (i.e. “causation” is assumed).
(iii) The PM results for the five museums are compared
by direct visual inspection of the respective
histograms.

5. RESULT S
The above presented histograms revealed the
following:
Ë

The frequency histogram of the third museum
showed that it had the worse score in the rank
2-3 (35 per cent).

Ë

The frequency histograms of the fourth and the
fifth museum showed the highest scores in the
range 5-7 (41 per cent and 36 per cent, respectively).

40%

40%

PM1

35%

PM2

35%

30%

30%

Frequency

Frequency

It is assumed that the average of the ratings
in the eight questions gives a measure of “virtual
presence” (PM index) for the five museums.

25%
20%
15%

25%
20%
15%

10%

10%

5%

5%
0%

0%
1-2

2-3

3-4

4-5

Bins

5-6

6-7

1-2

2-3

3-4

4-5

5-6

6-7

Bins

Figures 1 and 2. Presence index of the 1st and the 2nd virtual museums.
58

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

40%

40%

PM3

35%

30%

Frequency

30%

Frequency

PM4

35%

25%
20%
15%

25%
20%
15%

10%

10%

5%

5%

0%

0%
1-2

2-3

3-4

4-5

5-6

6-7

1-2

2-3

3-4

Bins

4-5

5-6

6-7

Bins

Figures 3 and 4. Presence index of the 3rd and the 4th virtual museums.

100%

PM5

35%

Frequency

30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%

Cumulative Frequency

40%

80%

PM2

70%

PM3

60%

PM4

50%

PM5

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

0%
1-2

2-3

3-4

4-5

5-6

6-7

Bins
Figure 5. Presence index of the 5th
virtual museum.
Ë

PM1

90%

The cumulative histograms of all five museums
revealed that the scores above average (3) were
90 per cent for fourth and fifth museum, 80 per
cent for first museum, 74 per cent for the second
museum and 60 per cent for the third museum.

Based on these findings (particularly the high
scores of fourth and the fifth museum and the low
score of the third museum) it may be argued that
the methods employed to enhance the virtual presence
in museums four and five are better than those used
in museums one to three.

6. CONCLUSION
Based on the aforementioned statistical results,
it can be concluded that 3-D spaces and real time
navigation results in the greater feeling of presence
in a virtual interface. In addition to this, some recent
web technologies to enhance interaction, such as
Macromedia Flash, in combination with embedded
sound and/or video add to this feeling of presence
significantly. In contrary, the up to now employed
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

6- 7

5-7

4-7

3-7

2-7

1-7

Bins
Figure 6. Cumulative frequency histogram.

approach by means of a “thumbnail gallery leads
to high resolution image” is no more adequate, as
regards feeling present in a virtual museum environment.
Even if photographs of the presented artifacts are
used, the feeling is the same: a web-based “virtual
gallery” in a “normal” web-based presentation style.
However, in utilizing broadly accepted technologies,
such as Macromedia Flash, implemented directly
in the visitor’s browser, enhancing thus the userenvironment interaction, enriched also with sound
and/or video, provides a low cost solution with good
acceptance with regards to presence in a virtual
environment, as the statistics of this study unveiled.
This result has its own value per se, as most
of the contemporary collections of cultural heritage
objects are presented by means of “virtual galleries”.
In contrast, there is concern whether employing
technologies such as VR or AR approaches could
severely impact usability and hinder virtual visitors
in completing efficiently tasks in the interface 17 .
This study does not raise such an issue; however
59

6. Webster’s II: New Riverside University Dictionary.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1984.

7

Mean PM

6
5
4
3
2
1
1

2

3

4

5

Museum
Figure 7. Summary statistics (mean and standard
deviation) for the five histograms.

it was not designed to assess usability issues. So,
this question, namely if high-end technologies, such
as AR/VR technologies impact usability, remains
open and is proposed for further research. As a
closing remark, a broader look at the results of this
study shows that virtual visitors feel present in a
virtual environment if they can dynamically interact
with the environment, which implies natural multimodal
(tactile, visual and aural) interaction and exploratively
navigate through it, feeling thus as being there, as
far as it can be possible in a technology facilitated
environment, such as a virtual museum interface.

REFERENCES
1. Jones, J. & Christal, M. The future of virtual
museums: Online, immersive, 3-D environments.
Created Realities Group, 2002.

7. Stanney, K.M.; Salvendy, G.; Deisigner, J.; DiZio,
P.; Ellis, S.; Ellison, E.; Fogleman, G.; Gallimore,
J.; Hettinger, L.; Kennedy, R.; Lackner, J.; Lawson,
B.; Maida, J.; Mead, A.; Mon-Williams, M.;
Newman, D.; Piantanida, T.; Reeves, L.; Riedel,
O.; Singer, M.; Stoffregen, T.; Wann, J.; Welch,
R.; Wilson, J. & Witmer, B. After effects and
sense of presence in virtual environments: Formulation
of a research and development agenda. Report
sponsored by the Life Sciences Division at NASA
Headquarters. International Journal of HumanComputer Interaction , 1998, 10(2), 135-87.
8. Lombard, M. & Ditton, T. At the heart of it all:
The concept of presence. Journal of Computer
Mediated Communication, 1997, 3(2), 1-45. http:/
/www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue2/lombard.html
9. Freeman, J.; Avons, S. E.; Pearson, D. E. &
Ijsselsteijn, W. A. Effects of sensory information
and prior experience on direct subjective ratings
of presence. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments , 1999, 8, 1-13.
10. Slater, M. Measuring presence: A response to
the Witmer and Singer Presence Questionnaire.
Presence, 1999, 8(5), 560-565.
11. Mania, K. & Chalmers, A. The effects of levels
of immersion on memory and presence in virtual
environments: A reality centered approach.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 2001, 4, 247-264.

2. Scali, G.; Segbert, M. & Morganti, B. Multimedia
applications for innovation in cultural heritage:
25 European trial projects and their accompanying
measure TRIS. In 68th IFLA Council and General
Conference, 18-24 August 2002.

12. Barfield, W.; Zeltzer, D.; Sheridan, T. & Slater,
M. Presence and performance within virtual
environments. In Virtual Environments and advanced
interface design edited by W. Barfield and T.A.
Furness. Oxford University Press, New York,
1995, 473-513.

3. Tsapatori, M. ORION research roadmap, evaluation
and assessment. Object Rich Information Network
(ORION), 2003. Deliverable 8.

13. Witmer, B.G. & Singer, M.J. Measuring presence
in virtual environments: A presence questionnaire.
Presence, 1998, 7, 225-240.

4. Mania, K. & Robinson, A. An experimental
exploration of the relationship between subjective
impressions of illumination and physical fidelity.
Computers and Graphics , 2005, 29, 49-56.

14. Chen, S. E. Quicktime VR: An image-based
approach to virtual environment navigation. I n
Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM conference
on Computer graphics, 1995, 29-38 .

5. Sadowski, W. & Stanley, K. Presence in virtual
environments edited by K.M. Stanney. In Handbook
of virtual environments: Design, implementation
and applications. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Inc., Mahwah, NJ, 2002, pp.791-806.

15. Beaudouin-Lafon, M. & Mackay, W. Prototyping
development and tools, edited by J.A. Jacko
and A. Sears. In Human Computer Interaction
Handbook. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.,
Mahwah, NJ, 2002, pp. 1006-1031.

60

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

16. Slater, M.; Steed, A.; McCarthy, J. & Maringelli,
F. The influence of body movement on subjective
presence in virtual environments. Human Factors,
1998, 40(3), 469-477.

17. Karoulis, A.; Sylaiou, S. & White, M. Usability
evaluation of a virtual museum interface. Informatica,
2006, 17(3), 363-380.

About the Authors
Stella Sylaiou is pursuing PhD at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. She holds
a BA degree in Archaeology and a MSc in Archaeological Computing, specialising in Virtual
Reality in Archaeology. Her areas of interest include Cultural Informatics, Human-Computer
Interaction, etc.

Dr Ioannis Stavropoulos is a Chemical Engineer from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Greece. His main interests are multivariate statistical process control and computer modeling
of physicochemical processes. He is currently an affiliated researcher at the Aerosol and
Particle Technology Laboratory of CERTH/CPERI, Greece.

Dr Athanasis Karoulis has a BSc in Mathematics, an MSc in Information Systems, an MSc
in Education, and a PhD in Informatics. He is currently active as an instructor in educational
technologies for secondary education, as a multimedia and web project manager, and as a
researcher in the domains of HCI and of Distance Learning, regarding the application of new
technologies at the Department of Informatics at Aristotle University. His scientific interests
include Human-Computer Interaction, Multimedia and Web design, Educational Technologies and
Distance Learning.
Prof. Petros Patias is a Professor at the Department of Rural and Surveying Engineering,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. His main interests are Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing, Visualisation, and Cultural Informatics.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

61

Invitation to Authors
If you are a library professional/information manager/information scientist/information
specialist/computer professional or a research scholar with a vision for developments
in Information Technology, including software, processors, storage media, and devices
having an impact on library and information systems and services, we invite you to
submit a paper for DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology (DJLIT)
and enjoy the following benefits:

Ò

Expert editorial support: All papers are wetted by the eminent members of the
Editorial Board of DJLIT

Ò

Critical review: All papers are peer-reviewed by the experts in Library and Information
Science

Ò

Extensive abstracting and indexing for greater visibility: DJLIT is covered in major
indexing and abstracting services like LISA, The Informed Librarian, INSPEC
database and Wilson database

Ò

Open Journal System

Ò

Complimentary copies to the contributors

Please send your paper/queries to:
The Editor(s)
DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology
House Bulletin Group
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
e-mail:dbit@desidoc.drdo.in

