DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 72-78
© 2008, DESIDOC

An Integrated Environment for Cataloguing and Online
Presentation of Museum Exhibits
Costas Vassilakis1, Akrivi Katifori 2, Elias Daradimos2 and George Lepouras1
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Peloponnese, Tripolis 22100, Greece

1

Department of Informatics and Telecommunications
University of Athens, Ilisia, Athens 157 84, Greece

2

ABSTRACT
The paper presents an integrated environment which enables museum personnel to catalogue and
at the same time publish online museum exhibits. The system is based on international standards and
is highly customisable to cater the needs of a variety of museum types. Moreover, the underlying database
allows storing for the same exhibit documentations for different audiences and in multiple languages,
while it is extendable to accommodate new media types, languages, exhibits and information categories.
The administrative part of the environment permits the restriction of certain functions to specific personnel
roles, enforcing thus a general museum security policy regarding access to and modification of information.
The environment presented is currently in use at the Athens University History Museum.
Keywords : Museum, online museum exhibits, integrated environment, cataloguing.

1. INTRODUCTION
Museums are often regarded as organisations
with a sole purpose of accumulating and preserving
artefacts of cultural or scientific importance. This
notion has been changing during the past decades
and the profile of museums has been enhanced with
educational and entertainment characteristics. Nowadays
museums utilise their exhibits to educate and at
the same time entertain their visitors. The advent
of the Internet has given the means to museums to
reach out and make contact with new audiences.
The new technologies are also causing a convergence
between the computing systems used for exhibition
and those used for collection management 1 . Long
established, large museums with the necessary
infrastructure digitise and publish their collections
on the web. Hermitage 2 and Louvre 3 are among an
ever increasing number of museums that offer a
wealth of information for their online visitors. However,
72

for smaller museums which lacked even the basic
resources for cataloguing their exhibits this was a
restricted task.
To date, a number of studies have been carried
out on the issues relating to developing websites
in general and specially for museums. Kohrs and
Merialdo4 studied techniques for personalising content
in the context of the web and tested these techniques
in the context of museum websites. Takahashi et
al.5 described a paradigm for unified and global
access to heterogeneous and distributed multimedia
contents of museums, while Marucci and Paterno 6
gave an example of a museum on the web which
does not disorient the user, and Hong et al.7 described
two methods for querying the exhibit database. Finally,
Lepouras and Vassilakis 8 presented an adaptive
system for virtual reality museums on the web,
while Lepouras et al. 9 presented a distributed system
for online museums.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

In the framework of “Digitisation and Online
Presentation of Athens University’s History Museum”
a project sponsored by Information Society
(http://www.infosoc.gr/infosoc/en-UK/default.htm) on
an integrated environment for cataloguing and online
presentation of museum exhibits has been developed
which caters the requirements outlined in the next
section.

2. MUSEUM REQUIREMENTS
During the initial phase of the project a requirements
analysis was carried out aiming to capture not only
the constraints set by a History Museum curator
but from other small to medium sized museums as
well. To this end, experience from curators of diverse
content museums was utilised ranging from zoology
and palaeontology to archaeology and criminology
museums. These requirements were later distilled
in specifications and adopted in the environment’s
design.
The basic requirements derived from this phase
were:
Ë

Ë

Ë

Support for cataloguing and presentation for a
variety of exhibits: The environment should be
able to support the cataloguing for a range of
different exhibits such as books, pictures, scientific
equipment, archaeological exhibits, natural history
exhibits, and art objects. Furthermore, the system
should allow the use of taxonomies (i.e. systematic
categorisation) which is especially useful for
natural history museums.
Support for presentation to diverse target groups:
Online visitors to museums originate from a
variety of educational, cultural and economical
backgrounds and have different interests, educational
needs, available time and cognitive abilities. To
this end, the system should cater for multilingual
and multicultural variations. Additionally, the
system should offer the possibility to museum
curators to form different, customised collections
of exhibits to address the needs of diverse
target groups.
Support for museum metadata standards: Information
concerning the title of the object along with a
physical description, the location of the object,
the availability of an exhibit for loan, conservation
treatments is among the most common kept for
each artefact. The museum should be able to
exchange this information with other museums.
To this end, adoption of international standards
is of the essence.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Ë

Minimisation of total cost of ownership: The
environment should be based on open source
technologies to better support extensibility and
to minimise cost of acquirement. In addition,
since most small to medium sized museums
have limited resources and cannot afford to
employ permanent IT personnel, maintenance
of the website content should be easy enough
to be carried out by non-IT personnel.

Based on these requirements we have proceeded
with a detailed design of the underlying database
and the user interface.

3. ENVIRONMENT DESIGN AND
IMPLEMENTATION
The information integrated museum system employs
a database for storing and retrieving all information
used by both the cataloguing and the web presentation
subsystems. Using a database ensures flexibility
in information storage options and good performance,
especially for retrieval operations, while offering possibilities
for creating customised complex reports, when requested
by the museum management. The database schema
for the integrated museum system was created in
the system design phase, and targeted the following
major design goals:
(i)

Full support for functional requirements: The
database schema should be able to fully support
all functional requirements identified in the analysis
phase, both regarding the information elements
that need to be stored and the queries that
need to be evaluated for creating web pages
and reports for museum personnel. In order to
determine the database information elements,
both the user requirements and international
standards, including Dublin Core10 , CIDOC11 and
Spectrum12 were considered, to ensure the widest
applicability of the integrated system.

(ii) Extensibility: The database schema should be
able to accommodate new media types and/or
information elements with the minimum number
of changes. For new media types (such as
panoramas, novel 3-D model representations,
etc.) in particular, it was highly desirable that
they should be readily supported by the database
with no modification at all, since such types
emerge as new capturing devices and/or digital
media formats.
(iii) Performance: The system should be able to
rapidly generate web pages, both for the cataloguing
and for the web presentation subsystems. Besides
73

quick formulation of web pages, the overall information
storage and delivery architecture should be tuned
to ensure that performance enhancement
mechanisms, such as client and proxy server
caches, could be fully exploited.
The cache exploitation consideration led to the
decision that images, audio, video and other media
contents would be stored on the filesystem, rather
than within the database. Indeed, if images were
stored within the database, they would have to be
extracted from it and sent to the requesting client
(i.e. a browser) in the context of a dynamic request;
the default behaviour of browsers is to not cache
the results of dynamic requests, thus any subsequent
need for retrieving the same resource would lead to
a retransmission of the same data, penalising thus
the overall performance. Although certain browsers
were found to honour explicit cache control specifications
stating that the pertinent document (image, audio,
video, etc.) could be stored in the cache and reused
later on, the caching behaviour was not consistent
across all browsers, thus filesystem storage was
opted for. For these items, the database—instead
of the content itself—stores pointers, in the form of
path names.
The core database schema for storing the museum
information content is depicted in Fig. 1. This core
schema illustrates only the basic tables used for
storing information, and is complemented with additional
tables, mainly for storing various aspects of data

related to exhibits, such as maintenance activities,
reproduction rights, exhibit parts, material and physical
dimensions, etc.
The central concept in this database schema
is the exhibit, with each exhibit representing a distinct,
self-contained artefact that is hosted by a museum.
The administrative interface for entering exhibit information
is illustrated in Fig. 2. As can be seen from the
menu zone, information captures a number of exhibit
facets, with each of them possibly related to different
museum personnel and/or website visitor roles or
profiles. The way information is organised in different
screens serves a twofold purpose:
(i)

Each portion of information is for specific role,
e.g. the information related to “Reproduction”
(rights and charges) is of interest only to the
museum administrators and the financial department.
Thus roles not interested in specific information
are protected from facing overwhelming amount
of information, either by simply not choosing
specific links and/or by customising their workspace
so as not to display certain links at all. The
system administrator may enforce certain links
to be invisible to specific roles.

(ii) By limiting user access to designated links,
system administrators may enforce the museum
security policy regarding access to and modification
of information thus protecting data confidentiality
and integrity. At a database level, the information

Figure 1. Core database schema for integrated museum system.

74

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 2. Administrative interface for cataloguing museum exhibits.

managed in each screen is stored in a different
table: this enables the exploitation of SQL’s
discretionary access control mechanisms, i.e.
granting data retrieval and/or modification privileges
to certain users on specific tables. Databaselevel security mechanisms complement the access
control features integrated in the management
application, thus delivering adequate security
provisions for most museum environments. Splitting
the data across different tables does not affect
performance, since tables storing exhibit information

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

facets are typically accessed individually using
the exhibit’s Id as filtering criterion (which is
part of the primary key in each table), thus
only selection operations, rather than joins,
are performed in the database. Reports
necessitating the combination of multiple facet
tables are not often executed, while the performance
penalty induced in such cases due to splitting
of information in multiple tables has been quantified
to be less than two per cent.

75

Two additional issues worth noting in Fig. 2 are
the multilinguality capabilities of the integrated system
and the support it provides for multiple profiles .
Regarding the multilinguality capabilities, the user
can select the user interface language when s/he
logs in the administrative interface. The user interface
language selection affects the language in which
menus, labels and messages are presented to the
user. Multilingual capabilities, however, apply to the
content entered and managed through the administrative
interface. Each museum may choose the languages
it wants to store and maintain in. The administrative
interface provides the required facilities for managing
content multilinguality: the “Language” combo box
appearing in each screen hosting multilingual content
may be used to switch between available languages
and enter or update original content or translations
in the languages chosen by the museum.
For multiple profiles, the museum may designate
visitor profiles that should be available in the web
portal; the default setting for available user profiles
is Researcher, Visitor and Student, which the requirement
analysis has identified as major web portal visitor
groups that (potentially) need to be presented with
different information. Indeed, researchers need to
be presented with details which are not of interest
(or even boring) to common visitors, whereas students
need to be presented with specially tailored descriptions
and texts, possibly edited with the aid of museopedagogues. Museums addressing different target
groups may customise this preset. For each piece
of information that is presented through the museum
web portal, the administrative interface displays a
distinct input area for every chosen visitor profile,
allowing thus museum content providers to enter
the appropriate information.
The collection (webCollectionsLang and
webCollectionExhibit ) tables provide the database
underpinnings for organising exhibits into collections.
One important provision made in the database design
is to allow exhibits to participate in multiple collections,
with each such participation possibly conveying a
different museum message . For example, the regal
decree announcing the founding of the Athens University
is interpreted differently when viewed in the “Athens
University History” collection than when viewed in
the “19th Century Calligraphy” collection. Museum
curators are therefore relieved from the physical
world restriction that each exhibit may participate
in a single collection/exhibition arrangement (since
it has only one physical instance), and are enabled
to formulate collections best suiting the museum
organisation and/or web visitor needs, including exhibits
76

in as many collections as needed. Each collection
is tagged with a flag (collectionType) indicating whether
the collection serves museum administration/organisation
purposes (e.g. exhibition of room A, artefacts donated
by a specific donor, etc.), or is crafted for presentation
through the web or even both.
The concept of categories supported by the
integrated system is an important provision for museum
curators, since it provides a concise and effective
means for describing properties of exhibits, while
these descriptions can be used in browsing, searching
and organisation activities. In more detail, categories
form a hierarchical concept tree , with each level
specialising the concept represented at its parent
level. Each exhibit may be linked to any number of
categories at arbitrary tree levels, associating thus
the exhibit with the relevant concepts. Users (either
museum staff or web visitors) are able to drill down
the concept hierarchy to locate exhibits correlated
with specific concepts and/or use these concepts
in queries to narrow the scope of their searches.
Figure 3 illustrates the administrative interface for
category management, and shows selected levels
of concept hierarchies created for the Athens History
University Museum. At database level, information
regarding categories is stored in the following tables
of Fig. 1: category (lists available categories and
maintains parent/child relationships between them),
webCategoryLang (hosting multilingual category
descriptions) and exhibitCategories (stores associations
between categories and exhibits).
A final issue worth discussing regarding the
database is the support it provides for multiple levels
of detail supported for all multimedia resources
(images, video, audio, etc.) that are stored in the
integrated system. Indeed, the integrated system
should store (a) digital formats with very high resolution,
to be made available to researchers or even be used
for reproduction purposes and (b)digital formats with
low and medium resolutions, to be made available
through the web (these resolutions entail files of
small sizes which can be effectively delivered through
the Internet, impeding also unauthorised high-quality
reproduction, which infringes the museum’s intellectual
property rights); at the database level, storage of
multiple resolutions is enabled through the provision
of appropriate fields in the pertinent tables
(exhibitResource and bookPages in Fig. 1), allowing
for storage of low, medium and high resolutions, as
well as a thumbnail for each resource. Of these, the
first two are made available through the web, while
the later is restricted for use within the museum
environment only. Naturally, the thumbnail is used
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 3. Administrative interface for managing categories.

for providing users with a quick visual overview of
the resource contents.
As shown in Fig. 1, information regarding book
pages, a special case of exhibit resource, is stored
in a separate table (bookPages) than other resources
(exhibitResource). This decision stems from the
different information storage needs identified in the
analysis phase for these resource types and more
specifically:
Ë

Ë

bookPages are strongly associated with a numbering
scheme, which dictates their order in the original
publication and enables the reproduction of this
order upon presentation. This requirement does
not hold for other resource types, which are
generally unordered.
bookPages need no additional description to
that provided for the book as a whole, while
generic exhibit resources in general do. For
instance, an exhibit entry regarding the Victory
of Samothrace statue may be associated with
multiple resources; pictures of the statue from
multiple angles, images representing the statue
without the boat added to it during the Roman
period, close-up detailed images from the broken
wings area, 3-D dioramas of the statue in the
environments it is believed to have been placed
in different years, etc. Obviously, each such
resource needs a description to help visitors
understand what the resource depicts and how
it should be interpreted.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Since the information storage needs for these
two resource types are diverse enough, it was decided
that different tables should be created at the database
level to store the data corresponding to instances
of these types. As shown in Figure 1, page numbering
is embedded in the bookPages table, while resource
descriptions (for non-page resources) are separately
stored in the webResourceLang table, since for a
single resource multiple descriptions need to be
maintained, to cater for multiple languages and
visitor profiles.

4. FUTURE WORK
The environment presented is currently in use
at the Athens University History Museum (http://
history-museum.uoa.gr/). The system holds 10 major
collections with 581 categories of exhibits, 1342
artifacts of which more than 200 are books with
more than 14,000 digitised pages. All of the
documentation is available in three languages: Greek,
English and French. For the future an extension is
planned which will allow the dynamic synthesis of
virtual-reality museum. The engine will automatically
create a web-based virtual-reality museum based
on user’s preferences and profile.

REFERENCES
1. Besser, H. The transformation of the museum
and the way it’s perceived. In Wired museum
edited by Katherine Jones-Garmil. American
Association of Museums, Washington,1997.

77

http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/~howard/Papers/garmiltransform.html
2. Mintzer, F.; Braudaway, G.; Giordano, F.; Lee,
J.; Magerlein, K.; D’Auria, S.; Ribak, A.; Shapir,
G.; Schiattarella, F.; Tolva, J. & Zelenkov, A.
Populating the hermitage museum’s new website,
Communications of the ACM , 2001, 44(8), 5260.
3. Louvre. http://www.louvre.fr/
4. Kohrs, A. & Merialdo, B. Creating user-adapted
websites by the use of collaborative filtering.
Interacting with Computers , 2001, 13(6), 695716.
5. Takahashi, J.; Kushida, T.; Hong, J.K.; Sugita,
S.; Kurita, Y.; Rieger, R.; Martin, W.; Gay, G.;
Reeve, J. & Loverance, R. Global digital museum:
Multimedia information access and creation on
the internet. In DL’98: Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM International Conference on Digital Libraries,
1998, 244-53.
6. Marucci, L. & Paterno, F. Designing an adaptive
virtual guide for web applications. In Proceedings
of the 6th ERCIM Workshop on ‘User Interfaces
for All, 2000.

7. Hong, J.S.; Chen, H.Y. & Hsiang, J. A digital
museum of Taiwanese butterflies. In DL’00:
Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference
on Digital Libraries, 2000, 260-61.
8. Lepouras, G. & Vassilakis, C. Adaptive virtual
reality museums on the web. In Adaptable and
Adaptive Hypermedia Systems, edited by S.Y.
Chen and G.D. Magoulas, IRM Press, 2005,
pp. 190-205
9. Lepouras, G.; Katifori, A.; Vassilakis, C. & Charissi,
A. Facilitating VR museums web presence. I n
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction, 2003, pp. 114347.
10. Dublin Core Metadata Initiative. Dublin Core
Metadata Element Set, Version 1.1, 2006.
http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/
11. CIDOC consortium, definition of the CIDOC conceptual
reference model, 2007. http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/
docs/cidoc_crm_version_4.2.2.pdf
12. Museum Documentation Association, SPECTRUM
3.1, 2007. http://www.mda.org.uk/ spectrum.htm

About the Authors
Dr Costas Vassilakis holds a BSc in Informatics (1990) and a PhD in Design and Implementation of a Historical
DBMS (1995). Dr Vassilakis has authored more than 70 papers for international conferences and journals in
subject areas including e-government, web technologies and databases. He has also participated in numerous
European and national RTD projects. Currently Dr Vassilakis is an Assistant Professor in the University of
Peloponnese and a research fellow for the University of Athens. His scientific interests include semantic web
technologies, e-government, databases, user interaction and distributed systems.
Akrivi Katifori holds a BSc in Informatics and Telecommunications (2000) and an MSc in Signal Processing for
Telecommunications and Multimedia (2003) from the University of Athens, and is currently a PhD student of the
same department. She has participated in European and national RTD projects and has authored several papers
in different research areas of computer science. Her scientific interests include ontologies and semantic web
technologies, virtual museums, information visualization and personal information management.
Ilias Daradimos holds a BSc in Electronics Engineering (2003) and an MSc in Data Communication Systems
(2005) from the Technical Educational Institute of Athens, and is currently a researcher at the Department of
Informatics of the University of Athens. In the context of two national RTD projects he has contributed in the
development of web–based applications for museums. His scientific interests combine virtual museums and web
community tools with the semantic web.
Dr George Lepouras holds a degree in Mathematics from the University of Athens (1991), an MSc in
Information Technology Systems (1992) from the University of Strathclyde, and a PhD in Human-Computer
Interaction from the University of Athens (2000). Dr Lepouras has participated in numerous European and national
RTD projects, including the SmartGov and CB-Business projects of the IST framework. Dr Lepouras has authored
more than 60 papers for international conferences and journals in various subject areas, including e-government,
user interfaces and web technologies. Currently Dr Lepouras is an assistant professor in the University of
Peloponnese and a research fellow for the University of Athens. His scientific interests include human-computer
interaction, e-Government, and virtual reality systems.
78

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

