DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 79-82
© 2008, DESIDOC

Your Website: Greater Visibility and Return of Investment
through Search Engine Marketing
Thierry Arsenault1 and Daniel Feeny2
Canadian Heritage Information Network
Patrimoine canadien|Canadian Heritage
15 Eddy, Gatineau, QC, K1A 0M5.
1E-mail: thierry_arsenault@pch.gc.ca
2E-mail: daniel_feeny@pch.gc.ca

ABSTRACT
Nowadays, the majority of the people find out the required websites information including virtual
exhibitions through web search engines. The most commonly used search engines in the market are
Google, Yahoo and MSN. This paper basically provides tips to the developers of virtual exhibition websites
to make their sites more visible to the public. This is one of the marketing strategies of the web search
engines are following to get best returns on their investment. This is a short paper based on the research
work done at Canadian Heritage Information Network and their results are communicated in form of short
paper.
Keywords: Return of Investment, website visibility, use of search engines for marketing.

According to some estimates in North America,
40 per cent of website visitors arrive from Google,
Yahoo, MSN and other search engines. For some
online exhibitions, the figure is as high as 80 per
cent. Thankfully, you can use this trend to your
advantage. It is simply easier to get potential visitors
to click on a link than to have them type your web
address into their browsers. The latter is commonly
referred to as ‘direct traffic’, and in significant numbers
it is usually the result of sophisticated, multi-platform
marketing campaigns. If you need to maximize
each dollar, then you will love online marketing and
particularly search engine marketing (SEM).
SEM is the art and science of increasing the
visibility of your web pages by boosting their ranking
on search engine results. The SEM mix includes:
(i)

Search engine optimization (SEO): Optimising
the visibility of web pages in the organic (free)

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

section of search engine result pages (see A
in Fig. 1). Tactics includes friendly architecture,
optimised content, link building, and social
marketing optimisation (Web colonisation).
(ii)

Pay per click (PPC): Optimising your visibility
in the sponsored section of the search engine
result pages (see B in Fig. 1). Payment goes
through only when browsers click on your ad,
or when they complete a transaction on your
website (cost per conversion).

(iii) Search engine advertising: Banner ads or
multimedia/interactive ads on search engines.
Getting started can be a bit intimidating, but
through trial and error you will see how SEM drives
highly targeted visitors to your online exhibitions.
The following steps to a successful SEM plan are
based on CHIN’s (Canadian Heritage Information
79

Figure 1. Yahoo search output.

Network) experience with the virtual museum of
Canada portal (virtualmuseum.ca), and on recognised
best practices from the industry.

(b)

a list of keywords and key phrases that
represent your current and most relevant
content;

(i)

(c )

a list of keywords and key phrases that
represent your potential content (content
strategy).

(ii)

Know your target audience: Who do you really
want to reach? Define your target audiences,
including their market size, profile, habits and
needs. Remember: “general public” is not a
target audience.
Set your online goals and key performance
indicators: What do you want visitors to do on
your website? Think about the percentage of
visitors who take a desired action (conversion
rate), whether it be registrations, newsletter
subscriptions, download publications, or just
about any activity beyond simple browsing.
Don’t forget to establish proper metrics to track
what visitors are doing.

(iii) Build an initial list of important keywords: This
is the foundation of your SEM plan. Spend
some time to create list of keywords and key
phrases for which you want to be retrieved by
search engines. We recommend that you have
(a)

80

a list of keywords and key phrases that
represent your mandate and your primary
messages;

Look at your target audiences’ blogs, chats,
message boards, and websites to better understand
their language, and draw from your internal documentation
(e.g. fact sheets, surveys, press releases).
Added Tips
–

Try to associate individual web pages in your
online exhibitions with the most appropriate
keyword(s) or key phrase(s).

–

Work with key phrases of two and three words.
This long tail approach leads to higher organic
rankings, and is also less costly for paid campaigns
since there is less competition.

(iv) Validate your keywords: Test and refine your
list with keyword selector tools such as Yahoo
Keyword Selector, Google Keyword Selector,
Google Trend and Keyword Discovery. It is
important to measure your competition and the

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

popularity of your keywords and key phrases.
Some keyword selector, such as Google, will
isolate country specific keyword searches: searches
for India only.
(v)

Check your current ranking: Type your keywords
and key phrases into a search engine, and
check your current performance. PPC campaigns
should only be use for strategic keywords or
key phrases that are not performing well organically.
Plan to organically optimise the keywords and
key phrases of your PPC campaign. Overall
this will help to reduce your PPC investment
while increasing your organic traffic gradually.

Added Tip
–

Check your ranking in the most popular search
engine in your country. For example, in North
America, Google is the most important search
engine with over 60 per cent of all searches.
In India, Google (http://www.google.co.in/) is
probably the most important one as well. It
is also good to check on other search engines
that you consider important based on your
target audience: byindia.com might be more
important for you if more representative of your
target audience (step one).

(vi) Optimise the website:
(a)

Design and architecture: No matter how
nice your pages look, if your online exhibition’s
architecture is weak, you won’t be indexed
by the search engines. Good practices
include, but not limited to the creation of
a search engine sitemap, proper HTML
and CSS coding, and limited parameters.

(b)

Web page content: Optimisation follows
the inverted pyramid structure, with important
information at the top and details further
down. Each Web page optimizes one key
phrase following specific rules: title, header,
proximity, density, prominence, thematic
words, cross linking, anchor text and alt
text.

Don’t forget your multimedia content. As part
of the emerging universal search approach, Google
is mashing (merging) specialised results within general
search engine results pages. As a result, optimised
video and pictures can offer more entry points towards
your online exhibition.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Added Tip
–

Provide a Web writing/SEO workshop to your
content contributors. This is helpful because
the importance of user and SEO requirements
is new for most editors.

(vii) Pursue link building and partnerships: Inbound
links to your online exhibition are a very important
factor for most search engines. Quality sites
that have agreed to link to your online exhibition
pages will also send you relevant traffic. Build
your inbound links by approaching reputable
Web sites related to your strategic keywords
and key phrases.
(viii) Colonise the Web: The beauty of Web 2.0 is
that you do not need to necessarily request a
link; you just need to publish or circulate it.
Populate Wikis (e.g. Wikipedia), blogs, and
video and picture sites (e.g. Flickr and Youtube).
Search engines will consider your popularity in
these social networks, and you will also get
direct traffic as a byproduct.
(ix) Get in the news: Feed news aggregators such
as Google News with RSS feeds containing
valuable developments for your community.
(x)

Track and analyse your performance for better
results: Install good tracking software to follow
your SEO performance separately from your
PPC performance. This way, you will be able
to replace keywords that are not performing
well, or create a web page that will better
optimise them. You will also improve the quality
of visitors coming from search engines, provide
a better experience, increase loyalty and reduce
your cost per visitor.

Added Tip
–

Along with web trends, CHIN is currently
experimenting with Google Analytics. This free
service offered by Google generates detailed
statistics about website visitors. The main benefit
is the Google adword (PPC) campaign performance
information that is provided.

At CHIN, we are continuously working to leverage
the potential offered by SEO and PPC. In the last
fiscal year, we were able to increase our visibility
on the web, reduce our cost per visit, increase our
visitor quality and better track our performance.

81

This initiative required the involvement of the marketing
team, IT and product managers and efforts from our
internal and external content contributors. You will
achieve good results if you have the buy-in of your
peers, and if you put in place the necessary educational
support and guidelines.

This ten step recipe may not guarantee success,
but it will surely contribute towards it. CHIN provides
SEM seminars, participates in expert panels, and
is currently working on complete SEM training package
that will be available in the Knowledge Exchange
at www.chin.gc.ca. Be sure to visit us often.

About the Authors

T h i e r r y A r s e n a u l t , BBA, a certified member of l’Institut du Commerce Électronique du Québec
(ICEQ), is an online marketing specialist for the CHIN, an agency of the Department of Canadian
Heritage. He specialises in online marketing, in particular search engine marketing (SEM).
Thierry has over 15 years of experience in marketing, sales and ebusiness. Prior to joining
CHIN, Thierry successfully doubled Culture.ca’s organic traffic, and considerably increased
visits and Internet revenue at Bellzinc.ca and Bell Canada/Hong Kong Telecom. He has spoken
at Museums and the Web, the Culture.mondo roundtable, and various other events.
Daniel Feeny manages the Marketing and Business Development unit at the Canadian Heritage
Information Network. This agency of the Department of Canadian Heritage enables Canada’s
museums to engage audiences through the use of innovative technologies. Daniel develops
and leads communications and partnership strategies that increase public participation in
CHIN’s two online platforms (virtualmuseum.ca and www.chin.gc.ca). Prior to joining CHIN,
Daniel led advertising and promotions for a subsidiary of Vidéotron Ltd, an integrated communications
company. He is a graduate of HEC Montréal, one of Canada’s foremost business schools.

82

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

