DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 83-91
© 2008, DESIDOC

Implementation of a Virtual Archives System using Virtual Reality
Technology: A Case Study of the National Archives Administration
Taiwan (ROC)
Wen-Hsi Chang
Archives Information Division, National Archives Administration
No. 10, Lane 59, Yitong St., Taipei 10486, Taiwan (ROC)
E-mail:whchang@archives.gov.tw

ABSTRACT
The article describes the virtual archives system developed using virtual reality technologies in National
Archives Administration (NAA), Taiwan, Republic of China. The project was launched in 2004 and consisted
of three parts: a projected virtual reality system; a virtual archives website; and a virtual archives kiosk. This
paper also discusses related issues during system development along with concepts, criteria and solutions.
Finally it provides the experience of how to implement a virtual reality system for the archives.
Keywords: Virtual archives, virtual reality, virtual museums, online museums, NAA.

1. INTRODUCTION
The intention of implementing a virtual archives
system was to simulate mandatory functionalities
of a public records preservation repository employing
computer technologies, instead of expanding existing
property. After conducting a year of feasibility study
for establishing a virtual archives system, Virtual
Archives Project was launched in 2004. The system
was opened to the public in the month of June
2005.We took advantage of computing technologies
to create innovative archival services without any
physical restrictions such as shelving, locations
and opening hours, etc.
Conceptually, we designed an ideal virtual archival
system that was able to satisfy users' individual
demands, share archival information and hold online
exhibitions in cyberspace. Besides, we operated
the system as an experimental marketing tool, which
was able to attract potential users to access archival
resources. The combination of virtual reality technologies
and archives would be an ideal alternative for promoting
archives application.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

One of most attractive features of virtual reality
is that users can interact with objects in cyber
space1 . Furthermore, every user can organise his
personal interests profile to design the system the
way he/she likes. For instance, the way a user
using a car driving simulator can emulate to control
handler, to accelerates, to change direction, to
read indicators on dashboard and so on. All detailed
driving behaviours during roaming in a virtual space
are same as steering a real car on the road. Furthermore,
there are successful instances on high-level learning
behaviours, which include motion control, perception
for a real world, etc. As for retrieving records, it
seemed to be more sophisticated than driving in
mind. Generally, information retrieval is complicated
and hard to be programmed. A proposal to draw a
blue print for an ideal archives house was submitted
as the very beginning of our virtual archives construction.
Then groups of virtual human figures and related
events were created in advance. Just like to compose
a movie script, the scriptwriter made possible reactions
of all characters. Lastly, characteristics of every
virtual figure reactions were deliberately designed
83

so as to make the virtual archives more realistic 2 .
These included:
(i)

What types of high-level behaviours regarding
intelligence, motivation, social communication
and decision-making can be presented in the
virtual archives?

(ii) What kinds of sensors does a user receive
message from the real world?
(iii) How to control motions of virtual figures flexibly?
(iv) How to use graphics to present every aspects
of a real world object?

2. TYPES OF VIRTUAL REALITY
TECHNOLOGIES
There are many definitions of virtual reality 3-10
in the literature. Whereas, virtual reality is a synonym
to immersive reality in which users are surrounded
by artificial 3-D images created by computers 3 . In
practice, there are lots of obstacles for accepting
a fully immerse virtual reality solution for archives.
Most of archives do not have an appropriate room
suitable to set up related equipment. Besides, most
sensory devices require isolation from noisy signals
of other electric appliances and carriers, or it won't
work properly. It is also very difficult for existing
archives to expand for accommodating extra equipment.
In addition, it is arduous for regular users to
distinguish the reflection on drape whether from a
virtual reality system or a 3-D animation program.
In fact, both of them are able to provide similar
stereo visual effects. Users don't care what a virtual
reality is. Technically speaking, whether the system
has an interactive interface or not is the distinguishing
feature. Since a virtual archives system is not merely
for applying virtual reality technologies, it should
also create more attractive environment for users.
Virtual reality can be classified into four basic categories:
(i)

Fully Immersive: A user who wears particular
display devices is a part of the virtual environment.
Display devices like head-mounted display and
stereo spectacles; provide a 3-D virtual space
in user's vision. The user never feels himself as
an outsider or audience in the virtual environment.
It is necessary to block any other visual contacts
from the real world for approaching absolute
immersive.

(ii) Semi-immersive: There are attached 3-D display
devices that augment on existing objects. For
instance, a pilot seat of an actual airplane was
84

set up as the position for a virtual reality system.
To keep the feeling of authentication is to use
part of real objects. The view of a user created
using computers. A number of vehicle control
simulators, such as car driving, ship steeling
and airplane controlling use this kind of environments
to practice manipulating skills.
(iii) Projected Visions: A system projected 3-D images
to a glass-beaded draper on the wall from different
directions, which can serve a group of people
view the same content simultaneously. Sometimes,
it can allow multi-screens to surround users for
obtaining better visual effects.
(iv) Desktop Display: A system merely displays a
virtual environment on the screen of a user's
monitor. Applying Flash is one of popular solutions
to provide dynamic pages on websites with
which player can be easily integrated with other
browsers to offer animation features. Even it
does not provide real immersive or semi-immersive
interaction. Sometimes, we still convey significant
messages in the virtual world without a real
virtual reality. It is more important to suffice
user's requirements than to apply a fancy technology.
For example, R. Schmidt created "Virtual Reality
Moon Phases" by ray-traced images of the Moon.
A Clementine spacecraft mosaic of the lunar
surface was mapped onto a sphere, and scenes
were rendered as a virtual Sun "orbited" the
Moon 11 . It is also categorised as a kind of
virtual reality application.

3. THE VIRTUAL ARCHIVES IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT IN NAA
The initiative of the project was to add values
to public records in virtual ways to satisfy individual
requirements, instead of simply creating archives
online exhibitions. Apparently, personalisation is a
trend for application development in software industry.
An advanced virtual reality environment depends on
various sensory devices to collect and respond users'
reactions with respect to stimuli from the virtual
environment. However, there are some non-technical
problems concerning the application of those devices
in practice. Part of the users are not willing to share
devices with others, such as left perspiration on
head-mounted display helmet, electronic tracker
and electronic gloves, etc., because of their personal
hygiene and healthcare reasons. However, it is easier
to employ visual simulation without expensive equipment
for archives. Unfortunately, there are technical constraints
for transmitting virtual reality images via Internet at
present, because of bandwidth and additional devices
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

requirements. With the result, we adopted relatively
cost saving alternatives were adopted to construct
NAA virtual archives in the following three facets.
(i) Multi-users Projective Environment: Setting a
multi-users environment on existing space is
the most economic solution. For the reason of
saving cost, we set up related equipment in our
lecture hall, which can accommodate 60 people
to view virtual reality shows, instead of using
a dedicated presentation room (Fig. 1).
(ii) Virtual Archives Website: Is a desktop virtual
reality website using Flash technology to drive
virtual objects dynamically. It is ubiquitous service
on the Internet (Fig. 2), with sub-titles in English,
on the bottom right of the screen, to translate
what the virtual figure says in Mandarin
synchronically (http://va.archives.gov.tw).
(iii) Virtual Archives Kiosk: A virtual reality kiosk
was positioned in front of information desk at
the lobby of NAA (Fig. 3) It provides users doit-yourself services that make users roam freely
with a 3-D track ball instead of mouse clicks,
just as using an automatic cashier machine.

4. CONSTRUCTION OF A VIRTUAL
REALITY ENVIRONMENT
The main reasons for the construction of a
virtual archives house include: (a) to present the
physical structure of ideal archives house and interior
decoration design in details; (b) presentation of
preserved digital collections; and (c) to offer virtual
archives services.
Construction of a virtual building is the skeleton
of the project. There are two types of constructive

Figure 1. Viewers with 3-D glasses viewing VR archives
system.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

frameworks: geometric and image models. Generally
speaking, a geometric model was produced, which
sometimes was created by designers without any
real objects for reference. The similarity of simulation
corresponds to the quality of models presentation.
Both the delicacy of interoperation between objects
and the visual granularity of images were associated
with creativity and developing time. Basically, modelling
is a matter of technology as well as synthesis of
art. Fortunately, there are proprietary tools that
assist to build 3-D solid geometric models quickly.
All virtual objects can freely rotate without restrictions
of movement angles for observing and modifying
easily. Meanwhile, users can interact with any other
objects in the space. Geometric modelling method
was applied to build the main building as shown in
Fig. 4.
Instead of building a 3-D geometric object, creators
can apply scanned existing object images to model
virtual objects. Definitely, it is an efficient solution
for modelling with a 3-D scanning camera to capture
the surrounded images of an object. Usually, there
are not many event driven components on an imagemodelled object. In business applications, the measure
of image modelling is good at demonstrating the
appearances of merchandises for marketing. It is
also applicable for the quick usage directions of a
product, such as how to assembly and disassembly
it. In Taiwan, there are many virtual reality agents
to build their clients' selling property 3-D models
in this way. Compared with other kinds of virtual
reality technologies, obviously it has weaker functionality.
But, it is appropriate for visitor to introduce static
features related to a building, such as interior
compartments and organisational allocations. As a
consequence, a hybrid model to construct virtual
objects, which includes assembling the images of

Figure 2. Virtual archives website of NAA.
85

Figure 3. A virtual archives kiosk with records exhibition
windows.

Figure 4. The geometric model of virtual archives house.

real objects, and rendering virtual objects generated
by geometric models was used at NAA. After completing
the modelling, subsequently interactions among
objects were started.

role to introduce all services. In the other themes,
demonstration avatars being used instead. Whatsoever,
all actions of virtual figures have got to depend on
scripts, including background settings? In principle,
there are three kinds of avatar operations:

One of historic event settings made by hybrid
model in NAA system is a real historic building
photograph on painted marble floor behind virtual
objects (Fig. 5). Similarly a virtual figure was modelled
with real images of the Director General of the
institution (Fig. 6) with a menu of themes behind
him.

4.1 Figures Creation
It is important for visitors whom they meet in
a virtual world, just like audience expects to see
certain roles in a cinema. These virtual figures are
similar to actors in a film who keep the storyline
going, whether they are fully created by computers
or transformed from real figures' images. In NAA
system, both kinds of figures have been used. The
image of Director General, NAA plays the major

Figure 5. A virtual historic wall setting.
86

(i)

An avatar is a guide of the system, which
directs a user to surf in virtual environment
(Figs 7 and 8).

(ii) It is a substitute of a user, and manipulates
all operations in the virtual archives.
A user is an audience who cannot manipulate
figures in the system. An avatar is surfing automatically
for presenting featured functions.

4.2 Interaction Design in Virtual
Environment
It is too complicated to simulate all human
reactions corresponding to what happens in a real
world12 . Therefore, it is necessary to narrow down

Figure 6. A virtual figure.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 7. A user is controlling an avatar by a 3-D mouse in
the lobby of NAA virtual archives house.

Figure 8. An avatar, named as Archives Gnome, is guiding
the second floor of our virtual archives house in
front of an elevator.

the scope of simulation in applications. On the
contrary, a simulated environment has to remain
the minimum essences of the real world. It is a
dilemma for a system designer to trade off what the
minimum is? The critical components of a virtual
reality are how virtual figures in scenes react corresponding
to the events. Just as filmmaking, all characters
and settings have to follow a well-defined script to
go through till the end. An archivist could play the
role of a director to make the virtual system keep
storyline forward. This includes where and when
virtual figures are placed, what kind of events would
be triggered, and their corresponding reactions.
Theoretically, reactions are relations among virtual
objects that have to be arranged in advance. They
are also the presentation of objects interaction in
a virtual reality environment. In details, there are
different presentation layers of an event and corresponding
responses. Generally, the quality of simulation affects
users' perception. Since all interactions of avatars
depended on existing definitions in a database, of
which all movements and scenes require huge computing
resources. It is necessary to restrict the number
of reaction modes for obtaining performance efficiency.
Hence, several types of working templates for presenting
different themes were generated. In short, a virtual
archives system at NAA is not just an application,
but also provides a general framework for virtual
exhibits. Therefore, contents can be easily modified
in virtual exhibitions.

virtual environment have to be assisted by auxiliary
devices. BOOM (Binocular Omni Orientation Monitor)
is one of very famous output devices for watching
virtual reality environment. It is very similar to a
head-mounted display, but is like a binocular to
observe images. Display screen and related devices
were integrated into a viewing box with an arm like
sensor to perform all movements.

4.3 Selection of Auxiliary Devices

5. THEMES DESIGN IN THE VIRTUAL
ARCHIVES SYSTEM

The source for triggering events among real
objects is not only from human vision, but also from
their other sensory organs. However, current multimedia
technologies still focus on audio and visual effects
primarily. That implicated that extra senses in a
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Nowadays, there are tangible devices capable
to response specific stimuli form the real world. In
manufacturing industry, people use haptic operation
mechanism such as robotic arms to deal with dangerous
works. It is helpful for some of learning activities
to apply haptic simulation equipment 13 . If a virtual
archives user can feel to flip pages of virtual records,
it would be more realistic than just viewing the
content of a record. However, this kind of device
allows one user at a time. Therefore BOOM solution
was not implemented at NAA even though it provides
a higher resolution. It is less practicable for archives,
especially for a non-profit oriented organisation. If
there is an advanced virtual reality environment in
which several users can involve simultaneously with
their bare eyes, it would be much more convenient
for viewers. Unfortunately, it is necessary to use
additional devices for achieving high visual effect at
present, so 3-D spectacles were used to generate
optical 3-D visual effects. It is the simplest way to
reach visual virtual reality.

If a computer could utilise historic records to
simulate parts of facts, it would be most fascinating
for researchers. For instance, Revival of Life in
Ancient Pompeii14, which is a very attractive application.
87

It successfully emulated ancient Pompeian life in
Italy with the virtual reality technologies. The results
filled the gap of historic records, and then made
viewers cross over historical lags consequently.
Similar concept was followed to select historic incidents
at NAA as themes to demonstrate in the system.
One of the merits for simulation is that the system
never makes a real event happened. So a video war
game is not a real war. But all scenes inside the
game absolutely make user realise what a war is
like. The users of a war game also get some exact
experience without casualties. For instance, the
921-earthquake occurred on 21 September 1999. It
was a catastrophe in Taiwan's history; thousands
of casualties took place in that earthquake. No one
can ever think of this kind of earthquake to happen
again, but simulation technologies were used for
reminding people and to preserve such important
incidents in Taiwan's memory by using partial investigation
data to synthesize artificial imagination, subsequently
to simulate certain phenomena, such as instantaneous
earth surface contour changes. For the reason of
simplifying system implementation, core collections
at NAA were extracted as descriptive targets of
which attributes decided what would be in the virtual
world. Finally, decided were themes to be presented.
In practice, simplifying colour pixels would make
the environment easier for readers to understand.
Moreover, abstracting records also shrinks storage
space effectively. Since the simulation was treated
as a simplified abstract of real object reactions, it
might be useful for some educational purposes to
refine some complicated concepts.
The system simulated the earthquake of Richter
scale 7.3 which destroyed Shih-Kang Dam, one of
hydroelectricity plants in Tai-Chung County, Taiwan,
on 21 September 1999(Fig. 9). Themes in the virtual
archives system are filled with educational intentions.

In other words, the virtual archives system is also
a new instrument for archives education; however,
developing an educational system is different from
a general one. As per our experience, there are six
factors for designing educational virtual reality software:
(i)

Verbal Linguistic: In the real world, only concise
semantics are able to express sophisticated
mind. Textual messages may not be a key
point for implementing a virtual reality system,
but it would be unavoidable to convey some
complicated concepts. Especially in archives,
most of collections are textual records. Therefore,
less or more, it cannot help using words to
present certain intents. It is useful for enhancing
system's accessibility to refine verbose description.
For example, we put on some subtitles into
parts of scenes to make foreign users understand
easier.

(ii) Logical Deduction: All events and propositions
have to be inferable logically in virtual scenes.
It would make users feel more realistic in the
cyber world. Usually, pattern-matching methods
are used as mathematical thinking processes
to artificially simulate themes in real archives.
Basically, it is difficult to define event patterns
to express intents of archives even in spoken
languages. All events in themes have to be
reviewed by archivists for sure.
(iii) Spatial Allocations: All objects in virtual reality
are represented in 3-D modes. Therefore, all
messages among objects should be considered
a spatial interactive relationship. Therefore,
allocations of characters and triggered events
would influence accessibility and friendliness
to users.
(iv) Bodily Kinesthetic: Default object procedures
should be designed by reasonable manipulation
schemes. The closer the movements of real
objects, the more users feel realistic. Even
certain actions of an avatar could be much
better than what an ordinary person can do.
(v) Musical: Dub in appropriate background music
could make the system more attractive. A good
incidental music always accompanies with a
perfect atmosphere 12 .

Figure 9. Simulated earthquake picture.
88

(vi) Interoperation: It is difficult to define general
interoperated reaction rules with respect to
individuals. In principle, the defined behaviours
among users and avatars have to follow regulations
in human societies by default. For generating
reasonable results, all interoperated behaviours
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

have to be designed and validated in advance.
Subsequently, essence of large size contents
is beneficial for education; it should be encapsulated
in related themes during the phase of system
designing.

6. DIFFICULTIES IN IMPLEMENTATION
OF VIRTUAL ARCHIVES
There are lots of difficulties in implementing a
virtual archives system. For instance, there are
many actions that are permitted in the virtual world,
but illegitimate in the real world. Since a virtual
archives system is without physical restrictions,
the result of simulation might be different from what
happens in the real world 15 . Apparently you cannot
jump from the rooftop of a skyscraper and kill somebody
you dislike, but you can do it in the virtual cyberspace.
On the other hand, doing what you cannot do in a
real world is the key attraction for regular users.
It is considerately difficult to create appropriate
events and scenes for constructing a virtual reality
application. A virtual reality system is an aggregation
of triggered events, scenes and scenarios. Circumstance
information surrounded users that provided by sensory
devices for transmitting human sensation reaction
to events. All virtual scenes are actually created by
experience, including the estimation of each avatar's
movement duration and located positions during
process. If a virtual scenario is embedded with
human experience, it would make viewers feel friendlier.
Highly recommended is to pay attentions to the
differences between natural human senses and sensor
devices, which might influence how to design triggering
points but it seems not to exist in any standard to
make decisions.
The first step for building up a virtual archives
system is to define accurate requirements. It is
very difficult for a system developer, because user's
requirements always fluctuate. Lots of concepts
were adopted at NAA from computer game designs,
especially in scenario planning. The features which
impressed game users were applied to attract users
to archives. For example, a series of virtual training
courses for archivists and regular users were established
in this way. The critical points of success on a
virtual archives system are: (i) functionality should
exactly satisfies users' requirements; (ii) expectation
is not over technical limitations of virtual reality,
such as levels of behaviours of a virtual figure, and
similarity to real characters; and (iii) reusability of
virtual objects, including behaviours, collections and
services, for keeping contents updated easy. In
addition, the effective sensory area of sensor devices
is different from each other. For example, fingertip
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

touching control would be more concise than a
mouse pointing to trigger an event on screen. In
contrast, it is more natural for using footstep-control
movement directions to advance or step back in
immersive environment. Sensory devices have to
send back the result they have sensed during environment
changes. Some devices pass signals via serial ports,
such as RS232, of which metal carrier would be
influenced by the distance of sensors and host.
That means the location of a virtual reality system
has to overcome existing possible transmission
noise. Moreover, some equipment will occupy huge
amount of space and consume high electricity. Archives
might not afford those extra expenses to operate
the system, without previously planning budget.
Theoretically, a perfect 3-D image was generated
by six-directional projections such as a cube. In
contrast, every projector has corresponding demand
for space and cost. For remaining, the functionality
of the lecture hall coexisted with the fundamental
visual effects in our virtual reality archives system.
We designed an elevated rack on the ceiling to
place two projectors, which projected different directional
images for generating 3-D visual effects instead.
Consequently, we spared an extra space for dedicating
the related equipment. Certainly, we scarified the
quality of virtual reality (Fig. 10).

7. CONCLUSION
The reasons for employing virtual reality technologies
in archives are: (i) simulation is cheaper than constructing
a real building; (ii) capability of offering new services
that are not provided in a physical archives; (iii) a
virtual archives system could partly substitute during
suspension of real services; (iv) online visitors can
browse and retrieve records in a virtual 3-D space
without physical restrictions such as transportation,
opening hours, allocation and so on; (v) an alternative

Figure 10. 3-D image projection facility at NAA.
89

to satisfy readers to apply precious records without
any possibility of any malicious or coincidental
violation; (vi) it is easy to change exhibits arrangement
in a virtual archives without schedule conflicts for
different themes. A virtual reality system can integrate
with digital contents management, which saves
coordination of labour works. Even we can use it
to promote a real exhibition; and (vii) a user can
play any roles in archives, such as an archivist to
make his own online exhibition.

5. Mannetta, C. & Blade, R. Glossary of virtual
reality terminology. International Journal of Virtual
Reality, 1995, 1(2). http://www.ia.hiof.no/~michaell/
home/vr/vrhiof98/whatisvr/ What1.html

Establishing a virtual archives system is to
fulfill the existing service gaps instead of replacing
completely, even though a virtual archives system
might provide better services under certain situations.
The virtual archives system cannot diminish the
value of existing archives. In fact, the purpose of
the project was to advance virtual circumstances to
demonstrate eminent archival contexts inside collections
and complement traditional archival functionality in
virtual ways. A wholesome strategy will shorten the
time of implementation, including what kinds of
activities should described in the system, how to
present featured collections with respect to virtual
objects, and what kinds of solutions for virtual reality
technologies and so on. If your institution intended
to implement a virtual archives system using virtual
reality, it would be proper to draft your strategy for
the first step.

7. Mitchell, Keith. Virtual reality. http://ei.cs.vt.edu/
~history/Mitchell.VR.html.

REFERENCES
1. Esmerado, J.; Vexo, F. & Thalmann, D. Interaction
in virtual worlds: Application to music performers.
Virtual Reality Lab, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, http://ligwww.epfl.ch/Publications/
pdf/Esmerado_Vexo_CGI02.pdf
2. Thalmann, Daniel. Simulating a human society:
The challenges. Virtual Reality Lab, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology. http://ligwww.epfl.ch/
Publications/pdf/Thalmann_CGI_02.pdf
3. Beier, K.P. Virtual reality: A short introduction.
University of Michigan, Virtual Reality Laboratory
at the College of Engineering. http://wwwvrl.umich.edu/intro/#Terminology
4. Beier, K.P. Virtual reality: A short introduction.
University of Michigan, Virtual Reality Laboratory
at the College of Engineering. http://wwwvrl.umich.edu/intro/#NonImmersive

90

6. Sherman, B. & Judkins, P. Glimpses of heaven,
visions of hell: Virtual reality and its implications
Hodder and Stoughton, London, 1992. http://
www.ia.hiof.no/~michaell/home/vr/ vrhiof98/whatisvr/
What1.html

8. Pemberton, Lyn. Virtual reality. http://
www.it.bton.ac.uk/staff/lp22/CS133/vr.html
9. Beier, K.P. Virtual reality: A short introduction.
University of Michigan, Virtual Reality Laboratory
at the College of Engineering. http://wwwvrl.umich.edu/intro/#Shared.
10. Louka, Michael. What is virtual reality?
http://www.ia.hiof.no/~michaell/home/vr/vrhiof 98/
whatisvr/ What8.html
11. Schmidt, R. Virtual reality moon phase pictures,
USNO. Time Service Department. http://
tycho.usno.navy.mil/vphase.html
12. Ressler, Sandy; et al. When worlds collideinteractions between the virtual and the real.
National Institute of Standards and Technology.
http://ovrt.nist.gov/twlt15/collidea4.htm
13. Ressier, Sandy; et al. Integrating active tangible
devices with a synthetic environment for collaborative
engineering. National Institute of Standards and
Technology, http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/ovrt/people/
sressler/tangible3.pdf
14. Papgiannakis, George; et al. LIFEPLUS: Revival
of Life in Ancient Pompeii. MIRALab, University
of Geneva. http://www.miralab.unige.ch//repository/
papers/80.pdf
15. Pantelidis, Veronica S. Virtual reality in education
and Howard Gardner's Theory of Multiple Intelligences.
Virtual Reality and Education Laboratory, College
of Education, East Carolina University. http://
vr.coe.ecu.edu/gardner1.htm

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

About the Author
Wen-Hsi Chang is a PhD candidate in information management, Graduate Institute of Management
Sciences, TamKang University, Taiwan. He was the Chief of MIS division, Taipei Municipal Library
during April 1996-May 2000. Afterwards, he joined Archives Information Division of National
Archives Administration, Taiwan (ROC) where he is currently in charge of developing archives
related information systems.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

91

