DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 4, July 2008, pp. 92-100
© 2008, DESIDOC

Voices: A Virtual Exhibition as Alternative
Model to the Forum 2004
Cèsar Carreras Monfort
Department of Humanities
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Spain
E-mail:ccarreras@uoc.edu

ABSTRACT
As a part of the cultural offer of the Forum of Cultures, held in Barcelona in summer 2004, the
organisers designed an exhibition called Voices focused on diversity, one of the thematic axis of the
Forum. The central objective of Voices was to celebrate the fact of human communication and linguistic
and cultural diversity. Apart from the presential exhibition, and taken advantage of the use of media as
one of the themes, a virtual version of the exhibition Voices was created. This work is the result of an
agreement between the exhibition organizers of the Fourm of Cultures, and the group Òliba (Dept.
Humanities of the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC) with the collaboration of the Multimedia Studies
of the same University.
Keywords: Exhibition, virtual reality, multimedia, online, education.

1. INTRODUCTION
As part of the cultural offer of the Forum of
Cultures held in Barcelona in 2004, the organisers
designed an exhibition called Voices dedicated to
world diversity in languages. The main aim of the
exhibition Voices was to celebrate human communication
and linguistic and cultural diversity.
Likewise, the exhibition wanted to reflect conditions
of individual and collective freedom, which are the
basis of the needed dialogues amongst cultures.
Reflection should allow us to ask for compromise
and individual responsibility in order to make possible
communication from equality and plurality. Consequently,
it is thought as a laudatory of any form of freedom
of expression and pluralism: languages, cultures,
viewpoints, media, ideologies, and geographic areas...
plurality of voices.
The exhibition was an own production of the
Forum 2004. Voices exhibition is a bid for knowledge
92

of the world linguistic diversity, whose organizer
was Vicenç Villatoro and was designed by the New
York studio of Ralph Appelbaum.
Apart from the presential exhibition, and taking
advantage of the subject of media use, it was
thought to include a virtual side of the exhibition
Voices. This work is the result of a agreement
between organizers of the presential exhibition as
part of the Cultures Forum 2004 and group Òliba
(Open University of Catalonia (UOC), http://oliba.uoc.edu)
with the collaboration of Multimedia Degree (GMMD,
UOC, http://www.uoc.edu/mosaic).
The project definition started in May 2003, with
the initial aim to include all ideas generated by
organisers and advisors (Jesús Tusón, Enric Marín,
Carme Junyent), with a different treatment from the
presential. The first structure of contents consisted
of three spheres: Signs, focusing on non-verbal
communication forms; Voices, showing language
diversity and evolution; and Networks, analysing
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

and interactives which were difficult to reproduce in
the real life, and favour itineraries to different kind
of people.
If the presential visit calculates an average of
15 to 60 minutes, the virtual exhibit can last for
hours. Normally, it is a space to come back since
information cannot be only accessed in one virtual
visit. It requires participation, in other words active
learning through interaction (manual, mental and
emotional) in diverse content capsules in which
website is organised. Such possibility to deepen in
contents through interaction has become one of the
main aims of the virtual exhibit, since physical
space did not allow it.

Figure 1.

Videos of the presential exhibition that
reproduce some world languages.

importance of media. This conceptual structure of
contents should have been maintained in the
museographic design of presential exhibition, whose
original venue was the Forum Building. Unfortunately,
the venue shifted to the Convention Centre, so the
whole museographic project had to change and
reduced the three spheres to only one, Voices.
Despite this change, the virtual exhibition maintained
the initial exhibition structure with three spheres,
and they were developed in small pieces as content
capsules. Every capsule contains basic concepts
and ideas developed by organiser and advisors.
This means that despite coming from the same
conceptual structure, both presential and virtual
exhibitions presented different versions and were
complementary to each other.

On the other hand, the presential exhibit played
with formal resources, chiefly audio-visuals and creating
atmospheres. The central point of the exhibit was
a semi sphere of 28 curved screens, playing a video
of 12 minutes in coordination. Besides, there were
60 screens surrounding the whole exhibit playing
videos of people saying hello in 60 languages. Also,
the venue included 20 interactive tables for automatic
translation or watching TV programmes from all
over the world. One of this interactive table included
the section Voices in its virtual version.
Another main objective of the virtual exhibit
was attracting people to the presential exhibit. That

On the other hand, the presential exhibition
was dominated by audio-visual, so public was not
expected to invest much time in reading texts and
looking at graphic contents and interactives. Part
of this content was employed in the virtual exhibition.
Therefore, the philosophy of virtual space was to
complement the presential exhibition the best as
possible.

2. WEB OBJECTIVES
As was mentioned, the main aim of the virtual
exhibition website was complementing information
of presential exhibit, including all the textual and
image documentation. On the other hand, it takes
advantage of multimedia to create environments
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Figure 2. Main video of the exhibition in a semi
sphere of 12 m.
93

is why it was thought to open the website few
months before the opening of the Forum on the 9th
May 2004. As the time went by, organisers decided
to postpone the website presentation in order to
keep some kind of surprise. Therefore, the opportunity
was lost to prepare public with the website contents
to the presential visit. Moreover, there were apprehensions
that the virtual exhibit could compete with the presential
exhibit, though both were complementary.
Exhibitions websites are still threatening for
Spanish museologists, who are afraid that public
will not come to presential exhibits if there is a
virtual alternative. On the contrary, experience suggests
that virtual exhibitions magnify presential ones and
make available complementary documentation for a
better comprehension. Unfortunately, we could not
test this hypothesis with the exhibition Voices since
the opening coincided with the presential one.
Another aim of the website was facilitating the
understanding of language diversity for students
and undergraduates through technology and in a
funny way. That is why; there is a good selection
of interactive games to learn by playing some topics
from the exhibit. Besides, these content capsules
were recreated in a comic environment to make
contents closer to this group of age. Organisers
have not always thought about secondary schools
students and undergraduates, so content not language
make exhibit suitable for younger people.
As always a virtual resource is created in Internet,
this fact favours dissemination to places and in
times in which normally it is difficult to do it. Breaking
time and space variables supposes a potential to
reach international public from anywhere, who may
not be able to access the presential exhibit. That
is why the website was translated to four languages
(Catalan, Spanish, French and English), with an
aim of making it as available as possible.

3. QUESTIONS OF DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUES
Since the conceptual structure was based on
three ambits and a total of 64 particular concepts,
each of them was described in a multimedia content
capsule. Contents of each capsule rather depend
on material available.
Therefore, each content capsule had an explicit
aim and provided contents (textual, graphic, video,
audio), to which a script gave a coherent story.
With those elements, a series of interactive were
created to represent content capsules. All of them
94

Figure. 3 Presentation in Flash of the exhibit website.

are very heterogeneous in form and contents, so
they appear in a new open window. The only way
to keep homogeneity was common style norms
(colours, font, backgrounds and icons).
The virtual exhibition was an excellent chance
to work together with students from the Multimedia
degree, who had created 15 out of 64 stops. Some
of the spectacular ones were created by those
students. It was attempted to keep some balance
so there are light capsules of content with only
images and textual quotes, as diaporamas.
The use of a good number of animations (in
either Flash or DHTML) makes exhibition available
in Explorer 5.5 (the most common browser in 2004
in 95 per cent cases) with a standard screen of
800x600, common at that time. Despite this effort,
it was realised that it is not accessible to everyone,
and do not fulfill basic WAI norms of accessibility.
Script conditions that included animations and the
lack of resources made impossible follow WAI norms
and make a space for universal accessibility.
There are some outstanding content capsules
for their animations such as Dance (Signs), Enriching
(Voices) or Public opinion (Networks). In other cases,
students have worked with comic images in order
to explain an idea such as the case of Borrowings
(Voices), Compromise (Voices) and one language
(Voices).
In other cases, content capsules showed videos
of some linguistic practices, recovering of languages
such as Heritage (Voices), Language wood (Voices),
Minorities (Voices) or Oral Library (Signs). Videos
were available online in swf format of Flash that
allows partial download of files while they are played
(streaming). In some other cases audio files (mpg)
were employed such as Dialects and languages
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

(Voices). Today all these troubles would have been
solved with applications such as YouTube with streaming
servers for video also in Adobe Flash.
As it is said earlier, the whole virtual exhibit
was organised according to three thematic axes
(Signs, Voices and Networks). However, this made
exhibit even more difficult since there were three
alternative menus to access the same 64 content
capsules. To some extent, such three menus reflect
the way each of us relates concepts and ideas.
Everyone should be identified according to its way
to navigate. Thereby, people who navigate in a
connected way linking between lines and capsules
may choose the menu Itineraries, which represents
a transport network. Other people navigate as if
they were in a galaxy with different planets that act
as satellites and follow orbits around others, may
choose the menu Universe. Finally, the ones who
prefer structured ways will probably choose the
menu Index.
Apart from the three main menus, a series of
complementary spaces exist such as Games, Credits,
Forums, Guestbook, Evaluation and 2004.
The space Games gathers all funny resources
created for kids and appears in diverse capsules
of content. Doing so, an individualised itinerary
was defined for a particular visitor profile. The title
Credits include all the people involved in the creation
of these virtual spaces and resources employed.
In the section Forums, it was planned to include
open discussions organised on the basis of previous
readings and with help of moderators. For a qualitative
evaluation of the virtual exhibit, two transversal

spaces were created: a guestbook where anyone
could leave their opinion and an Evaluation with an
open questionnaire for virtual visitors. Finally, there
is a space called 2004, kept for including other
resources related to the presential exhibit before
its closure on the 26th September 2004.

4. AN ALTERNATIVE MODEL
At conceptual level, the virtual exhibition of
Voices supposes a new way of working from the
starting ideas of exhibition organizers. Most proposals
cannot go forward by economic reasons, space or
others. However, virtual exhibition can overcome
such problems since they inhabit a flexible space.
To some extent, both exhibitions steam from
the same origin, though they take different way or
paths at a very early stage. Such common origin
provides some coherence to the museographic
discourse, though there are clear differences in
between.
Every original idea of organisers and advisors
became a group of virtual objects and narrative that
represent them. In the presential exhibit, those
ideas were reproduced in audio-visuals, some of
them in excellent quality. For instance, the central
audio-visual of 12 min displayed in 28 screens
forming a semi sphere of 12 m high can be difficult
to reproduce in the virtual world [ Deloche defended
that art means to show sensitivity through artifacts,
and distinguishes a relationship between the aesthetic
sphere (object—sensitive thing and the sensitive
process), museality (object—showing thing and process
of showing) and virtual (object—artifact and process
of substitution)] 1. However, its effect is difficult to
reproduce in other venue, so Voices could not be
a temporary exhibit visiting other cities.
This core idea of diversity appears all over the
virtual exhibit with capsules that include linguistic
maps, alphabets or symbols. Therefore, the message
is the same at heart between both exhibits, but
objects chosen and means of communication are
completely different.

Figure 4. Navigation menu reproducing a transport
network to access any capsules of content.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Besides, the presential exhibit has some interactive
such as an automatic translator, but most elements
are audio-visuals and graphics. On the contrary,
the virtual exhibition is based on interactive animations
and dioparamas that expect an active visitor, i.e.
Borrowing or Enriching [Playing with manual Interaction,
in other words experimenting with the object properties
or phenomena, and the mental one, bringing about
intellectual reflection facing particular situations
95

that some terms were so wide that it was difficult
to put them at the top of the search engines. Effectiveness
of such words was tested previously also without
much success 2. Once, meta tags were defined, a
systematic dissemination with the help of the program
Addweb 6.0 was carried out.
Advancing some of the evaluation results, one
of the searching words to reach this website was
pictogram, though it does not turn up amongst the
first 10 sites in Google. Both the title of the exhibit
“Voices” and Forum is widely used term in Internet,
so it was difficult to position this website in the
network.
Figure 5. Representation of a content capsule of Borrowings.

(i.e. memory, decision taking …)] 2. Furthermore, we
looked for more participation of youngsters by using
games and comic images.
Due to the high flexibility of this medium, the
virtual exhibition allowed us to incorporate other
resources already created in Internet, so visitors
could follow navigation on subjects such as human
communication and linguistic and cultural diversity.
There are examples of a Braille translator online or
questions about gesture language.
For all those people who enjoyed both exhibitions,
and also expressed their opinion in our questionnaires
and guestbook, combination of presential and virtual
exhibits was suitable. On the one hand, the presential
exhibit is a sensorial experience, in which people
do not invest much time (an average of 20-30 minutes),
and do not take advantage of all the contents available
in the interactives. The presential exhibition appeal
visual and audio senses, and does not care much
about interaction and reflection. Such two aspects,
interaction and reflection, are fostered by the virtual
space, that is why visiting the website is recommended
before and after the presential visit.

5. SELECTIVE AND GENERAL DISSEMINATION OF THE SPACE
If the initial idea was opening the virtual exhibit
in February 2004 in order to facilitate awareness
about the presential exhibit, organisers decided to
make the opening of both exhibits at the same time.
Thereby, the first opening of the virtual was on the
9th May 2004.
To favour access by search engines, a series
of meta tags were defined identifying all the sections
and content capsules from the website. It was realised
96

With the aim of broadening dissemination, the
press cabinet from the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
and Forum 2004 send some press notes. The first
news about the website appeared in the newspapers
or virtual spaces such as Monografias.com—the
first virtual community in Spanish. The press notes
appeared in the portals of the University (http://
www.uoc.edu) and the Forum 2004 (http://veus.
barcelona2004. org) also. As always happens in
these cases, during the time that website appeared
on the media, accesses to website increased a lot
(EuropaPress, Agenda cultural de la Generalitat, El
Diari de Barcelona, El Punt, LaMalla.Net, Yahoo,
BarcelonaActiva).
In August (summer time) 2004 there was a
complete coverage of the virtual exhibit in the University
portal (http:// www.uoc.edu). However, the University
community is normally on holidays at that time, so
such advert did not make much influence in the
dissemination.
Together with such strategy of dissemination,
a selective dissemination to institutions that were
believed could be interested in this kind of resources
such as Voices was carried out. Support of Internet
portals of museum such as musealia (http://
www.musealia.com), educative portals such as
Aprendemas (http://www.aprendemas.com) or Educar
(http://www.educ.ar) or solidarity portals (http://
www.canalsolidario.com) was immediately received.
Besides, it was also sent to the regional educative
portal (http://www.xtec.es) since this resource was
basically aimed to attract local students. After 15
days of dissemination through different media, the
virtual visitors were basically local public (logins
from Spain.es) using Spanish and Catalan as main
languages. Probably, dissemination on local media
was responsible for that. On the contrary, there
were a few French and English visitors, probably
due to scarce awareness of the Forum 2004 abroad.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

A serious drawback for dissemination was that
the opening of the virtual exhibit coincided with the
end of the school and University courses. On 16th
May the information was sent to the regional network
of education (Xarxa Telemàtica Educativa de Catalunya
–(XTEC), though they could not update their portal
until the 27th May, at the end of primary and secondary
school courses. Some teachers were interested in
the virtual Voices, so asked if they could access
the following course. Adapting the virtual exhibit
opening to the educational public should have increased
the resource potential and use, so it is highly recommended
to adapt virtual opening to the education calendar 2 .
Following Bellido’s words 3 is not a question
that the virtual visit could substitute the real one in
the classroom, but improving it. Therefore, there is
no competition between presential and virtual exhibits,
only a complementary and alternative way to access
information following a particular narrative.
As is said before, part of the content of the
virtual exhibition was undertaken by Multimedia Degree
students, who have done their own dissemination
amongst classmates and professionals. Besides,
the own digital journal of the Multimedia Department
called Mosaic (http://www.uoc.edu/mosaic/entrevistas/
gmmd0604.html) conducted a series of interviews
with students who took part in the experience [in
the same journal was an interview with one of the
organisers of the presential exhibition and coordinator
of the virtual one, Teresa Férriz (http://www.uoc.edu/
mosaic/entrevistas/teresa0604.html)].

6. VIRTUAL PUBLIC TO THE EXHIBIT
AND WEBSITE EVALUATION
Before starting discussing accesses to the virtual
resource, it must be pointed out that timing was not
the best one for dissemination and virtual access
since it coincided with summer holidays. It has
been detected in all our virtual projects that number
of virtual visitors decrease in holiday periods (June
to September in Spain) when leisure activities outside
increases instead 4 .
According to the Spanish AIMC (Research
Association of Media) in May 2004, most Internet
users in Spain access Internet from their jobs (31,
7 per cent ), Universities or schools (20,1 per cent )
or home (10,6,3 per cent ). In summer time, when
educational and working centers are close, and
people move from their homes, Internet access becomes
more complicated through cyber cafes or alternative
places. Therefore, there is a drop in activity in the
network.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

Such low activity is reflected in some statistics
of logins to the Voices virtual exhibit, obtained from
the program AWStats and WebAlizer. In terms of
number of virtual visitors, the exhibit received 2551
visitors in May, 2797 in June, 1271 in July, 1638
in August and 1016 in September 2004. AWStasts
records this drop of accesses from the opening in
May to the closure of the Forum in September
2004, coinciding with the summer season. With
regards to the number of pages visited (Table 1)
numbers go from 14,915 in May to 2,820 in September
2004 from Spanish visitors.
The visitors origin also refers to the web
dissemination, since it only had a national dissemination.
That was a general critic made to the Forum 2004,
where the event was hardly known outside our frontiers
despite attempting to be a universal fair (only 7, 4
per cent of visitors were foreigners). The low percentage
of foreign visitors to the presential exhibition as
well as the access to the website is strange as the
Table 1 shows. Compare to other experiences 4, the
low percentage of American visitors is striking who
normally accounts for 10-20 per cent of the logins
in our projects. In this case, we believe that the
Forum calendar as well as the dissemination market
could have much better.
Digital resources online have a long life. Therefore,
we expected that such virtual exhibition could have
more visitors afterwards. The same happened to our
other projects such as the exhibition Aureum Opus
(http://oliba.uoc.edu/aureum) or the Boi valley portal2 .
Figure 6 gives a general idea of access to the
virtual exhibition from visitors of the 12 main countries.
Early visitors were basically Spanish, but as soon
as the exhibit was known there were access from
foreign countries such as Germany, France, Great
Britain (our typical tourist in summer), South American
countries (Mexico, Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Colombia,
Venezuela), and USA.
Besides, this access distribution is also confirmed
by logins since most access use Spanish or Catalan
as main language (90 per cent approximately), even
visitors from USA. In May 2004, most virtual visitors
were in Spanish language (47 per cent) followed by
Catalan (43 per cent), English (5 per cent) and
French (3 per cent). In September, results were
similar, though main community were Catalan speakers
(52 per cent) ahead of Spanish speakers (37 per
cent), English (9 per cent) and French (1 per cent).
Taking into account the number of speakers of every
language in the world, it is obvious that our virtual
97

Table 1. Sample of the number of pages accessed during May-September 2004 from the
exhibit VOICES (AWStats statistics)
Countries

May

June

August

September

14915

13178

1020

320

9577

4675

2820

221

242

83

Mexico

531

108

125

104

226

Great Britain

517

Argentina

409

134

98

345

32

66

157

154

42

USA

393

425

250

181

110

Uruguay

330

323

142

340

94

France

225

153

132

190

16

Brasil

160

121

116

243

101

Colombia

128

64

8

409

25

Portugal

120

226

418

126

119

Venezuela

113

45

62

101

4

Switzerland

74

15

74

19

2

Chile

Spain
Germany

67

78

90

147

215

Slovenia

0

166

0

1

0

Andorra

60

132

0

1

16

Netherlands

49

113

28

85

28

Italy

53

87

40

41

391

Canada

5

0

81

27

0

Sweden

16

25

52

79

841

Ireland

1

0

14

215

0

Perú
Belgium

0
32

65
4

4
4

104
4

0
190

exhib it had a very local dissemination in 2004.
Therefore, we did not take advantage of a global
media such as Internet.
It has been argued the Forum 2004 portal (http://
www.barcelona2004.org/) did not help much to disseminate
the virtual exhibit, which was hidden and without
any care about crawlers and robots [in our test of
usability none could find our website through the
Forum portal, what was a terrible design (http://
www.barcelona2004.org/cat/eventos/exposiciones/
ficha.cfm? IdEvento= 129&IdTipo Pest=1)]. Only few
visitors could reach by clicking to a gif that read
Virtual exhibition. Again the coordination with the
presential organisers has not been as good as expected.
Another potential reason for the lack of foreign virtual
visitors was the quality of translations in English
and French carried out by the Forum 2004, some
virtual visitors had complained in their messages as
recorded by Vicente 5 .
Vicente has been the person responsible for
evaluating the website and comparing it to the presential

98

July

one. She has employed qualitative and quantitative
methods by analysing data from presential visitors
and logins with statistical packages such as Webalizer
and AWStats. Besides, evaluation has been completed
with a virtual questionnaire with a low participation
(0,1 per cent of virtual visitors) something normal
in Internet. Opinions are also recorded in the guestbook
(http://oliba.uoc.edu/forum2004/ca/guestbook/index.php)
of the own website.
One of the most outstanding facts is that more
than 54 per cent of the virtual visitors had already
visited the presential exhibit. Therefore, it means
that both versions are complementary, and the virtual
visitors were people who mostly have enjoyed the
real version. In some cases, the virtual visitors
rather preferred the virtual versions as it is said in
the guestbook: “...exhibition in the Forum appeared
me poor, however the website is quite interesting,
you have done a good job, congratulations ” (11/07/
2004, M.A.). Anyway, there has been normal coincidence
in assessing both exhibits with similar values.”

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

16000
14000
12000

May

10000

June

8000

July

6000

August

4000

September

2000
0
la
zue
ne
Ve
l
ga
rtu
Po
bia
lom
Co
sil
Bra
nce
Fra
y
gua
Uru
A
US
tina
en
in
Arg
rita
tB
ea
Gr
o
xic
Me
any
rm
Ge
ain
Sp

Figure 6. Graphic with number of page accesses according to country in 2004 (AWStats).

For instance, a virtual questionnaire made for
the presential exhibit Voices (http://www.barcelona2004.
org/cat/eventos/exposiciones/ficha.cfm?IdEvento=129&Id
TipoPest=3) with rates between 1 to 4 for a total
of 236 people, the exhibit reaches a rate of 3,3.
Sixty-seven per cent of the people who answered
the questionnaire gave it the maximum rate 4 [amongst
ranking of events valued in the interviews, the presential
exhibit Voices is not one of the top 30. Most valued
events are music concerts, theatre performances or
cuisine. Only one exhibition, Living in the World,
is the choice: 18th (rating 3,57 with 793 votes)] 6 .
Similar to this result is the rate of the virtual exhibition
in which 63,23 per cent say that the virtual resource
is good or very good (35 per cent consider very
good). With regards to critics, they concentrate in
formal aspects such as orthographic errors and
translations in French and English.
The visitors to the virtual exhibit were basically
students and tourists. They reached the virtual exhibition
by navigating through Internet (39,7 per cent), only
16 per cent by media and 4,41 per cent by search
engines (basically Google). They could hardly find
information from the virtual exhibit in the presential
one, so it did not help to disseminate it 5 .
With regards to number of visitors, presential
exhibition received more than 800.000 people. It
must be born in mind that buying a ticket for the
Forum 2004 included a series of free events, such
as four exhibits: Quiang warriors, Living in the World,
Corners and Voices. All four received around one
million one-hundred thousand visitors 6 . The virtual
exhibit only received 8.000 visitors in the same
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

time, since September 2004 up to now has received
around 100.000 visitors.
As was mentioned, virtual exhibitions enjoyed
long lives. For instance, the website received 30.000
visitors in 2006, and the main accesses came from
countries such as USA, South Korea or Arab Emirates,
while Spanish visitors were the fourth group. Therefore,
the website has become more international over the
time, and visitors normally come through searching
engines. Some of the visits are very short in time,
as if they were only searching for particular information
and not browsing all over the resource. We believe
it has become a virtual archive of the world linguistic
diversity existing in 2004.
The data of 2007 is quite similar to the previous
years, though there is a decline in the numbers of
virtual visitors. Perhaps it is the end of its virtual
cycle…

7. CONCLUSION
The virtual exhibition Voices is a good example
of advantages and disadvantages of virtual exhibits.
Any virtual application in heritage should complement
real activities or infrastructures, because this is a
key point for success. Competition between real
and virtual exhibits generates more problems than
real advantages. Timing of opening and dissemination
is also a key issue that affects potential public and
results in online exhibits. Finally, it must be borne
in mind that virtual exhibits enjoy a long life depending
on the quality of contents and the way it is designed,
despite possible changes in technology.
99

REFERENCES
1. Deloche, B. El museo virtual . Gijón, 2001.

4. Carreras, C. & Munilla, G. Patrimonio digital .
Barcelona, 2005.

2. Carreras, C. “Claves de difusión de exposiciones:
Narrowcasting (difusión selectiva) vs broadcasting
(divulgación). En Jornadas de Patrimonio.es,
2004.

5. Vicente, M. Veus: virtualidad y presencialidad
en los recursos museográficos. Evaluación de
la exposición Veus del Forum BCN 2004 (Unpublished
Final Degree Assignment, Humanities, UOC),
2005.

3. Bellido, M.L. 2001 Arte, museos y nuevas
tecnologías. Gijón, 2001.

6. Dossier Dades Forum, (Unpublished interim report).
AAVV, 2004. Barcelona.

About the Author

Cèsar Carreras is currently a Junior Lecturer in the Department of Humanities of the Universitat
Oberta de Catalunya (UOC), Spain. He holds a PhD in Ancient History (1995) from the University of
Barcelona (Spain), another PhD in Archaeology (1994) from the University of Southampton (UK) and
MSc in Archaeological Computing (1991) from the University of Southampton (UK). Nowadays, he
is lecturing computer applications in the Department of Humanities and Ancient History in the University.
Besides, he is co-director of the research group Òliba (http://oliba.uoc.edu), whose main aim is the
evaluation of applications of ICT to cultural heritage. He is coordinating and taking part in different
European projects such as COINE (Cultural Objects in Networked Environments) and Project SEE ArchWeb (an interactive web-based presentation of Southeastern European Archaeology).

100

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(4)

