DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 5-12
© 2008, DESIDOC

Knowledge Sharing through Intranet
M. Natarajan
National Institute of Science Communication & Information Resources
14, Satsang Vihar Marg, New Delhi-110 067
E-mail: m_natarajan@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
The article describes the Intranet, knowledge and knowledge sharing (KS) with the key considerations
of Intranet. The different types of KS like professional knowledge, coordinating knowledge, object-based
knowledge and know-how are discussed. A modular approach for Intranet has been explained with the
perspectives of managing Intranet through cyclical activity. The contents, which may be shared on
Intranet, are exhaustively outlined, while emphasing on the relevancy of information content on it. In
addition, the different categories of information to be included for KS like news, directories, reports,
agreements, training material, etc., are mentioned. Some of the examples are given where, KS has been
implemented. The benefits of Intranet for KS are given in detail with the problems of KS also. It is
concluded that KS is an emerging area and all organisations/departments must share their resources
in a fast way.
Keywords: knowledge sharing, Intranet, knowledge management, professional knowledge

1. INTRODUCTION
The concept of knowledge management (KM),
the aspects of information communication technology
(ICT), intellectual capital and people management
have received wide attention from academics and
practitioners in the past 10 years. Human behaviour
is the key to success or failure of KM strategies.
KM involves an emphasis on organisations; culture,
teamwork, the promotion of learning and sharing of
skills, experience and knowledge. The explicit knowledge
can be articulated in written and oral forms, and
easily acquired, transferred and shared, while tacit
knowledge is troublesome and difficult to articulate,
describe and communicate. KM is focused on operational
issues, while some others emphasise on conceptual
issues. However, organisations are sharing their knowledge
across people and management. Knowledge sharing
(KS) is of vital importance, enabling to develop skills
and competencies, increase value and sustain their
competitive advantage. It is a prerequisite for developing
new techniques and products. Also, the ability to
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

share knowledge between units contributes significantly
to the performance of the organisations. Intranets
are often cited as one of the pragmatic routes to
promoting KS, as an essential part of KM strategy.
This article focus on the opportunities and the Intranet
management practices to increase their usability
and KS capability.

2. INTRANET
Intranets have emerged as one of today's most
effective ways of sharing information and knowledge
in organisations. They act as the nervous and circulatory
systems for a company, supporting business processes
as well as the flow of information. An Intranet has
been defined by Parks as "a private computer network
based on the data communication standards and
technologies of the public Internet". Curry and Stancich
defined an Intranet as a private computing network,
internal to an organisation, allowing access only to
authorised users. Blackmore described an Intranet
as simply a means of exploiting Internet technologies
5

within an organisation-based computer environment
to aid the progression towards the seamless navigation
of both Internet-based and inhouse-generated learning
materials.
From the above definitions, an Intranet can be
defined as a network that uses Internet concepts
and technologies within an organisation in order to
be accessed by employees to share knowledge. In
addition, such knowledge is stored electronically
and access is usually controlled by password.

Knowledge has been suggested as the prime
mechanism for economic value creation, thereby
sparking a keen interest in managing and controlling
it. In general knowledge-focused activities are:
Generating new knowledge.
Accessing valuable knowledge from outside sources.
Using accessible knowledge in decision making.
Facilitating knowledge growth through culture
and incentives.

3. KEY CONSIDERATIONS
An Intranet can be regarded both as an information
and strategic management tool in the context of
KM. First, Intranet is a network based on the Intranet
protocol TCP/IP and runs common Internet applications.
Secondly, it is private network, granting access on
a selective basis and finally they do not address any
specific well-defined need. The term Intranet also
covers a variety of mobile and remote work environments1.
The key considerations for the Intranet are:
Web management on/of the Intranet site.
Ease the webmaster/publishing bottleneck by
devolving management of content to library groups.
Acts as an information structure and submission
system to ensure regular updating and user
confidence in the content.
Managers and staff must be able to contribute,
update and manage content on the site without
specialist skills such as HTML skills.
Support easy workflow to be able to submit,
approve, publish, review, retract and finally remove
content.
Schedule when content goes live and when it
is to be removed.
A role-based security model to control who can
change what.
Ability to build pages automatically with consistent
headers and footers.
Tag the content with metadata to facilitate finding
information.
2

Storage and searching both content and metadata .
Intranets also offer new ways to manage and
communicate data, information and knowledge.
6

4. KNOWLEDGE AND KS

Monitoring the value of knowledge assets and/
or impact of knowledge management, etc 3 .
From the literature 4,5, KM can be operationally
defined as a process of collecting and identifying
useful information (i.e., knowledge acquisition), enabling
employees to retrieve organisational knowledge including
orphaned knowledge (i.e. organising knowledge),
exploiting and usefully applying knowledge (i.e. knowledge
leverage), disseminating it through the whole organisation
(i.e. KS) and storing the knowledge in a repository
(i.e. organisational memory). KS is, hence, not solely
linked to work that has been done, and that has
been benchmarked, but also to work that is being
done. It becomes a process bridging situations of
organisational interdependencies in ongoing activities.
Bartol and Srivastava 6 defined KS as the action
in which employees diffuse relevant information to
others across the organisation. According to Bock
and Kim, KS has been considered the most important
part of KM. The ultimate goal of sharing employees'
knowledge is its transfer to organisational assets
and resources. As Inkpen puts it, ''unless individual
knowledge is shared throughout an organisation,
the knowledge will have a limited impact on organisational
effect. The goal of KS can either to create new
knowledge by differently combining existing knowledge
or to become better at exploiting existing knowledge7.
KS is defined as the process intended at exploiting
existing knowledge, and hence defined as being
about identifying existing and accessible knowledge,
in order to transfer and apply this knowledge to
solve specific tasks better, faster and cheaper than
they would otherwise have been solved.
Knowledge sharing is also to be understood as
a process of bridging organisational interdependencies
inherent in ongoing organisational activities. Viewing
KS as a process of bridging organisational
interdependencies expands our understanding of what
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

types of knowledge are at stake in KS, and what
channels are best suited for sharing knowledge. KS
is the process by which individuals collectively and
iteratively refine a thought, an idea or a suggestion
in the light of experiences. The original idea may be
progressively modified or gradually rejected until a
shared perspective emerges. Knowledge can be shared
through face-to-face interactions, synchronous and
asynchronous communication using an electronic
knowledge repository. The degree of explicitness of
knowledge shared is influenced by the media richness
of the communication channels used.
First, the empirical setting is introduced, then
the four types of knowledge, viz., professional knowledge
(PK), coordinating knowledge, object-based knowledge
and know-who is identified. Then the type of knowledge
is related to situations of interdependencies for KS.
The PK basically describes knowledge that enables
the operation supporter to perform the job. PK is
limited to the practice of being an operation supporter,
and has also been referred to as know-how. It originates
from a person's formal education in combination
with the experience in performing job. It is a prerequisite
for being able as a specialist to contribute to organisational
activities, but in itself it does not produce any
organisational outcome 8 .
Coordinating knowledge is embedded in rules,
standards and routines for how jobs are supposed
to be performed. It guides the application, for instance
PK, in order to secure the efficient transformation
of input to organisational output. In other words,
coordinating knowledge shapes who is going to perform
what and when not necessarily how (which is rather
guided by the PK).
Object-based knowledge is knowledge related
to a certain object passing through the production

line of the company. In situations of interdependencies
the central organisational task is clustering the contribution
from various specialists (and their specialised knowledge).
Often, the combination of specialised knowledge
and coordinating knowledge is applied to a certain
object such as a patient, a machine or a customer.
Know-who is knowledge about where knowledge exists.
It enables the identification of who might be able to
help solve specific problems. These four types of
knowledge are all a prerequisite for organisational
activities, since they all emphasise that knowledge
is being shared as a means for efficiently transforming
an input to an organisational output.

5. BUILDING THE INTRANET
A collaborative, open environment is essential
to encourage and foster networking and information
sharing. The Intranet should be viewed as a strategic
tool that helps the organisation to achieve its objectives.
Wherever in the organisation, the responsibility for
the coordination of this system ultimately resides,
it needs to be managed like any other business
activity involving a cyclical process 9 as shown in
Fig. 1.
A modular approach to the design of the Intranet
on an experimental basis has to be done and then
it may be extended gradually to meet the needs of
all the library groups. The site framework consists
of an Intranet homepage of common areas of interest
to all library staff, and links to several library group
areas. This requires a portal, which has to be set
up for each area, and each of the library group
portals will be customised in terms of colour and
content requirements. Existing content has to be
prioritised and then to be migrated to the new site
over a period of time 10 .

Collection
and Organisation

Planning and
Direction

Analysis and
Evaluation

Marketing
Figure 1. Intranet management.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

7

6. CONTENTS FOR KS
The library Intranet aims to deliver content, which
is important to all our users. All the staff is invited,
to contribute content, ideas and to assist with this
process so as to help, identify working needs such
as sharing of minutes from a meeting, finding an
important document, adding a photograph to a document,
evaluation information on a training event, and open
management. The content needs to be managed
carefully so that it is always fresh and up to date;
and concentrates on sharing best practices, and the
"how was it done factor".
The library groups may have the following objectives
for the Intranet:
Providing a repository for documents.
Offering a searchable and browseable collection
of documents and web pages.
Obtaining policies, procedures, forms.
Disseminating reports to staff, and eventually
to the rest of the members.
Finding out about current projects, conferences,
and training opportunities.
Supporting discussion particularly planning events,
scenario planning.
Identifying knowledge gaps.

Searching on library related topics, e.g., metadata,
digitisation, KM, etc.
Accessing database information, white pages
(staff directory).
Workflow-check new content before it is published,
control versions.
Events calendar, shared group diaries.
Linking to related library information, e.g., LISA,
(Library & Information Science Abstracts), library
and technology news feeds, etc.
Apart from the technical elements, primarily
two issues are coincident with activity levels. First,
relevant information has to be put on the Intranet at
regular intervals. The users of Intranet tries to put
on data and demand others to do so. It demands
for high activity and expectations. Second, the Intranet's
contribution to maintaining a work culture among
the people is more important. The Intranet generates
a kind of consensual knowledge. Different users
can, wherever they are spatially, go into familiar, a
mutual trust and get a feeling of belonging, i.e.,
bringing people together, to get a feeling of coming
closer to each other.

7. CATEGORIES OF INFORMATION
The types of information, which can be made
available on Intranet, can be grouped as:

Fitting in with working needs.

News: all matters concerning staff.

E-mail alerting feature whereby someone has
registered that they are interested in a particular
area, and wants to know when new information
or resources are available.

Directories: a list of contact details of personnel.

De-skilling the publishing process to enable
staff to focus on content and keep to the library
style.

Annual budget: annual budget of the enterprise
provided by the mother organisation.
Reports: feedback on activities, meetings, business
and seminars.
Agreements: for example, between the institution
and vendors or partners.

Personalising the service.
Collecting feedback.
Logging usage.

Archives: repository of information stored and
organised for easy retrieval.
Policies: principles of action adopted or proposed
by the organisation.

Finding performance indicators.

8

Publishing news, e.g., connections (library's monthly
newsletter), news from the library groups.

Templates of letters: kept centrally and can be
completed. Data can be sent through or a print
out generated.

Monitoring new developments, e.g., technology
and web watch.

Management information: messages from top
management can be made available on the Intranet
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Training materials: training materials and policies
can be linked using the actual electronic documents.

It is concluded that aligning KS with the organisation
culture require:

Electronic magazines: refers to magazines, which
are available online or stored in electronic format.

(i)

Forms: includes application forms for employment,
experiential training, leave, and conference attendance.
Discussion forums: tools which facilitate interactive
communication via the Intranet, allowing all users
to contribute their knowledge.
Bulletin boards: an information source where
notices, announcement, brief news, and
advertisement are placed.
Points of interest: includes suggestions, comments,
recommendations as well as any matter of interest
which employees need to raise.
The above-mentioned categories of information
assist in sharing knowledge. Valuable records can
be stored in the archives and retrieved when needed.
Availability of such information can save time. It
improves productivity because, for example, employees
need not leave their offices to look for leave forms;
they can easily download the forms from their computers
in their offices.

8. ORGANISATIONAL CULTURE
Culture is defined as the shared values, benefits
and practices of the people in the organisations. It
is reflected in the visible aspects of the organisation,
like its mission and espoused values. It is rooted
in the organisation's core values and assumptions.
Following this definition, in an organisation with a
knowledge sharing culture, people would share ideas
and insights because they see it natural rather than
something they are forced to do. They would expect
it of each other and assume that sharing ideas is
the right thing to do. To those who know the core
values of the organisation, they speak volumes,
reinforcing the organisation's values 11 . Three of our
following findings relate to this visible dimension of
culture:
(i)

There is a visible link between sharing knowledge
and solving practical business problems.

(ii) The approach, tools and structures to support
knowledge sharing match the overall style of
the organisation.
(iii) Reward and recognition systems support sharing
knowledge.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

To create a KS culture, make a visible connection
between sharing knowledge and practical business
goals, problems or results.

(ii) It is far more important to match the overall
style of the organisation than to directly copy
the practices developed by other organisations.
To make sharing knowledge a natural step, think
through how effective change happens in the
organisation. Make the visible artifacts knowledge
sharing the events, language, websites match
the style of the organisation, even if you intend
to lead into new behaviour and approach.
(iii) Link sharing knowledge to widely held core values.
(iv) Human networks are one of the key vehicles for
sharing knowledge. To build a sharing culture,
enhance the networks that already exist. Enable
them with tools, resources, and legitimisation.
(v) Recruit the support of people in the organisation
who already share ideas and insights. Ask influential
people and managers to encourage and even
pressure people to share their knowledge. Build
sharing knowledge into routine performance appraisal.
Find the knowledge sharing networks that already
exist and build on the energy they already have12.

9. SOME EXAMPLES
KS can be viewed as an organisational innovation,
owning to its fundamental role in generating new
ideas and developing new business opportunities
through the socialisation and learning process of
knowledge workers. An important approach often
found to significantly influence organisational innovation
is the socio-technical perspective, which treats both
social and technical issues as equally important in
facilitating innovation. Although little research has
been conducted into the use of networked computers
to support knowledge-building among school students,
work by Hakkarainen13 and Hill, et al. provides evidence
of the merit of this approach, by finding positive
aspects to the use of networked computers for this
purpose. The effective study of a community engaged
in online knowledge-building is dependent upon a
suitable theory being used to frame it. Little research
has been done on the utilisation of an Intranet as
a KM tool in academic libraries, especially in South
Africa. Ford openly talks about the importance of
KS, conducts internal advertising and organises KS
events. Lotus works through informal teams to share
knowledge based on their business needs 14 .
9

Questions sharing and interactive assignments
(QSIA) offers a unified infrastructure for developing,
collecting, managing and sharing of knowledge items.
QSIA enhances collaboration in authoring via online
recommendations and generates communities of teachers
and learners. At the same time, QSIA fosters individual
learning and might promote high-order thinking skills
among its users. The system is based on open
standards, flexibility, privacy, open source, ease of
use and multi-community. It enables users to create
and edit different knowledge items such as questions
or learning tasks. Also, it acts as a web-tool and
permits easy accessibility to a variety of knowledge
databases that include written text, as well as interactive
multimedia such as music, video films, special simulations
and virtual tours to museums. It is a multi-lingual
system and has been used in English, Hebrew,
Arabic, and Turkish 15 .

10. BENEFITS OF INTRANET
Intranet provides an opportunity to bring new
value, new rewards, manage information in new ways.
The benefits and savings of the Intranet are:

Relieve the need for numerous paper-based forms
as they can be delivered, and submitted electronically.
Searches can be performed to find documents/
information including metadata (e.g. author, date,
keywords, etc.) searches.
One access point to the organisation's databases
which allows a remote worker to access the
knowledge available.
Alerts can be set up to notify users of new
content.
Topic lists, which identify virtual working groups
such as metadata, digitisation, personalisation,
will provide additional pathfinders to the right
people and content.
Information and data will remain accurate and
remain the same for all users accessing it.

The same document/information is shared by
staff.

The more Intranet progresses, the less paper
will be used.

Can be updated easily by any member of staff
who has the permission(s) to do so, with checks
such as version control in place.

Using an Intranet requires the organisation to
review and evaluate its working practices, and
this is a valuable exercise in itself.

Online discussions may prevent the need to
physically meet or can help before a meeting
and planning.
Sharing generic information on the Intranet can
lessen the amount of e-mail messages.
People should work smarter as they will find
information quicker and more easily.
Acts as an up-to-date information sharing area
and, therefore, the information is timely available.
Supports the project culture-keeps people upto-date, interaction, project content, templates
are available for project initiation, progress and
closure, best practice, exemplar projects, etc.
Documents can be mapped so that any related
documents can be linked or if staff read a particular
document then it may be possible to push them
towards other related documents or documents
which may be of interest to them.
Easy for staff to use as it uses familiar web
technology.
10

Information can be richer as it can incorporate
text, tables, graphics, sound, animation, and
multimedia with ease.

Thus, it is found that the Intranet as a KS tool
facilitates for speedy and effective communication
within an organisation.

11. PROBLEMS OF KS
Researchers seem to agree that the problems
of KS most often stem from social dilemmas, knowledge
dilemmas and a combination of the two, causing
behaviour of knowledge that is counterproductive-or
irrational-to the common good of the organisation.
Social dilemmas are also referred to as ''dilemmas
of the common good'' and ''public good dilemmas'',
while knowledge dilemmas refer to cognitive barriers
and epistemologically differences of knowledge, i.e.,
that knowledge can be either tacit or explicit, and
exist at either an organisational or individual level.
Some ways of overcoming the social and knowledge
dilemmas are believed to be increased financial
incentives, increased organisational efficacy, and a
KS culture. Broadly speaking, the social dilemmas
and knowledge dilemmas give rise to the following
five problems inherent in organisational KS:
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

(i)

The stickiness of knowledge: all sharing of knowledge
is to some extent sticky-but to the epistemologically
different faces of knowledge.

(ii) No common identity.
(iii) No relation between the receiver and sender of
knowledge.
(iv) Unwillingness to share knowledge.
(v) No knowledge of knowledge.

12. CONCLUSION
Intranet plays a central role in many organisations,
expanding the knowledge in the organisation. Running
an Intranet includes the ambition to manage it or,
at least, to make a decision not to. Managing the
activity level and letting relevant information circulate
are primary managerial concerns. To make an Intranet
a success, the users must discipline themselves.
They should also communicate problems of fulfilling
expectations of the Intranet's potential. Therefore,
organisations tend to support KS as if they were in
situations of pooled interdependency, but in the
words of Thompson this will eventually favour the
least costs to the increased instrumentality. Alternatively,
in other words, KS will most likely fail 15 .
If companies are to practice KS, they must
accept that getting started on sharing knowledge
requires thorough identification and analysis of the
problems that KS are supposed to be solved. This
analysis has to start with identifying organisational
interdependencies, and the flaws in bridging these
interdependencies. Different forms of interdependencies
involve different types of knowledge, and the sharing
of these types of knowledge is to be facilitated
differently. For global organisations, the implementation
of Intranets may be difficult to achieve, since in
some developing countries, Internet access is still
not reliable and bandwidth problems may hinder
their effective use. However, the evolution towards
a KS tool implies more than state-of-the-art technology.
People have to be motivated to share information
and knowledge. Most importantly, management needs
to examine their objectives for the use of Intranets
and develop a strategy for their development, which
is consistent with organisational goals.

REFERENCES
1. Edenius, Mats & Borgerson, Janet. To manage
knowledge by intranet. J. Knowl. Manage., 2003,
7(5), 124-36.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

2. Ramsden, Anne & Turpie, David. Managing the
intranet: Trying a new tool. Vine, 2001, 31(1),
36-45.
3. Ali, Yakhlef. The intranet and the management
of making and using skills. J. Knowl. Manage.,
2001, 5(4), 338-48.
4. Nonaka, I. The knowledge creating company.
Harvard Business Rev., 1991, 69(6), 96-104.
5. Rowley, J. From learning organisation to knowledge
entrepreneur. J. Knowl. Manage., 2000, 4(1), 715.
6. Bartol, K.M., & Srivastava, A. Encouraging knowledge
sharing: The role of organizational reward systems.
J. Leadership & Organis. Studies, 2002, 9(1),
64-76.
7. Yang, Jen-Te. Knowledge sharing: Investigating
appropriate leadership roles and collaborative
culture. Tourism Manage., 2007, 28, 530-43.
8. Christensen, Peter Holdt. Knowledge sharing:
Moving away from the obsession with best practices.
J. Knowl. Manage., 2007, 11(1), 36-47.
9. Stoddart, Linda. Managing intranets to encourage
knowledge sharing: Opportunities and constraints.
Online Inf. Rev., 2001, 25(1), 19-28.
10. Mphidi, Hamilton & Snyman, Retha. The utilization
of an intranet as a knowledge management tool
in academic libraries. The Electronic Lib., 2004,
22(5), 393-400.
11. Hill, C.; Cummings, M. & van Aalst, J. Activity
theory as a framework for analyzing participation
within a knowledge building community, 2003.
http://www.educ.sfu.ca/kb/Papers/Hill_Cummings.pdf.
12. McDermott, Richard & O'Dell, Carla. Overcoming
cultural barriers to sharing knowledge. J. Knowl.
Manage., 2001, 5(1), 76-85.
13. Hakkarainen, K. Pursuit of explanation within a
computer-supported classroom. Internat. J. Sci.
Educ., 2004, 26(8), 979-96.
14. Chua, Alton. Knowledge sharing: A game people
play. Aslib Proceed., 2003, 55(3), 117-29.
15. Rafaeli; Sheizaf, et al. QSIA-A web-based environment
for learning, assessing and knowledge sharing
in communities. Comp. & Educ., 2004, 43(3),
273-89.

11

About the Author

Dr M. Natarajan is a Senior Scientist in National Institute of Science Communication and
Information Resources (NISCAIR), New Delhi. He obtained Doctorate in LIS from University
of Madras; Associateship in Documentation and Information Science from DRTC, Indian Statistical
Institute, Bangalore; and MSc. in Mathematics. He also passed Computer Systems and Design
from Thiagarajar College of Engineering and PGDCA from Chennai. He joined INSDOC in 1981
and worked on Networking (SIRNET, MALIBNET), searching from National and International
databases, conducted many training programmes of INSDOC and UGC Refresher Course for
LIS and delivered lectures. He headed the position of Scientist-in-Charge of INSDOC Chennai
and Bangalore and delivered special lectures at various places. Dr Natarajan acted as Programmein-charge for IGNOU, and still acting as Councillor for IGNOU courses like BLIS, MLIS, PGDLAN,
and as a faculty for AIS course in NISCAIR. He has published more than 90 papers in national
and International journals/conferences/seminars, Festschrift volumes, etc. He is a Life member
of many associations like ILA, IASLIC, SIS, SALIS, MALA, AIS, etc. and ordinary member of
American Library Association (ALA), TLA, RRC, etc.

12

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

