DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 13-17
© 2008, DESIDOC

Knowledge Management and Sharing through Interactive
Web-based E-learning and Training Opportunities for
Lifelong Learning in Developing Countries
S.C. Kumaresan
BITS Pilani-Dubai, Dubai International Academic City
PO Box No.500 022, Dubai, UAE
E-mail: sckumaresan@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
The paper elaborates on the importance of web-based knowledge sharing (KS) and management
opportunities in large organisations and institutions and the concept of electronic learning (e-learning)
in developing countries. It looks at some of the key issues of e-learning and knowledge management (KM)
with the help of information and communication technologies; the potential benefits and drawbacks of
such KS. The paper also discusses some of the areas of implementations in different organisations and
educational Institutions.
Keywords: Knowledge mangement, knowledge sharing, e-learning, implicit knowledge, tacit knowledge, explicit
knowledge, KM, KS

1. INTRODUCTION
Knowledge management (KM) and knowledge
sharing (KS) are important factors that support continuous
and lifelong learning enabling people to continue
developing their skills throughout their careers. The
concept of e-learning is attractive and drawing attention
of the management of organisations and people who
share similar concern as far as continuous learning
and assessment are concerned. There are many
problems associated with traditional education and
assessment including student's and employee's schedule
conflicts, geographical isolation, changes in demographic
and economic issues, and other obstructions that
preclude students and employees from attending
traditional classes and training programmes. This
paper tries to point out the need for an alternative
educational/training system to complement the traditional
system. It also tries to highlight the importance of
how KM solutions and KS can foster the traditional
system in running an effective alternative educational
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

and training programmeme in organisations and
institutions. Many organisations and institutions are
beginning to feel that the knowledge of their employees
is their most valuable asset. They may be right, but
few firms have actually begun to actively manage
their knowledge assets on a broad scale. With the
help of information communication technology (ICT)
it has now become very easy to share knowledge
and access the same from any demographic location
by a student or an employee.
The Internet and web-based technologies have
a profound effect on the way(s) in which educational
and training institutions now operate in. These technologies
have paved the way for many innovative educators/
trainers to think of new ways in which to use the
Internet/Intranet to provide web-based KM and training
opportunities. The global networking and web-based
solutions are catalysts for addressing today's challenges
of KM, KS, and e-learning. This has become evident
with the increasing number of tertiary educational
13

institution and industry-based training organisations
attempting to offer a wide variety of web-based online
learning solutions in developing countries and globally.
This effort may be a supplement to face-to-face
communication between students and educators/
trainers.

2. KM AND KS IN E-LEARNING BY
WHOM, HOW AND WHY?
Training and lifelong learning are the main objective
of any organisation or institution as for as their
employee or learner is concerned. Organisations
need their employees to be updated with the latest
development and know-how in their area and expect
them to be skilled in all the latest trends. They take
advantage of the employee's knowledge to improve
their productivity. However, universities offer continuous
learning opportunities for all those who are unable
to attend traditional learning programme due to various
reasons.
Universities that offer the traditional distance
learning programme invest a lot on conducting the
class room lectures and delivery of printed course
materials. A lot of money, material and time is spent
on document creation and delivery. However, most
of the time the material do not reach the learner on
time and may not be beneficial. Organisations also
spend a lot on the material manpower and time in
organising training programmes for its employees
and assessing their skills.
These can be made easy with the help of webbased interactive e-learning programmes where the
learner can take the course at his own leisure time
and have an online assessment and know his results
immediately. Universities can spread their wings to
greater demographic area and people in such an
environment where the learner is not required to
take the traditional class room lectures. Thus, the
process of lifelong learning for an individual can be
realised.

3. WHAT HAPPENS TO THE EXISTING
SYSTEM?
The web-based e-learning/training is in lieu of
the existing practice of conventional class room
teaching or training. The system can be introduced
where the conventional system is not available. Depending
upon the response and the success factor the elearning/training can be introduced in other areas by
replacing the conventional method. So a phased
conversion from the conventional to the electronic
method would be the right way to faster the concept
14

of lifelong learning through web-based e-learning.

4. KM AND KS
Knowledge management is a discipline that promotes
an integrated approach to identifying and sharing all
of an organisation's knowledge assets including
unarticulated expertise and experience resident in
individual workers. In other words, KM is taking
advantage of what you know. It involves the identification
and analysis of available and required knowledge,
and subsequent planning and control of actions to
develop knowledge assets so as to fulfill organisational
objectives. Knowledge can be divided into two types:
"Tacit or Implicit Knowledge" and "Explicit Knowledge".
Tacit knowledge consists of the hands-on skills,
best practices, special know-how, heuristic, intuitions
and so on. Tacit knowledge is personal knowledge
that is hard to formalise or articulate 1 . The transfer
of knowledge is by traditional and shared experience.
Explicit knowledge is rule-based knowledge that
is used to match actions to situations by invoking
appropriate rules. Explicit knowledge is used in the
design of routines, standards operation procedures
and the structure of data records. It enables the
organisation to enjoy a certain level of operational
efficiency and control. It also promotes equable,
consistent organisational responses. These forms
of knowledge can be found in any organisation and
institution. The organisation, however, is skilled at
continuously expanding, renewing and refreshing its
knowledge in all categories. The organisation promotes
the learning of tacit knowledge to increase the skill
and creative capacity of its employees and take
advantage of explicit knowledge to maximise efficiency.
Knowledge sharing is a process where the tacit
or implicit knowledge is transformed into the explicit
knowledge, which means that knowledge of an individual
is converted or transformed into public or formal
knowledge in an organisation or institution by a
process called the externalisation (Fig. 1). The rapid
growth of information and communication technology
has made this transformation process very easy and
accessible to everyone.

5. KM HIERARCHY IN E-LEARNING
ENVIRONMENT
Rosenberg's review of some KM systems/solutions
indicates that KM can be divided into three layers 2 .
Document Management: The earliest form of
KM has been the use of technology in order to
retrieve and access documentation. Today it is
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Implicit/tacit
Knowledge

Socialisation

Externalisation

Implicit/tacit
Knowledge

Internalisation

Explicit
Knowledge
Figure 1. Transformation of Knowledge.

common for organisations to provide access to
documents, reports, and online forms.
Information Creation, Sharing and Management:
This is where people contribute information to
the system, creating new content and growing
the knowledge base. That is to say, users are
encouraged to read documents, fill forms and
submit forms online. This would allow for the
information to be continually updated.
Organisation or Enterprise Intelligence: The ultimate
in KM is the development of a robust and interactive
KM system so as to accurately represent the
organisational "know-how".

6. WEB-BASED E-LEARNING CONCEPT
The concept of digital learning or e-learning has
been defined in many different ways. The historical
background of e-learning can be observed over three
decades of development in ICT-based education and
training. Among the various technologies that were
introduced in the past few decades, global networking
advancements and web-based solutions occupy a
very important position and have changed the concept
of continuous learning significantly. Overall organisations,
universities and institutions especially in the US
have played a pioneering role in the application of
technology and developments, which has eventually
led to digital delivery of learning solutions 3 .
Today a lot of universities abroad are offering
profit oriented e-learning course and degree programmes.
It is also to be noted that the e-learning industry is
quite diverse and includes organisations that support
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

the establishment of learning infrastructure and networks
for higher education institutions and organisations.
The web-based technologies allow students and customers
to create learning programmes directly on the web
without investing on their own tool or infrastructure.
Web-based learning materials can be accessed from
the web or Intranet and educators/trainers can
communicate with each other using e-mail, chat or
discussion forums. E-learning can be used as the
main method of delivery of education/training or as
combined approach with face-to-face class roombased teaching and training. Some of the key
characteristics of e-learning solutions include 2 :
Relaying on computer networking technologies—
so as to make it capable of instant updating,
storage/retrieval, distribution and sharing of instruction
or information.
Delivering to the learner via a computer that is
connected to standard Internet technologies.
Focusing on the broadest view of learning. That
is to say, it considers learning solutions that go
beyond the traditional paradigms of training.
E-learning moves beyond training to include the
delivery of information and tools that improve
performance and competitiveness within the job
market.
Providing effective futuristic learning solutions
require a shift in attitudes and perceptions including
Focusing on outcome: Learning solutions need
to make a positive impact on learner's performance
and work readiness.
15

Providing flexible access anywhere/anytime:
Knowledge solutions must meet the diverse need
of learners concerning time frames and locations.
Placing emphasis on online rather than paperbased delivery.
Shifting of the focus from physical facilities to
networked facilities: networked solutions for knowledge
delivery play a significant role in information
sharing, communications, and flexible access
to learning material from any location in real
time.

7. BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF
E-LEARNING
It is known without any doubt that there is an
enduring and important role for traditional classroom
instruction and the one-to-one interaction with the
tutor or trainer, and nothing can replace the experience
of interaction with the fellow learners/trainees. However,
the concept of e-learning, as described earlier is
undoubtedly the best alternative having its own advantages.
Some of the advantages of the e-learning concept
and disadvantage are described below.

7.1 Potential Advantages to Solution
Provider

fashion.
Availability of lecture notes/training material even
if a session or class is missed by the employee/
student.
Avoid travelling long distance to attend the
conventional classes. Can take the lecture at
a time of his choice.
Know the results of class room evaluation/
assessment immediately.
Upload assignments/seminar notes on the web
based portal and need not waste time or cost
in sending it to the university/institution.

7.3 Potential Disadvantages to Solution
Provider
As there are many advantages of e-learning/
training the systems has it own disadvantages too.
Some of these are discussed below and can also
be taken as a topic for further research:
The need for investment in technology of delivery
and access of the materials.
An appropriate content and effective instructional
design is very important.

Reduced learning time.

Availability of infrastructure facilities in remote
areas for delivery of the learning material for
poor people especially in developing countries.

Consistent delivery of learning/training materials.

Authenticity of the content has to be maintained.

Expert knowledge can be communicated and
captured with effective e-learning and KM systems.

Difficulty in assessing the real caliber of the
learner in the absence of a one-to-one interaction
by the tutor.

Reduced overall costs.

Anytime/anywhere distribution and access of
learning/training materials.
A consolidated database of all problems and
solutions (FAQ) can be stored and retrieved at
any time saving time on repetition of answering
the same question by the teacher/trainer.
Educators can also provide potential solutions
to problems or clear the doubts in their own
leisure time and pace and the same can be
accessed by the learner or trainee.

7.2 Potential Advantages to Learner

Technology selection free from any hacking or
tampering of content
Knowledge of access technology by the potential
learner.

7.4 Potential Disadvantages to Learner
The disadvantage of the learner or the trainee
has a telling effect on the success of the entire elearning concept in a university or an organisation.
Some of these potential are:

On-demand availability of learning/training materials.

The need for access technology by the learner.

Self-pacing of learning and training by the leaner.

The need for printed workbooks or reference
materials.

Interactivity with the trainer/tutor.
Availability of newly updated material in a timely
16

Reduced social and cultural interaction with
fellow learners and tutors.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Non-availability of infrastructure facility in the
specific areas of the learner.
High cost involved in accessing, especially in
developing countries.
The potential implications of KM for e-learning
can be significant. For example, rather than relying
on instruction, one can use well structured information
including productivity enhancing tools to help people
learn and improve their performance. We can differentiate
between skills that must be performed automatically
from information that can be accessed or referenced
when needed. Learners need not be taught the steps
in a process, but only how to find the steps.

addresses the fundamental issues of lifelong learning
for those who desire. Expert knowledge can be
pooled and shared through the web-based network.
There is no doubt that ICT is essential to enable
the full potential of KM, however, it is important not
to get carried away by technology if it does not
improve the basic process of KM. KM is expensive
but not implementing it could be costlier for an
organisation or institution.

REFERENCES
1. Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge. Routledge
& Kegan Paul, London. UK, 1973.

8. CONCLUSION

2. Rosenbergm, M.J. E-learning. McGraw Hill, UK, 2001.

Overall the introduction of e-learning and KM
solutions needs to be a holistic process; one that

3. Putzhuber, W. From e-learning to KM. Graz University
of Technology, Austria, 2003.

About the Author

Shri S.C. Kumaresan is working as Senior Librarian at BITS-Pilani, Dubai. He has over 14
years of experience in the field of library and information science. He obtained Master of
Philosophy from Alagappa University and Master of Library and Information Science from
Bharathidasan University, Tamilnadu. He has published many books and articles in various
journals. He is the Editor of AALIS Newsletter, and also a member of the Editorial Board of
the SALIS e-Journal. His areas of interest are knowledge management, organisation and
knowledge sharing.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

17

I nvit a t ion t o Aut hor s
If you are a library professional/information manager/information scientist/information
specialist/computer professional or a research scholar with a vision for developments in
Information Technology, including software, processors, storage media, and devices having
an impact on library and information systems and services, we invite you to submit a paper
for DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology (DJLIT) and enjoy the following
benefits:
Expert editorial support: All papers are wetted by the eminent members of the Editorial
Board of DJLIT.
Critical review: All papers are peer-reviewed by the experts in Library and Information
Science.
Extensive abstracting and indexing for greater visibility: DJLIT is covered in major
indexing and abstracting services like LISA, Indian Science Abstracts, Library Literature,
INSPEC database, and Wilson databases.
Open Journal System for online submission of manuscripts.
Complimentary copies to the contributors.

Please send your paper/queries to:
The Editor(s)
DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology
House Bulletin Group
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
e-mail:dbit@desidoc.drdo.in

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

