DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 19-26
© 2008, DESIDOC

Knowledge Sharing Tools and Technology: An Overview
B. Ramesh Babu1 and S. Gopalakrishnan2
1

Department of Information Science, University of Madras, Chennai-600 005
E-mail: beeraka_r@yahoo.co.uk
2

Madras Institute of Technology Campus, Chromepet, Chennai-600 044
E-mail: gopallong@gmail.com
ABSTRACT

The study of knowledge sharing— the means by which an individual/organisation obtains access
to any individual's own and other knowledge—has emerged as a key research area from a broad and
deep field of study on technology transfer and innovation, and more recently from the field of strategic
management. Increasingly, knowledge-sharing research has moved to an organisational learning
perspective. Indeed, experience and research suggests that successful knowledge sharing involves
extended learning processes rather than simple communication processes, as ideas related to development
and innovation need. This paper provides basic concepts of knowledge sharing and its means of
implementation.
Keywords: Knowledge sharing tools, knowledge management, knowledge sharing, knowledge sharing culture,
knowledge creation, knowledge dissemination

1. INTRODUCTION
There have been diversified approaches in developing
knowledge management (KM) technology as a solution
to promote knowledge dissemination, knowledge creation,
and knowledge sharing (KS) in an organisation or
community. These approaches have strengths and
weaknesses of their own with respect to technological
advances, user's reception, adaptability, and success
rate in the actual sense of generating knowledge.
Web-enabled infrastructures and practices are
creating turbulent disruptions for virtually every institution
and enterprise. Strategic responses to these disruptions
are progressively leading to new practices, business
models, and strategies in a variety of domains. The
acquisition, assimilation, and sharing of knowledge
is one such domain that is truly experiencing a
revolution. Using technologies that are already developed
or will be deployed over the next five years, and best
practices in knowledge sharing are not only diffusing
rapidly but will be substantially reinvented in all
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

settings: education, corporations, government,
associations, and nonprofit organisations. These will
help individuals and organisations achieve quantum
leaps in their abilities to exchange knowledge. Even
the manner in which they experience knowledge will
be transformed.
It is often said that it is essential to create a
"Knowledge Sharing Culture" as part of a KM initiative.
An isolated KM programme looked after by a privileged
few is a paradox in itself and will not survive for long.
Only effective collaboration and communication, which
spans across the whole company structure will give
KM the boost it really needs. Employees have a
sphere of influence along with their own individual
knowledge, and this is where one believes a KS
culture can begin.

2. WHAT IS KS?
Knowledge sharing refers to "activities of transferring
or disseminating knowledge from one person, group,
19

or organisation to another"1. In the context of information
technology usage, KS involves the use of given knowledge
bases or portions of knowledge bases either at sites
other than those at which those knowledge bases
were developed or in a context of new computer
programs at the same site, possibly within software
environments that are quite different from those in
which the knowledge bases were first developed 2 .
The process of KS involves both the creation and the
transfer of knowledge through different artifacts such
as documentation or communication, among entities.
The entities may refer to individuals 3 , groups 4 ,
organisations5 or networks of organisations6. Knowledge
is initially created by the individuals 7 but it can be
produced and held collectively8 . When the sharing
activity involves a larger number of individuals who
are exposed to different values, environments, or
interests as a result of being part of different organisations,
the sharing may not be as straightforward.

3.

IMPORTANCE OF SHARING
KNOWLEDGE

Today, the creation and application of new knowledge
is essential for the survival of almost all businesses.
There are many reasons. They include:
Intangible products—ideas, processes and information
are taking a growing share of global trade from
the traditional, tangible goods of the manufacturing
economy.
Increasingly, the only sustainable competitive
advantage is continuous innovation. In other words
the application of new knowledge.
Increasing turnover of staff. People don't take a
job for life any more. When someone leaves an
organisation, his/her knowledge walks out of
the door with him/her.

Learning to make knowledge productive is as
important, if not more important, than sharing
knowledge.

4. MOTIVATION FOR KS
Reasons that motivate knowledge users are:
Knowledge is perishable. Knowledge is increasingly
short-lived. If you do not make use of knowledge
then it rapidly loses its value.
Even with the low level of KS that goes on today
if you do not make your knowledge productive
than someone else with that same knowledge
will do. You can almost guarantee that whatever
bright idea you have, someone else, somewhere
in the organisation may be thinking along the
same lines.
By sharing your knowledge, you gain more then
you lose. Sharing knowledge is a synergistic
process—you get more out than you put in. If
I share a product idea or a way of doing things
with another person, then just the act of putting
my idea into words or writing will help me shape
and improve that idea. If I get into a dialogue
with the other persons then I will benefit from
their knowledge, their unique insights, and improve
my ideas further.
To get most things done in an organisation
today requires a collaborative effort. If you try
to work alone you are likely to fail—you need
not only the input from other people but their
support and buy-in. Being open with them, sharing
with them, helps you achieve your objectives.
Sharing knowledge is not just about giving. But
it is about
Soliciting feedback.

Our problem as an organisation is that we don't
know what we know. Large global or even small
geographically dispersed organisations do not
know what they know. Expertise developed and
applied in one part of the organisation is not
leveraged in another.
Accelerating change—technology, business and
social. As things change, so does our knowledge
base erode in some businesses as much of
50 per cent of what you knew five years ago is
probably obsolete today.
The purpose of KS is to help an organisation as
a whole to meet its business objectives. We are
not doing it for our own sake.
20

Asking questions.
Telling people what you plan to do before doing it.
Asking other people for help.
Asking someone to work with you in some way,
however small.
Telling people what you are doing and more
importantly why you are doing it.
Asking people what they think; asking them for
advise.
Asking people what would they do differently.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Not just sharing information but know-how and
know-why.

5. MEANS OF KS
Key KS behaviour includes:
Seeking ways to document and share your own
knowledge.
Taking advantage of other people's experience
when starting a new activity.
Re-using and building on previous work from
within your organisation or other sources.
There are three factors that contribute the most
to successful mergers, consolidations and other
major organisational changes. Successful organisations
demonstrate these characteristics at all times, but
these are most critical during times of organisational
changes. The factors are:
Leadership.
Constant communication.
Knowledge sharing.
Other steps in KS include:
Quantify and communicate your service offering.
Focus on benefits, not actions.
Explain without defending.
Increase connection points within the organisation.
Volunteer and seek out opportunities to contribute.
Take action to make things better.
Become known as a source of organisational
knowledge.
The key areas of knowledge likely to be considered
are:
Who our users are?
Where our users "fit in"?
Points of knowledge valuable to different users.
Internal shorthand for communication.
During a period of change, the organisation will
continuously ask the following questions:

When did we/you make that change?
How does this system (software, process, etc.)
works?
A few of the resources you may want to make
available to the organisation are:
Collections of project reports.
Directory of staff expertise.
Product literature and communications archive.
Training on internal systems.

6. TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT FOR KS
Some people will argue that you do not need
technology to implement a KM programme. To some
extent they are right. KM is fundamentally about
people, not technology. But there is absolutely no
way that one can share knowledge effectively within
an organisation, even a small one, never mind a
large geographically dispersed one, without using
technology. Information technology (IT) support can
be classified into the use of proper repository for
storing and sharing knowledge and the use of a
communication medium for communicating and
transporting knowledge among individuals.
The first approach is the use of proper repository
or the repository model of a KM system, which is
related to database management and organisational
memory. IT can be used to capture knowledge,
categorise, search, subscribe relevant content or
information and present it in more meaningful formats
across multiple contexts of use. IT can be used to
convert tacit knowledge into an explicit form.
The second approach is the use of a communication
medium or the network model of a KM system,
which is an extension of the stream of computermediated electronic communication methods. It is
used to support interactions, direct communication
and contact among individuals. Facilitative IT tools
in KM are shown in Fig. 1.
Technology plays a crucial transformational role
and is a key part of changing the corporate culture
to KS. In many ways, technology has made knowledge
sharing a reality. In the past it was impossible to
share knowledge or work collaboratively with coworkers around the globe. Today, it is a reality.

7. CONTEXT OF KS
Why did we/you do that project?
Who knows about this technology?
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Successful KS requires the use of the following
interdependent types of KS activities:
21

Knowledge Mgmt
Intellectual Capital
•
•

Tacit/Implicit Knowledge
Explicit Knowledge

Social Capital

Information Mgmt
Information “Resources”
(lifecycle mgmt)
Mgmt
Content

•
•
•

Communities/Networks
Collaboration
Culture

Mgmt
Technology
Mgmt

Data Mgmt

Records Mgmt

•
•
•

(repositories)

(infrastructure)

Document Mgmt

Application
Mgmt

(static)

•
•

Versions
Workflow

Human Capital
Organizational Learning
Succession Planning
Business Processes

Information Services
•
•
•

Library
Research
Knowledge repositories

Content
Taxonomies/Metadata
Facilitative IT Tools

(dynamic)

Figure 1. IT tools in KM.

Those focused on assessing the form and
embeddedness of the knowledge.
Those focused on establishing and managing
an administrative structure through which differences
and issues between the parties can be
accommodated and reduced.
Those focused on transferring the knowledge.
The five primary contexts that can affect knowledge
sharing are knowledge internalisation, including the
relationship between the source and the recipient;
the form of the knowledge; the recipient's learning
predisposition; the source's KS capability; and the
broader environment in which the sharing occurs.
Collectively, these five contexts define the overall
setting in which KS occurs (Fig. 2).

8. BARRIERS IN KS
The barriers in KS can be divided into three
categories 9 . They are
Individual KS barriers.
Organisational KS barriers.
Technological KS barriers.

8.1 Individual KS Barriers
The individual KS barriers comprise:
22

General lack of time to share knowledge, and
time to identify colleagues in need of specific
knowledge.
Apprehension of fear that sharing may reduce
or jeopardise people's job security.
Low awareness and realisation of the value, and
benefit of possessed knowledge to others.
Dominance in sharing explicit over tacit knowledge
such as know-how and experience that requires
hands-on learning, observation, dialogue, and
interactive problem solving.
Use of strong hierarchy, position-based status,
and formal power ("pull rank").
Insufficient capture, evaluation, feedback,
communication, and tolerance of past mistakes
that would enhance individual and organisational
learning effects.
Differences in experience levels.
Lack of contact time and interaction between
knowledge sources and recipients.
Poor verbal/written communication and interpersonal
skills.
Age differences.
Gender differences.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Source: Cumming, J. Knowledge sharing: A review of literature. The World Bank,
Washington D.C.

Figure 2. Context of KS.

Lack of social network.

support for sharing practices.

Differences in education levels.

Deficiency of company resources that would
provide adequate sharing opportunities.

Taking ownership of intellectual property due to
fear of not receiving just recognition and accreditation
from managers and colleagues.
Lack of trust in people because they misuse
knowledge or take unjust credit for it.
Lack of trust in the accuracy and credibility of
knowledge due to the source.
Differences in national culture or ethnic background;
and values and beliefs associated with it (language
is part of this).

8.2 Organisational KS Barriers
The organisational KS barriers comprise:
Integration of KM strategy and sharing initiatives
into the company's goals and strategic approach
is missing or unclear.
Lack of leadership and managerial direction in
terms of clearly communicating the benefits and
values of knowledge sharing practices.
Shortage of formal and informal spaces to share,
reflect and generate (new) knowledge.

External competitiveness within business units
or functional areas and between subsidiaries
can be high (e.g. not invented here syndrome).
Communication and knowledge flows are restricted
into certain directions (e.g. top-down).
Physical work environment and layout of work
areas restrict effect sharing practices.
Internal competitiveness within business units,
functional areas, and subsidiaries can be high.
Hierarchical organisation structure inhibits or
slows down most sharing practices.
Size of business units often is not small enough
and unmanageable to enhance contact and facilitate
ease of sharing.

8.3 Technical KS Barriers
The technical KS barriers are:
Lack of integration of IT systems and processes
impedes the way people do things.

Lack of transparent rewards and recognition systems
that would motivate people to share more of
their knowledge.

Lack of technical support (internal and external)
and immediate maintenance of integrated IT
systems obstructs work routines, and communication
flows.

Existing corporate culture does not provide sufficient

Unrealistic expectations of employees as to

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

23

Table 1. Process and practice approaches to KS

Category

Process Approach

Practice Approach

Type of knowledge supported

Explicit knowledge: codified in rules,
tools, and processes

Mostly tacit knowledge: unarticulated
knowledge not easily captured or
14
codified

Means of transmission

Formal controls, procedures and
standard operating procedures with
heavy emphasis on information
technologies to support knowledge
creation, codification, and transfer of
15
knowledge

Informal social groups that engage in
story telling and improvisation
(Wenger and Snyder, 2000).

Benefits

Provides structure to harness
generated ideas and knowledge17

Provides an environment to generate
and transfer high -value tacit
16,17
knowledge

Achieves
11
reuse

scale

in

knowledge

Provides spark for fresh ideas and
responsiveness
to
changing
17
environment

Disadvantages

Fails to tap into tacit knowledge. May
limit
innovation
and
forces
participants into fixed patterns of
thinking

Can
result
in
inefficiency.
Abundance of ideas with no structure
to implement them.

Role of information technology

Heavy investment in IT to connect
people with reusable codified
11
knowledge

Moderate investment in IT to
facilitate conversations and transfer
11
of tacit knowledge

what technology can do and cannot do.

10. PRACTICAL APPROACHES TO KS

Lack of compatibility between diverse IT systems
and processes.

The principal approach used in traditional intraorganisational KM is the process approach. The
process approach is characterised as a formal and
technologically-based process of gathering and storing
explicit knowledge within the organisation 11. The
alternative approach to managing knowledge sharing
is the practice approach. This approach is more
effective in gathering tacit knowledge through informal
networks with moderate use of information technology.

Mismatch between individuals' requirements and
integrated IT systems and processes restrict
sharing practices.
Reluctance to use IT systems due to lack of
familiarity and experience with them.
Lack of training regarding employee familiarisation
of new IT systems and processes.
Lack of communication, and demonstration of
all advantages of any new system over existing
ones.

9. CRITICAL IMPEDIMENTS TO
SHARING AND REUSE OF THE
KNOWLEDGE
There are many senses in which the work that
went into creating a knowledge-based system can
be shared and reused. Neches identified four critical
impediments in sharing and reuse of the knowledge10.
Heterogeneous representations.
Dialects within language families.
Lack of communication conventions.
Model mismatches at the knowledge level.
24

13

11. CONCLUSION
A successful knowledge-sharing effort requires
a focus on more than simply the transfer of the
specific knowledge. Instead, many of the activities
to be undertaken need to focus on structuring and
implementing the arrangement in a way that bridges
both existing and potential relationship issues, and
examining the form and location of the knowledge
to ensure its complete transfer. In other words,
while the activities used to share knowledge such
as document exchanges, presentations, job rotations,
etc., are important, overcoming the factors that can
impede, complicate and even harm knowledge
internalisation are equally important in determining
the ultimate results of a KS effort. The KS effort is
a consortium to develop conventions facilitating sharing
and reuse of knowledge bases and knowledge-based
systems. The goal of the effort is to define, develop
and test infrastructure and supporting technology to
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

enable participants to build much bigger and more
broadly functional systems than could be achieved
working alone. KS should be incorporated into daily
procedures and routines, thus making it part of the
work and not an extracurricular, time-consuming
activity where one feed reports into some system,
and never know if someone else might use it.

REFERENCES
1. Lee, J.N. The impact of knowledge sharing,
organisational capability and partnership quality
on IS outsourcing success. Inf. & Manage., 2001,
38(5), 323-35.

8. Brown, J.S. & Duguid, P. Organizing knowledge.
California Manag. Rev., 1998, 40(3), 90-111.
9. Riege, A. Three-dozen knowledge-sharing barriers
managers must consider. J. Knowl. Manag., 2005,
9(3), 18-35.
10. Neches, Robert, et al. Enabling technology for
knowledge sharing. AI Magaz., 1991, 12(3), Fall.
11. Hansen, M.; Nohria, N. & Tierney, T. What's
your strategy for managing knowledge? Harvard
Business Rev., 1999, 77(2), 106-16.

2. Musen, M. A. Dimensions of knowledge sharing
and re-use. Comput. Biomed. Res., 1992, 25,
435-67.

12. Alavi, M.; Kayworth, T. & Leidner, D. An empirical
examination of the influence of knowledge
management on organizational culture. Working
paper, Baylor University, 2003.

3. Weiss, L. Colletion and connection: The anatomy
of knowledge sharing in professional service firms.
Organ. Develop. J., 1999, 17(4), 61-77.

13. DeLong, D. W. & Fahey, L. Diagnosing cultural
barriers to knowledge management. Academy of
Manag. Execut., 2000, 14(4), 113-27.

4. Sole, D. & Applegate, L. Knowledge sharing
practices and technology use norms in dispersed
development teams. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Information Systems,
2000, Brisbane, Australia.
5. Ciborra, C.U. & Andreu R. Sharing knowledge
across boundaries. J. Inf. Tehnol., 2001, 16, 7381.
6. Apostolou, D.; Sakkas, N. & Mentzas, G. Knowledge
networking in supply chins: A case study in the
wood/furniture sector. Inf. Know. Syst. Manag.,
1999, 1, 267-81.
7. Nonaka, I. A dynamic theory of organizational
knowledge creation. Organization Science, 1994,
5, 14-37.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

14. Leonard, D. & Sensiper, S. The role of tacit
knowledge in group innovation. California Manag.
Rev., 1998, 40(3), 112-32.
15. Ruggles, R. The state of the notion: Knowledge
management in practice. California Manag. Rev.,
1998, 40(3), 80-89.
16. Wenger, E. C. & Snyder, W. M. Communities of
practice: The organizational frontier. Harvard Business
Rev., 2000, 78(1), 139-45.
17. Brown, S. J. & Duguid, P. Balancing act: How
to capture knowledge without killing it. Harvard
Business Rev., 2000, 78(3), 73-80.

25

About the Authors

Dr B. Ramesh Babu is Professor in the Department of Information Science, University of
Madras. He has been awarded Dr S.R. Ranganathan Memorial Gold Medal by the University
of Mysore for the First Rank in MLibSc; Commonwealth Fellowship for Postdoctoral research
for the year 1999/2000 (he worked on Web OPACs in the UK Academic Libraries in the
Department of Information Science, Loughborough University, United Kingdom); Dr C.D. Sharma
Best Paper Aw ard by the Indian Library Association for the Year 1999; and READIT 2001
Best Paper Aw ard by the IIT, Chennai, IGCAR, and MALA . He has published more than 200
research papers in Indian and Foreign journals, Festschrift volumes, and National and International
seminars/workshops on various aspects of LIS. He is a resource person in various distance
education institutes. He has delivered guest lectures in a number of universities and academic
staff colleges in Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Pondicherry, and Orissa.
Dr S. Gopalakrishnan is Assistant University Librarian, Anna University, MIT, Chennai. He
obtained Master degrees in Political Science, and Library and Information Science, Doctorate
in LIS, and a Diploma in System Analysis and Data Processing. He has prepared course
materials of Distance Education in LIS for Madras, Annamalai and Alagappa Universities. He
has published more that 100 papers in the journals, and edited volumes and national international
seminar proceedings. He has written three books on Computers, titled Fundamentals of
Computers, Computer Programming: Made simple, and Computers and Softwares. He has
brought out the CD-ROM product on LIS for UGC NET/SELECT examinations. He is the visiting
faculty of University of Madras and a resource person for distance education programmes
and refresher course in LIS. He is the life member of ILA, ISTE, IATLIS, MALA, MULISSANet,
and TLA.

26

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

