DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 27-34
© 2008, DESIDOC

Symbiosis between Knowledge Society and E-Governance
Arun Kumar Chakraborty
Bose Institute, P-1/12 CIT Scheme-VII-M
Kankurgachi, Kolkata-700 054
E-mail: akc@bic.boseinst.ernet.in

ABSTRACT
E-governance brings urban and rural areas together and breaks the barrier of distance to lead an
efficient administration. Surprisingly, e-governance has not made enough impact on the people as ecommerce and e-learning have done. In the digital world, libraries are emerging as means of creation
and dissemination of knowledge. It is enough for e-commerce and e-learning to be reactive whereas
e-governance to be proactive. While e-commerce and e-learning involve information management, egovernance involves knowledge management (KM). KM is the management of information, skill, experience,
innovation, and intelligence. E-governance based on knowledge management system (KMS) is built on
KM cycle of knowledge capturing, knowledge sharing, knowledge enhancing, and knowledge preserving.
A few popular models of e-governance use a concept of "knowledge centers" to share knowledge. The
digital library requires searching, sorting and KM strategies for maintaining/updating the resources. This
paper describes challenges in KM, technological growth and studies development of KMS-based egovernance, which is path-based. It also discusses symbiosis between knowledge society and egovernance.
Keywords: Knowledge management, e-governance, knowledge society, e-commerce

1.

INTRODUCTION

Information and communication technologies (ICTs)
are increasingly playing important roles in the dayto-day lives of people, revolutionising their work and
leisure, and changing rules of doing businesses.
Developments in ICT have paved the way to e-governance,
the most talked word around the world. KM is increasingly
imperative as it is regarded as the key determinant
of a firm, industry or country for survival and growth
in knowledge era. Varieties of disciplines have contributed
to knowledge and KM. Research focuses on one or
more specific fields, but to understand which levels
of knowledge processes KM should concentrate on,
should be more fundamental than advocacy of KM.
In the public context, governance is about how
to steer or guide society so as to best serve public
interests and achieve the common good. E-governance
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

means the application of advanced ICT to improve
governance.
The evolving standards for creating, structuring,
and disseminating digital content has allowed libraries
to make shift from proprietary methods of information
access and management that characterised the early
days of electronic information. As libraries gained
experience with new methods of delivering content
and the new genre of digital collections, these standards
were embraced and integrated into library operations.
Distributed computing and the emergence of
standards were critical steps toward achieving a
more unified information environment and interoperability
among distributed collections and content providers.
These standards have offered libraries new opportunities
for handling content (e.g. to add functionality, deliver
content differently for different audiences, or to sustain
27

digital collections over time) and for enhancing their
classic role in information access and preservation 1.

more useful definition of knowledge is that it is
about know-how and know-why.

2.

2.6 Knowledge Management

KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY

A knowledge society is a formal association of
people with similar interests, who try to make effective
use of their combined knowledge about their area of
interest, and in the process contribute to this knowledge.
In this sense, knowledge is the psychological and
useful result of perception, learning and reasoning.
Following facets encompasses the knowledge society2.

2.1 Data
Data is information, knowledge and conceptions
related to data, people or things obtained by observation,
investigation, interpretation, visualisation, and mental
creation. It is intangible and includes numbers, words,
symbols, ideas, concepts, and oral verbalisation. It
also includes information with a specific physical
representation3.

2.2 Information
Information is a term with many meanings depending
on context, but is as a rule closely related to such
concepts as meaning, knowledge, instruction,
communication, representation, and mental stimulus.

2.3 Knowledge
Oxford English Dictionary defines knowledge as
(i) facts, information, and skills acquired by a person
through experience or education; the theoretical or
practical understanding of a subject, (ii) what is
known in a particular field or in total; facts and
information or (iii) awareness or familiarity gained by
experience of a fact or situation. Philosophical debates
in general start with Plato's formulation of knowledge
as "justified true belief". There is however no single
agreed definition of knowledge presently, nor any
prospect of one, and there remain numerous competing
theories.

2.4 Society
Society is made up of people, groups, networks,
institutions, organisations and systems. These aspects
of society may include local, national and international
patterns of relationships. People belong to informal
and formal groups, and within and between these
groups there are patterns of interactions.

2.5 Knowledge and Information
Knowledge is often seen as a rich form of information.
This differentiation however is not terribly helpful. A
28

There are many definitions of KM. A common
definition is, 'the collection of processes that govern
the creation, dissemination, and leveraging of knowledge
to fulfill organisational objectives'. "Knowledge Management
is a business philosophy. It is an emerging set of
principles, processes, organisational structures, and
technology applications that help people share and
leverage their knowledge to meet their business
objectives”.
This puts focus and responsibility on the individual—
the knowledge worker—and on the holistic nature of
KM. Also, critically it is about meeting business
objectives. KM is not an end in itself. It is also
fundamentally about sharing knowledge and putting
that knowledge to use 4,5 .

3.

KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION

Knowledge acquisition involves complex cognitive
processes: perception, learning, communication,
association, and reasoning. The term knowledge is
also used to mean the confident understanding of
a subject, potentially with the ability to use it for
a specific purpose.
"We suppose ourselves to possess unqualified
scientific knowledge of a thing, as opposed to knowing
it in the accidental way in which the sophist knows,
when we think that we know the cause on which the
fact depends, as the cause of that fact and of no
other, and, further, that the fact could not be other
than it is. Now that scientific knowing is something
of this sort is evident-witness both those who falsely
claim it and those who actually possess it, since
the former merely imagine themselves to be, while
the latter are also actually, in the condition described.
Consequently the proper object of unqualified scientific
knowledge is something which cannot be other than
it is" 6 .

4.

TYPES OF KNOWLEDGE

There are three kinds of knowledge. One is
explicit knowledge, which can be expressed in words
and numbers and shared in the form of data, scientific
formulae, product specifications, manuals, universal
principles, and so forth. This kind of knowledge can
be readily transmitted across individuals formally
and systematically. This has been the dominant
form of knowledge in the west.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Second is tacit knowledge, which is highly personal
and hard to formalise, making it difficult to communicate
or share with others. Subjective insights, intuitions
and hunches fall into this category of knowledge.
Furthermore, tacit knowledge is deeply rooted in an
individual's action and experience, as well as in the
ideals, values or emotions he or she embraces.
Third is situated knowledge, which is specific
to a particular situation. Imagine two very similar
breeds of mushroom, which grow on either side of
a mountain, one nutritious, one poisonous. Relying
on knowledge from one side of an ecological boundary,
after crossing to the other, may lead to starving
rather than eating perfectly healthy food near at
hand, or to poisoning oneself by mistake.
Some methods of generating knowledge, such
as trial and error, or learning from experience, tend
to create highly situational knowledge. One of the
main benefits of the scientific method is that the
theories it generates are much less situational than
knowledge gained by other methods. Situational
knowledge is often embedded in language, culture,
or traditions.Knowledge generated through experience
is called "a posteriori" knowledge, meaning afterwards.
The pure existence of a term like "a posteriori"
means this also has a counterpart. That is "a priori"
knowledge, meaning before. The knowledge superceded
by experience means that there are certain "assumptions"
that one takes for granted 6 .

4.1 Knowledge for What and for Whom?
If it is true that we live in a knowledge society
that demands multimodal competencies most of
which are mediatised, then it follows that the role
of public libraries and librarians is challenged once
again. Public libraries, in their physical as well as
virtual versions, are spaces that people enter at

liberty and often in their spare time. In shaping new
visions for public libraries in the knowledge society,
perhaps this image is their most fundamental value.
For, it offers public libraries a unique chance of
catching on to the multi-sited nature of learning in
a knowledge society.
For example, for European children and young
people informal sites of media and ICT learning are
more diverse and more advanced than are the formal
school settings 7 . These findings imply that part of
the present library public—and most of the future
public—already possess a strong, informal repertoire
of multimodal learning, if not collective competences.
Public libraries can build on those trends by redefining
the physical libraries as informal knowledge centres
and by developing their professional competences
in close collaboration with other knowledge partners
both in the private and public sectors. To develop
that kind of knowledge involves presence in the
physical library, and it involves collective learning.
While digital libraries certainly must and will further
and finetune individual services in future, perhaps
the most decisive library challenge in the years to
come is to develop the physical libraries which
harbour the possibilities of collective presence and
hence collective learning. Ultimately, the vision must
be how to develop a synergy between virtual and
physical libraries with respect for the end users'
frames of reference. Defining the role of the librarian
as knowledge facilitator is in line with the projected
function of the physical library as a knowledge centre.
In a sense, the issues involved in developing
public libraries as informal knowledge centres in the
manner sketched out above, takes us back to some
of the old, yet recurring questions of library service:
what is the role of public libraries in furthering civic
society and citizenship? How should librarians be
trained and how should they operate in their daily

Table 1. Library Innovation and socio-cultural conditions

Industrial society

Information society

Knowledge society

Aim of library use

Cultural
discrimination
(taste)Personal relevance
of cultural choice

Universal and free access
to
information
Information literacy

Universal and free use of
information and fiction
Multimodal literacy

Definition of
library/librarian

Cultural
Cultural guide

Information disseminator

Knowledge facilitator

Definition of
material/content

Material
artifact

physical

Non-material
process
Effective,
reliable
information processing

Material artifacts and nonmaterial
processes
Information and fiction

Definition of user

Receiver
of
cultural consumer

choice

Information producer and
evaluator

Knowledge
producer,
cooperator and cultural
citizen

custodian

entity,

Source: Kirsten Drotner
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

29

work in order to make the institutional ideals materialise?
The answers to be found, however, belong to our own
present and immediate future 7 .

5. KNOWLEDGE SHARING
The first challenge is to define what 'knowledge
sharing' means in practice. On the face of it, the
meaning is self-obvious: to encourage the sharing
of knowledge or information between members of
staff within an organisation. When this is probed
more deeply, however, KM teams tend to start talking
about 'capturing tacit knowledge' and other similar
topics. Unfortunately, this simply introduces further
jargon, but no greater clarity. Knowledge sharing is
certainly an important concept for those in the KM
and information management disciplines. The starting
point to moving beyond this terminology, however,
is to recognise that it means little to anyone else
in the organisation 8 .

Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary is "culture is
the integrated pattern of human behaviour that includes
thought, speech, action, and artifacts and depends
on man's capacity for learning and transmitting knowledge
to succeeding generations." This second definition
is an exciting one as increasing our capacity for
learning and transmitting knowledge is one of the
prime aims of KM 9 .

7. INFORMATION CULTURE
Information culture can be thought of as a relatively
rigid tacit infrastructure of ideas that shape not only
our thinking but also our behaviour and perception
of our library/information centre environment. It effectively
establishes a set of guidelines by which members
of a library/information centre work and how those
library/information centres are structured. It is rigid
mainly due to our paradigms we don't recognise why
we do so much of what we do. Also, we tend to
resist change rather than embrace it.

5.1 Purpose of Knowledge Sharing
Knowledge sharing is not just about giving. It is
about:
Soliciting feedback.
Asking questions.
Telling people what you plan to do before doing it.
Asking other people for help.
Asking someone to work with you in some way,
however small.
Telling people what you are doing and more
importantly why you are doing it.
Asking people what they think; asking them for
advise.
Asking people what would they do differently
Not just sharing information but know-how and
know-why.
Fundamentally sharing is about being more open
in our way of work and in our relationships with other
people.

6. CREATING A KNOWLEDGE SHARING
CULTURE
Culture, according to Vijay Sathe is "the set of
important understandings (often unstated) that members
of a community share in common." These shared
understandings consist of our norms, values, attitudes,
beliefs and 'paradigms'. Another definition given in
30

8. IMPORTANCE OF SHARING
KNOWLEDGE
Today, the creation and application of new knowledge
is essential for the survival of almost all businesses.
There are many reasons. They include:
Elusive products ideas, processes, information
are taking a growing share of global customers
from the conventional substantial goods of the
manufacturing economy.
Progressively, the only sustainable spirited advantage
is continuous novelty. In other words the application
of new knowledge.
Increasing yield of staff. People don't take a job
for life any more. When someone leaves an
organisation their knowledge walks out of the
door with them.
Our problem as an organisation is that we do
not know what we know". Large global or even
small geographically discrete organisations do
not know what they know. Expertise learnt and
applied in one part of the organisation is not
leveraged in another.
Accelerating change technology, business and
social. As things change so does our knowledge
base erode 6 .

8.1 Rewarding Knowledge Sharing
We are told by many of the gurus that rewards
must be put in place to encourage knowledge sharing.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

We need to find out mechanisms of rewarding those
who share knowledge.

8.2 Motivating Knowledge Sharing
The real answer is to help people see for themselves
that knowledge sharing is in their personal interest.
The old paradigm was "knowledge is power". Today
it needs to be explicitly understood that "sharing
knowledge is power". If people understand that sharing
their knowledge helps them do their jobs more effectively;
helps them retain their jobs; helps them in their
personal development and career progression; reward
them for getting things done (not for blind sharing);
and brings more personal recognition, then knowledge
sharing will become a reality. So what are the reasons
to share that should motivate people? Here are a
few:
Knowledge is perishable and is increasingly
short-lived. If we do not make use of our knowledge
then it rapidly loses its value.
Even with the low level of knowledge sharing
that goes on today if we do not make our knowledge
productive than someone else with that same
knowledge will. One can almost guarantee that
whatever bright idea you have someone else
somewhere in the organisation will be thinking
along the same lines.
By sharing our knowledge, we gain more then
we lose. Sharing knowledge is a synergistic
process we get more out than we put in. If I
share a product idea or a way of doing things
with another person then just the act of putting
my idea into words or writing will help me shape
and improve that idea. If I get into dialogue with
the other person then I'll benefit from their knowledge,
from their unique insights and improve my ideas
further.
To get most things done in an organisation
today requires a collaborative effort. If we try to
work alone we are likely to fail we need not only
the input from other people but their support
and buy-in. Being open with them; sharing with
them, helps us achieve our objectives.

8.3 Overcoming the Objections
Some people object to sharing as they feel that
others will steal their ideas and reap the rewards
rightly theirs. This is a fallacy. Knowledge sharing
is not about blindly sharing everything; giving away
our ideas; being politically naïve; or being open
about absolutely everything. We still need to exercise
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

judgment. There is also another fallacy embedded
in this thinking, knowledge sharing is not just about
sharing great ideas, its about improving the way that
things get done by sharing the little things. One
may have lots of knowledge of little use to him if
it can share with others who can make use of it and
in return they will share relevant knowledge with
you.

9. ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY
Some people will argue that there is no need
of technology to implement a KM programme. To
some extent they are right. KM is fundamentally
about people not technology. But there is absolutely
no way that one can share knowledge effectively
within an organisation, even a small one, never mind
a large geographically dispersed one without using
technology. Technology plays a crucial transformational
role and is a key part of changing the corporate
culture to knowledge sharing one. In many ways it
is technology that has made knowledge sharing a
reality. In the past it was impossible to share knowledge
or work collaboratively with co-workers around the
globe. Today it is a reality. If implemented well and
if people are trained and educated in its use, knowledge
sharing technology is good. Not only one can find
the information and knowledge one need quickly and
effectively but one can post their knowledge on the
system for access by others in the organization; be
they at the next desk or on the other side of the
world2.

10. ROLE OF E-GOVERNANCE
Imagine a situation in which all interaction with
the government can be done through one counter 24
hours a day, seven days a week, without waiting in
lines at government offices. In the near future this
is possible if governments are willing to decentralise
responsibilities and processes and they start to use
electronic means such as the Internet. Each citizen
can then make contact with the government through
a website where all forms, legislation, news and
other information will be available 24/7. Of course,
at first the front office will retain several communication
channels, such as physical counters, telephone,
(e-) mail and Internet to serve everyone properly, but
this will change dramatically in the next few years10,11 .

10.1 Defining E-governance
Many definitions exist for e-governance. Before
presenting an overall definition of e-governance, the
relation between governance, e-democracy and egovernment is explained. E-democracy refers to the
31

processes and structures that encompass all forms
of electronic interaction between the government
(elected) and the citizen (electorate). E-government
is a form of e-business in governance and refers to
the processes and structures needed to deliver electronic
services to the public (citizens and businesses),
collaborate with business partners and to conduct
electronic transactions within an organisational entity12.

10.2 E-Governance based on KM
E-governance has not made enough impact on
the people as e-commerce and e-learning have done.
There are several barriers on the roads of e-governance.
From the software engineering point of view, e-governance
has a lot of characteristics, which are different from
e-commerce and e-learning. Unlike e-commerce and
e-learning, e-governance needs to be proactive. While
e-commerce and e-learning involve information
management, e-governance involves KM. KM is the
management of information, skill, experience, innovation,
and intelligence. E-governance mostly based on knowledge
management system (KMS) is built on KM cycle of
knowledge capturing, knowledge sharing, knowledge
enhancing, and knowledge preserving. The development
model of e-governance, based on information management
system, applies a cycle-based process such as
waterfall, spiral or iterative process. E-governance
is a combination of interaction and integration. It is
also a path-based process 10,13.

11. 2010 DIGITAL LIBRARIES INITIATIVE
The 2010 Digital Libraries initiative is of significant
interest to all librarians. The initiative is evidence
that the European Commission recognises the value
of library and information services. The library community
must ensure that its voice is heard as the initiative
is developed. Community must also ensure that
they have the capacity to deliver the social and political
role of public libraries14 .

12. SOCIAL AND POLITICAL ROLE OF
PUBLIC LIBRARIES
How will libraries continue and develop their
roles in e-government? Through doing what they
have always done. In the words of the UNESCO
Public Library Manifesto:
'The public library, the local gateway to knowledge,
provides a basic condition for lifelong learning,
independent decision-making, and cultural
development of the individual and social groups.
Provides access to the world of imagination; to
32

the cultural memory of communities and society
at large, and to sources of information and knowledge.
Have provision of easy, personalised access to
information.
Have trained staff and a wide range of documentation
and multimedia information facilities to put users
in touch with full-time help desks manned by
experts.
Free phone access to a live Q&A service, free
PC access to e-mail questions and browse online
services, and especially trained staff to answer
questions. This network should cover a spectrum
of urban and rural environments, while maintaining
accessibility from any part of the country 9 .
The initiative hopes to increase the general level
of understanding and endorsement of Indian priorities
and activities in the general public and to enable the
public to participate in debates and discussions
about the information on India and about India.
This purpose of the public library, generally accepted
worldwide, has not changed by the ICT revolution.
It is still to further democracy, equality, and social
justice; increase access to information; disseminate
culture and knowledge; contribute to a meaningful
and informative leisure time; and act as a communal
institution and a social meeting place 1 .
Good governance rests on the pillars of knowledge
and recognition of this set of knowledge by the
decision makers and people alike. Digitisation of
this entire set of knowledge within a network, which
is open to all individuals (an inclusive network by
design) opens up possibilities for all to access and
use this knowledge, paving the way for digital governance
or e-governance as it is more popularly known.
Introduction of digital governance will ensure
that citizens can participate in, and influence decisionmaking processes which affect them closely. Citizens
will no longer remain passive recipients of governance
provided to them, but can pro-actively decide the
types and standards of governance they want and
the governance structures which can deliver best.
Stressing on the importance of a national coordination
for the e-governance system, Mr Sam Pitroda, Chairman,
National Knowledge Commission (NKC) said, egovernance was not about computerising existing
processes. We need to change our basic governance
pattern and ensure transparency, productivity, and
simplicity. We should pick 10 to 20 important services
and offer them on the Web and create a common
e-governance platform to make it citizen-centric. He
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

further added that at present, different states have
different ways of implementing e-governance. The
recommendations were based on the report of a
special group formed within NKC headed by InfoSys
CEO, Nandan Nilekani on e-governance 15 .

13. NKC ROADMAP
Before computerisation, redesign government
processes.
Offer services like issuance of birth/death certificates,
ration cards on Web.
Ensure common standards of operation, across
the country.
Digitise relevant government data. Make it accessible
to the public.
Provide nation-wide broadband infrastructure.
Localise data and services in regional languages.
Provide open source software for implementation.

centres in rural areas to provide all possible services.
Fitting into this overall e-governance plan, Council
for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology
(CAPART) proposes to introduce an e-governance
initiative to reach the un-reached, un-served, and
under-served areas more effectively using state-ofthe-art high-tech ICT through its partner NGOs by
setting up Village Knowledge Centres 16 .
Dissemination of knowledge and services to the
under-served, un-served, and un-reached areas will
help in:
Better skilled and oriented cadres and individuals.
Training of trainers.
Capacity enhanced at the grassroot level.
Modern human resource practices for efficient
service delivery.
Improved organisation and better decision-making
ability in the community.

Appoint Chief IT Officer for each State.
Invest 1-2 per cent of national programme budget
e-governance.
Create organisation with CEO to drive e-governance16.

14. VILLAGE KNOWLEDGE CENTRES
Information and communication technology is
the key enabler and a vital component of the new
knowledge-based economy and information revolution.
It is a major factor in economic growth and increasing
productivity. India is increasingly integrating ICT into
its national development plans and adopting strategies
for its widespread promotion in all the spheres of
economic activities. There is a need to ensure that
the benefit of the ICT percolates to all the different
socio-economic strata and to the grassroots of the
rural India. The rural areas in India cannot be compared
with its urban areas, where needs and service requirements
are at a very different level. With poor existing infrastructure
in the rural areas, delivery of services of essential
requirements becomes in itself a formidable task in
its 6,40,000 villages spread out in every type of
agro-climatic zones 15 .
Along with the improvement of physical infrastructure,
the government has shown firm commitment to improve
the e-infrastructure, especially in the villages, through
its National e-governance Plan. According to the
guidelines provided by Department of IT, it has been
mandated that the Government would create an enabling
environment for establishment of at least 1, 00,000
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Improved capacity within communities to manage
VKC systems.
Networking of governmental, non-governmental
institutions, PRIs, SHGs.
Knowledge connectivity.
Better opportunity of employment.
Availability of online market rates and better
marketing of rural produce.
Financial assistance will be provided for the
following components:
To meet the operational expenditure for central/
remote site for initial 3 years.
Content generation.
Capacity building and training of NGOs/communities
Community organisation and orientation.
Any other component related to the local need11 .

15. CONCLUSION
The most effective way to create a knowledge
sharing culture is first to start to practice it at
working level. The higher up the organisation, the
more effective it will be in changing the culture. But
even if we are low down the hierarchy, we have an
33

influence. We need to put in place the knowledge
sharing technology and train and educate people in
its effective use. The people with the appropriate
knowledge sharing mindset and the appropriate knowledge
sharing technology to support them will rapidly bring
about a knowledge sharing culture that will help us
to meet our objectives in a better way. Libraries are
increasingly adapting distributed models for information
access and management, and more often, use open
and collaborative models for developing library content
and services. With the incorporation of open models
and distributed technologies, libraries have the potential
to get more involved in knowledge creation, dissemination,
and use. With reference to libraries, the creation
and dissemination of knowledge in ways that represent
the libraries’ contributions broadly and that intertwine
the library with the other stakeholders in these activities.
The library becomes a collaborator within the academy,
yet retains its distinct identity.

7. Drotner, Kirsten. Library innovation for the knowledge
society. Scandavian Public Library Quarterly,
2005, 38(2), 7-8.

REFERENCES

13. Creating a knowledge sharing culture by Gurteen
David, 1999.

1. Srinivasan, G. We want e-Governance to take
over. The Hindu Business Line, 29 May 2000.
2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_society
3. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information

8. http://sharynheili.wordpress.com/2006/08/27/publiclibraries-as-knowledge-centers/
9. Bishop, P. & Davis, G. Mapping public participation
in policy choices. Australian Journal of Public
Administration, 2002, 61(1), 14-29.
10. http://knowledgecommission.gov.in/
11. Argyriades, D. Governance and public administration
in the 21st century: New trends and new techniques.
In Governance and public administration in the
21st Century: New trends and new techniques.
12. Bellamy, C., & Taylor, J. Governing in the information
age. Buckingham Open University Press, 1998.

14. Globalisation, institutions, and regional development
in Europe, edited by A. Amin and N. Thrift.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995.

4. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posterior_Analytics

15. Blakely, E. J. Planning local economic development.
Theory and practice. Sage Library of Social Research,
Newbury Park, CA, Sage, 1989. 168p.

5. http://www.gdrc.org/kmgmt/km-7.html

16. www.oalj.dol.gov/public/dot/refrnc/dotappb.htm

6. http://www.deccanherald.com/Archives/may92006/
state201854200658.asp

17. http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/
digital_libraries/index_en.htm

About the Author

Dr Arun Kumar Chakraborty obtained his PhD from Vidyasagar University, Bangalore, in
2000. He worked as Deputy ManagerFITT, IIT Delhi, and designed information system and
service centres there. He is also the founder editor of FITT: Forum, a newsletter of IIT Delhi.
He has published more than 37 papers in national/international seminars and journals and edited
course material, proceedings, etc. He is the life member of ILA, IASLIC, BLA and member of
SIS, and also the research secretary of IASLIC. His areas of interest are digital library, open
archives, information management science, communication science and environment information
system.

34

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

