DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 35-38
© 2008, DESIDOC

Relevance of Technical Communication to
Knowledge Management: An R&D Perspective
Anuradha Ravi
Defence Bioengineering & Electromedical Laboratory
CV Raman Nagar, Bangalore-560 093
E-mail:anuradharavi@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
This article is based on the author's experiences in providing documentation and KM-based services
to a variety of audiences. Starting from the basic definitions of the fields of information science (IS) and
technical communication (TC), the interdisciplinary nature of the emerging field of knowledge management
(KM) and the role of TC practitioners in building KM systems are described.
Keywords: Knowledge management, technical communication, information science

Information science (IS) is the generation, collection,
organisation, interpretation, storage, retrieval,
dissemination, transformation, and use of information
with particular emphasis on the application of modern
technologies in these areas 1 .
One of the definitions of technical communication
(TC) is that it is reader based, focused on the
subject, dependent upon technology (both for its
subject matter and its means of production) representative
of the corporate culture which produces it, collaborative,
and marked by its technical style and visual display2.
Incidentally, technical writing is also used interchangeably
with TC in literature.
The main charter of an R&D organisation is to
conduct research in its area of work and design and
develop products based on the user's needs. In an
R&D set up both information scientists and technical
communicators render important service and contribute
to the success of the R&D projects. Information
scientists supply the right information and convey
the right information at the right time. Technical
communicators shape the information and convey
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

the right information at the right time in the right
form. The characteristics and techniques of technical
writing and the role of technical writers in information
dissemination has been brought out earlier3. The five
distinctive characteristics of TC are: rhetorical modes;
factual context and specific readers; vocabulary and
format; objective style; and technical subject matter.
The intersection of the Venn diagram of the two
fields is documentation; that is, classifying and
making readily available the records of all kinds of
intellectual activity (Fig. 1.)

IS

Documentation

1. INTRODUCTION

TC

Figure 1. Overlap in fields of work between IS and TC.
35

2. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Knowledge management (KM) means different
things to different people depending on their perspective.
Considering that the earliest papers on the subject
appeared only in the 1980s, a vast body of literature
has been built up. What is of interest, however, is
that many of them deal with the interdisciplinary
nature of KM and have identified TC and IS as
constituents or contributory factors in KM.
Bellinger 4 brings out beautifully the technical
relationship between data, information, knowledge
and wisdom. He says that the sequence data →
information→ knowledge→wisdom represents an emergent
continuum. Although data is a discrete entity, the
progression to information; to knowledge; and finally
to wisdom does not occur in discrete stages of
development. Learning occurs by connecting new
information to already understood patterns and by
doing so, patterns get extended. In an organisational
context, data represents facts and values of results
and the relations between data and other relations
have the capacity to represent information. Patterns
of relations of data and information, and other patterns
have the capacity to represent knowledge.
Barclay and Murray5 give an overview of the
subject starting from definition of knowledge; kinds
of knowledge (explicit and tacit); brief history of KM
and the nature of KM as a cross disciplinary domain.
Their list of fields contributing to KM includes, inter
alia, cognitive science, library and information science,
technical writing, relational, and object databases.
Handoic and Zhou6 make a case for an integrated
view of KM. They give an overview of current perspective
of KM and elaborate on the three main categories
or schools of KM: technocratic, economic and behavioural.
They reproduce Earl's taxonomy of schools of KM
covering the differences in attributes such as focus,
aim, critical success factors, philosophy in the different
schools. In the strategic school, rhetoric artifacts
is identified as the critical success factor for KM.
Rhetoric is one of the main attributes of TC.

3. KNOWLEDGE CREATION IN R&D
ORGANISATIONS
As mentioned earlier, the main activity of an
R&D organisation is undertaking and executing projects
within specific time and cost to achieve the desired
goals. The goals may vary depending on the type
of projects undertaken. Human energies, physical
and monetary resources are dedicated towards this

36

end in an organised manner. The management,
methodology, procedures and practices may vary
from organisation to organisation or from time to
time within the same organisation depending upon
the needs of the project tasks and the nature of the
technology development. However, the steps in a
project life cycle can be broadly classified as shown
in Fig. 2.
Feasibility
Study

Project
completion

Project proposal
formulation

Project sanction

Project execution

Figure 2. Stages of a project in R&D organisation.

The feasibility study examines the following aspects:
goals of the projects; state-of-the-art analysis; preliminary
design; resource management; project execution
plan; cost-benefit analysis; and spin-offs. The project
proposal drawn on the feasibility study will have
details also on probable duration of completion of
the project and detailed project execution plan. That
is, its goals, tasks, budget, timeline and responsibilities.
The project sanction is based on thorough
examination of the proposal, necessity of the project,
adequacy of the core competence of the executing
agency, etc. The project execution will have stages
like design, development, testing, evaluation, reworking
(where necessary), trials, etc.
Comprehensive critical reviews are conducted
at each stage of a project's life cycle, i.e., before
sanction, during execution at each stage, and after
closure of the project. A whole range of documents
get generated as a result of the review processes
as well as the project execution itself. Chief among
them are: feasibility study reports, project proposal
document, preliminary design review document, critical
design review document, periodic project progress
review reports, test and evaluation reports, publications
in research journals, patent applications, and closure
reports. These form the repository of the explicit
knowledge gained from the project.
Apart from these, the people of all levels involved
in the R&D process  R&D managers, scientists,
engineers, and technicians  get enriched by the
experience and their tacit knowledge gets enhanced.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

4. NEED FOR KNOWLEDGE
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Projects are not executed in isolation. They are
related to the organisational objectives and are intended
to achieve certain specific outcome such as improved
performances, competitive advantage, innovation, etc.
When a new project is taken up, apart from the
manpower and the infrastructure built up earlier, the
lessons learnt from the previous projects are also
transferred to the new project. Considerable literature
survey is done to find out the new information on
the topic from other sources. This, in fact, is the
process of extension of the patterns referred by
Bellinger.
Knowledge transfer is easy in case of small
teams but becomes difficult to apply across the
board at inter laboratory or pan organisational levels.
For this, relevant systems based on dataware housing
and data mining techniques are necessary. Such
systems will help in preventing wasteful repetition;
development of collaborative practices, etc., and
will enable knowledge discovery from unstructured
textual information bases.

5. ROLE OF TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION IN KM
Even the best IT-based systems will only play
a supplementary role in KM. This is because, in
R&D organisations also, like in any other knowledge
creation process, only a part of the new knowledge
gets recorded in documents and becomes explicit
knowledge which others can refer to for enhancing
their own knowledge. This explicit knowledge is
only the tip of the iceberg; the tacit knowledge
residing in the people (workers of all levels) in the
form of know-how and experience is much more.
That true KM is about people and has been brought
out nicely in a concept paper by the OSD Comptroller
I Center, DoD, USA 7. The paper also voices the
general concern that is important to public sector
organisations; that is, over the next few years, a
substantial portion of the workforce would retire.
This is true for many R&D organisations in India too.
When people leave an organisation, they take a
wealth of knowledge about their jobs with them.
Knowledge management has to deal with securing
and replenishing the learning experiences, as well
as the work products of the people who comprise
any organisation.
Knowledge management has to find means of
capturing the valuable tacit knowledge. The interchange/
exchange of tacit knowledge occurs through interpersonal
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

communications in both formal and informal settings.
Considerable people skills, communication skills
are required to grasp these and record them in such
a way that it becomes useful for others. Technical
communicators have these very skills because of
their training and core competence.
Many a time, R&D organisations have to make
presentations to outside agencies like budget authorities,
auditors, etc., who may be from a different subject
background. Answering their queries and satisfying
them in an effective, convincing manner is not an
easy task. It has been experienced that the presentation
has to be based on both explicit and implicit knowledge.
Considerable rhetoric skills as well as eloquent
communication skills are required for this purpose.
Again these are the very qualities which have been
identified as success factors in KM systems and
which are possessed by good technical communication
personnel.

6. TC TOOLS FOR DEVELOPING KM
SYSTEMS
TC professionals are mainly engaged in developing
documentation in organisations, as has been mentioned
earlier. In the IT industry in particular, they are
employed for creating software documentation, help
files, online help menus, etc. In R&D organisations,
they are involved at all levels of the projects and the
various documents evolving at each stage as explained
earlier under Knowledge Creation.
Technical communication professionals use a
variety of tools for this purpose. There is no particular
set of tools that is a 'must' for all of them; by training
and aptitude, each person picks up familiarity and
skills in a particular set of tools.
The TC tool kit can be broadly categorised into
Word Processors, Graphic Programmes, Desktop
Publishing Software, Text Editors, HTML, XML Editors,
etc. These are used to a small or large extent by
almost all technical communicators. Technical writers
in the software documentation use specialised tools
like Robo help for generating help files. It is very
difficult for a TC practitioner to keep acquiring mastery
in all the latest developments in the area of TC
tools, especially as one moves up the hierarchy and
has administrative and other responsibilities along
with the technical work; but it is necessary to be
at least aware of the features of the new products
in the market. For example, Adobe Systems has in
8
September 2007 announced
the launch of Adobe
Technical Communication Suite Software, which is
an integrated solution for authoring, managing and
37

publishing technical information across multiple formats
and languages. The suite includes Adobe Robo
Help 7, an update of its help system and knowledgebase authoring tool, Adobe Frame Maker; Adobe
Captivate 3, and Adobe Acrobat 3D version 8 software.
This first of its kind system is expected to empower
communicators in delivering compelling materials,
save time, and reduce discrepancies in content.

7. CONCLUSION
TC professionals can use their inherent skills
for communication and coordination along with their
familiarity in handling TC tools and contribute to the
development of KM systems in organisations. They
have a vital role to play in sharing and leveraging
of knowledge and in settling up Knowledge Portals,
Discussion Forums, Document Management Systems,
Document Libraries, Data Warehousing, Web Enabled
Exchange Vehicles, etc. Thus it can be concluded
that TC professionals have a lot to contribute in
developing KM systems in R&D organisations.

REFERENCES
1. Syed, Fazle Rab. The changing frontiers of library
and information science (concepts, models and
applications), Commonwealth Publishers, 1994.

2. Burnett, Rebecca E. Technical communication,
Wordsworth, Belmont, 1994.
3. Sharma, G.S. & Ravi, Anuradha. Role of technical
writers in information dissemination. In Proceedings
of the National Conference on Scientific Information
for Defence, DESIDOC, New Delhi, 1986.
4. Bellinger; Gene. Knowledge managementEmerging
perspectives. http://www. systems-thinking.org/
kmgmt/kgmt.htm.
5. Barclay, Rebecca O & Murray, Philip C. What
is knowledge management. Knowledge Praxis.
http://www.media-access.com/whatis.html, 1997.
6. Handzic, Meliha & Zhou, Albert Z. Knowledge
management : An integrative approach. Chandos
Publising, Oxford, 2005.
7. USD Comptroller I Centre Concept Paper. Knowledge
management (KM): Maximising human potential.
http://www.dod.mil/comptroller/icentre/learn/know
ledman.html
8. Press Release from Adobe dated 25 September
2007. http://www.adobe.com/aboutadobe/pressroom/
press releases/200709/092507/TCS.html

About the Author

Mrs Anuradha Ravi obtained Ist class BSc and MSc degrees in Physics from the University
of Delhi. After pursuing research in superconductivity for two years in the same department,
she switched over to teaching and thereafter, science editing. She has several papers on
S&T communication and IT to her credit. She is the co-editor of two books: Bibliographic
Databases and Networks by Tata McGraw Hill, and Medical Informatics brought out by SBMT.
She received the National Science Day Oration Medal in 2005. Her popular articles have
appeared in national dailies. Her fields of special interest are S&T communication with reference
to new information technologies and knowledge management. She is presently the Joint Director,
Information Services at DEBEL, DRDO, Bangalore.

38

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

