DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 39-42
© 2008, DESIDOC

SPECIAL SECTION

Is Digital Rights Management an IPR?
C. Vidyadhar Bhatt
Judicial Department, High Court of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad-500 066
E-mail: cv_bhatt@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
The relationship between law and technology has to be strengthened to raise the level of present
electronic era. Though it is a challenging task, as per the latest know-how, it is the time to respond to
new technologies. Till recently, the law makers handled problems presented by technology without
breakdown of legal resources. Convergence of computers and Internet has posed a much graver problem,
which legal policy makers find difficult to address. Music and film industries are also facing the heat of
Internet piracy. Their reliance on traditional laws pertaining to copyright or other laws have not produced
the expected results. In this scenario, a new emerging revolutionary digital technology, that could enable
the originator to manage, control, permit usage of digital content is most welcoming. This article discusses
the possibilities of paper management of IPR becoming digital management of IPR and surmise that DRM
is becoming an important tool to manage digital products.
Keywords: Digital right management, intellectual property rights, copyrights, digital contents, piracy

1. INTRODUCTION
DRM, an acronym for Digital Rights Management,
is a new emerging and revolutionary technique applied
and used for restricting the free use and transfer of
digital contents. It is basically an aggregation of
technologies, which specifies, manages, and enforces
rules in all aspects of usage and distribution of
digital content. The process of DRM is used in a
number of media, but is most commonly found in
video and music files. Using this technique the right
holder of a specific work, be it audio or video, can
manage his copyright material and the terms and
conditions on which it is made available to the
users.

2. WWW AND PIRACY
World Wide Web (WWW) evolved as a classic
media for dissemination of information. Every conceivable
form of information in different formats is available
on the net. Personal computers furthered the access
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

to net by netizens even in remote areas. Along with
this boom came the piracy; in the music, audio and
video, the written, fictional, and non-fictional work,
even to the extent of piracy of e-mails. The Internet
has now become a gigantic copying machine enabling
unlimited illegal copying of contents. Also, there
was a phenomenal improvement in compression
technology such as MP3, RAR files, etc., which
reduced download speed to almost 10 to 15 per cent
of the earlier download time. The availability of multiple
and perfect copies of various work has become a
threat to the music industry's viability and profitability.
Ingenious programmers started free sharing networks
like the Gnutella (Gnutella is the third-most-popular
file sharing network on the Internet), enabling peerto-peer copying, which hit the revenues of the music
industry. The more defiant music lovers even started
breaking into precious databanks of the music industry
and pilfered the loot to their hearts content. Copyright
protection, though sounded formidable, was not proving
adequate enough. The industry was in search of a
39

more effective and immediate process or technique,
which could enable the author or performer or the
right holder to control and permit that could either
stop such copying or permit the use or download
on payment of certain price. The goal was to protect
the rights of the author, prevent piracy and encourage
digital music commerce, and to ensure that only
paying consumers can access media.

3. SETTING STANDARDS AND SELFPROTECTION
To fight back this digital piracy, the music industry
got together and created secure digital music initiative
(SDMI). The SDMI is a working group, comprised of
over 150 businesses and organisations with significant
interests in the future of digital music, working to
develop a specification for its secure distribution
and securing music across all digital-delivery platforms.
DRM is one part of the SDMI. In the past few years,
DRM has developed into a viable system for intellectual
property (IP) protection and enforcement. The music
industry's prayer for a programme that could stem
the tide of unauthorised file sharing has been answered
in the form of DRM. Indirectly, DRM is also protecting
the IPR of the owners, thereby proving itself an
important facilitating mechanism for protecting copyrights
in free market. Like specified IP protections such
as copyright, DRM also can protect several other
kinds of rights like the right to privacy, a fundamental
right in many legal systems, which can directly or
indirectly affect the distribution of the information,
the product or even in remote, the services too. It
is predicted that the current approaches to IP protection
and enforcement through DRM may render the present
legal protection available in form of copyright archaic.

4. COMPONENTS OF DRM
The following are some of the broad components
and important areas of DRM (only a broad indication
and not specific related areas):
Business objective and privacy.
Planning the product, identifying the rights and
related documents.
Basis of use of such rights.

4.2 Planning the Product, Identifying the
Rights and Related Documents
It has been the experience of various organisations,
which have implemented the DRM package either in
its simple format or complex procedures, that initial
identification of work or product, the recordings of
the works, the concerned and right owners, their
rights and the works and also their consent to exploit
the work is a bit difficult. Let us take one aspect,
identification of material and document of a literary
work. The products in general in literary work are
books, compilations of information, electronic database,
computer scripts or programs, articles, etc. Having
done this the next step would be to identify the work
and who created the said work. This can be done
in various ways like enquiring about the owners'
rights, checking for copyright notices, and also a
search of relevant industry catalogues.
It is a general rule that a creator or producer
of material holds the copyright unless there is an
agreement to the contrary. Authors could be writers,
music composers or even software developers. Once
the identification of the author is done, then the
moral and performers right should be taken into
account. In the maze of technology development the
system should not forget to respect the moral and
performers rights. This can be achieved by detailing
all the information about the performer, the work
done by him, etc.

Management of legal and other rights.

4.3 Basis of Use of Such Rights

Tools of DRM: legal and technical.

A right is based on the consent of such right
holder. If a copyright user is not exercising his
exclusive right himself, then he can give permission
through licenses to other people to do so. Such
licenses could be subject to certain payment conditions
like outright sale or royalty or license fee, etc. In

4.1 Business Objective and Privacy
Every entity starts with an objective. The objective,
being the vision of the company, obviously has an
40

aura of secrecy or privacy around it. The entity
could be an individual, a partnership, a private limited
company, a trust or a society. It is still not clear
as to how DRM could step in at this very nascent
stage, though there are ideas visualised and visions
set, there is not enough work done or information
or strategy developed to segregate, decide, and
crystallise the probable course of action, be it
manufacturing, programming, developing a prototype,
etc. It could simply be stated that this nascent
stage is the drawing board stage. In such a scenario,
it is to be seen whether a technique like DRM can
be implemented or even protection tools like nondisclosure, trade secrecy agreements are simple
enough to give the adequate protection at this stage.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

a digital environment the copyright owner may expressly
or impliedly license the work to some other. It is to
be remembered that almost all common DRM platforms
or systems digitally reproduce the content and transmit
them to the end users. However, in such transmission
there is one practical problem that arises. In the
multiple reproduction of such content in various servers,
the transmission and retransmission from one server
to another, a temporary memory is created till such
content reaches the end user. The matter of concern
could be such temporary copy created as a part of
the technical process. Whether this infringes copyright
or not depends upon whether the original transmission
is authorised. Also, under the Copyright Act the
temporary material, which is a part of the technical
process of transmission, do not infringe the copyright
provided the original transmission is authorised. It
also means that if a particular work is being transmitted
on the Internet, rights need not be obtained to make
temporary copies.

4.4 Management of Legal and Other
Rights
The most common rights that could accrue to
the author are copyrights, trade secrets, and patents.
Rights management is a very crucial stage in the
entire process. Normally, it can be on two levels,
organisational and the product level. The management
of rights can be successfully achieved only when a
management plan is put in its place. At the organisational
level, rights management could include setting up
of rights management policies, refining such policies,
drafting and managing of agreements, managing the
information on rights acquired, which would also
include knowing from whose the rights were received,
how broad such rights are so on and so forth, control
and enforcement of licenses, supporting licenses,
and also the revenue collection. Management of
rights would also include valuating of rights where
under factors like creating costs, time taken to
produce, are also considered. One more aspect is
the mode of securing such rights where under acquiring
variety of consents and authorisations need to be
done. Development of appropriate agreements is
also a very vital part of the management. Agreements
portray the extent of rights that can be acquired or
bargained. These agreements could be assignment
agreements, which involves transfer of ownership for
consideration or licenses, which may include nonexclusive
licenses, etc. Similarly, at the product level things
to be attended, acquiring adequate information on
the product information on policies and agreements,
enforcement of such rights, and also revenue collection
support are also important.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

4.5 Tools of DRM
DRM also incorporates and envisages technical
and legal tools that are vital. These tools are:

4.5.1 Technical Tools
DRM can be performed by several different kinds
of tools like a right definition language. Though it
is demanding to define a particular language, however,
extensible rights markup language (eXRML), and
open digital rights language (ODRI) may define DRM.
There are also the communication protocols that
need to be developed to maintain the homogeneity
of understanding the transferring of data.

4.5.2 Legal Tools
Legal tools constitute the copyrights, patents,
trade marks, the various law enforcement authorities,
modes of settlements of disputes like arbitration,
court rulings, etc. In the matters of evidence, technical
tools may be needed to show and prove evidence.
For this purpose legal tools may have to heavily
depend on technical tools. Thus, it can be concluded
that in the matter of legal proceedings and establishment
of evidence, it is imperative that legal as well as
technical tools are deployed and worked in consonance.
Some of the major entertainment companies
are using DRM or copy protection, to confine the
digital media. These DRM technologies do nothing
to stop copyright pirates, but instead end up interfering
with fans' lawful use of music, movies, and other
copyrighted works. DRM can prevent one from making
backups of the DVDs and music downloaded from
online stores, recording favourite TV programmes,
using the portable media player, remixing clips of
movies, and much more. At present, DRM has been
introduced as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
(DMCA). Circumventing DRM locks or create the
tools to do so, even to enable non-infringing fair
uses, may lend to the receiving end of a lawsuit.
The DMCA has been a disaster for innovation, free
speech, fair use, and competition. Further, the US
Congress is now considering new laws that go beyond
the DMCA, mandating DRM in a wide array of digital
media, devices and personal computers, giving
entertainment industry lawyers, and federal bureaucrats
veto power over new gadgets.

5. CONCLUSION
It is beyond doubt that DRM is becoming increasingly
an important area with its focus on management of
digital products. Today, the situation is that many
41

companies are developing their own DRM systems,
be it small or large. There are companies and entrepreneurs
who have developed DRM packages and products
on a commercial platform. Sometimes such companies
are also designing and developing tailor made DRM
packages in accordance with the specific needs.
Though a standard language and a homogeneous
protocol network are yet to be fully developed, efforts
are being made to speed up the process. It would
be only a matter of time before such standardisation
is implemented at a commercial level.
It is a future that the know-how, development,
knowledge and use of the DRM system is likely to

be absorbed into normal business skills and practices
in next few years. Usages could be free or cheap
or even expensive but things are brightening up for
the DRM infrastructure.
For creators and all sorts of content communities,
DRM is likely to enable the growth and success of
e-market and finally will be the key point in
e-commerce system for marketing of the digital content,
and will enable a smooth, safe, secure movement
of the digital work from the creator and producer to
retailers and consumers at a cost. DRM, if proved
reliable, may see authors seek legal advice on more
occasions.

About the Author

Shri C. Vidyadhar Bhatt is a Postgraduate in Indian Laws and Library & Information Sciences.
He also obtained Postgraduate Diplomas in Public Relations, Theatre Arts, Computer Applications,
and Cyber Laws, and Legal Information Systems. He worked as Assistant Registrar (Library
and Legal Information Services) at High Court of Andhra Pradesh. He computerised system
integration and workflow system in High Court of Andhra Pradesh, and introduced Grandhalaya,
library management software for the judges' library. He specialised in writing head notes for
the orders/judgments rendered by the Hon'ble judges. He has also worked as Editor-in-Charge
for Indian Law Reports (Andhra Pradesh Series). Presently, he is rendering the services in
the Judicial Department of High Court of Andhra Pradesh as Deputy Registrar. He is working
on cyber laws and IPRs and on the different innovations of legal information systems and
their development.

42

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

