DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 43-48
© 2008, DESIDOC

Practical and Legal Protection of Computer Databases
Ashok Ram Kumar
Plot No. 491, Road No. 10 Jubilee Hills, Hyderabad-560 073
E-mail: ashokramkumar@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
In India, the legalities of computer software are often poorly understood by the programmers, authors,
and the software industry. Indian software industry, being one of the top most foreign exchange earners,
needs to take a close look and safeguard its market and intellect of its many programmers since computer
database is a new type of intellectual property of growing importance in today’s world. The Indian
software industry has to change its orientation and stress the protection of intellectual property. Only
by doing so, there will be a good scope for original product development. The article discusses the
practical and legal methods of protecting computer databases from unauthorised copying and use, and
areas of trade secrecy and non-disclosure.
Keywords: Software, software industry, legal protection, IPRs, copyright

1. INRODUCTION
Tremendous opportunities and advantages of
cybernetics with the phenomenal growth of computer
software, Internet, mobile technologies, and digital
instrumentation, have arisen serious judicial concerns
of techno-legal dimension more specifically in the
arena of intellectual property rights (IPR) regime.
The net, with the convenience of World Wide Web
(www), mass reeling of hypertext transfer protocol
(http), and hypertext markup language (html) has
become the most efficient distribution mechanism.
While the issue of computer software piracy, and
copyright violations is itself not a new one, the
onset of the digital environment has become the
death knell for copyright law, as the jurisprudential
foundations and ideological mooring of the copyright,
information technology, and cyber laws are juxtaposed
to each other in many respects. These juxtapositions,
if not seriously address to by the lawmakers and the
judiciary ultimately may prove the various IPR and
Cyber law enactments an exercise in futility.
Copyright is unique kind of intellectual property
right, the importance of which is increasing day by
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

day, and does not fall in the area of industrial property.
For enjoying copyright protection, the work must be
an original creation. Copyright, was not regarded as
being of much relevance to the sale of products
other than traditionally artistic products such as
books, music compositions, artistic works, literary
works, pantomimes motion pictures, and gramophone
records. Copyright remains the principle means of
preventing others from copying or selling software
as well as literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
works. The foremost purpose of copyright law is to
foster the growth of learning and culture, and the
dissemination of information. It is meant to induce
the creation of as many works of art, literature,
music, and works of authorship (including software)
as possible. Copyright law gives authors limited
property rights in their works, but only for the ultimate
purpose of benefiting the public by encouraging the
creation of more works. The purpose of copyright is
not to protect the author, but it is to benefit the
public. The balance in copyright law is drawn by
limiting property rights to the author’s particular
method of expressing an idea. Copyright never protects
the idea, but instead only protects the expression
43

of the idea. But once the idea has been expressed
in tangible form the copyright protection exists for
words, literary, and musical works in which it is
encompassed.

2. COPYRIGHTS AND COMPUTER
PROGRAMMES
Today, however, in addition to the above-mentioned
traditional areas, copyright has become an extremely
important weapon in preventing piracy of computer
software and preventing copying of various useful
items to which art has been applied. The protection
for software has traditionally been restricted to copyrights.
Software can only be copyrighted as a literary work.
Copyright infringement is fairly easy to get away
since it can always be claimed that the source
codes, algorithms, etc. could be used for different
implementations. It necessitated the need for inserting
moles of special identities in the software called as
“seeds” and “signatures” by the author. The intentional
use of “seeds” and “signatures” in a database, when
combined with the three main vehicles of legal protection,
viz., copyright, trade secrets, and contract can create
a powerful defence against the computer pirate.
For the Indian industry, low value-added body
shopping and data processing constitute the bulk of
the software exports. Handful of software companies
in India seriously pursue and secure copyright protection
for their software. Out of the rest, some are even
unaware that they can secure their works by going
in for copyrights and the balance do not seriously
pursue the process. There is also one school of
thought, which simply thinks that it is not worth
pursuing a copyright since enforcing and suing for
infringement and damages is a long, and cumbersome
legal process.
Globally, very few of the large companies in the
world hold a virtual monopoly on operating systems
and no one in the industry is really putting up much
of a fight against the one or two software giants who
hold monopoly and minting millions. The only reason
being that these one or two companies have done
a phenomenal job protecting themselves and their
software products by effectively using the different
intellectual property protections available for computer
programs including trade secrets, copyrights, and
patents.

3. INDIAN COPYRIGHT LAW
The earliest copyright statute in India is the
1847 Act, enacted during the East Indian Company’s
44

regime. Not much of information is available about
how the Copyright Act operated till 1911. In 1911,
Britain codified the Copyright Act of 1911 and made
it applicable to India. In 1914, the Indian Copyright
Act was enacted, which was a modified version of
the 1911 Act. The first Act after independence is the
Copyright Act of 1957, which took into consideration
the new developments and technological advances
and introduced number of changes and new provisions.
The Act was further amended in 1983, 1984, 1994,
and 1999. The amendment of 1994 brought computer
programs within the ambit of the Act. The further
amendment in 1999, apart from others, saw the
amended definition of the literary works and meaning
of copyright in respect of computer programs.

4. WHAT IS A COMPUTER DATABASE?
“What exactly is a computer database?” Essentially,
computer database, is a collection of information
stored, in hard disk drives, diskettes, tape drives,
CD-ROMs, etc. so that it can be selectively searched
for retrieving the desired information using a computer.
Computer database could be a program used by the
computer to run certain applications (like the word
processor), or data entered by a person in the computer
for purpose of record and reuse, or a image file, etc.
With the advancement in information technology,
the significance and volume of database products is
on the increase. Since this is a relatively new type
of property, there is a need to rapidly evolve and
create new standards and legal principles to try and
protect it against its misuse, theft, unauthorised
copying, and use.
Databases have long existed in manual or book
form. For example, the telephone book or directory,
reference books, and legal reporters which can be
termed as manual databases. The computer database
is essentially an information compendium like a
phone book, which has been placed in a computer
and automated. When information is computerised,
there are many more ways for the information to be
accessed, manipulated, and used; the value of the
database to users is thereby greatly enhanced. Some
popular examples of computer databases include
legal databases such as Lexis, Juris, Westlaw, etc.,
and various business and scientific databases such
as those found on Dialog and Internet.
An automated database can be defined as “a
body of facts, data, or other information assembled
into an organised format suitable for use in a computer
and comprising one or more files”. The Indian statutes
are yet to specifically list automated databases as
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

a copyrightable subject matter. For the purpose of
copyrights, a computer database can also be defined
as a “compilation”, which means data formed by the
collection and assembling or pre-existing materials
or of data that are selected, coordinated or arranged
in such a way that the resulting work as a whole
constitutes an original work of authorship. Examples
of compilation include periodical, anthology and
encyclopedia, or a reference work such as a directory,
index, map, telephone book, guidebook, law reporter,
catalogue, chart, or a racing guide.

5. WHY A DATABASE CAN BE HARD TO
LEGALLY PROTECT?
Under traditional concepts of literary copyright,
the data contained in a compilation, and the selection
of the data, may sometimes not be protected from
copying. Only the coordination and arrangement of
the database may be protected, and even then there
must be some originality to the collection and arrangement
for it to be protected. When a database is composed
of facts, these facts frequently cannot be copyrighted,
for otherwise the public’s right to use information in
the public domain would be unreasonably limited.
The basic problem in protecting a database is
that the information compiled is frequently public
knowledge, understandably so since the user has
to know how to use the database. Just facts or the
data is otherwise not susceptible of ownership by
the compiler of the database. For example, a person
could call every lawyer or solicitor in the country
and ask if they are specialised in computer law. The
names and addresses of those who said yes could
then be put into a database of computer lawyers.
The question is, “Does the person preparing this
database own the names and addresses of these
lawyers or solicitors? Understandably this would be
denied by the concerned lawyers or solicitors. Then
what does the person preparing this database own?
How can he prevent other from copying and selling
as his own? The way the information about lawyers
or solicitors is arranged in the database might involve
little or no originality. Hence, this aspect of the
database might not fall under the caption “copyright”
and therefore cannot be sought to be protected.
Since the names and addresses of the advocates
or solicitors are not susceptible to ownership, a
competitor certainly could call up all of the attorneys
in the country and, assuming he got the same
answers, come up with the same list. This would
unquestionably be fair competition, and the first
person who thought of the idea of compiling a list
of advocates or solicitors specialising in computer
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

laws would not be able to stop the competitor from
coming out with compilation of another list of advocates
or solicitors specialising in computer law.
There are essentially three ways to legally protect
computer databases: copyright, trade secret, and
contract. Ideally, all three of these legal means can
be employed, along with practical non-legal methods,
to provide the maximum protection against the piracy
of the databases. There are, of course, other legal
theories propounded in the US, such as unfair competition
and conversion, however, these theories may be
pre-empted by copyright law. Indian copyright law
provides the framework and basic foundation for
legal protection by securing for limited time to the
authors and inventors the exclusive rights in their
respective writings and discoveries.

6. COPYRIGHT LAW
Copyright protects the expression of idea and
not the idea itself. Originality requires the author of
the specific work to contribute something more than
a “merely trivial” variation, which is recognisably
“his own.” The traditional copyright doctrine envisages,
that a work must show some “creativity” in order to
meet the originality test, and it is not subject to
copyright if the work merely copies an existing
work. The work should evolve from the intellect of
the author and shall not be altered or edited repetition
of any other existing work. This essential element
of “creativity” is weak or completely absent in many
manual reference works or computer databases. For
example, what creativity is there in an alphabetical
listing of names in a phone book?
Another basic problem in protecting a database
is that copyright law does not prohibit the copying
of facts, even newly discovered or expensively acquired
facts, nor does it prohibit the copying of ideas.
Copyright law can only provide protection to the
arrangement and coordination of facts in a database.
Even then, there must be some originality to the
collection and arrangement for it to be protected.
Typically, the preparation of a database requires
a significant expenditure of time, effort and money
to cull and select information from various different
sources, but little or no original creativity to express
the facts, or arrange them. In these circumstances,
where the compiler gathers and compiles raw facts,
he did not create the facts; he just discovered or
uncovered them, sometimes at great expense and
trouble. Such was the case in the earlier example
of the poor investigator who had to call every advocate
or solicitor in the country to see if they practiced
45

computer law. So how can one prevent copying of
the work?
In order to lend copyright protection to merely
factual databases, we have to look to the decisions
pronounced by American Courts. They moved away
from a strict application of the creativity test, and
employed the test of “industriousness” or “sweat of
the brow”. This was attempted in order to test and
determine if the database is an “originality” from the
“labour and expense” necessary to make the compilation,
rather than from any real “creativity’ of the author.
Under the “sweat of the brow” doctrine, copyright
could prevent the unauthorised copying facts in a
database, if the compiler could show that sufficient
effort went into the acquisition and selection of the
data to make it original. The protection would lie
even if the information compiled was public knowledge
or otherwise not protected.
The decisions of the American Courts and the
above doctrine have to be critically analysed in the
Indian legal perspective before any reference is made
or guidance taken from.
Indian copyright law more than meeting the World
Trade Organisation (WTO) requirements has weak
enforcement. And with other problems inherent in
copyright protection of a database, contract and
trade secret law becomes all the more important to
try and prevent the unauthorised copying of factual
data from a database.

7.

TRADE SECRECY PROTECTION

Secrecy, in the software industry is judged in
light of the industry’s level of general knowledge, the
information’s ascertainability, and the offensive of
the missappropriator’s conduct. Secrecy can be
destroyed by insufficient precautions, by the marketing
of a product that reveals the secret, or by disclosure
in judicial proceedings or to government agencies.
Trade secrete had long been the favourite protection
by the software industry. Trade secrets extend to
virtually any concrete information, including formulas,
data compilations, programs, devices, processes,
and customer lists. Thus, trade secret can protect
software against the unauthorised use or disclosure
by anyone who obtains it through improper means
or through a confidential relationship. Secrecy can
be divided into two parts: (i) prevention of disclosure
to external competitors, and (ii) imposition of confidentiality
on one’s employees. Most of the software is protected
atleast to some extent by trade secrets. Adding
46

trade secrecy protection to a database can provide
significantly greater legal rights. Unfortunately the
Indian legal system has not seen much development
in this sphere of law. Much needs to be done by the
Government and the Judiciary in this field of law.
Following are the facts to consider in determining
whether particular information is a trade secret or not:
(i)

The extent to which the subject information is
known outside the business.

(ii) The extent to which it is known to the employees
and others involved in the business.
(iii) The extent of measure taken to guard the secrecy
of the subject information.
(iv) The amount of money, time, efforts spent by the
company to develop the said information.
(v) The value of the subject information to the company
and to the competitors.
(vi) The ease or difficulty at which the subject information
could be acquired or duplicated by others.
To obtain the trade secret status two important
requirements are: (i) the subject information provides
a commercial advantage, and (ii) the information is
a secret.
Trade secret protection is a viable and useful
tool in protecting software because it is immediate
protection and can be perpetual. Indian software
companies should use this protection to keep their
former employees from stealing the work product
that rightfully belongs to the company. Additionally,
trade secret protection can protect the company
again stealing of part/s of the code in violation of
an express agreement.
Essentially a trade secret is a knowledge, which
a person or company acquires through its own efforts
and which has some value to it. Typically, this
knowledge is kept secret from competitors because
it is felt that this information provides some type of
competitive advantage. Trade secret information includes
information regarding a formula, pattern, compilation,
program, device, method, technique or process. The
information should derive independent economic value,
actual or potential, not being generally known to and
not being readily ascertainable by proper means by
other persons who can obtain economic value from
its disclosure or use; and is the subject of effort that
reasonably warrants under the circumstances to
maintain its secrecy.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

Since a computer database is a compilation,
which derives economic value, it is a type of intellectual
property, which requires trade secrecy protection.
The common legal devise for implementing the principle
of trade secret is the non-disclosure and secrecy
agreement. It is a common practice with the Indian
companies to take a declaration or enter into a nondisclosure and secrecy agreement with its employees.
Once having signed this the employee is obliged to
keep as a secret the knowledge gained from his
former employment in any future employment more
so with a competitor.

8. PROTECTION OF DATABASES BY
CONTRACT
A seller of the database can ask any purchaser
to enter into a written contract as a condition of
purchase of the database. Similarly, surveyor of the
computer lawyer database could refuse to sell this
information to anyone unless they first sign a written
contract. That written agreement could expressly
provide that the purchaser will not disclose the list
of computer lawyers to anyone but authorised users,
nor make any copies or unauthorised use of the
information. Typically this takes the form of a License
Agreement between the preparer/licensor of the database
and the user/license of the database.
A License Agreement is unlike a typical purchase
and sale agreement in that the ownership of the
product involved, the program, remains in the licensor.
The licensee merely purchases the right to use the
program. The licensee’s right to use the program
can be limited in any number of ways. The most
important limitations typically are that licensee can
only use the program on one or a select number of
computers, the licensee may not make any copies
of the program, and the licensee has to keep confidential
certain information about the program or the database.
Many other types of limitations or rights and reservations
can be contained within the license agreement between
the parties.

these methods it may be difficult to know whether
or not a competitor has “cheated,” and simply copied
your information, or has come up with the same
information on his own.
The solution to this problem is the deliberate
placement of errors or omissions in your database.
If your competitor’s database contains the same
errors or omissions, then you have pretty good evidence
that your database was copied. The odds are astronomical
against a second database happening to come up
with the same errors and omissions as the first.
Although a clever “pirate” might detect and eliminate
or correct some seeds in a salted database, if the
database is large enough and the original compiler/
salter author is clever enough, it is unlikely that a
pirate will ever catch them all. These seeds will
provide the best evidence of copying. They will bloom
at the time the pirate is sued and this evidence is
placed before the Judge deciding the case.
Even if the authors do not deliberately salt their
database, errors will occur naturally anyway if the
database is large enough. So in addition to deliberately
adding some harmless errors, when and if accidental
errors are discovered, they should also be carefully
documented or recorded. When subsequent revised
additions of the database are made, not all errors
should be corrected. There should always be subtle
and harmless errors that are well documented in
order to have the seeds necessary to protect a
database.

9. PRACTICAL MEANS OF PROTECTION
OF DATABASES

In computer databases, however, there is an
additional element, “signature”, which can be used
to prove copying. Signature pertains to the computer
code or programming itself used to record the information
and the program which manipulates the information.
The signatures can be identified by the author as
they depict his style of programming. This can be
comparable to the style of writing. A programmer
has also the opportunity to deliberately implant hidden
but recognisable signatures in his work. These deliberate
idiosyncrasies can be documented and can again
provide excellent proof that there has been a wholesale
copying of the program data.

Since the law and courts in general are struggling
to keep up with the rapid changes in technology, the
author of a database is well advised to try and
strengthen his legal hand as much as possible with
certain practical protection measures. There are
methods, which a programmer can employ to try
and prevent someone from simply copying his work,
or if they do, to make proof of this copying in court
far easier. Without the conscious employment of

Some database products consist only of the
database itself and the user displays this database
on his program. For instance, the names and addresses
of computer lawyers could be typed in a MSWord
file. The purchasers of a database would thus have
to use their own MSWord program in order to view
the information. In other types of database programs,
the information is sold along with a program, which
allows you to view and manipulate the data. In this

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

47

case it is a “standalone” program which does not
require another program to view it. Therefore, instead
of having to load a lost of the lawyers’ names and
addresses into MSWord, under such a standalone
program simply running the program would display
the names and addresses by itself. When the database
program is a standalone type with its own display
and manipulation capabilities, then there are far
more opportunities to place signatures in the programming
itself. Further, the copy protection strategy that is
applicable to all types of software can be applied.
Also, standard non-copying protection can be
imposed upon the program itself. This makes it
difficult for most users to ever make a copy of the
program. Still, as every computer buff knows, for
every good copy protection scheme there is another
good “unprotection” scheme. In other words, a skilled
programmer can find a way around such practical
copy protection schemes. The ability of one programmer
to rise to the technical competence of another, and

frustrate such practical protection schemes, makes
legal protection all the more important.

10. CONCLUSION
Although copyright protection is important and
should almost always be pursued, in any license of
a computer database of significant value, copyright
protection alone should not be relied upon to prohibit
unauthorised copying. Trade secrecy protection and
an express written agreement between the vendor
and consumer are necessary to try and protect the
database. If, as expected, information continues to
grow in value and importance as a commodity in our
society, the proliferation of licence and secrecy
agreements is likely. To make or buy technology,
the country needs a strong system of IPR protection,
be it copyrights, patents or trademarks. If we need
to stand on par with the developed nations in the
world market for knowledge, we need to protect
ourselves and this is the only way of converting
knowledge into wealth.

About the Author

Shri Ashok Ram Kumar is a practicing lawyer in the field of Intellectual Property and
Information Technology. He is an adviser and legal retainer for various software companies.
He is guest lecturer in the areas of IPRS and IT at Central University and Institute of Company
Secretaries, Hyderabad Chapter, Hyderabad.

48

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

