DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 5, September 2008, pp. 49-55
© 2008, DESIDOC

Intellectual Property Rights: Issues
for Creation of Institutional Repository
S. Shashi Nath1*, Sridhara B.2, C.M. Joshi3, and Puneet Kumar3
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad-500 058
2
Centre for Airborne Systems, Belur, Bangalore-560 037
3
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre, Delhi-110 054
*
E-mail: sshashinath@gmail.com

1

ABSTRACT
The present scholarly publishing system, at best can be described as a monolithic complex tangle
of monopolistic publishers and their stringent copyright policies for content, which to say the least, are
not in the author’s or society’s interest. The open access (OA) movement has brought a whiff of fresh
air and is fast emerging as a possible solution to the problem of ‘chained content’. It has spawned several
initiatives, which in their own way propose to change the way people publish and share scholarly
content. Institutional repository (IR) is becoming one of the most popular tools for self-archival and
dissemination of an organisation’s intellectual or scholarly output. The primary objective is not just
preservation or changing the scholarly publication process, but showcasing the institution’s research
or work to the outside community. The IR serves as A tangible indicator of an institution’s quality, thus
increasing its visibility, prestige, and public value. One of the biggest roadblocks to self-archiving is the
copyright policies of publishers, which may not allow or allow self-archiving with associated riders.
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) issues and content licensing are major policy issues from creation and
depositing content in an IR. The paper examines the implications of copyright in the context of populating IR.
Keywords: Institutional repository, self-archiving, open access, copyright, scholarly publishing, green road,
project RoMeo, gold raod

1.

INTRODUCTION

The scholarly publishing is undergoing a churning
phase, wherein lot of factors like the open-access
movement via self-archiving and open access (OA)
journal publishing, open-archives initiative (OAI), opensource software, and development of cheap computing
and storage costs are playing a major role in changing
the whole paradigm. Helping the cause is the meteoric
rise in prices of journals and consequent drop in
library subscriptions. For long, scholarly content
has been chained because of the stringent policies
of traditional subscription-based, for-profit monopolistic
publishers. Stray initiatives for OA were taken in the
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

past but the movement has taken a strong leap
ahead recently with more vocal support from the
scholarly community. Though there are reservations
about OA with people casting their apprehensions
about the peer-review process of OA papers, impact
factors, publication costs, and dissemination/access
interfaces the movement is surely gaining momentum
and looks promising enough if some initial glitches
are ironed out. IRs are becoming prevalent as the
most preferred route to self-archiving. They are providing
a centralised system for content capturing, organising,
storage, retrieving, disseminating, and preservating
from a single interface thus acting as a scholarly
content management system. One of the chief roadblocks
49

to OA is the copyright issues of intellectual content.
As most of the authors rather gift away their invaluable
rights over their published research to the publishers,
it becomes a very onerous task to populate the IRs.

2.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

The IPRs, very broadly, are rights granted to
creators and owners for their intellectual creativity
in the industrial, scientific, literary, and artistic domain.
The work can be in the form of an invention, a
manuscript, a suite of software, or a business name.
In general, the objective of IPRs is to protect the
rights of the creators/owners and at the same time
allow the general public to access their creativities.
IPRS maintain this balance by putting in place
time-limits on the creators/owners mean of controlling
a particular work. The law that regulates the creation,
use and control of the protected work is popularly
known as Intellectual Property (IP) Law. 1
PRS are mainly statutory rights that allow the
creators/owners of the products to prevent people
from using the same commercially for a certain
period of time. IPRS issues have today taken a
global shape in the form of World Intellectual Property
Organisation (WIPO) and Trade-related Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement. The principal
IPRs are copyright, patents, trademarks, registered
designs, geographical indicators, anti-competitive
policies in contractual licenses, and trade secrets.
Research and development (R&D) involves a lot of
funding and human intellectual efforts. The result of
R&D like products and processes, innovations/inventions,
new designs, literary and artistic work, generally
turning out in financial gains to their inventors,
authors or creators, and thus are registered under
one or the other heads of IPRs. The authors or
creators can opt for a legal action when their IPRs
are infringed. Since copyright of scholarly content
is the primary theme of this paper, it is discussed
in detail in the next section.

3.

COPYRIGHT

Copyright stands for the legal rights exclusively
given for a definite period of time to the authors or
creators of intellectual work such as a publication
or an artistic or a literary work for sale or any other
use. Copyright in such cases provides the authors/
creators the rights of ownership and legal protection
against unlawful reproduction of such work. Besides,
providing the legal protection against unlawful reproduction
and use of their work, the copyright also recognises
the benefits accrued by the reproduction or usage
of their creative works by others. This obviates an
50

agreement between the authors and the publishers
(or users). The time span for which the law provides
the copyright protection varies in different countries
depending upon their regulations. It is life time of
the author and a term of 60 years after the death
of the author in India, 50 years in UK and USA, and
70 years in the European Union. After the expiry
of the copyright period, the work falls into the public
domain and then can be used by anyone without
authorisation. The salient features of copyright are:
±

Protection of aesthetic creations without formalities.

±

Registration not necessary.

±

Protection of expression of ideas only, not the
ideas themselves.

±

No concern with the quality of the work.

±

Protection to original work only. 2

Copyright grants certain exclusive rights to its
owner. Based on these rights, the copyright owner
can copy the work, issue copies of the work to the
public, rent or lend the work to the public, perform,
show or play the work in public, communicate the
work to the public (including broadcasting and electronic
transmission), and can adapt of the work or do any
of the above in relation to an adaptation.
Copyright is said to be infringed when one of
the exclusive rights of the owner is performed by
a party without the consent or authorisation of the
owner. This infringement is called primary infringement.
Providing accessories for infringing the exclusive
rights or assisting in the making or distribution of
infringing rights is also treated as an infringement
and is referred to as secondary infringement. 1

4.

COPYRIGHT FOR SCHOLARLY
CONTENTS—PROTECTION OR
STRANGLEHOLD?

Research and development (R&D) generates
scholarly content, which is published in different
forms by publishers. This cycle involves funding by
an organisation for R&D documentation of the research
being carried out and its ultimate publication as
research papers. The papers go through a peerreview process in which referees put in their efforts
to evaluate the content. The government or other
bodies extend grants, financial assistance, and budgetary
support to these institutions, which of course is tax
payer’s money. The irony of the fact is that after
such gargantuan efforts the biggest beneficiary is
the publisher who laughs all the way to the bank
along with the copyright of the content. The author
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

is just left with a small satisfaction of his work
getting published.
If we perceive all this on a societal platform,
then the net gain to society at large is negated
totally because of the narrow mindset of the publishers.
All the leading publishers get a copyright transfer
form signed by the author as soon as he submits
a work and there goes the ‘baby along with the bath
water’. The solution to this rampant copyright stranglehold
may lay in choosing the OA way or choosing journals
that offer non-exclusive licenses, choosing journals
with user-friendly licenses and amending existing
licenses, granting publishers the exclusive and nontransferable right of first commercial publication,
distribution and sale of work, and keeping copyright
with the author.

5.

OPEN ACCESS—THE REDEEMER

Researchers and scholars require access to
relevant scholarly literature for furthering their existing
knowledge. This literature is becoming harder to
acquire as it is interdisciplinary, priced too high,
voluminous, and stashed behind licensed restrictions.
The richest of libraries find it difficult to satisfy their
scholars need for specialised literature, while the
poorest barely can handle the most rudimentary of
queries. The OA movement can be a critical factor
to combat this issue.
OA has emerged as a cost-effective way to
disseminate and use information. It is being widely
accepted as an alternative to the traditional subscriptionbased publishing model. The Budapest Open Access
Initiative (BOAI) defines OA as Freely availability of
the articles on internet permitting any users to
read, download, copy, distribute, print, search or
link to the full-texts of these articles, crawl them
for indexing, pass them as data to software or use
them for any other lawful purpose, without financial
legal or technical barriers other than those inseparable
from gaining access to the Internet itself”. 3
OA refers to work that is created with no expectation
of direct monetary return and made available at no
cost to the reader on Internet for purposes of education
and research. OA does not apply to materials for
which the authors expect to generate revenue. The
authors retain copyright for their articles with right
to disseminate these to anyone. OA is intended to
be free for readers, not free for producers. It focuses
on academic research, and is concerned with scientific
and research texts that scholars give to the community
without expectation of direct monetary return, including
peer-reviewed journal articles, pre-prints, preliminary
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

findings, and data sets.
Establishing OA as a worthwhile procedure ideally
requires the active commitment of each and every
individual producer of scientific knowledge, and holder
of cultural heritage. OA contributions include original
scientific research results, raw data and metadata,
source materials, digital representations of pictorial
and graphical materials, and scholarly multimedia
material. OA contributions must satisfy two conditions:
(i)

The author(s) and right holder(s) of such contributions
grant(s) to all users a free, irrevocable, worldwide
right of access and a license to copy, use,
distribute, transmit and display the work publicly,
and to make and distribute derivative work in
any digital medium for any responsible purpose,
subject to proper attribution of authorship (community
standards will continue to provide the mechanism
for enforcement of proper attribution and responsible
use of the published work, as they do now), as
well as the right to make small numbers of
printed copies for their personal use.

(ii) A complete version of the work and all supplemental
material, including a copy of the permission as
stated above in an appropriate standard electronic
format is deposited (and thus published) in at
least one online repository using suitable technical
standards (such as the OA definitions) that is
supported and maintained by an academic institution,
scholarly society, government agency, or other
well-established organisation that seeks to enable
OA, unrestricted distribution, inter operability,
and long-term archiving.”
So in short, OA can be achieved when rights
holders decide to give some of their rights away to
the end-user. Because copyright law is regulatory,
rights holders are entitled to decide whether to
cede some of their rights. The full merit of the strict
reading of the definition of an OA contribution according
to the Berlin Declaration is that it makes clear that
initiatives by (groups of) private authors are required
to advance a public goal. 4
Authors are also somewhat responsible for the
current state of affairs as they take the least interest
in the copyright issues of their own content. According
to a study 30 per cent of the respondents do not
know who initially owns the copyright of their own
research articles, and 26 per cent of these respondents
indicated a low interest in the copyright issues of
their own research articles. 5
OA publishing takes two routes, i.e., OA journal
publication (termed as the Gold road to OA), OA
51

self-archiving (the Green road to OA), Self-archiving
can be achieved in at least three ways: putting
articles on author’s personal websites, depositing
articles in disciplinary archives, and depositing articles
in IR.
OA repositories provide access to the world’s
research, thus increase the democratisation of knowledge,
and suggest that repositories can also contribute
in terms of the larger impact of research—the ‘social
good’. There are clear benefits to society and to the
tax payers by indirectly funding a large proportion
of scholarly research. Peter Suber characterises
the core concept of OA as: Open access removes
‘price barriers’ (e.g., subscription fees) and “permission
barriers” (e.g., copyright and licensing restrictions)
to “royalty-free literature” (i.e., scholarly works created
for free by authors), and making them available with
“minimal use restrictions” (e.g., author attribution).6

6.

INSTITUTIONAL REPOSITORIES—
THE WEAPON

An IR is a digital archive of an institution’s
intellectual capital. IRs generally adheres to an OA
model, by centralising and preserving the knowledge
of an institution and making it accessible over a
network, preferably Internet. IRs are not disciplinespecific, and aims to archive the entire range of an
institution’s scholarly output. IRs form part of a
larger global system of repositories, which are indexed
in a standardised and searchable way, using one
interface, (thanks to a common protocol, OAI-PMH)
by harvester software, providing the foundation for
a new model of scholarly publishing. The paradigm
shifts in the social and technological arena surrounding
the information and knowledge cycle or generation
of scholarly literature are indications of the radical
shift towards IRs.
An IR is defined as a web-based database (repository)
of scholarly material, which is institutionally defined
(as opposed to a subject-based repository); cumulative
and perpetual (a collection of records); open and
interoperable (e.g., using OAI-compliant software);
and thus collects, stores and disseminates (is part
of the process of scholarly communication). 7
IRs may contain pre-prints/post-prints of research
articles, research reports, conference papers, teaching
materials, project reports, doctoral theses and
dissertations, datasets resulting from research projects,
committee papers, computer software, and works
of art, photographs, audio/video recordings, patents,
standards, and the like. It may cover content of
which copyright is owned by the workforce or institution,
or for which permission has been obtained from the
52

publisher to include a copy of the content in the
repository. Thus, an IR should not contain content
for which suitable copyright or licensing arrangements
have not been made. The content of the IR is institutionally
bounded, scholarly in nature, cumulative in growth
and perpetual in access.
Salient features and benefits of IRs may be
listed as:
±

Collection, preservation, and dissemination of
an institution’s collective scholarly resources.

±

Act as significant pointers of an institution’s
academic or research quality.

±

Collation of the intellectual capital of an institution
on a single podium instead of diffusing it in
diverse publications.

±

Wider accessability and visibility to institution’s
research.

±

Protection to authors from copyright sharks
(publishers).

±

Challenges the monopoly of publishers.

±

Free and OA to content (global access to local
content).

±

Demonstrates institution’s scientific, social and
financial value.

±

Provides measurable indicators of institutional
productivity and increase in its prestige.

±

Reduces the time lag between a pre-print and
a post-print thus facilitates more timely access
to research and scholarship.

±

Centralised storage to help carry out research
auditing with ease, and acts as a central archive
of author’s research profiles.

±

Captures unconventional research material such
as datasets, video, and audio which cannot be
generally accommodated in traditional journals.

Journals are not getting any cheaper, rather the
cost of procuring them is becoming exorbitant and
out of the reach of many research institutions. This
in turn may decrease the readership and access to
most of the intellectual content. Herein lies the
major role of the IRs, i.e., to break the shackles
of monopolistic publishers and focus more on the
intellectual content generated by organisations. A
study carried out by Steven Harnad, has revealed
that openly accessible research has a higher frequency
of getting cited and also that the impact ratio of OA
to non-OA research has increased from 1 per cent
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

to 18 per cent and citation from 253 per cent to 557
per cent during 1991-2001. 8
There may be various reasons as to why an
institution should go for the IR approach. These
include long term preservation of knowledge, wider
access to content or simply, centralised organisation
of information. The creation of an IR would provide
the institution a tool to manage its information assets,
thereby providing greater control over its local knowledge
economy, and retaining copyright and IPRs of work
within the institution. Once an institution opts to
set up an IR, it has to consider manifold issues,
having both, technical and social hues as outlined
below.

6.1 Content
The first step towards creating an IR include
establishment of content guidelines. Importantly, it
would enlist policies regarding the nature of the
content to be deposited (pre-prints, post-prints, working
papers, technical reports, etc.) and format of content.
This should be done before the implementation of
the software tool, as it will have implications on
metadata and information fields.

6.2 Technology
This is the stage where a decision regarding
the IR software has to be taken by the implementers.
Lots of choices (both commercial and open source)
are there, but it depends upon a lot of factors such
as the content volume, content format, access
authentication, content workflow, user interfaces,
and implementation of standards and so on upon
which one needs to dwell on and carefully make a
choice. Among the open source the most talked
about are DSpace, Eprints, Fedora, and Greenstone.

6.3 Metadata
The main issue regarding metadata is the schema
and the quantity of metadata the content needs to
have. It is important to have a healthy mix of descriptive,
structural, administrative and rights metadata to
have a good indexing and storage system. Unqualified
Dublin Core is the minimum metadata required for
OAI interoperability. However, depending on the type
of content in the repository, one may want to include
other metadata sets.

6.4 Copyright and Content Licensing
The major concern, while depositing content in
IR, is the copyright and the licensing issue. The
authors and the IR are concerned that whether or
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

not their publisher’s copyright policies will allow it.
The checking of publisher copyright polices in order
to establish whether or not articles can be added
to the repository is one of the most tedious jobs.
A ready reference about publisher’s copyright policies
is the list developed by the RoMEO (Rights Metadata
for Open Archiving, Project maintained by the SHERPA
(Securing a Hybrid Environment for Research Preservation
and Access) Project—a Joint Information Systems
Committee funded project at the University of
Loughborough to investigate the rights issues surrounding
the self-archiving of research in the UK under the
Open Archive Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting
(OAI-PMH). Through surveying the academic community,
it ascertained how give-away research literature
and metadata was used and how it should be protected.
From this work, the RoMEO Project created a list
of publisher’s conditions for self-archiving. SHERPA
maintains the SHERPA/RoMEO listing, which details
the rights given to authors by the major publishers
of peer-reviewed academic journals. It is now possible
to search for many publishers and find out what
permissions they normally give as part of copyright
transfer agreement. The majority of publishers support
the rights of academic authors to make available
their work online. However, some see repositories
as a threat and prohibit authors from depositing
their work by virtue of the copyright transfer agreement,
which they ask the author to sign. This makes it
difficult or impossible to populate the repositories
with content. According to current data, around 71
per cent of the 297 publishers on the RoMEO list
formally allow some form of self-archiving. The archiving
policy varies from publisher to publisher like green
publishers allow both pre- and post-print archiving;
blue publishers allow post-print (i.e. final draft after
refereeing) archiving; yellow publishers allow preprint (i.e., before refereeing) archiving; and white
publishers do not support archiving formally. Digital
content available freely cannot be considered as
OA content, because the copyright owner might not
have given consent for the types of permissive uses
outlined by the BOAI. In the same way, the lack
of a copyright statement does not imply that a
digital document is in the public domain. The user
should assume that the document is under full
copyright until a thorough check of the copyright
status of the work has been conducted. If a free
digital document does not have a license or special
copyright statement that specifically grants additional
rights, the user’s rights are limited by standard
copyright provisions, the most relevant right being
fair use.
The above implies content licensing because
OA and free access are not synonyms (a license
53

is used for explicitly granting rights by the copyright
owner to the users of content). For example, an ejournal may be freely available, but if its articles are
also not available with minimal use restrictions (e.g.,
proper author attribution), it cannot be termed as
an OA journal. OA journals typically use the Creative
Commons Attribution (CCA) license. The CCA initiative
provides creators with a series of 11 licenses under
which creators may make their OA work available.
For example the CCA license allows anyone to
make derivatives and to make commercial use of
the material without permission. This means that
a commercial publisher can republish material from
an OA publisher without permission or payment of
fees.
Although e-prints in IRs are freely available,
they do not have consistent copyright notice or
license practices, and generally have:
±

No copyright statement.

±

A conventional copyright statement.

±

A copyright statement modified by specific use
provisions.

±

Liberal use permitted for noncommercial purposes.

±

A CCA or other license, which may or may not
permit commercial use or derivatives.

±

Another local variation 9.

The IR implementers need to deposit content
with proper license agreements to protect the author’s
rights and at the same time make the content more
widely accessible. They can choose to write their
own license agreement or use the CCA, as long as
they embody the OA principles. They also need to
offer information on the standard CCA licenses to
the depositor and should encourage depositors who
retain their copyright to use licenses like the CCA.

7.

CONCLUSION

The copyright of research articles generally is
vested with the authors and is often transferred to
the publisher, drastically sinking the scope of reuse
of the research material in other contexts by the
author and other users. OA and the establishment
of an IR have emerged as plausible negotiation
platforms with publishers over the rights to publish
and disseminate research in a wider manner.
Author awareness regarding copyright is minimal
and stress needs to be put on copyright awareness
to prevent the ‘gifting’ syndrome by making copyright
54

more users-friendly.
Institutions keep control over how their work is
accessed, used and re-used, by ensuring recognition
and preservation of author’s rights. Copyright is a
pivotal issue in the acceptance of an IR service.
The author/submitter must go through the copyright
policies of the publisher, which vary from publisher
to publisher. Authors should also be convinced that
they are not losing their copyright by depositing
their work into the repository. The key issue for IR
is to ensure that they do not violate or infringe
copyright or other IPRs. Project RoMEO’s list of
publisher policies is one such tool to prevent this.
Content licensing is also one of the areas where
active interest from IR implementers and authors
has to be put in to generate more user-friendly
copyright licenses and remove unnecessary restrictions.
One of the methods to increase deposition in
IR is to increase copyright awareness and making
deposition mandatory. To ensure initial content for
the IR in order to encourage more deposits, implementers
can identify the ‘green’ publishers and then ask the
authors who have published in those journals for
permission to deposit their papers in the institution’s
IR.
Copyright laws are meant to protect the author’s
basic rights and help in advancement of knowledge
and research through rewards to the creators. Rights
protection is impeding the access and use of digital
information and is negating the objective of copyright
law. These are not supposed to stranglehold the
free flow of information. Nothing can be starker than
the present situation, where the institutions and
authors have to buy back their own published research,
which they themselves had gifted freely, from monopolistic
publishers at an exorbitant price. Embracing OA
with open arms by content generators is the golden
chance to break the shackles on knowledge. All
government-funded research works needs to be selfarchived and put under minimum restrictive licenses
to maximise their use and re-use by the society at
large.

REFERENCES
1. Madhavan, Mahesh. Intellectual property rights:
An overview. JISC Legal Report, 2006. http://
www.jisclegal.ac.uk/ipr/ IntellectualProperty.htm.
2. Moorthy, A.L. & Karisidappa, C.R. Intellectual
property rights, and copyright issues in the
context of electronic information. In Information
technology and applications in libraries: a textbook
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

for beginners, edited by M. Mahapatra & D.B.
Ramesh, 2004. pp. 583-89.

and their preprints. http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/
fos/overview.htm

3. Budapest open access initiative, 2002. http://
www. soros.org/openaccess/read.shtml.

7. Ware, Mark. Pathfinder Research on Web-based
Repositories. Publisher and Library/Learning
Solutions, London, pp.3. http://www.palsgroup.
org.uk/palsweb/palsweb.nsf/0/8c43ce800a9c67cd
80256e 370051e88a?OpenDocument

4. Hoorn, Esther. Repositories, copyright and creative
commons for scholarly communication. Ariadne,
2005, 45. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue45/hoorn/
5. Hoorn, E. & Van der Graaf, M. Towards good
practices of copyright in open access journals.
http://www.surf.nl/en/publications/index2.php?oid=50.

8. Harnad, Steven & Brody, Tim. Comparing the
impact of open access vs non-OA articles in the
same journals. D-Lib,10(6). http://www.dlib.org/
dlib/june04/harnard/06harnard.html

6. Suber, Peter. Open access overview: Focusing
on open access to peer-reviewed research articles

9. Charles W. Bailey, Jr. What is open access?http:/
/www.digital-scholarship.com/cwb/WhatIsOA.htm

About the Authors

Shri S. Shashi Nath is presently working as a Scientist at the Defence Metallurgical Research
Laboratory, Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO), Hyderabad. His area of
interest include setting up and managing e-information services, digital libraries/institutional
repository and knowledge management solutions. He has a postgraduate degree in Information
Science and a bachelors in Computer Science. He has served in several other capacities in
different organisations like NCSI, IISc., Bangalore, IIM,Lucknow, and Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University (a Central University), Lucknow.
Shri Sridhara B. obtained his Masters in Library and lnformation Science from Kuvempu
University, Karnataka. His areas of interest include digital libraries, database, and digitisation.
Currently he is working as a Scientist at the Centre for Airborne Systems (CABS), Defence
Research & Development Organisation (DRDO), Bangalore.

Shri C.M. Joshi obtained his Masters in Library and lnformation Science from Karnataka
University, Dharwad. His areas of interst include setting up and managing e-information services,
digital libraries/institutional repository and knowledge management.

Shri Puneet Kumar obtained his Masters in Library and Information Science from Kurukshetra
University. His areas of interest include digital libraries/institutional repository, database, digitisation
and machine translation.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(5)

55

