DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 6, November 2008, pp. 21-26
© 2008, DESIDOC

Scholarly Digital Library Initiatives: World Versus India
Sadanand Bansode1 and S.M. Pujar2
1

Department of Library and Information Science
University of Pune, Pune-411 007
E-mail: sadanand_bansode@yahoo.co.in
2
Balasaheb Khardekar Library
Shivaji University, Kolhapur-416 004
E-mail: smp_lib@unishivaji.ac.in

ABSTRACT
The emergence of digital technology and computer networking have provided means whereby
information can be stored, retrieved, disseminated, and duplicated in a very fast manner. Digital libraries
have made considerable advances, both in technology and its applications. The digital library initiatives at
international level are many, but in developing counties like India they are still in a nascent stage. But with
the initiative like Million Book Project, initiated by Carnegie Mellon University, the culture of digital library
has also made a beginning in India.
Keywords: Digital library, digital library-international, digital library-India, Million Book Project, Carnegie Mellon
University

1. INTRO DUCTION
Providing right Information to the right users at
the right time has been the motto of information
professionals. Recent developments in information
and communication technology (ICT), especially the
Internet and the Web, have brought significant changes
in the ways the information being generated, distributed,
accessed, and being used. For centuries, the information
was being provided through printed material made
available by the systematic efforts of the publishers,
booksellers, and librarians. But with the advent of
ICT, the situation is changing fast as the printed
information is being converted into electronic format
and made available for use with the help of the
computer networks. This resulted in the development
of digital libraries at publishers, institutional and at
individual's level to provide access to scholarly literature
through World Wide Web (WWW). Today, the development
Received 2 April 2008; Revised 24 April 2008

of digital libraries is fast picking up both in developed
and dev eloping countries using both commercial
and open source software. This has changed the
way in which information is being deliv ered to endusers by the libraries.

2. WHAT IS A DIGITAL LIBRARY?
The term digital library has varied meanings;
ranging from a digitised collection of materials that
one might find in a traditional library, through the
collection of all digital information along with the
services that make that information useful to all
possible users1. Several definitions of digital libraries
are available in literature. According to Borgman 2
there are two major classes of digital libraries; those
coming from digital library researchers (in the US
context they are mostly computer scientists and
engineers), and those coming from library and information
professionals.
21

Borgman further opined that the first researchoriented definition of digital libraries came in 1992
when the phrase 'electronic library' was used. The
phrase 'electronic library' is now used as digital
library. In digital libraries focus is given to the contents.
Rosenberg3 defined digital library as one where users
access resources by electronic means, and where
information is delivered to users electronically. However,
Gladney et al.4 gave the most comprehensive definition
of the digital library. He said that, "a digital library
is an assemblage of digital computing, storage and
communications machinery together with the content
and software needed to reproduce, emulate and
extend the services provided by conventional libraries
based on paper and other material means of collecting,
cataloguing, finding, and disseminating information".
A full service digital library must accomplish all
essential services of traditional libraries and also
exploit the well known advantages of digital storage,
searching, and communication.

stored information. However, the interest in digital
libraries, both scholarly and professional, grew very
rapidly only in 1990s. As stated earlier, digital library
developments in the USA took place mainly in the
course of research led primarily by the computer
science community that concentrated on designing
and developing technologies for various digital library
collection and services. Electronic Library Information
Online Retrieval (ELINOR), started in 1992, was the
first electronic project in the UK funded by De Mantfort
University, the British Library, and IBM, UK 8 .

In fact, digital libraries, like traditional one, select,
acquire, catalogue, classify, and disseminate information
and knowledge. The major difference is the machinereadable data in digital library. This implies that the
traditional concept of collection must be revised to
accommodate materials that are accessible electronically.

5.1

3. TYPES OF DIGITAL LIBRARIES
Digital libraries can be grouped in the following
ways5
Ê

Digital libraries developed in USA as part of
DLI1 and DLI2 (Digital library initiatives).

Ê

Digital libraries developed in the course of eLib
(electronic libraries) Programme in UK.

Ê

Digital libraries built by individual institutions.

Ê

Digital libraries that are part of National Libraries.

Ê

Digital libraries that are part of universities, or
by period, or by country of their origin.

4. GENESIS OF DIGITAL LIBRARIES
The concept of digital libraries is rooted in the
age-old dream of creating a virtual library. Among
early efforts, one can quote the efforts made by Paul
Otlet and his colleagues in 1930s in order to design
functions similarly to today's hypertext and hypermedia
system 6. In 1945 Vannevar Bush7 made some efforts
to give an idea of connecting the entire human
knowledge. He gave a concept of Memex machine,
which used a microfilm reading process to retriev e
22

Today, there are umpteen numbers of digital
libraries worldwide. Some of the important projects
at international level and in India have been highlighted
here from the perspective of open access to scholarly
literature. The projects undertaken at commercial
level have not been included in this study.

5. INTERNATIONAL SCENARIO
Akron-Summit County Public
Library's Digital Library
(http://www.akron library.org/digitallib/index.html)

It is an ongoing effort, which provides access
to the local history resources. The Special Collections
Division of library has selected and digitised items
from some Akron-Summit County Public Library's
collections. The collection includes two exhibits,
viz., library history exhibit and Tallmadge history
exhibit.

5.2

Alexandria Digital Library
(http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/)

The Alexandria Digital Library (ADL) is a distributed
digital library with collections of geo-referenced materials.
ADL includes the operational library with various
nodes and collections, and the research program
through which digital library architectures, gazetteer
applications, educational applications, and software
components are modelled, prototyped, and evaluated.
ADL provides HTML clients access to its collections
and gazetteer, and provides specific information
management tools such as the feature type thesaurus
for classing types of geographic features as well as
downloadable software code.

5.3

Arizona Memory Project
(http://azmemory.lib.az.us/index.php)

The Arizona Memory Project (AMP) was launched
in March 2006 and has been granted the Arizona
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

Centennial 2012 legacy project designation by the
Arizona Historical Advisory Commission. AMP is an
online effort to provide access to the wealth of primary
sources in Arizona libraries, archives, museums
and other cultural institutions. This initiative provides
the opportunity to view some of the best examples
of government documents, photographs, maps, and
objects that chronicle Arizona's past and present.

5.4

California Digital Library (http://www.
cdlib.org/)

The California Digital Library supports the assembly
and creative use of the world's scholarship and
knowledge for the University of California libraries
and the communities they serve. The library provides
its community with more digital material including
more than 21,000 electronic journals, tens of thousands
of electronic books, and more than 250 articles and
reference databases.

5.5

Collaborative Digitisation Program
(http://www.cdpheritage.org/)

The collaborative digitisation program (CDP) began
in the fall of 1998 as the Colorado Digitisation Program,
funded by a Library Services and Technology Act
(LSTA) grant through the Colorado State Library.
The CDP endeavours to provide meaningful content
on human culture, science, and art to everyone
connected online. The photographs, maps, documents,
sound recordings, and objects held by the partner
museums, libraries, and archives offer a rich and
insightful glimpse into human culture.

types. Mobile code techniques are employed to
fulfil this goal.

5.7

Digital Library of Georgia
(http://dlg.galileo.usg.edu/?Welcome)

The Digital Library of Georgia is a gateway to
Georgia's history and culture in digitised books,
manuscripts, photographs, government documents,
newspapers, maps, audio, video, and other resources.
The Digital Library of Georgia connects users to 5,
00,000 digital objects in 90 collections from 60
institutions and 100 government agencies.

5.8

Digital South Asia Library
(http://dsal.uchicago.edu/)

The Digital South Asia Library (DSAL) provides
digital material for reference and research on South
Asia to scholars, public officials, business leaders,
and other users. Participants in the DSAL include
leading US universities, the Centre for Research
Libraries, the South Asia Microform Project, the
Committee on South Asian Libraries and Documentation,
the Association for Asian Studies, the Library of
Congress, the Asia Society, the British Library, the
Univ ersity of Oxford, the University of Cambridge,
MOZHI in India, the Sundarayya Vignana Kendram
in India, Madan Puraskar Pustakalaya in Nepal, and
other institutions in South Asia.

5.9

Digital Library for International
Research (http://www.aiys.org/aodl/
index.php)

The project concentrates on two main goals: (i)
the structuring and electronic presentation of existing
documents (document project) and (ii) the development
of an infrastructure for digital libraries (infrastructure
project). The document aims at providing access to
paper documents by scanning and converting them
into standard generalised markup language (SGML)
documents.

Building on the established libraries and research
collections of its 19 constituent centres, the Council
of American Overseas Research Centres (CAORC)
in 1999 launched the American Ov erseas Digital
Library (AODL) as a cost-effective, efficient, centralised,
Internet-based mechanism for the standardisation,
and electronic deliv ery of important bibliographic
and information from full-text primary and secondary
source from all CAORC member centres, cov ering
both print collections and research collections in
other media.

Efforts for developing computer-supported SGML
structuring of scanned documents are on. The SGML
documents will be accessible via W WW and via the
online public access catalogue (OPAC) of the Stadtund Universitätsbibliothek Frankfurt (StUB). The goal
of this infrastructure project is the development of
an efficient, scalable and dynamically extendable
infrastructure that allows the storage, retrieval and
presentation of documents containing different media

The initial resources for the AODL program were
located in ov erseas centres in Europe, the near and
middle-east, south and south-east Asia, and West
Africa. Plans are now underway to include bibliographic
materials from inner Asia, the new world as well as
countries that host centres. In November 2004, the
Program's name was changed to Digital Library for
International Research (DLIR) to reflect this new
level of participation and coverage.

5.6

Digital Library Frankfurt (http://
haddouti.de/projects/dl_de.html)

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

23

5.10 Indiana University Digital Library
Program (http://www.dlib.indiana.
edu/)
The Indiana Univ ersity Digital Library Program
is dedicated to the production, maintenance, delivery,
and preservation of a wide range of high-quality
networked resources for scholars and students at
Indiana University and elsewhere.

5.11 Library of Congress (http://www.
loc.gov/library/libarch-digital.html)
The National Digital Library programme of Library
of Congress (LoC), USA has created an American
Memory Database (AMD). AMD, the flagship of the
LoC's digital services, offers multimedia collections
of digitised documents, photographs, recorded sound,
motion pictures, and text from the American historical
collections of the LoC and other institutions. It has
now more than 7.5 million digital items from more
than 100 historical collections.

5.12 Michigan Digitisation Project (http://
www.lib.umich.edu/mdp/)
The University of Michigan and Google, Inc.
have entered into a ground-breaking partnership to
digitise the entire print collection of the University
Library. The digitised collection, called MBooks, is
searchable in the library catalogue, Mirlyn as well
as in the Google Book Search. Full-text of works
that are out of copyright or are in the public domain.

5.13 National Library of Australia (http://
www.nla.gov.au/digicoll/)
In 2001 the National Library of Australia embarked
on a major digitisation project in order to provide
improved access to its wide and diverse collection
of material in traditional formats. In 2004, digitisation
of still image collection became a mainstream activity.
Significant quantity of original Australian material
has been digitised including pictorial material, maps,
sheet, music, manuscripts, and selected print items.

5.14 Networked Digital Library of Theses
and Dissertations (http://www.ndltd.
org/)
The Networked Digital Library of Theses and
Dissertations (the "Corporation") is a non-stock
corporation duly formed under the provisions of the
Virginia Non-stock Corporation Act. The Library is
an international organisation dedicated to promoting
the adoption, creation, use, dissemination, and
preservation of electronic analogues to the traditional
paper-based theses and dissertations.
24

5.15 National Science Digital Library
(http://nsdl.org/)
The National Science Digital Library (NSDL) is
created by the National Science Foundation to provide
organised access to high quality resources and
tools that support innovations in teaching and learning
at all levels of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. NSDL is designed primarily for
K-16 educators but anyone can access and search
the library. Access to most of the resources is free.
However, some content prov iders may require a
login, or a nominal fee or subscription to retrieve
their specific resources.

5.16 The New Zealand Digital Library
Project (http://nzdl.sadl.uleth.ca/
cgi-bin/library)
The New Zealand Digital Library project is a
research programme at the University of W aikato.
Programme's aim is to develop the underlying technology
for digital libraries and make it available publicly so
that others can use it to create their own collections.

5.17 The Open Video Project (http://www.
open-video.org/)
The purpose of the Open Video Project is to
collect and make available a repository of digitised
video content for the digital video, multimedia retrieval,
digital library, and other research communities.
Researchers can use the video to study a wide
range of problems such as tests of algorithms for
automatic segmentation, summarisation, and creation
of surrogates that describe video content; the development
of face recognition algorithms, or creating and evaluating
interfaces that display result sets from multimedia
queries.

5.18 Utah Digital Newspapers (http://
www.lib.utah.edu/digital/unews/)
Utah Digital Library Project is funded by the
Institute of Museum and Library Services and the
Library Services and Technology Act. Commercial
partners in this project include iArchiv es Inc., and
DiMeMa Inc. This library contains about 42 newspapers.

6. INDIAN SCENARIO
6.1

Digital Library of India

The mission is to create a portal for the Digital
Library of India which will foster creativity and free
access to all human knowledge. It is piloted by the
Office of the Principle Scientific Advisor to the Government
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

of India, Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology with Indian Institute of Science and Carnegie
Mellon University, USA as partners. Eleven academic
institutions, six religious and cultural institutions,
four government and research agencies, and two
research institutions in India are participating in this
programme. The current status of scanning centres
of Digital Library of India is detailed in the Table 1.

Kalasampada provides access to over couple of
lakhs of manuscripts, over a lakhs of slides, thousands
of rare books, rare photographs, audio, and video
along with highly researched publications of the
IGNCA from a single window.

6.4

Librarians Digital Library (https://
drtc.isibang.ac.in/)

Table 1. Language-wise report as on 8th April 2005
Language

Books

Pages

Bengali

2

1059

English

36283

13464420

French

30

11304

German

41

23305

Hindi

155

38269

Italian

6

4660

Kannada

511

100655

Norwegian

5

1452

Persian

1130

352032

Sanskrit

2233

752880

Spanish

8

3455

Tamil

278

37350

Telugu

14182

2854286

Unknown

921

244355

Urdu

1433

332222

Source: http://dli.iiit.ac.in 9

6.2

INFLIBNET (www.dspace.
inflibnet. ac.in)

INFLIBNET has developed a digital library by
using Dspace, an open source software. So far
INFIBNET has digitised their conference proceeding
namely, Caliber and Planner. INFLIBNET provide
users the facility to download the full-text articles
from its databases..

6.3

Kalasampada (http://www.ignca.gov.
in/dgt_0001.htm)

Recognising the need to encompass and preserve
the distributed fragments of Indian art and culture,
and to serve as a major resource centre for the arts,
the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA)
in collaboration with Ministry of Communication and
Information Technology, initiated a project, Kalasampda
(digital library: resources of Indian cultural heritage),
for the development of databank of cultural heritage.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

This library has been developed by Documentation
Research & Training Centre (DRTC), and contains
full-text of papers/articles related to Indian librarianship.
Presently, it contains full-text papers submitted in
DRTC seminars, papers submitted by LIS professionals,
and theses/dissertations of students. It also has
plans to include conference proceedings of Indian
LIS Associations.

6.5

Nalanda Digital Library (http://www.
nalanda.nitc.ac.in/)

Nalanda Digital Library initiated in 1999 at the
National Institute of Technology (NIT), Calicut, is
one of the largest digital libraries in the country.
Nalanda helps members of the NIT in meeting their
academic and research needs by providing timely
and up-to-date information with value added services
in all the areas of science, engineering, and technology.

6.6

National Library of India
(www.nlindia.org)

The library preserves the scanning and archives
the rare and brittle books and other documents on
compact disc. The library will digitise the books and
documents published before 1900 and available Indian
publications prior to 1920. So far, 6,600 selected
books in Indian and English languages have already
been scanned and stored.

6.7

Raman Research Institute (http://
dspace.rri.res.in/)

Raman Research Institute has digitised the research
publications of the faculty, students, and the publication
of the institute. The Institute has also digitised its
annual reports and newspaper clippings.

6.8

Universal Digital Library (http://
www.iiita.ac.in/research/udl.html)

Univ ersal Digital Library seeks to digitise books
of common interest to different communities of interest
(COI) and make them available in a manner that is
independent of language, location, and time. A complete
solution for this was developed by Carnegie-Mellon
25

Univ ersity, USA inv olving state-of-the-art planetary
scanners for scanning, cropping, OCR, and XML
converting. Apart from Indian Institute of Science
(IISc), other Indian institutions involved in this project
are NCST Mumbai, and IIIT, Hyderabad.

6.9

Vidyanidhi Digital Library and
e-scholarship Portal (http://210.212.
200.226/index.html)

Libraries, which would like to develop a digital library,
must make careful planning and undertake feasibility
study, as digital library projects requires careful
selection of hardware, software, materials and standards
to be used in their preserv ation. The sustainability
of digital libraries is difficult unless organisations
have good budgetary support and quality manpower.

REFERENCES

Vidyanidhi is an information infrastructure, a
digital library, a portal of resources and tools, and
facilities doctoral research in India. Vidyanidhi is
envisioned to evolv e as a national repository and a
consortium for e-theses through participation and
partnership with universities, academic institutions,
and other stake holders. It will enhance the access
to Indian theses and will also enlarge the reach and
audience for Indian doctoral research works.

1. Leiner, Barry M. The scope of digital library.
http://www.dlib.org/metrics/public/papers/dig-libscope.html

6.10 Development of ETD

4. Gladney et.al. Digital library: Gross structure
and requirements. www.csdl.tamu.edu/DL94/paper/
fox.html.

Many research and academic institutions have
taken initiative to develop Electronic Theses and
Dissertation (ETD) library in India. ETD basically
includes theses and dissertations submitted in their
own institution. Some of the prominent among these
institutions are: IISc, Bangalore (http://etd.ncsi.
iisc.ernet.in/); IIT Delhi, New Delhi (http://eprint.iitd.ac.in/
dspace/); Indira Gandhi Institute of Development
Research, Mumbai (http://oii.igidr. ac.in:8888/dspace/);
and Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati (http://
202. 141.117.109:8080/dspace/).

7. CONCLUSION
Digital library initiativ es in India are still in a
nascent stage of development. The digital environment
in the Indian context is a new concept that can
became reality through projects funded by the government
and the initiatives taken by the Million Book Project.

26

2. Borgman, C. From Gutenberg to the global Information
infrastructure: access to information in the networked
world. ACM press, New York, 2000.
3. Rosenberg, Daina. Towards the digital library in
Africa. Electronic Library, 24(3), 289-93.

5. Chowdhury, G.G. & Chowdhury, Sudatta. Introduction
to digital libraries. Facet Publishing, London,
2003.
6. Bhatt, R.K. & Singh, K.P. Digital libraries: Emergence,
features, challenges and opportunities. In Digital
Libraries 2004: Knowledge, Preservation, Access
and Management, New Delhi, 2004. pp. 49-44.
7. Sorkin, V.D. & Farley, J. National digital library.
In Encyclopedia of library and information science,
edited by Allen Kent. Marcel Dekker, New York,
pp. 218
8. Ramsden, A. et al. ELINOR electronic project.
Bowker-Saur, London, 1998.
9. http://www.dli.iiit.ac.in/ (Accessed on 5.10.2008).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

