DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 6, November 2008, pp. 27-33
© 2008, DESIDOC

Towards Quality of Health Science Information on the Internet
Mahabaleshwara Rao1*, Mahesh V. Mudhol2 and Shivananda Bhat K.1
1

Health Sciences Library
Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University
Manipal–576 104, Karnataka
*E-mail: baikadi@yahoo.com
2

Dept. of Library and Information Science
Mangalore University, Mangalore-574 199
E-mail: maheshmudhol@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
W ith the advent of Internet and rapid development of other information technologies, there is a
paradigm change in the quantity and quality of health information available to medical professionals. There
is a plethora of information available on subjects such as medical conditions/disorders, treatments, drug
and other therapies and research on the Internet. Though Internet has created new opportunities to
improve decision-making to handle typical cases related to healthcare, it has also generated many
unprecedented problems. The changing nature of information distribution has important implications for
healthcare: issues like the quality of care and the validity and consistency of available information. The
quality of health information available on the Internet is important, because it has the potential to benefit or
harm a large number of people. The paper discusses the problems of aplenty of medical-related
information available on the Internet, and how to sift the quality information from the available information.
The paper recommends the development of technology-based tools that support the assessment and
development of quality health information on the Internet.
Keywords: Internet, health information, information research, medical professionals

1. INTRO DUCTION
Internet has evolved into a heavily trafficked
reference resource in almost every field of public
domain. It also provides access to unprecedented
volume of health-related information directed toward
medical professionals1 by way of extensive medical
databases, online journals, open access resources,
e-books, medical websites, etc.
Internet is continuously evolving as a global
communications network. Sev eral hundred million
people worldwide use the Internet, of whom 37 per cent
use it as a source of health information 2. Medical
professionals are increasingly relying on the Internet
to update their clinical knowledge. The speed with
which new technologies and treatments are being
Received 24 March 2008; Revised 18 May 2008

developed means that many medical professionals
are using the Internet to access health information
to guide them in their practice.
There is an explosion in the amount of health
information available on the Internet. For example,
entering the word “health” in a generic search engine
like Google currently yields over 60 million pages3 .
Numbers vary and none are very accurate, but it is
estimated that there are over 100,000 health-related
websites on the Internet today. These vary from
highly-academic sites, online peer-reviewed journals,
various databases and websites, governmental sites,
and health-provider-institutions’ sites to countless
individual contributions from citizens, patients, and
medical professionals 3 .
27

2. INFORMATION QUALITY
Quality is defined as “the totality of characteristics
of an entity that bear on its ability to satisfy stated
and implied needs” 4. Any measure of information
quality is attended by a myriad of individual characteristics
and contexts that affect perceptions of what quality
means. In traditional publishing channels, the term
quality has rarely been used to describe information.
Information on the Internet challenges these traditional
measures of quality. But in this mass of information,
there is information relevant to a specific need,
written or created by respected authors and organisations
with credibility in their field. The ever-increasing
amount of work on developing tools to assess the
quality of information aims to assist people to identify
this information. In health science, where information
quality can mean the difference between an effective
treatment of a health problem and a potentially
dangerous and/or harmful outcome, criteria for information
quality have been developed to act as a gold standard
to which all health sites are encouraged to ascribe.
The quality of medical information is particularly
important because misinformation could be a matter
of life or death 4 .

3. THE PROBLEM
Health information can be posted by anyone
with access and an interest in doing so. Many of
these sources are authoritative and valid. Others
can be well intentioned, but misinformed. The quality
of the health-information on the Internet is extremely
variable and difficult to assess. As the health-information
proliferates on the Internet, there is a growing need
for objective criterion that can be used to evaluate
the quality of information. In the medical field, the
profusion of available information of unknown provenance,
often written by unidentifiable authors, with undisclosed
agendas, brings problems to the medical profession
and patients.

accumulating. Filtering through information on the
Internet may also be very time consuming. Tools
such as Internet directories, indexes, search engines,
databases assist medical professionals in their search
for health-information on the Internet. However, searching
for and locating information are only starting points,
after which the medical professionals themselves
must choose appropriate resources to take the crucial
decisions. Judging whether the information is applicable
and credible may present a greater challenge than
just searching for information. To make this process
more time efficient, medical professionals may rely
on a number of Internet resources, open access
resources, online databases, search engines, websites
that review and rate the health-information.
The focus of this study is to assess the quality
of health-information on the Internet for the medical
professionals. Health-information includes preventing
and managing disease and making other decisions
related to health and healthcare. It may be in the
form of data, text, audio, and/or video. It may involve
enhancements through programming and interactivity.
This paper focuses primarily on how to access quality
health-information on the Internet.

4. OBJECTIVES
The main objectives of the study are:
Ä

To know the strategies to be used to find quality
health-information on the Internet effectively and
quickly.

Ä

To understand how medical professionals evaluate
health-information on the Internet?

Ä

To find out the minimum set of criteria for assessing
the quality of health-information on the Internet.

5. MET HODOLOGY

The greatest barrier to the Internet attaining its
potential with regard to healthcare is not the difficulty
in finding information, rather finding valid and reliable
information. Many factors affect the quality of webbased information. Lack of governance is both a
strength and weakness of the Internet as a communications
system. Proprietors of healthcare websites are competing
for sales and market share, which can often lead to
selective disclosure of evidence, and the presentation
of the inaccurate information.

The study aims to provide models for accessing
the quality health-information on the Internet for the
medical professionals. Sixty-five among 488 medical
professionals such as Professors, Associate Professors,
and Assistant Professors of Kasturba Medical College
(KMC), Manipal, Karnataka, who visited the Health
Sciences Library of the college between June 2007
and December 2007 were interviewed to find quality
health-information and minimum set of criteria for
assessing the quality of health information on the
Internet. They were asked the following questions.

Seeking useful and valid health information on
the Internet can be difficult because of the speed
and lack of control with which the information is

Ä

28

How to find the quality health-information on the
Internet?
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

Ä

W hat are the strategies to be used?

Ä

How to evaluate health information on the Internet
and what are the criteria to be followed for
evaluation of the quality of health information?

Ä

W hich Internet resources are accessed to find
the quality health-information in his/her subject
and for patient care?

To facilitate the model for accessing quality
health-information over the Internet, the opinion, thoughts,
knowledge expressed by the medical professionals
of KMC were compiled. Related work, on the quality
of health-information on the Internet through a literature
review and review of various databases, was also
compiled in the form of strategies, guidelines, criteria,
etc. to be followed for accessing the quality healthinformation on the Internet.

6. STRATEGIES FOR SEARCHING
QUALITY HEALTH INFORMATION
ON THE INTERNET
The medical professionals, who were interviewed
for the study, were of the opinion that there are wide
range of sources of health information on the Internet,
which could help in finding information on subjects
such as medical conditions, disorders, research,
drugs, and other therapies. These sources include
health agencies and institutes, universities, hospitals,
laboratories, pharmaceutical industry sites, private
companies, publishers, medical libraries, medical
networks, online databases, support groups, individuals,
etc. Some of the common and useful strategies or
sources of information for locating quality health
information5 are:
Ä

Consulting colleagues.

Ä

E-mail discussion lists and newsgroups.

Ä

W eb rating evaluation sites.

Ä

Meta search engines.

Ä

Printed guides and directories published in the
book form.

Ä

Popular magazines and newspapers (print and
electronic).

Ä

Consulting-websites of professional organisations,
library associations/organisations, medical libraries,
search engines and directories, online databases,
universities, hospitals, laboratories, pharmaceutical
industry, publishers, medical networks, etc.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

7. EVALUATING HEALTH INFORMATION
ON INTERNET
Libraries procure books, journals, and other resources,
evaluated by the scholars, publishers, and the librarians.
But this does not apply for the information available
on W orld W ide W eb because there are no filters6 .
There is an abundance of health-information produced
each day on the Internet. However, this can be
variable in quality. But what does ‘good quality’
mean in the context of health information on the
Internet? The ‘good quality’ in this context is some
thing, which is accessible, usable, and reliable 7 .
As there is lot of good information on the Internet,
there are also misconceptions and inaccurate information.
How do we judge the quality of Internet resources?
Quality issues and the evaluation of health-information
on the Internet have generated countless journal
articles, studies and attempts at developing the
ultimate appraisal tool. The core issues are well
summarised by the British Medical Association library’s
criteria f or its award f or health care websites
(www.bma.org.uk/ap.nsf/Content/LIBBMAPatientInfor
mationAward#app2). In summary, the key things
about when looking health-information on the Internet are:
Ä

W here is the site based? Is it prov ided by a
particular organisation? What type of organisation
is it and is it credible? W hat is the nature of
their work?

Ä

When was the information provided? Is it dated?
Is the information current? Has often is the site
maintained and revised? Are links up to date?

Ä

W ho is the author of the site or web page? Do
they provide contact details and information about
themselves? What is their reputation or authority
to produce this information?

Ä

Why is the information being provided? W hat is
the motivation? Is the information biased? Are
the scope of the site and its intended audience
clear?

Ä

W hat makes us think that this information is
accurate? Are references provided? Does the
information seem balanced? Is the content likely
to meet the needs of users?

Ä

How is the site presented? Is it easy to find us
way around it? Is there a link at the end of each
page to take us back to the home page? Is the
material presented logically? How accessible
would the site be to someone with a visual or
physical impairment? Is the language used clear
and simple?
29

8. CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING QUALITY
OF HEALTH INFORMATION ON
INTERNET
The study revealed that the Internet technology
provides access to an enormous volume and a variety
of health information. It is increasingly difficult to
screen which resources are accurate or appropriate
for the medical professionals. The choice of appropriate
evaluation criteria is both crucial and challenging.
To help preserv e the benefits of the Internet for
health-care information, one must think about what
actions they can take to improve quality while maintaining
freedom of access. The quality criteria for evaluating
health-information on the Internet fall into seven
broad categories.

8.1 Credibility
To determine the credibility, one must consider
its source, currency, relev ance/utility and editorial
review process.

8.2 Content
The content of health information on the Internet
must be accurate and complete; an appropriate
disclaimer should also be prov ided, describing the
limitations, purpose, scope, authority, and currency
of the information.

8.3 Disclosure
Websites should provide appropriate disclosures,
including the purpose of the site, as well as any
profiling/collecting of information associated with
using the site, so medical professionals can understand
the intent of the organisation or individual in providing
the health information.

8.4 Links

can be evaluated in terms of accessibility, logical
organisation (navigability), and internal search capability.

8.6 Interactivity
Websites should include a feedback mechanism
for users to offer their comments, corrections and
criticisms, and raise questions about the information
provided. This makes the website accountable to
its users.

8.7 Caveats
Sites that market services and products have
different agenda then those that are primary content
providers.

9. CRITERIA FOR CONSULTING
INTERNET RESOURCES
Internet is a vast resource of varying worth.
W hen consulting Internet resources about health
topics and for the purposes of determining whether
health-information on the Internet can be trusted,
the following criteria can help determine if information
is “good” information 8 :

9.1 Authority
Probably the single most important criterion is
authority. If we don’t know who is writing the information,
we cannot really trust it. The following points should
be clarified when looking for health information on
the Internet 9 .
Ä

W ho created this information and why?

Ä

Do we recognise this author or their work?

Ä

Is the author a physician or other health professional?

Ä

W hat are their credentials, affiliations, and
professional experience?

Ä

W hat are their qualifications for writing on the
topic?

Especially critical to the quality of Internet site,
are its external links—connections to other internal
pages or to external sites that form the web-like
structure of information searches within and among
sites. There are four criteria for evaluating the quality
of links: selection, architecture, content, and back
linkages.

Ä

Are they acknowledged experts in the field we
are reading about?

Ä

W hat knowledge or skills do they have in the
area?

8.5 Design

Ä

Is he or she stating fact or opinion?

The design or layout of the website, including
graphics and text, as well as links, is important for
the effective delivery and use of any web-based
information, even though it does not affect the quality
of the information per se. The design of websites

Ä

W hat else has this author written?

Ä

Does the author acknowledge other viewpoints
and theories?

30

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

Ä

W here is the webpage located?

Ä

Ä

Is the page part of the website of an organisation
whose name we can trust?

Explanation of the methods used to obtain the
information

Ä

Listing of reference sources used.

Ä

Ev idence that content was reviewed by other
authorities for accuracy.

Ä

Information on how studies were conducted and
analysed.

Ä

Lack of obv ious errors or omissions.

Ä

Lack of spelling, grammatical, and typographical
errors.

Ä

Does the address show that it is a personal
home page?

9.2 Objectivity
Objectivity means all sides of issues are portrayed
in a fair light. There is no propaganda or misinformation.
The information is free from obvious errors or misleading
omissions. However, this may not be easy to detect,
if we don’t know the subject matter well already. To
see if the information is presented objectively, one
should look for the following:
Ä

Is the information objective or subjective?

Ä

Is it to sell a product of some kind?

Ä

Is it to persuade us of the correctness of a
certain opinion on a controversial issue?

Ä

Are all sides of the issue presented fairly?

Ä

Is it to present current information, as a public
service?

Ä

W hat kind of organisation is responsible for the
information?

Ä

Is it full of fact or opinion?

Ä

Is the information biased?

Ä

W hat type of language is used?

Ä

W hat tone does the page have?

Ä

How does the sponsorship impact the perspective
of the information?

Ä

Is a balance of perspectives represented?

Ä

Could the information be meant as humorous,
a parody or satire?

Ä

W hat about advertising? Is there any on the
webpage?

9.4 Coverage
Coverage means the completeness of the information
presented. It is also difficult to determine without a
thorough understanding of the topic. The cov erage
of the topic is greatly influenced by the audience for
whom the information was written. For example,
information intended for use by medical professionals
would probably have greater coverage than information
intended for use by health care consumers. Coverage
includes:
Ä

The depth (level of detail presented) and breadth
(coverage of all aspects of the subject) of the
information.

Ä

Look for obvious gaps or omissions in the coverage
of the topic. Does the information presented
leave us with unanswered questions?

Ä

Compare the information presented with print
resources on the same topic. Is the information
presented equivalent in breadth and depth?

9.5 Relevance
Relev ance is defined as “relation to the matter
at hand: practical and especially social applicability
pertinence.” This criterion is particularly important
in the evaluation of health-related information. Is the
information suited to our needs? Is it pertinent? It
can be related to:

9.3 Accuracy

Ä

The purpose of the webpage.

Accuracy is important in judging information
sources. Accuracy means the information presented
is exact and correct. The accuracy of a source is
more difficult to evaluate than authority and objectivity.
If we do not already have a good understanding of
the topic, it is hard to tell if the information presented
is accurate or not. To find if information is accurate
or not, one should look for the following:

Ä

The purpose we have in looking for the information.

Ä

The utility or usability of the information. W hy
are we looking for the information? Is the content
related to our needs?

Ä

Are the information current and the cov erage
broad enough to meet our needs?

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

31

Ä

Is the information written in a form that is useable
(i.e., reading level, technical level)?

Ä

Is the information authentic?

Ä

W here does the information originate?

Ä

Is the information in a form that is useful such
as words, pictures, charts, sounds or video?

Ä

Is the information from an established organisation?

Ä

Ä
Do the facts contribute something new or add
to our knowledge of the subject?

Has the information been reviewed by others to
insure accuracy?

Ä

Is this a primary source or secondary source
of information?

Ä

Are original sources clear and documented?

Ä

Is a bibliography provided citing the sources
used?

9.6 Time Aspects
The time aspects of a document are particularly
important in fields which change rapidly, for example,
science and medicine. It is important to get up-todate health information. Even a few months can be
crucial in a field in which drugs and treatments are
evolving so rapidly. Time aspects of the document
are shown below:

9.9 Reliability
To know the reliability of the health information,
one must consider the following:

Ä

Is the information current?

Ä

Is the sources truth worthy? How do we know?

Ä

W hen the document was created? Placed on
the web? Copyrighted? Last revised or updated?

Ä

W ho is sponsoring this publication?

Ä

Does the page provide information about timeliness
such as specific dates of information?

Ä

What is the purpose of the information resource:
to inform, instruct, persuade, or sell?

Ä

Does currency of information matter with our
particular topic?

Ä

W hat is their motive?

Ä

How current are the sources or links?

Ä

W hat edition of the work is presented?

Ä

When was the information in the document gathered?

9.7 Usability
Website should be “user-friendly”, and navigating
around the site should be easy. The site should be
logically arranged, with the use of good graphic
design. Multimedia should be used appropriately.
Information should be concise, to reduce lengthy
scrolling through the document. Hyperlinks should
be intact and operable. Consideration must be taken
of the varying levels of technology which may be
used to access the site. The site should be accessible
to most users. When possible, enhancements should
be added to aid those with access problems (e.g.,
text versions of image and sound files for individuals
with visual or hearing problems).

9.10 Efficiency
One should think about the organisation, and
speed of information access including table of contents,
index, menu, and other easy-to-follow tools for navigation.
One should also consider whether the information
presented in a way that is easy to use (i.e., fonts,
graphics and headings)?

9.11 Points of View or bias
Points of view or bias reminds us that information
is rarely neutral. Because data is used in selective
ways to form information, it generally represents a
point of view. Ev ery writer wants to prove his point
and will use the data and information that assists
him in doing so. When evaluating information found
on the Internet, it is important to examine who is
providing the “information” we are viewing and what
might be their point of view or bias. The popularity
of the Internet makes it the perfect venue for commercial
and sociopolitical publishing. These areas in particular
are open to highly “interpretative” uses of data.

9.8 Authenticity
Authenticity of the information is most important
while one accesses health information on the Internet.
To access the right health information, one should
check the following:
32

9.12 Referral to and/or knowledge of the
literature
Referral to and/or knowledge of the literature
refers to the context in which the author situates his
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

or her work. This rev eals what the author knows
about his or her discipline and its practices. This
allows us to evaluate the author’s scholarship or
knowledge of trends in the area under discussion.
The following criteria serve as a filter for all formats
of information.
Ä

The document includes a bibliography.

Ä

The author alludes to or displays knowledge of
related sources, with proper attribution.

Ä

The author displays knowledge of theories, schools
of thought or techniques usually considered
appropriate in the treatment of his or her subject.

Ä

If the author is using a new theory or technique
as a basis for research, he or she discusses
the value and/or limitations of this new approach.

Ä

If the author’s treatment of the subject is controversial,
and he/she knows and acknowledges this.

10. CONCLUSION
Medical professionals wishing to use an Internet
resource must consider the source very carefully
before deciding whether or not to use it. Any Internet
source to be used must be cited fully in the bibliography
or references section of the research paper in question
and must be accompanied by a paragraph evaluating
the source. It is also important to consider how
current the author’s analysis is; many webpages
are put up and then forgotten by their authors,
meaning that they quickly lose currency and are not
changed in response to changing ev ents.
Quality of health information on the Internet is
important, because it has the potential to benefit or
harm a large number of people. It has this potential
because of the nature of the Internet and the Internet’s
rapid worldwide spread. The medical professionals
of KMC, Manipal have recommended the development
of technology-based tools that support the assessment
and development of quality health information on the
Internet. Authors agree on key criteria for evaluating
health related websites, databases, etc. Efforts to
develop consensus criteria may be helpful. The next
step is to identify and assess a clear, simple set
of consensus criteria that the medical professionals
can understand and use. Also, instruments to evaluate
health information on the Internet have to be developed.
It is observed that Medline (PubMed) of National

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

Library of Medicine, USA; ScienceDirect and MD
Consult databases of Elsevier; Ovid SP and ProQuest
Medical Library online databases; online journals of
Blackwell, BMJ, Cambridge, Elsevier, JAMA & Archives,
JBJS, John Wiley, Karger, Lancet, Lippincott, NEJM,
Oxford University Press, Sage, Springer, Taylor &
Francis, etc., publishers are some of the commonly
used Internet resources by the medical professionals
at KMC, Manipal to access quality health information.

REFERENCES
1. McLeod, S. D. The quality of medical information
on the internet: A new public health concern.
Archives of Ophthalmology, 1998, 116(12), 1663-65.
2. Maloney, S; Ilic, D. & Green, S. Accessibility,
nature and quality of health information on the
Internet: A survey on osteoarthritis. Rheumatology,
2005, 44, 382–85.
3. Risk, A. & Dzenowagis, J. Review of internet
health information quality initiatives. J. Med.
Internet Res., 2001, 3(4), e28.
4. Eysenbach, G.; Diepgen, T. L.; Gray, J. A. M.;
Bonati, M.; Impicciatore, P.; Pandolfini, C. &
Arunachalam, S. Towards quality management
of medical information on the internet: Evaluation,
labeling and filtering of information. BMJ, 1998,
317, 1496-1502.
5. Franco, A. & Palladino, R. L. Finding quality
information on the W orld W ide W eb. http://
www.iona.edu/faculty/afranco/iima/webliog.htm.
Accessed on 24.12.2007.
6. Kirk, E. E. Ev aluating Information Found on the
Internet. http://www.library.jhu.edu/res earchhelp/
general/ev aluating/. Accessed on 24.12.2007.
7. Evaluating the quality of health information. 2006.
http://www.londonlinks.ac.uk/working_groups/pig/
pig_quality_issues.pdf. Accessed on 24.12.2007.
8. Wolfe, G. L. How do we evaluate web resources?
2001.http://www.msu.edu/~wolfegay/how% 20to%
20evaluate.htm. Accessed on 24.12.2007.
9. Johnson, L. & Lamb, A. Evaluating internet resources.
http://eduscapes.com/tap/topic32.htm. Accessed
on 24.12.2007.

33

About the Authors

Mahabaleshw ara Rao is presently working as Senior Librarian in the Health Sciences
Library of Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka. His areas of interest include Health
Sciences Librarians hip. He has c ontributed s everal papers in national j ournals and
conferences on Knowledge Management, Digital Library, Internet Resources, and Open
Access Resources.
Dr Mahesh V. Mudhol is working as Reader in Department of Library and Information
Science, Mangalore University, Karnatak a. He has published many articles , pres ented
several papers in National conferences, attended refresher courses in Library Sciences
and published seven books. He is the member of Board of Studies and Examination
of Department of Library and Information Science and also the member of the Science
and Tec hnology Faculty in the Mangalore University, Karnataka. His areas of interes t
include Inform ation Technology.

Dr Shivananda Bhat K. is work ing as Senior Librarian in the Health Sciences Library
of Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka.

34

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

