DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 6, November 2008, pp. 34-38
© 2008, DESIDOC

Online Public Access Catalogue: A Journey to Alice for
Windows, LibSys, and Virtua
Shabahat Husain* and Mehtab Alam Ansari**
Department of Library & Information Science
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh-202 002
*E-mail: shabahat12@rediffmail.com
**E-mail: mehtaba2003@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
The importance of knowing the various search facilities available on a range of software packages,
on a comparative basis, cannot be overemphasised. This study concerns with laying the foundation for
such exercise. W ith the application of information technology in libraries, selection of an appropriate
library automation software package has become a challenge for the library administrators. Online Public
Access Catalogue (OPAC) is an important module in all library packages. The present study evaluates
three important library software packages, namely, Alice for W indows, Libsys, and Virtua in the context
of OPAC module.
Keywords: Information technology, library automation, search strategy, library software, OPAC, database
search, AMU, Alice, Libsys, Virtua

1. INTRO DUCTION
Ov er the years, the Indian market for library
automation software packages has been subject to
remarkable changes, particularly with respect to the
growing competition among the leading suppliers.
As a result of this stiff competition, librarians are
facing a dilemma. W hile on one hand, they are not
so well equipped with the technologies on their own,
on the other, software companies send their marketing
professionals who demonstrate very few features,
particularly from the Online Public Access Catalogue
(OPAC) module. OPAC module has much more to
offer beyond the author, title, and subject searches.
It is simply not a replacement of the card catalogue
with simple search facilities.
Now when Indian market is witnessing a cut
throat competition between the Indian and international
players, there is a need to identify and have a closer
look at the predominantly used software. This study
will give library managers some ideas for comparing
Received 15 February 2008; Revised 21 May 2008

the most widely used module of library automation
software either in the country or elsewhere in the world.

2. SCOPE
Today, many library automation software packages
are available in Indian market. Besides the availability
of indigenously designed and developed software, a
number of foreign software packages are also available.
Among the indigenously developed library software,
Libsys is still on the top with more than one thousand
installations. On the other hand, Alice for W indows
is the top selling foreign software. Virtua, though,
a new entrant in Indian market, is gradually picking
up the market. Present study evaluates OPAC module
of these three library automation software packages.

3. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
W ith the flood of library automation software
packages in Indian market, many libraries have selected
different packages. Consequently, many comparative

studies have also been conducted about their utilities.
However, the literature available on comparative review
of various library software is very less. Further compounding
the problem is the non-existent of literature on the
software predominantly in use in India. The studies
of Muskier 1,2 were limited to parts of the South
Africa. Vietzen3 did a comparative study of the software
developed in-house in their respectiv e libraries in
South Africa. Study by Norden and Lawrence4 observed
how library users use public terminal of an online
catalogue in Ohio State University. Moore5 in a study
observ ed use of OPAC along with success-failure
rates comparison. The study by Chisenga6 provides
a good overview related to factors that influenced
the choice of software. However, this study was
restricted to central and southern part of Africa.
Jones7,
et al. collated some of the early studies
on how software can be designed to help users, and
how computer systems might adapt to users’ needs.
Recent studies by Konomos and Herrington8 described
the data collection techniques through OPAC in the
university libraries at the Arizona State. Shabahat
and Mehtab9 though studied similar library automation
software packages in Indian context, but their study
was also restricted to the cataloguing module only.
The present work is an attempt to fill the gap prevalent
on comparative review of library software.

4. MET HODOLOGY
The Department of Library and Information Science,
Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), has procured the
licensed copies of Alice for W indows and Libsys.
These software are being used to impart the handson-training to the MLISc students in the department.
Also, one of the authors had received hands-on
training on Virtua software at VTLS Headquarters
located in Blacksburg, USA. The OPAC modules of
Alice, Libsys, and Virtua software have been examined
and analyzed in the present work, particularly in
terms of multiple search strategies, multiple cross
references, and tracings, library-defined indices,
multimedia access, filtering, sorting, patron-empowerment,
Z39.50 compliance, Unicode support, and security
features.

5. ALICE FOR WINDOWS
Alice for Windows (AfW) is very popular, integrated
library automation software designed and developed
by a leading Australian company, Softlink, based in
Brisbane. Alice is marketed worldwide through a
number of agencies based in America, Australia,
New Zealand, Britain, Iceland, Singapore, Malaysia,
and India. It has more than 13,000 installations
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

across the world. In India more than 200 libraries
are using Afw. The company has also bagged a very
prestigious Microsoft Certified Solution Provider Award
in 1999 from the Microsoft Corporation.
Alice for Windows comprises modules required
for day-to-day transaction of a library, i.e., management,
circulation, inquiry, and reports and utilities. It is
important to mention here that OPAC module is
known as inquiry in AfW. Apart from these modules,
the software has some advanced modules like
acquisitions, periodicals, journal indexing, multimedia,
web inquiry. The software operates on any IBM
compatible PC in any version of W indows. It is also
compatible with MAC with at least 32 MB of RAM
with 2.1 GB hard disk. The software runs in a single
as well as multi-user environment.

6. LIBSYS
Libsys is fully integrated library management
software designed to run on a number of platforms.
It supports UNIX, W indows NT, and Novell Netware
in client-serv er architecture. It can run on many
servers such as Windows NT, SCO Unix, Linux,
Unixware, Novell, Sun Solaris, Alpha OSF/1, etc.
On the client side, a library may have any version
of windows. Besides, the software is also compatible
with Java-enabled thin client. Significantly, Libsys
does not need any relational database management
system (RDBMS) as it uses proprietary database.
However, ORACLE as backend or SQL server is the
available options of Libsys.
Libsys has the largest installations base in India
with more than one thousand libraries using the
software. Importantly, many world renowned institutes
in India are also the users of Libsys software.
Libsys has six modules: (i) acquisition,
(ii) cataloguing, (iii) circulation, (iv) serials control,
(v) article indexing, and (vi) OPAC. The software has
the support of Unicode, so if a library chooses radio
frequency identification technology, SIP-2 interface
in the Libsys, would facilitate installing self-check
workstation, book drop counters, re-shelving of items,
etc.

7. VTLS
Virginia Tech Library System (VTLS) Inc. located
in Blacksburg, Virginia, is the offspring of a project
launched in 1974 at Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State Univ ersity’s Newman Library, a member
of the Association of Research libraries with more
35

than 1.5 million catalogued volumes. Having studied
available library automation alternatives and having
realised no system perfectly suitable for the needs
of its libraries, Virginia Tech initiated a project to
develop an automated library system. This forerunner
of VTLS, comprising an OPAC and an automated
circulation system, was installed at Virginia-Tech’s
Newman Library in 1975. By 1985, the software had
grown into the integrated library system known as
VTLS. In the same year, VTLS Inc. was formed as
a subsidiary corporation of Virginia Tech Intellectual
Properties (VTIP), which granted VTLS Inc. exclusive
worldwide rights to market VTLS products. In 1998,
VTLS Inc. introduced Virtua library automation software5.
VTLS Inc is an ISO 9001 certified company. Significantly,
more than 1000 libraries in around 40 countries have
chosen Virtua software for automation purpose.
Virtua has many modules, viz., acquisition and
fund accounting, cataloguing, circulation, serials control,
OPAC, chameleon gateway, statistic and reporting,
and system profiling. VTLS also manage collection
through radio frequency identification (RFID) technology.
Furthermore, company specialises in microfilm scanning
and digital library techniques.

8. OPAC FEATURES IN AFW, LIBSYS
AND VIRTUA
AfW contains 11 fields for search. These are
author, title, subject, keywords, topic, publisher,
ISBN, call no., barcode, and accession number.
There is a facility for simple as well as complex
searches. Users can store Set, having their preferred
search strategy temporarily in the software for the
purpose of saving their time. Inquiry (OPAC) can
also be used as an information bulletin. Facility of
library map helps user in identifying the location of
a particular book. Inquiry module of Alice also supports
viewing multimedia files. There is no need to rebuild
the index to view any resource in inquiry as automatic
indexing is done. Alice also offers the ability to
catalogue electronic files including documents and
HTML files downloaded from the W orld Wide Web.
These files are viewable through inquiry module. The
status of any book can also be checked and if the
book is issued, librarian can know the details of the
borrower through Inquiry module. Afw offers quick
searching to assist school libraries with very young
students also interested to view pictures.
In Libsys OPAC services include title, catalogue
author cataloguing, subject catalogue, classified catalogue,
publisher index, place of publication index, keyword
in context/keyword out of context indexes. Boolean
searches allows use of logical connections OR,
36

AND, and NOT. It allows use of truncation, parentheses,
and proximity connectors. Libsys also allows userdefined searchable fields, and stop words. OPAC
provides online information on holding of current
journals including recent issues received. There is
also facility for online reservations, serial digital
interface (SDI), conditional access system (CAS),
etc. Moreover, Libsys supports defining multiple databases
based on types of documents for searching in OPAC6.
Other serv ices from OPAC client includes updating
subject interest profile for SDI by users themselves,
request for acquisition of a document while browsing/
searching various catalogues, and facility to make
request online for putting a specific title on reserve,
etc. OPAC module of the software also has the
multimedia interface.
The Virtua OPAC gives the user fast, easy and
comprehensive access to data regardless of how
the data is stored. The client/server environment of
the Virtua OPAC supports multiple search strategies,
multiple cross-references and tracings, library defined
indices, multimedia files, filtering, sorting, patron
empowerment, multilingual access through Unicode,
security. OPAC search features have browse, keyword,
expert, and control number. Virtua’s browse search
option allows users to explore a list of indices chosen
by indiv idual library. The browse search produces an
alphabetical list of the index chosen by users and
allows user to easily navigate through the list. The
keyword search options give users the power to
incorporate, single or in combination, the use of
Boolean operators, and left, right and middle wildcard
truncation. Control number searching is designed
for staff use. It returns records based upon numbers
such as ISSN, ISBN, OCLC, LCCN, Item Id, etc.
To further refine search results users can employ
the use of filters in keyword and expert searches.
The user can filter on categories such as location,
format, nature of contents, language, place of publication,
and year of publication. Software also facilitates
printing, saving or e-mailing readers. There is provision
for reading ‘see’ and ‘see also’ references. More
importantly Virtua tells the user the term referenced
are broader, narrows, earlier, later, acronym etc.

9. DISCUSSION
Table 1 giv es the comparative study of various
OPAC features available in AfW, Libsys, and Virtua.
Multiple search strategy provides facility to conduct
searches on specific bibliographic fields. This search
can be limited to any particular document type.
Moreov er, the search results can be displayed on
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

Table 1. Selected OPAC features in AfW, Libsys, and Virtua
Features

AfW

Libsys

Virtua

Multiple search strategy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Multiple cross-references and
tracings

Yes

Yes

Yes

Library-defined indices

No

No

Yes

Multimedia access

Yes

Yes

Yes

Filtering

No

Yes

Yes

Sorting

No

No

Yes

Patron empowerment

Yes

Yes

Yes

Z39.50 Compliant

Yes

Yes

Yes

Multi-lingual access through
Unicode

No

Yes

Yes

Security

Yes

Yes

Yes

Full-text retrievals

Yes

Yes

Yes

the screen or printed. Additionally, these may be
saved on any external backup medium.
Multiple cross-references and tracings allow viewing
‘See’ and ‘See Also’ references and ev en informing
users whether cross-referenced terms are broader,
narrower, earlier, later, acronym or musical compositions.
Multimedia access provides access to images, sound
and video clips as well as any other multimedia
object.
Filtering allows users to further refine their searches.
A user can filter on location, format, language, publication
year, etc.
Patron empowerment helps users to place their
requests, view the status of their requests, and view
their own record and activ ity as well as to initiate
document delivery requests.
Sorting sorts the results in ascending or descending
order by author, title, call no., and publication date
with a sub sort of author or title.
Z39.50 compliant enables users to search databases
such as SilverPlatter, DIOLOG, etc. Users may access
these databases and compare result sets from various
databases.
Multi-lingual access through Unicode allows storage,
display and input in native script of dozens of languages
including Urdu, Persian, and Arabic.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

Security allows and denies access to bonafide members
and unauthorised users, respectively. Each user
will be hav ing a user profile according to his/her
privileges.
Full-text retrievals allow browsing of images of full
text or specific portion of a document in multiwindows interface.
Of late, libraries, in particular academic and
research, has begun to realise that access to bibliographic
information should meet varied approaches of the
users. It is worth pointing out that OPAC module
of any library automation software should not only
be user-friendly but also intuitive. Failing which,
user’s dependency on the manual card catalogue
will not be diminished.
The study of the three software packages reveals
that each package has got its own capabilities and
limitation. For instance AfW has a remarkable feature
of reorganising database just with one click of mouse
as per wishes of the user. Its multimedia interface
in inquiry module had simply turned many potential
customers in India into actual users. Its feature of
tracing a document at a particular location in the
library through Map facility is considered a marvelous
one. Automatic keyword generation through title,
author, and notes area is a strong feature of the
software. Another peculiar feature is that software
offers the ability to catalogue electronic files including
documents and HTML files downloaded from the
World W ide Web. Notably, majority of the students
in the Department of Library Science, AMU, found
themselves at ease while receiving hands-on-training.
Moreover, a wide range of search strategies available
in the inquiry module of AfW have impressed them
immensely. OPAC module of Libsys software is
also having powerful features. Its KWIC/KWOC indexes
are popularly used search strategy. Its proximity
connectors, same as provided by DIALOG, reflects
the strong technological base of the software. It has
also been observed that MLiSc students take special
interest in learning all modules of Libsys software
including OPAC keeping in view its huge installations
base.
Virtua, though new entrant in Indian market is
being considered a very powerful and technologically
sound library automation software package. Its unicode
support is the most attractive feature for the libraries
having pre-dominant collection in Urdu, Arabic, and
Persian. Significantly, Virtua’s unicode implementation
can support all languages based on the legacy
scripts of Latin, Cyrillic, Greek, Hebrew, Turkish,
Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese, and Korean.
37

Multilingual support has made the case strong
in favour of Virtua for its selection by the great
Alexandria library of Egypt. Virtua also opens up a
whole new world of access with regards to multimedia,
which is linked through the 856 tag of the MARC
record. Resultantly, web pages, sound clips and
other external files are all accessible at the click
of a button. Moreover, Virtua’s patron empowerment
feature helps giving special privileges to different
users. These salient features of OPAC module creates
a special interest among the students of the department
during practice classes.

10. CONCLUSION
This study has attempted to evaluate the features
of OPAC module of three well known library automation
software packages, viz., AfW, Libsys, and Virtua.
Observations regarding the behaviour of students of
the Department of Library and Information Science
at AMU related to their practical classes have also
been reported. It is now left to indiv idual libraries to
select any particular library software package that
can cater to their needs and requirements. However,
it would be fair to suggest, to analyse thoroughly
the features of OPAC module of the chosen software
because it is not only related to users but also to
the library staff.

REFERENCES
1. Muskier, Reuben. Library computerisation in the
Southern Transvaal. South African J. Librarianship
Inf. Sc., 1982, 49(4), 198-99.

2. Muskier, R. The new technology in South African
libraries: An update to 1984. South African J.
Librarianship Inf. Sc., 1985, 53(2), 68-71.
3. Vitzen, Collen. Library computerisation in the
Cope and Natal. South African J. Librarianship
Inf. Sc., 1982, 49(4), 193-95.
4. Norden, David J. & Lawence, Gail Hendon. Public
terminal use in an online catalogue: Some preliminary
results. College Res. Lib., 1981, 42(4), 308-16.
5. Moore, Carole W eiss. User reactions to online
catalogs: An exploratory study. College Res.
Lib., 1981, 42(4), 295-302.
6. Chisenga, Justice. Factor influencing the choice
of library software in the SADC-PTA region. African
J. Lib. Archive Inf. Sc., 1996, 6(1), 52-56.
7. Jones, A.; Scalon, E. & O’Shea, T. Computer
revolution in education: New technologies for
distance teaching. Harvestor Press, Brighton,
1987. 276 p.
8. Konomos, P. & Herington, S. Evaluating the use
of public PC workstations at the Arizona State
University Libraries. The Electronic Library, 2000,
18(6), 403-06.
9. Husain, Shabahat & Ansari, Mehtab Alam. Library
automation software packages in India: A study
of the cataloguing modules of Alice for Windows,
Libsys and Virtua. Ann of Lib. Inf. Studies,
2007, 54, 146-51.

About the Authors

Shri Shabahat Husain is presently working as Professor in the Department of Library and Information Science,
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. He has more than 30 years of teaching experience and is a member of various
national level committees of UGC and professional organisations in India and abroad.

Dr Mehtab Alam Ansari is presently working as Lecturer in the Department of Library and Information Science
at Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh.

38

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

