DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 28, No. 6, November 2008, pp. 39-44
© 2008, DESIDOC

Performance Management and Job Satisfaction of University
Library Professionals in Karnataka: A Study
T.Y. Mallaiah
Mangalore University Library
Mangalagangothri-574 199, Mangalore, Karnataka
E-mail: mallaiahty@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The relationship between job satisfaction and employe’s performance has always been discussed in
organisational behaviour and human resource management literature. A highly satisfied employee need
not necessarily be a profound performer. However, an employee, who is dissatisfied, can cause
irreparable damage to the orgnisational effectiveness. Performance management system should be
based on ideological underpinnings and a holistic context by strengthening the linkages among the key
components such as performance planning, performance execution, performance appraisal, recognition
and reward, and performance improvement on a continuous basis. The paper discusses performance
management and job satisfaction of university library professionals in Karnataka. Present study is based
on the primary data collected from 188 library professionals through a pre-tested, structured,
comprehensive questionnaire. The key issues were identification and definition of key performance
areas, role clarity and direction, performance feedback and potential appraisal, and job rotation as a
powerful tool to develop and unleash employee’s potential. Factor analysis highlighted the significance of
three sub-systems of performance management system, i.e., performance planning and development,
employee involvement and empowerment, and orgnisation-employee rapport. The paper concludes that
the conducive and congenial physical, social, and psychological conditions present in the workplace
have potential to enhance the job satisfaction of the library professionals. The bottom line is that library
administration should pay proper, adequate, and timely attention to the interaction and reinforcing nature
of ‘motivation-performance-satisfaction (MPS)’ cycle.
Keywords: Performance planning, performance appraisal, job satisfaction, employee involvement, employ’s
empowerment, congenial conditions, library professionals

1. INTRO DUCTION

to those who manage these.

Human resource in any organisation is its most
expensive but vital resource. Consequently, the future
of any organisation depends more on its staff than
any other factor. The usefulness of service institutions
like libraries is measured by the services rendered
by them to the users, which in turn depends on the
personnel who are responsible for the efficient and
effective delivery of service. If the authorities tend
to think of their services almost exclusiv ely, it is
very likely that these serv ices cannot effectively be
provided unless the authorities give due weightage

It is imperative from the above facts that the
human resources have to be properly and adequately
motivated, developed, maintained, and utilised to
provide efficient services. Library professionals, therefore,
occupy a prominent and decisive place in university
libraries. The reason is that human resources are
animated with attendant emotions, feelings, beliefs,
opinions, perceptions, attitudes, etc., and human
factor gives the necessary support and life to all the
material resources to prov ide useful serv ice to the
users.

Received 4 February 2008

39

2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

3. OBJECTIVES

Library is the central point of the whole university
system wherein one could find the various functions
performed and services rendered by the library
professionals. Library professionals should know that
one of the most effective ways to win the loyalty of
their staff is to make each employee feel that his/
her work is important and appreciated. In addition
to possessing an employee-centred attitude, a library
supervisor should be equipped with certain skills in
dealing with people, should have the ability to make
clear assignments and to delegate authority, should
be competent to instruct and to check completed
work, should know the most effective ways to correct
as well as commend, and should be able to discuss
problems with staff members in an atmosphere of
mutual trust, confidence, and goodwill.

The purpose of the study is to examine and
report on ‘motivation-performance-satisfaction’ linkages
among library professionals working in the university
libraries of Karnataka. The specific objectives are:

To realise library’s unique function of serving as
the one unbiased non-partisan bureau of information,
personnel of the highest competence and integrity
are essential. This calls for proper management of
university library personnel.
The task is no doubt challenging, as the behaviour
of the human being is both complex and unpredictable,
making human resources probably the most difficult
and frustrating to manage. The disregard of an employee’s
capacity to feel, think and grow is a subtle but
menacing danger that results in the breaking down
of his social and spiritual morale. As a result, it may
produce an ineffective and frustrated staff.
Performance of an employee in any organisation
is largely determined by the motivation he or she
possesses. Positive motivation not only leads to
better performance, but also increases the employee
morale, commitment, and emotional identification
with the organisation. The employee so motivated
would surely contribute his/her best to serv e the
user. Further, the question of motivation and its
impact on performance assumes greater significance
in serv ice organisations like libraries where there is
direct personal interaction between the employees
and the user. It need not be overemphasised that
the positive motivators would definitely pay rich dividends
in the form of increased work-efficiency and productivity,
reduced costs of operations, increased motivation
and heightened morale, high job satisfaction, greater
level of involvement, dedication, and commitment.
Further, there would be a spectacular reduction in
the number of complaints and grievances, and decrease
in absenteeism. This automatically contributes to
the reputation of the libraries by way of effective
performance.
40

Ä

To discuss the views and perceptions of the
library professionals in respect of their job, jobenvironment, and the organization.

Ä

To identify and analyse the major personal, work,
and organisational factors influencing motivation,
performance, and job satisfaction of library
professionals.

Ä

To raise important human resource management
implications and to offer suggestions for strengthening
the ‘motivation-performance-satisfaction’ linkages
among library professionals based on the findings
of this study.

4. MET HODOLOGY
The study is mainly based on the primary
data collected from the professionals working in
different university libraries (regular and deemed) of
Karnataka. The information, opinions, perceptions,
and attitude of these library professionals were collected
and analysed. Relevant data was collected from the
records of the university libraries. These official records
include pathfinder, annual reports, and special publications
of the university libraries in Karnataka.

5. SELECTION OF THE LIBRARIES AND
LIBRARY PROFESSIONALS
There are 15 universities (regular and deemed)
in Karnataka, of which six are the academic/general
and nine are deemed universities. Two hundred eighteen
library staff works in these universities. The library
professionals identified in this study are grouped
into two categories, namely, professionals and semiprofessionals. The pre-tested, structured, comprehensive
questionnaire was sent to these 218 professionals
and semi-professionals. The questionnaire was selfadministered by the respondent population. One
hundred eighty eight respondents submitted their
questionnaire (86.24 per cent).

6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
6.1 Factor Analysis
Factor analysis was performed for performance
management of library professionals. The analysis
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

has been discussed in terms of total variance and
rotated component matrix. Kaiser’s criterion 1 was
used to extract factors. The factors, which had
Eigen value of more than one, were only considered.
The connotations of variables are interpreted as
seen through rotated component matrix. The significance
of rotated factor loadings was obtained through BurtBank’s1 formula (+0.23 rotated factor loading was
found to be significant for a sample size of 188 at
0.05 level of significance).

6.2 Factor Analysis of Performance
Management
Continuous improvement and development of
the process of carrying duties and responsibilities
is considered as the hallmark of performance management
in any organisation. Competent and effective management
of work performance must be characterised by performance
planning and performance development. A meaningful
performance planning should spell out the key performance
areas for each employee well in advance in order
to prov ide the role clarity and direction to generate
qualitative work performance. On the other hand,
the development component of performance management

comprises two variables, namely, appropriate and
timely performance feedback about the potential of
the employee’s for higher-level jobs, and practicing
job rotation as a tool to develop employee’s potential
in new areas.
Factor analysis from the data set of six variables,
suggests three factors to be generated that accounts
for 70.028 per cent of the total variance (Table 1) in
the scores. The rest of 29.97 per cent of variance
produced ‘n’ number of factors; these factors are
insignificant because of low Eigen values and low
per cent of variance in the data set of six variables.
These factors explain three major sub-systems of
performance management pertinent to a library namely,
performance planning and development, employee
involvement and empowerment, and organisationemployee rapport. These factors individually possess
36.83, 19.14 and 14.06 per cent of variances, respectively.
These sub-systems are components of a major system
called performance management. The Kaiser’s rotated
component matrix is giv en in Table 2.
Factor I, defined as performance planning and
development, measures the attributes of employee’s

Table 1. Total variance explained of performance management
Initial Eigen values

Component

Extraction sums of squared loadings

Total

Per cent of
variance

Cumulative per
cent

Total

Per cent of
variance

Cumulative per
cent

1.

3.315

36.833

36.833

3.315

36.833

36.833

2.

1.722

19.139

55.971

1.722

19.139

55.971

3.

1.265

14.056

70.028

1.265

14.056

70.028

4.

0.996

11.062

81.089

5.

0.723

8.035

89.124

6.

0.521

5.784

94.909

7.

0.273

3.036

97.945

8.

0.134

1.488

99.433

9.

0.051

0.567

100.000

Table 2. Rotated component matrix of performance management
S. No.

Components
Performance planning
and development

Employee involvement
and empowerment

Organisation-employee
rapport

1.

0.893

0.032

-0.065

2.

0.892

-.249

-0.034

3.

0.303

-.328

0.594

4.

-.307

0.644

-.168

5.

-.238

0.367

0.664

6.

0.144

0.891

0.176

7.

0.121

-.026

0.834

8.

0.761

0.121

0.284

9.

0.712

-.400

0.145

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

41

work performance and is presented in Table 3. Table
3 shows a significant proportion of the respondents
opined that key performance areas were identified
for each employees in their respective organisations
(0.893 loading). Similarly, they also stated that the
key performance area identified and defined by their
organisations provided them the much needed role
clarity and work direction to discharge their duties
and responsibilities (0.892 loading). Besides these,
employees regularly received performance feedback
from their superiors about their potential for higherlevel jobs in the organisation (0.761 loading). Finally,
job rotation was practiced widely to help employees
develop their potentials in new areas (0.712 loading).
Factor II, defined as employee’s involv ement
and empowerment, acknowledges mechanism of
continuously improving organisational performance
and effectiveness. Employee’s participation and
organisational communication are the vehicles ensuring
effective involvement and empowerment of employees
(Table 4).
Table 4 depicts that most of the respondents
indicated that employees’ participation was sought
in all the matters pertaining to the work and goals
of their respective organisation (0.891 loading). With
regard to organisational communication, their organizations
used circulars and newsletters to keep every employee
well informed and connected (0.644 loading).

It should be clearly noted that by effectively
involving and keeping the employees well connected
through the provision of an interrupted flow of information,
progressive and purposeful organisations can definitely
attract and retain willing, committed and talented
work-force in addition to significantly improving their
work performance. Hence, the issue of employee’s
involvement and empowerment in the area of performance
management cannot be lost sight of.
Factor III, defined as organisation-employee rapport,
is considered as a prerequisite for effectively managing
work performance and organisational effectiveness.
For the purpose of this study, ‘organisation-employee
rapport’ is viewed as a construct made up of three
variables, namely, sense of pride in the quality of
work, mechanisms for interacting with top management
if need be, and discussing performance and targets
with the subordinates by the immediate superiors
(Table 5).
Table 5 shows that majority of the respondents
indicated that every employee in his/her organisation
enjoyed a sense of pride in the quality of the work
accomplished (0.834 loading). Some of the respondents
also reported the presence of certain mechanisms
(e.g. open-door policy) for employees at all levels
to meet their top officers in case they wished to do
so (0.664 loading). Finally, a few respondents stated
the practice of regularly discussing performance

Table 3. Perfor mance pl anning and dev elopment
S. No.

Variables

1.

Loadings

Key performance is as identified for each employee in the organisation

0.893

2.

Performance is role clarity and direction to employees in terms of their work

0.892

3.

Employees regularly receive feedback about their potential for higher level jobs

0.761

4.

Job rotation is practiced widely to help people develop their potential in new areas

0.712

Table 4. Employee involvement and empowerment
S. No.

Variables

Loadings

1.

Employees’ participation is sought in all the matters that pertain to the work and
organisation’s goals

0.891

2.

The circular and newsletters in the organisation keep every employee well informed

0.644

Table 5. Organisation-employ ee rapport

42

S. No.

Variables

Loadings

1.

Every employee in the organisation has a sense of pride in the quality of the work they do

0.834

2.

There are mechanisms for employees at all levels to meet top officers if they wish to

0.664

3.

Senior officers always discuss performances and targets with their subordinates

0.594

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

and targets with subordinates by the senior officers
in their respective organisations (0.594 loading) helped
them a lot. Therefore, organisation-employee rapport
should be considered as an integral part of human
resource. Essentially, every employee should posses
and reflect a sense of pride in the quality of the work
done, encourage the employees working at all levels
to meet the top officers if necessary, and senior
officers must assume the responsibility and accountability
of discussing performance and targets with their
juniors.

to resign; (ii) it has been demonstrated that satisfied
employees have better health and live longer, and
(iii) satisfaction on the job carries over to the employees’
life outside the jobs. In this respect, the question
of how the material and moral elements affect the
job satisfaction of the librarians gains importance.
Table 6 shows the opinion of the librarians on their
level of satisfaction in their organisations. Table 6
shows significant proportion of the respondents 11
(73.33 per cent) opined that they were well satisfied
with their job.

7. JOB SATISFACTION

Table 7 shows that 26.67 per cent of librarians
opined that their employees were the best group as
far as work-related aspects were concerned. Five
(33.33 per cent) respondent felt that they like them
a great deal, while the other five felt that they liked
them fairly well. One has expressed that he has no
feeling one way or the other.

Job satisfaction is one of the criteria of establishing
a healthy organisational structure. Employees tend
to prefer jobs that give them opportunities to use
their skills and abilities and offer a variety of tasks,
freedom, and feedback on how well they are doing.
These characteristics make work mentally challenging.
Jobs that have too little challenge create boredom,
but too many challenges create frustration and feelings
of failure. Under conditions of moderate challenge,
most employees will experience pleasure and satisfaction.
Managers should be concerned with the lev el of job
satisfaction in their organisations for at least three
reasons: (i) there is clear evidence that unsatisfied
employees skip work more often and are more likely

Table 8 indicates that nine (60 per cent) respondents
were satisfied with the respect they received from
their colleagues, while fiv e (33.33 per cent) were
highly satisfied with it. One respondent was dissatisfied
with the amount of respect received from his colleagues.
Finally, we asked the librarians a question relating
to the overall opinion on their job satisfaction (Table 9).

Table 6. Level of satisfaction received from supervision
S. No.

No. of responses

Percentage

1.

Dissatisfied

Level of satisfaction

—

—

2.

Some what satisfied

—

—

3.

Moderately satisfied

04

26.67

4.

Well satisfied

11

73.33

5.

Extremely satisfied

—

—

Table 7. Opinion about the employ ees
S. No.

Opinion

No. of responses

Percentage

1.

I do not particularly care for them

—

—

2.

I have no feeling one way or the other

01

06.67

3.

I like them fairly well

05

33.33

4.

I like them a great deal

05

33.33

5.

They are the best group I could ask for

04

26.67

Table 8. Respect received fro m colleagues
S. No.

Respect received from their colleagues

No. of responses

Percentage

1.

Highly dissatisfied

—

—

2.

Dissatisfied

01

06.67

3.

Moderately satisfied

—

—

4.

Satisfied

09

60.00

5.

Highly satisfied

05

33.33

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

43

Table 9. Opinion about the ove rall job satisfaction
Overall job satisfaction

No. of
responses

Percentage

Completely dissatisfied

—

—

Dissatisfied

01

06.67

About half-and-half

01

06.67

Satisfied

09

60.00

Highly satisfied

04

26.66

Table 9 shows that nine respondents (60 per
cent) expressed that they were satisfied with their
job and the work environment. About four (26.66 per
cent) respondents felt that employee’s attitude promotes
the willingness, dedication and commitment in their
profession, and that they were highly satisfied about
that.
One respondent felt he was moderately satisfied,
while the other respondent stated that he was more
dissatisfied than satisfied. Hence, it is evident from
the above analysis that 86.66 per cent of the respondents
were satisfied with their jobs.

8. CONCLUSION
This study was aimed to gauge the limitations
of existing human resource management practices
relating to library professionals and semi-professionals

44

working in the university libraries of Karnataka, and
to assess their views in respect of their work-related
aspects, keeping motivation and performance at the
centre. This endeavour was set against the background
of the need for a consolidated approach to the
development of professionals in the library and information
field. This approach was perceived to be important
to educate, enlighten, entertain, and inspire the
user community by way of strengthening the university
library system with competent, qualified, skilled,
and able staff.
In summary, performance planning and development
frame work in any organisation should aim at identifying
and defining the key performance areas for the employees
at the individual level; provide role clarity and direction
to the employees through these key performance
areas; provide performance feedback about the potential
of employees for higher jobs in the organisation;
and rotation of jobs as a technique for developing
employees potential in new areas. Therefore, performance
planning and dev elopment can be viewed as two
sides of the same coin—the coin being performance
management.

REFERENCE
1. Child, Dennis. The essentials of factor analysis.
London, Holt, Rinehart and Winton, 1972. 43-45.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(6)

