DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2009, pp. 23-30
© 2009, DESIDOC

Libraries–a Key to Harness E-Learning: Issues and Perspective
S.M. Pujar* and R.K. Kamat**
*Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research
Gen Vaidya Marg, Film City Road, Goregaon (E), Mumbai-400 065
E-mail: pujar@igidr.ac.in

**Department of Electronics, Shivaji University, Kolhapur-416 004
E-mail: rkk_eln@unishivaji.ac.in

ABSTRACT
E-learning is a nebulous term; meaning teaching-learning facilitated through the modern media like web,
satellite, cable networks, etc. Though it is successful in spreading its wings on today’s higher education
sector, it’s linkages with the libraries are still feeble. The academic and other types of libraries, especially
from the developing countries such as India, are struggling to cater to the increasingly heterogeneous
requirements of the e-learners and associated community. This paper presents the key role of LIS professionals
in the e-learning paradigm. After a thorough analysis of the e-learning scenario, authors have realised that
libraries and librarians have an important role to play possibly through the digital libraries–a contemporary
movement growing along-with the e-learning. The aspirations of e-learner community from the LIS professionals
in this new era of e-learning are propagation of the movement itself, course content development, technical
facilitation, technical trouble shooting, fuelling open-archives, improving user interfaces, identifying and training
the usage of free and open source software tools to the user community to ensure maximum participation
in teaching-learning process. The paper also discusses e-learning-library linkages and the innovations
implemented in the top ranking off-shore public libraries that the Indian LIS community can follow. It reveals
an emanating strongly bonded model of e-learning–library linkage required for the sustainance and mutual
growth of the duo. This will also lend a hand in emerging an open knowledge culture and ultimately beneficial
for the evolving knowledge society.
Keywords: E-learning, libraries, digital library, digital reference service, content management system, courseware
federated search, education

1. INTRODUCTION
E-learning is a term generally used for computerenhanced learning. It is often extended to include the use
of mobile technologies such as PDAs and MP3 players. Elearning includes the use of web-based teaching materials
(hypermedia in general), multimedia CD-ROMs, websites,
discussion boards, collaborative software, e-mail, blogs,
wikis, text chat, computer-aided assessment, educational
animation, simulations, games, learning management
software, electronic voting systems, etc. with possibly a
combination of different methods being used (Wikipedia,
2008). Today, most of the e-learning activities are delivered
using Internet. Some of the present applications of elearning are online training, distance learning, learning with
threaded discussions or interactive bulletin boards,
website-based curriculum, courses that post assignments
online, correspondence course-style read-and-test
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

programs, etc.1 The worldwide scenario in the higher
education sector reveals the dominant force of e-learning
which could be the only solution to satisfy the diversified
needs of the learner community increasing by leaps and
bounds. The institutions of higher learning are opting for
this new media of education to reach their patrons in the
nooks and corners of the world, however without much
thought on the supporting academic facilities. Amongst
these neglected academic support services, library tops
the list and needs a serious rethinking for the very
sustenance of the e-learning model.
Technologically, e-learning seems to be far ahead of
the traditional academic libraries. Therefore, fear tends
to exist regarding the possible obsolescence of the
traditional academic libraries, which find it hard to catch
up with the swift pace of the technology and thus still
23

searching for a permanent and serviceable position that
is quick enough to be flexible, accessible, and up-todate with the wider educational institute set-up. The
same is true for the other types of the libraries. It is an
undisputed fact that libraries should gear up hand in
hand with the modernisation of the traditional classroom
activities with electronic elements customised for the
learners. Technology being the common link between
the e-learning and the modern libraries; lots of new
avenues are seen emerging for the LIS community. This
new environment is providing opportunities for libraries to
design and disseminate new services to the users. The
economic concerns also forced these to choose
electronic collection, especially journals rather than their
counterparts. This repositioning strategy was adopted to
help libraries extend the services of a traditional library
by enabling activities such as access to materials
outside the physical confines of the library. Thus the
complimentary linkage between libraries and e-learning
will help to widen the access. However, at the same
time it is putting enormous responsibility on the libraries
to quickly adapt to the changing environment by
developing their expertise, abilities, and resources in
order to take a leading role in the new e-learning
environment.

2. E-LEARNING: AN EMERGING
PEDAGOGICAL APPROACH
E-learning refers to learning that is facilitated using
digital tools and contents. It involves some form of
interactivity, which may include online interaction
between the learner and their teacher or peers.
According to Kaplan-Leiserson2 e-learning covers a wide
set of applications and processes such as web-based
learning, computer-based learning, virtual classrooms,
and electronic collaboration. It includes the delivery of
content via Internet, Intranet/Extranet (LAN/ WAN),
audio- and videotape, satellite broadcast, interactive TV,
and CD-ROM. In other words, e-learning is concerned
with learning facilitated and supported through the use of
information and communications technology (ICT). It can
cover a spectrum of activities from supported learning, to
blended learning (the traditional and e-learning
practices), to learning that is entirely online. Whatever
the technology, however, learning is the vital element. elearning is no longer simply associated with distance or
remote learning, but forms part of a conscious choice of
the best and most appropriate ways of promoting
effective learning.

3. NEW GROUND IN E-LEARNING PARADIGM
The library is a hub of any institute or organisation.
A hub in a digital network has lots of significance. In that
sense, the conventional library should go through some
24

major transformations in terms of its knowledge
sources, knowledge delivery management, and
connecting all the above elements with strong bonds.
Library is often referred as a heart of the institute of
higher learning catering information needs of all the
people associated with the institute. Till recently,
libraries used to furnish the information needs of users
by means of their vast print sources. However, now due
to to the impact of ICTs, this arena is fast changing. The
new electronic era, having Internet in the forefront, is
pushing libraries towards the digital environment. This
has led libraries to acquire, organise and provide access
to electronic resources required for their users. It has
made it mandatory for these to have both print and nonprint collections. Non-print collections include CD-ROM/
DVD databases, online full text electronic journals,
databases, e-books, etc. ICT applications have helped
libraries in terms of space, time, and cost. In addition to
these resources libraries have started using ICT in
managing various housekeeping activities of the library,
thereby reducing the repetitive processes involved in
acquisition, cataloguing and circulation of resources,
and time of the users and staff. The cruxs of the story is
the transformation of the libraries and librarians in terms
of their tools, media and the modus operandi in
knowledge exploration and management. The
conceptual model of the framed is shown in Fig. 1.
This has been further complimented by new elearning environment being introduced in higher
education system, where various courses are being
offered through Internet, allowing students do away with
visiting the universities or colleges. The enhancement of
traditional classroom activities with electronic initiatives
such as course management system is changing the
way faculty and students access, create, and use
information. It is providing new opportunities for libraries
to design and to disseminate new services. In other
words, e-learning integration offers libraries a powerful
medium for reaching faculty and students directly as
they engage in teaching, learning, and research. In turn,
the integration will enrich services to academic
community using traditional library services and offers
an opportunity to reach those faculty and students who
have began to ignore the library and go directly to the
web for their information needs. In other words, libraries
have to find strategies for making their resources and
services readily available in the environments faculty and
students prefer and use, otherwise their existence will
be at stake. Libraries in the e-learning environment have
already made some progress by providing access to
their catalogues, databases, electronic journals, Internet
resources, etc. to the user’s community on the Intranet
or Internet. However, libraries are still capable of
providing many more value-added services, if the
following issues are addressed amicably.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

Information
Explosion

Websites
e-journals

Electronic Information
Sources

Traditional
Libraries

Subject Databases

Digitisation,
metadata
generation

Information robots

Digital Libraries

Librarian playing key
role in Information
Discovery, Management
and customised user
interface

Federated Search

Information
repackaging and
delivery

ipod

webcasting

mobiles

Email forums

Blogs, wikies

Figure 1. Transformations of libraries and librarians with knowledge explosion.

The issues that need to be resolved for building the
bridge between e-learning and LIS profession are:

the best use of library resources and services. In other
words, libraries have to deploy their services in a new
learning environment using a technology outside their
control.

3.1.1 Standards

3.1.3 Costs Control

The standards need to be taken into consideration
for effective utilisation of library resources in the elearning environment. Firstly, the interpretability standard
for exchange of metadata and digital objects between
different systems must need to be in place. The
standards such as Dublin Core for exchange of
metadata need to exist. Secondly, standard for
seamless resource discovery mechanisms and
scaleable solutions is required for effective integration of
services.

E-learning environment ensures cost control in the
dissemination of information. Even though initial cost of
converting resources and services will be higher to suit
to e-learning environment, but over a period of time, this
will come down, as only maintenance of services will be
required in later years. This will have a greater benefit for
libraries, as administrators always consider them as
spending institutions. Hence, authorities may sanction
appropriate budget for libraries to provide access to eresources and services in the e-learning environment.

3.1.2 Collaborations

3.2 Resources and Services in E-Learning
Environment

3.1 The LIS Perspective

The faculty, the library, the IT, and the instructional
design departments need to collaborate in developing
sustainable and seamless infrastructure. However, very
few institutions systemically attain such a coherent
strategic approach. Efforts need to be made in
undertaking collaborative work from the beginning to
provide effective services. Here library can take a lead in
bringing together different coherent groups to maximise
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

In order to support access to crucial electronic
resources, libraries organise online tools to provide
metadata for online materials, link online index entries to
individual journal articles and provide mechanisms for
requesting printed articles. Some of the areas, which
libraries can provide access to and initiate measures to
implement the same are:
25

3.2.1 E-resources
Electronic resources are available in various forms
such as databases, journals, pre-print archives, working
papers, etc. Some of these are priced but many of them
are available free of cost on the Internet. Libraries have
to devise a mechanism to identifying the resources
required for their users and provide access to them
through their website or portal on Intranet or Internet.
This will enable users to access these resources
remotely from their offices or homes, which is a
preferred mode of users in the present e-learning
environment. This will also enable distant learners to get
benefit of such services.
In a recent case study Low and MacColl have
shown that the resource discovery has been overlooked
as a function of virtual learning environments (VLEs) by
vendors3. Recent digital library work based on open
architectures and web services has allowed the initially
closed environments of VLEs to be opened in order to
allow library resources to be searched dynamically with
result sets made consistent through metadata mapping
and capable of being displayed in a variety of portal
interfaces. In this way, library services have been
proactively developed in order to be flexibly retrofitted to
learning environments. The value of the service oriented
approach has been proved, and user studies have
encouraged further development, which is likely to
include enrichment of discovered resources with user
annotation and other useful information, as well as
putting resources into appropriate use such as reading
lists.

3.2.2 Content Management
In today’s Internet era Content management has
become absolute necessity. Managing the scattered
online information resources, which is growing at
phenomenal rate, has now become vital. The user
desires to have all information in electronic form from a
single point of access. The access point is usually a
library website, which provides access to all types of
local and remote electronic resources. Hence, libraries
have to gear up and establish Content Management
Systems using open sources or commercial software
such as MyLibrary or Plone to provide customised
services to the users.

3.2.3 Digital Library/Institutional Repository
The Internet era has caused proliferation of
electronic documents in all the subjects and also forcing
institutions to bring out their publications in electronic
format for wider publicity, and distribution. The number of
such documents has been increasing steadily at a
phenomenal rate thus causing problem of managing
26

these resources. The libraries attached to institutions
need to develop digital libraries to have a control and
provide access to documents, which are of interest to
institute’s employees. In addition, libraries can also
develop an institutional repository for providing wider
access to their institute’s publications. Libraries can
develop such digital library systems using any open
source software such as Greenstone, DSpace, etc.

3.2.4 Courseware
Enhancement of classroom activities, beyond the
four walls, with electronic documents resulted in rise of
course management systems either developed within
the institute or by an outside agency. The courseware
enables students to have access to resources, including
those offered by libraries from a single web space. This
makes the most effective and cost-efficient use of
institutional resources bringing the library’s traditional
role as resource-sharer into the world of digital objects
and environments. The courseware environment provides
an opportunity for libraries to take their services directly
to the students. Libraries can offer access to
courseware from their website or portal.

3.2.5 Digital/Virtual Reference Service
A digital/virtual reference service is a service
requested and provided over the Internet usually through
e-mail and instant messaging (chatting) by the library
staff responsible for providing reference service to the
users. This service is a new way of answering users’
reference queries without them visiting the library. This
service is provided using e-mail answering queries over a
period of time or through real-time chat messaging
services. Users’ get connected to this service through
library website by clicking on a link ‘Ask a Librarian’ or
‘Live Chat Reference Services’. This enables libraries to
meet users’ expectations in the web-centric environment
without wasting their valuable time.

3.2.6 Electronic Discussion Forums
Electronic discussion forum is a special usage of email that allows for widespread distribution of information
to Internet users on a given topic. Many a times it brings
in interesting discussion on the topic among the
registered members and also helps in bringing
consensus on the topic. Various web service providers
such as Google, Yahoo and MSN provide this service
free of cost to members in the form of groups. Through
these lists, researchers in various subject fields
exchange views, expertise, and information on the
current topics. In the present environment, it acts as an
important tool to keep library members informed about
new library collection, services, updates, and upcoming
events.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

3.2.7 Federated Search
It is a search for information using software
designed to query multiple networked information
resources or databases through a single search
interface. These interfaces are designed to search local
and remote library catalogues, abstracting and indexing
databases, full-text databases, and digital repositories
using standardised protocols such as Z39.50 and OAIPMH. Federated search has gained a momentum in the
e-learning environment as library users are no longer
interested in searching information from multiple
sources. Hence, libraries can make use of this tool by
cross linking their databases, catalogues, and contents
from the subscribed e-journals available from single
search box. This could be specific to parent organisation
or part of a search engine such as Google or Google
Scholar.

3.2.8 Social Networking and Web 2.0
Social networking is the grouping of individuals in a
specific groups like small rural communities or experts
in a particular field to discuss or exchange views online
through a website. Facebook and Orkut are the best
examples of such mushrooming sites on the Internet. In
order to be part of social networking site, membership is
a must and then depending upon the interest, one may
interact with friends or groups or anybody in general on
topics of common interest. These sites can be used as
a good tool by libraries to get users’ feedback, ranking
for services, library notices, etc. In the web 2.0
environment, the sites providing social networking play
crucial in enhancement of library services.

3.2.9 Education and Training
Role of libraries does not end by simply providing
access to the traditional or electronic resources. They
have to provide an orientation to the users in the use of
such resources either by classroom teaching or through
online tutorials. In the e-learning environment, to reach
the remotest users, libraries have to develop online
tutorials for using various electronic resources and
services and make these available from their website.
In a recent a survey4 conducted by Jane Hart, Head
of the Centre for Learning & Performance Technologies,
Somerset, England to know the non-librarians
perception regarding the usefulness of the library
databases as e-learning tool they can access courtesy
of their local library, not a single online library database
could make its mark in top 10 amongst the 100 elearning tools short listed by 64 e-learning experts. The
top amongst these were the Firefox Web browser; social
book marking tool like del.icio.us, followed by Webbased e-mail, specifically Gmail from Google. This
indicates that the librarians have to go miles towards the
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

education and training aspect to create the awareness
regarding the e-resources. There should be some
rethinking regarding the critical licensing issues of the ejournals and databases so as to make them available for
the common man. Even some innovative knowledgebased marketing efforts are required by librarians in
collaboration with the domain experts. Some open tests/
quizzes could be assigned to the students to encourage
them to find the answers from the e-journals/databases.
The popularity of Google and Google Scholar amongst
the academic community forces some rethinking
regarding the user interface and regularity of the
updation of the knowledge resources for the e-journal
and e-databases trying to attract the e-learning
community.

4. E-LEARNING: NOTEWORTHY INITIATIVES
Libraries can provide access to various resources
and services to the users in the e-learning environment.
The initiatives taken by some libraries in meeting the
challenges of e-learning environment in order to retain
their base have been presented here. The study includes
only few selected academic, research and public
libraries of India and the world.

4.1 Indian Scenario
In addition to the libraries mentioned above, elearning initiatives are in nascent stages in certain other
libraries of India. It is certain that, after sometime, these
libraries will also have full fledged e-learning activities to
support the information requirements of their clientele.
The survey (Table 1) shows that, libraries in India have
started gearing up towards the e-learning environment.
However, still they have to introduce many services such
as federated search, courseware, training, content
management, web 2.0, etc.

4.2 World Scenario
According to study undertaken by Christina Laun5
some of the best libraries, who have made best use of
technology and innovation in providing the effective
services to their patrons’ in the e-learning environmentare summarised in Table 2. A fading demarcation exists
in western countries in public and academic libraries.
Many of the public libraries are seen serving the
academic community. In this sense, the suit may be
followed by the Indian academic libraries from the
viewpoint of implementing technological methodologies
as well as increasing access to common man.

5. CONCLUSION
The e-learning environment has ushered new
avenues for libraries to blend their traditional
resources and services with electronic ones to meet the
27

Table 1. Libraries in the e-learning environment
S. No.

Libraries

Resources and services provided in
the e-learning environment

1.

IIT Libraries

Digital library (DL)/institutional repository (IR)
VRD/Ask the Librarian
e-Resources (Journals/Databases)
e-Print archives
Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC)

2.

IIM Libraries

OPAC
e-resources (Journals/Databases)
DL/IR
e-Print Archives
Ask a Librarian

3.

IGIDR, Mumbai

DL/IR
OPAC
e-Library
Content Management System
e-Resources (Databases/Journals)
OII

4.

University of Hyderabad
Library

Ask a Librarian
DL
e-Resources
OPAC

5.

NAL Information Centre

e-print Archives/IR
e-Resources
OPAC

6.

IISc Library/NCSI

DL/IR
e-Print Archives
Ask the librarian
e-Resources (Databases/Journals)
OPAC

7.

NIT Library, Calicut

DL
e-Resources (Databases/Journals)
OPAC

8.

Indian Statistical Institute (ISI)
Libraries

DL/IR
e-Resources (Databases/Journals)
OPAC

9.

Bangalore University Library

Ask a Librarian
e-Resources (Databases/Journals)OPAC

10.

Raman Research Institute
Library

DL/IR
e-Resources (Databases/Journals)
OPAC

information needs of wider clientele. The benefits paved
with the synergic combination of e-learning with LIS are
shown in Fig. 2. But there are still serious concerns
regarding the low visibility of the e-resources for the elearning in the academic community. The libraries are
definitely transforming and getting modernised with the
e-learning movement. However, this force shouldn’t
become brutal to convert the libraries into the stores as
seen by the latest naming conventions of libraries
worldwide. Librarians have a major role to play to
maintain the piousness in the e-learning environment by
gradually taking the mastery of the technology hand in
hand with the conventional library practices. The psyche
of the librarians regarding the technology as “cutting the
mustard” needs to be changed. Accordingly, they have
to gear up for this challenge by developing new
mechanisms such as portals, digital library, courseware,
28

etc. in order to provide access to resources and effective
services to users. It lays greater responsibility on library
professionals to develop their skills to meet challenges
posed by e-learning environment.
As far as scenario of the developing countries like
India towards making the libraries techno-savvy is
concerned, it showcases awesome trends. Although,
India is regarded as the nation with best technocompetent human resource, their participation and
contribution in ‘Library Movement’ is not noticeable. It is
high time now to change the Indian psyche of a
librarian’s image as the person taking care of security of
books, but to the information manager. This might be
possible with changing the recruitment profiles for the
librarians and/or by incorporating more technologybased components in today’s bachelors and masters
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

Table 2. Most modern libraries
S.No.
1.

Name of the Library
DOK (Delft Public Library)

2.
3.
4.

Turku City Library, Finland
Bow Idea Store
Cerritos Library

5.

Cuyahoga County Public Library,
Ohio

6.

Pace University Library, New York

7.

Richmond Public Library

8.

Denver Public Library

9.

San Diego Public Library

10.

Cleveland Public Library

11.

Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh

12.

New York Public Library

Fuels open knowledge
initiatives through open
access and archives

Technology and Innovation
Wired to deliver a text message to phone when user enters, books
and cards. RFID, LCD screens available around the building filled
with information, stations for podcasting and videocasting.
Books, DVDs, CDs classified together as per subject.
Combination of technology with conventional resources.
Huge multimedia lab, thousands of laptop stations, wireless
headsets and computers for librarians and an RFID tracking system
for books.
Text message delivery of library notices, offers access to 85
colleges and universities through its online OhioLink program,
participates in a podcasting program and places videos of speakers
and visitors to the library online for all patrons to enjoy.
Internal streaming system called MediaPatch that facilitates library
to share various types of media across campuses quickly and
easily. This also solves several copyright concerns as the
information never leaves the school’s secure servers but still allows
distance learners and those in the classroom to quickly and easily
access information.
Library users express check out stations so librarians are free to do
other things.
Uses extensive webpage, a podcasting series, and a huge digital
download site. Audio books, online movies and e-books for use on
their computer or MP3 player.
Free wi-fi along with a variety of e-books and audio books, online
assistance.
With a NetNotice plan the information is sent on the library or
reserved materials directly to patrons’ inboxes.
Uses online chat with librarians, an RSS feed, a blog, podcasts,
online requests, downloadable media, reach out to teens with
MySpace and Facebook pages.
Worked with Google to create a selection of digital books and offers
patrons a large number of online text collections. The library is also
highly tech savvy with an active RSS feed as well as podcasts on
iTunes

Resource sharing
saving senseless
Economic model for knowledge
creation and dissemination
“Create once use multiple times”

Simplified copyright and
licensing models
Transformation of
knowledge sources that
enhances viewing and
imagination of patrons
Changing perception of
librarians and enhancing the
relationships between
learners, teachers, and
institutions, adding value to
the profession

No physical boundary
Advantages of
transformation of Libraries
with e-learning

One of the major possible solutions to
ensure inclusiveness of disabled and
minorities.

Learning without
limitation of time

Customised resource
discovery with maximum
user satisfaction.

Figure 2. Benefits paved with the complementary hand-in-hand marching of library and e-learning.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

29

program of library and information science. The trends in
the offshore libraries reviews in the article evidences
their technological capability, as well as the use of
diversified media tools such a podcasting, chatting for
reaching the library resources to the patrons. The
notable fact is the technology has been effectively used
to keep librarians free to study, research, explore, and
experiment more innovations.
There is no doubt that the winds of e-learning are
forcing the libraries and LIS community to lead towards
the Library 2.0 movement. In order to achieve the goal of
Library 2.0, there is a need of common exploration by
academicians, e-learning experts, and library
professionals. Together they can come out with
innovative technological platforms such as a common
search service, linking of portals to databases,
webcasting of information, customisation of e-journal
article search for the e-learners etc.

3.

Laun, Chritina. The 25 most modern libraries in the
world.
http://www.bestcollegesonline.com/blog/
2008/07/02/the-25-most-modern-libraries-in-theworld/

4.

Low, Boon & MacColl, John. Searching
heterogeneous e-learning resources. http://www.
ukoln.ac.uk/events/delos-rep-workshop/
presentations/low-maccoll.ppt

5.

Manjunath, B. & Patil, Shobha. E-learning and its
impact on library and information services. https://
drtc.isibang.ac.in/bitstream/1849/215/1/paperH_
manjunath.pdf

6.

McLester, S. The e-learning phenomenon,
Technology and Learning, 2001, 22(1), 31-32.

7.

OCLC. E-learning and libraries: New white paper.
Tammaro, Anna Maria. In The Role of Libraries in eLearning-ELAG 2004 workshop. http://www.elag
2004.no/ws_papers/ws9.pdf

8.

Wang, Mei-Yu & Hwang, Ming-Jiu. The e-learning
library: only a warehouse of learning resources? The
Electronic Library, 2004, 22(5), 408-15.

9.

Wikipedia. E-learning. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/elearning

REFERENCES
1.

ACRL. Library resources must not be e-learning
tools. http://acrlog.org/2007/08/06/library-resourcesmust-not-be-e-learning-tools/

2.

Kaplan-Leiserson E. E-learning glossary in learning
circuits.
http://www.learningcircuits.org/glossary.
html#E

About the Authors

Dr S.M. Pujar is presently working as Deputy Librarian at Indira Gandhi Institute of Development
Research (IGIDR), Mumbai. His areas of interest include digital library, search engines, CDS/ISIS
family, Internet information sources and services and library automation.

Dr R.K. Kamat is presently working as Reader in Department of Electronics at Shivaji University,
Kolhapur. His areas of research include VLSI design, embedded systems, and human-computer
interaction.

30

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

