DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2009, pp. 31-36

© 2009, DESIDOC

Application of E-Learning in Creative Writing
Shyama Rajaram
Department of Library & Information Science, Faculty of Arts
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara-390 002
E-mail: shyama.rajaram@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
As e-learning has entered the mainstream, it is important for library professionals to understand the
concept and trends in e-learning in different subjects. Such an understanding is necessary to provide effective
services to the users. The paper makes an attempt to bring out various aspects of application of e-learning
in creative writing. The paper discusses the strengths and limitations of e-learning and the various tools used
for e-learning in creative writing. Ten websites on e-learning in creative writing are also discussed.
Keywords: E-learning, creative writing, tools for e-learning, wbsites for e-learning

1. INTRODUCTION
Today when we are eight years into the 21st
century, e-learning is no more a revolutionary concept
but a model that has come to stay as the mainstream.
As innumerable organisations and universities have
adopted e-learning, it has become important for library
and information science (LIS) professionals to understand
what is e-learning, and be aware of the recent trends
in e-learning in different subjects. The aim of the LIS
professionals should be to acquaint themselves about
opportunities available for e-learning in different subject
areas so that they can bring about a qualitative difference
in offering new services to their users.
This paper makes an attempt to bring about the
various aspects of application of e-learning in creative
writing. It explores the strengths and limitations of
e-learning and the various tools used for e-learning
in creative writing, and lastly the websites on elearning in creative writing. The purpose of the paper
is to acquaint LIS professionals to e-learning in creative
writing. This would not only help LIS professionals
to improve their information services but may also
help them to improve their own writing skills which
is needed to develop good library literature.

2. WHAT IS E-LEARNING?
In the simple terms, e-learning means education
and training through digital media. The digital media
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

could be a computer, a personal digital assistant, a
mobile phone, a digital television or any other electronic
gadget that could deliver through a network. Network
here could mean Internet, LAN, or a corporate WAN.
The term e-learning has been defined profusely resulting
in a proliferation of definitions. Two definitions that
capture the core of this concept in a succinct manner
are presented here. According to Education Encyclopedia
(StateUniversity.com), the term e-learning refers to
any electronically assisted instruction, but is most
often associated with instruction offered via computer
and the Internet 1.
According to the Glossary-of-Key-Terms of Digital
Strategy, e-learning means, learning that is facilitated
by the use of digital tools and content. Typically, it
involves some form of interactivity, which may include
online interaction between the learner and their teacher
or peers 2. Thus, e-learning is basically the use of
computers and Internet to facilitate learning. Here
the basic concept of learning remains the same only
the mode of delivery and presentations differ. Individuals
can learn at their own pace and locations through
interactive tools that may be synchronous, i.e., in
real time or asynchronous, i.e., over a period of time.
Now education is imparted through distance mode
in almost all areas of human knowledge. Likewise,
e-learning is being successfully applied in creative
writing as well. Contextually, it is appropriate to understand
the meaning of creative writing.
31

3. WHAT IS CREATIVE WRITING?
According to the article on creative writing in
Wikipedia, “Creative writing can technically be considered
any writing of original composition that is in no way
guilty of plagiarism.” 3
The same article also states that creative writing
could be fiction as well as non-fiction writing. It is
something more than “normal professional, journalistic,
academic, and technical forms”4 of writing. The article
also clarifies that creative writing is a discipline in
its own right. It is not an extension of English literature
or literature of any other language. In literature as a
discipline literary forms are critically studied and it
does not teach how to create the literary forms.
Creative writing basically encourages the learners to
use their imaginations and express their emotions to
create written material. Thus creative writing can
include any written expression. It can be a novel,
short story, drama, play, epic, poetry, lyrics of a
song, script for a film, dialogue, writings for children
or non-fiction writings like speech, autobiography,
biography, historical writings, memoirs, travelogues,
etc.
Many argue that individuals are born with creative
writing skills, but at the same time it is also widely
accepted that creative writing skills can be polished
and cultivated. We all have to write for a range of
audience for different reasons. The reason decides
the topic and the audience the genre. We have to be
expressive in whatever we write to achieve our purpose
successfully, be it a letter, an argument, an explanation,
or a description. Even good fiction writing skills can
be consciously cultivated, polished, and perfected.
Therefore, many universities conduct formal creative
writing programmes. The e-learning revolution has
taken creative writing as well into its fold.

3.1 Strenghts of E-learning in Creative
Writing
Creative writing can be very successfully learnt
in the electronic environment due to the use of multimedia
content like audio, video, graphics, and text. For
instance, learners see a picture, and this visual cue
helps them in building a story on it. Many e-learning
sites for short stories are using visuals to encourage
writing skills. Creative writing is something that people
of all ages and from different walks of life like to
learn. E-learning in creative writing helps such nontraditional students achieve writing skills. Individuals
can choose their own genre to learn and continue it
as long as they want and give up when they are
satiated or bored. The hypertext environment of elearning offers the kind of dynamism that is needed
32

to stimulate the imagination essential for creative
writing. As collaborative learning is possible in elearning environment, it helps learners to enhance
their creative writing skills through participation. The
learners become proactive and search information.
Friedrich Nietzsche, the late 19th century German
philosopher used a typewriter to shoot his aphorisms.
When he migrated from his longhand to a typewriter,
a friend of his noticed a change in his style of writing
and expressed his observations to Nietzsche. To this
Nietzsche replied, “You are right. Our writing equipment
takes part in the forming of our thoughts” 4. Thus, in
the electronic environment the facility of the hyperlinks
and the multimedia content has the potency to kindle
the human imagination to its dizzy heights.

3.2 Limitations of E-learning in Creative
Writing
Studies have revealed that the creative writing
community does not embrace the information technology
readily 5. Some learners find the technology used in
e-learning courses very complicated, which hampers
the process of learning. If grappling with the technology
is one problem then digital divide is another. Besides,
creative writing requires reflection, which the fast
pace of electronic environment often fails to provide.
Often too much of information in the e-learning courses
may hinder the understanding of the learner. As the
physical presence of the teacher and the actual classrooms
are missing in the e-learning environment, the learner
often feels lonely and cut-off from the society. Socialising
and the experiences of a physical world are extremely
essential in developing creative writing skills.

3.3 Tools Used for E-learning in Creative
Writing
A variety of virtual communication tools are used
for e-learning in creative writing. These tools are of
two types: asynchronous and synchronous. Asynchronous
tools are used by learners at their own choice of
time. The messages or information held by the system
are read by the users when they choose to come
online unlike synchronous tools, which take place in
real time. Synchronous tools are live communication
like conversations on the telephone. However, many
systems keep a record of such communications.
This section briefly discusses the virtual communication
tools used for e-learning in creative writing.

3.3.1 E-mails
E-mails are very common and popular way of
communication today in the cyber world. It is just
like the ordinary letter writing in the physical world.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

This simple asynchronous method of exchanging
information can be successfully used as an e-learning
tool in developing writing skills. Computer technology,
especially word processing, has become a vital tool
in writing for the students of this generation. Burns
in her write up, Improving Student Writing through Email Mentoring explains how she succeeded in improving
the sentence structure, grammar, and vocabulary of
her students through e-mails 6. She muses that email being a very private space gives the learners a
sense of intimacy with the person they correspond.
Learners also become reflective and introspective,
and feel happy about being read and appreciated.

3.3.2 Mailing Lists
Mailing lists, also called discussion lists, are
asynchronous method of exchanging communication.
It is a process of sending e-mails to a group of people
using a listserv. A listserv is a mail server programme
that maintains the e-mail addresses of different groups
of people who subscribe to it. Listserv copies a message
to all the people of group on its mailing list. There
are hundreds of mailing lists devoted to creative writing
on the Internet. These mailing lists help writers who
need guidance from experienced writers. Often self
doubts prevent individuals from writing. Mailing lists
help shed such inhibitions through discussion and
sharing of experiences. Learners can easily communicate
with a wide group of experienced writers to sharpen
their own writing skills. Also, this networking can
take place at learner’s own locations and they can
easily get their works reviewed through a feedback.
There are also separate mailing lists for poems, short
stories, novels, children’s writings, essays, newspaper
articles, etc. Mailing lists give novice writers a platform
to share their writing, get comments and encouragement,
which is necessary for improving ones writing skills.

experiences. There are newsgroups that give access
to a large audience to meet all kinds of interests for
creative writing.

3.3.4 Bulletin Boards
Many websites provide bulletin boards, which is
a facility for discussion. This is asynchronous
communication and messages posted on it would
have permanent visibility. Those who have access to
a particular bulletin board can log on to it at any time
and read the messages. The advantage of this tool
in creative writing is that potential creative writers
can come together to explore a genre and work online
to create a piece of writing. Often but not always,
bulletin boards are confined to a group and require
online registration. There are sites like ‘createwrt.net’
that provide bulletin board services even to housebound
disabled budding writers.

3.3.5 Instant Messaging
Instant messaging, as its name implies, is an
online mode of synchronous communication where
the message is displayed instantaneously on the
other person’s screen. Instant messaging systems
have a friend list and instantly inform if someone
from the list comes online. Obviously, here both the
persons have to be online at the same time. This tool
is also used for improving creative writing skills. For
instance, ‘Twitter’ according to Carvin is one such
instant messaging tool (www.twitter.com/manyvoices)
that is used for collaborative writing7. He further mentions
that Mayo uses a framework called ‘Twittory’ and has
invited middle school children to participate in it.
Each child should add only 140 characters to it and
within 140 posts the story should be completed.

3.3.6 Chat or Conferencing
3.3.3 Newsgroups
Newsgroups are again asynchronous method of
communication like mailing lists, enabling communication
with a group of like-minded people. It is basically a
discussion forum where participants link to a site. To
participate in a newsgroup, individuals have to apply
for membership. Once they register themselves they
can post their messages and reply to the remarks
of others. There are newsgroups specifically designed
for creative writers or those aspiring to write. Such
individuals can join the community of writers and
exchange ideas, and get feedback on their writings.
There are newsgroups exclusively for only published
writers, unpublished writers, science fiction writers,
writers of romantic writings, poets, short story writers,
and even writers of non-fiction work. Learners freely
seek feedback or critique, and veterans share their
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

Chat/conferencing is a synchronous method of
communication in real time. Chat normally facilitates
communication sessions among the individuals or
groups in private or public domain. Private here means
that the software enables individual chat rooms for
different users. The software may also facilitate the
use of a white board that can be used as a blackboard
in a real class room. Many online learning platforms
have a chat function. The learners are informed about
the timings of the chat sessions through e-mail or
phone. The teacher and the learners log on at the
same time and the learning process takes place in
real time. These sessions are normally used for quick
problem solving by the learners. It is also used by
the teachers when they want to address a specific
topic or get a team work done. Such chat sessions
help in socialising and building relationships, which
33

are extremely important for developing creative writing
skills. Learners can hone their writing skills by writing
on the white board and getting an instant feedback.
There are creative writing chat rooms, especially for
adolescents. Creative writing chat rooms give them
an opportunity to meet other young people who share
their interest. There are online chat rooms like
‘fearofwriting.com’ and ‘bcreative.proboards100.com’
where people unite to write. The idea of a story is
floated and everyone gets a chance to build it up.

3.3.7 Internet Telephony
Internet telephony is the facility to make phone
calls to people via the Internet. Long distance calls
become cheaper through this facility. The infrastructure,
required other than the computer and Internet facility,
is a microphone, fast modem, and high RAM memory.
This is a synchronous communication method and
allows chat sessions converted into voice communication.
This brings back to the teaching-learning process
where critical human factor is essential. Such multiple
communication channels are often used for intense
discussions.

3.3.8 Weblogs
Blogs or Weblogs are important Internet developments
in the recent years. Owing to the volatile nature of
the blogs, it is difficult to agree to a common definition
for the blogs. Blogs can be personal websites, institutional
websites, or professional websites. Chronological
arrangement of information on the blogs and the
interactive nature of some blogs make them a very
effective e-learning tool for creative writing. While
tracing the history of blogs, Clyde 8 points out that
what attracted people to blogs was its “instant
communication power by letting you post your thoughts
to the web whenever the urge strikes.” Lots of people
write online diaries in the form of blogs. So people
essentially use it for creative writing. Also exploiting
its interactive nature, weblogs are used by teachers
to communicate with their students for creative writing
sessions. This is a text-based asynchronous
communication method, where students can post
their writings and ideas when they feel they are most
creative, and also read the writings of others when
it is convenient to them. The blog can become a
communication hub for learners of creative writing.
A variety of synchronous and asynchronous tools
as discussed above are used by various websites to
impart creative writing. Videoconferencing through
standard desktop computers is yet another synchronous
communication tool used in e-learning in recent years.
Though not widespread, videoconferencing does have
a potential for use in creative writing. These tools
34

enhance the teaching–learning process of creative
writing rather than merely replicate what is done in
the traditional environment.

4. USEFUL WEBSITES FOR E-LEARNING IN
CREATIVE WRITING
The Web abounds in a variety of websites for elearning in creative writing. Some sites like the ‘Internet
Writing Workshop’ are a collection of mailing lists for
the community of writers. Some cater to only chat
sessions in creative writing. Some are mere bulletin
boards. There are sites of different universities offering
formal courses like a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree
in creative writing. For instance, University of Northampton
in UK offers BA degree in creative writing through elearning. There are commercial sites too and some
individuals also offer training in creative writing skills
free of cost. The following 10 websites for e-learning
in creative writing will give a brief look into this
exciting area. Many of these sites link to hundreds
of other similar sites.

4.1 Can You Haiku?
Haiku (http://edsitement.neh.gov/view_lesson
_plan.asp?ID =250) is a Japanese epigrammatic verse
form of three short lines. This is very beautiful and
sophisticated form of verse that helps in expressing
a momentary and minute observation. This site with
three simple lessons helps in learning the rules and
conventions of haiku, appreciate haiku created by
Japanese masters, and compose haiku. Plenty of
online material can be downloaded through this site.
The site teaches haiku in English.

4.2 Creative Writing
This is the creative writing site (http://coursecatalog.
thecambridgeacademy.org/index.asp?PageAction
=VIEWPROD&ProdID=323) of the Cambridge Academy.
One hundred and eight online lessons on different
literary genres are provided to help learners to improve
their creative writing skills. This one-year online course
is fee-based and students can enroll at anytime of
the year.

4.3 Creativity Workshop
This site (http://www.creativityworkshop.com) helps
people from all walks of life to develop their imagination
and keep their creative instincts alive. It offers exercises
through workshops in creative writing, drawing, memoir,
storytelling, and map making. It helps learners overcome
the fear of writing and creative blocks. The workshops
also help in changing the perception of the participants
and improving their self-confidence.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

4.4 eWriteLife Magazine

4.9 Virtual Writer

This site (http://ewritelife.com/content/view/17/100
02/) offers some writing prompts and helps in creating
and capturing ideas. Actually this site is a combination
of a website and a blog, and archives the previous
posts in the format of a magazine, which is easily
accessible. The blog section continues but is not
updated frequently. To receive the magazine one needs
to register as a member.

This site (http://www.virtualwriter.net/) is developed
in association with Longford County Council, and
helps in developing learner’s literary talent. It helps
in developing the skills in poetry, fiction, and creative
non-fiction. Learners can also join the writers group
through this site. It also gives access to a number
of projects related to developing creative writing skills.
People can also read the works of the local writers
here. This site also links to various creative writing
courses in Ireland and Britain in particular. For example
it links to a course on Creative Writing for Beginners
of Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology. This link
provides all the needed information about this course,
i.e., its aim, the course content, the fee, the duration,
the starting date, the resource person, etc.

4.5 Kids on the Net
This site (http://www.kidsonthenet.org.uk/about/
index.htm) invites children to post their writings on
the net. Children from all over the world send their
poems, short stories, opinions, and anything they
write to this site. Anyone who logs on to this site
can read the writings of the children. The site also
provides writing tips and offers a number of online
writing projects.

4.6 oneword.com
This website (www.oneword.com) helps in spontaneous
flow of thoughts. A simple word is used as a prompt
to write anything on it for one minute without stopping
to think. This is a simple exercise in creative writing.
The basic purpose of this site is to reduce the tendency
which everyone has to edit oneself even before expressing
oneself fully and freely. It is popular site where potential
writers test their flow.

4.7 Online Writing Lab
Online Writing Lab (http://owl.english.purdue.edu/
internet/resources/genre.html) is an excellent gateway
to business and technical, creative, and non-academic
writing, writing in grade school through high school,
writing in special fields, tutorials and guides, and
writing abstracts and proposals. There are number of
links under each category of writing and many of
these links in turn link to thousands of writing resources.

4.8 STT Writing Courses
This site (http://www.sttcourses.co.uk/WritingCourses/
Courses/NovelAndShortStoryWriting/tabid/154/
Default.aspx) offers certificate course in novel and
short story writing. Anyone who wants to learn short
story or novel writing can take this course. Even
those who already have some published work can
also take this course to sharpen their writing skills.
This course is fee-based, but offers some free information
pack. The course offers help in every aspect of fiction
writing from ideas and imagination to style and grammar.
It also helps in getting published.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

4.10 WritePro
This site (http://www.writepro.com) offers a creative
writing tutorial program called WritePro. This tutorial
helps in the craft of fiction writing and making even
non-fiction highly exciting and interesting to the readers.
It offers software which is easy to install and helps
in creating characters, plots, and dialogue. It also
offers tips to different kind of writers.

5. CONCLUSION
A society that reads and writes well can go a
long way in developing a nation. The technology is
making a significant impact on learning of creative
writing skills. Many individuals often nurture the desire
to be great writers. Expression, articulation, and
communication are paths to success in any field. Elearning in creative writing appears to be an effective
way of improving ones writing skills. Modern libraries
are the centres that give computing and Internet
facilities to their user community. Librarians can draw
the attention of their users to the creative writing
sites and encourage them to use them.

REFERENCES
1.

Education Encyclopedia. http://education.state
university.com/pages/1917/Distance-Learning-inHigher-Education.html (accessed on 21 June, 2008).

2.

Digital Strategy. Glossary-of-Key-Terms. http://
www.digitalstrategy.govt.nz/Media-Centre/Glossaryof-Key-Terms/

3.

Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Creative writing.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_writing

4.

Sullivan, Andrew. The way we think now. The
Times of India. Ahmedabad, June 21, 2008, pp. 12.
35

5.

6.

Lucas, Brett. Bringing e-learning home: An experiment
in embedding e-learning using departmental elearning advocates. In Proceedings of the 23rd
Annual AsciliteConference: Who’s Learning? Whose
technology? The University of Sydney, 2006. pp.
479-82. http://www.ascilite.org.au/conferen ces/
sydney06/proceeding/pdfpapers/p101.pdf
Burns, Mary. Improving student writing through
e-mail mentoring. Learning and Leading with

Technology. February 2006, 38-43.
7.

Carvin, Andy. Collaborative writing, 140 characters
at a time. In PBS Teachers Learning.now. http:/
/www.pbs.org/teachers/learning.now/2007/12/
collaborative_writing_140char_1.html (accessed
on 2 July 2008)

8.

Clyde, Laurel A. Weblogs and libraries. Chandos
Publishing, Oxford, 2004.

About the Author

Dr Shyama Rajaram is Head, Department of Library and Information Science and Chairperson, Board
of Studies in Library and Information Science in M.S. University of Baroda, Vadodara. She received
Dr C.D. Sharma Award for the best written and presented paper in 1996 in the 41st All India Library
Conference of Indian Library Association.

36

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

