DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2009, pp. 69-71
© 2009, DESIDOC

Special Paper

Digitisation: Preservation and Challenges
N.S. Mani
National Archives of India, Janpath, New Delhi-110 001
E-mail: archives@nic.in; nsmani53@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
Digitisation involves conversion from analog to digital. With the boom in the information technologies and
also with the changes in the retrieval of information need arises to convert the heritage into digital form. This
paper discusses Digitisation, its need and how to preserve the digitised documents.
Keywords: Digitisation, preservation, conversion, resolution

1. INTRODUCTION
Digitisation is the process of converting an analog
signal into a digital signal. Digitisation converts an image
into a series of picture elements or pixels (little squares
that are either black or white), a specific shade of gray
(grayscale) or colour. Each pixel is represented by a
single or series of binary digits, either 1s or 0s. Many
computer programs like drawing, illustration, 3D model,
computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing,
and architectural design use vectors—arrows of direction,
points, and lines that define shapes, as compared to the
individual picture elements used to represent a raster
image. One important part of digitising is the type of
imaging sensor used. These image sensors/detectors
can be compared to the film used in photography. The
common digital imaging sensors are:
(i)

Charged Coupled Devices, or CCDs, used in flatbed
scanners and digital cameras.

(ii) Photomultiplier tubes, or PMTs, used in drum
scanners.
(iii) Complementary metal oxide semiconductors, or
CMOS chips, used in low-end flatbed scanners and
low-end digital cameras.
The most common sensor used in all types of
scanners and digital cameras is CCD. The photo
multiplier tube, or PMT, is used only in drum scanners for
the graphic arts or prepress market, i.e., printing and
publishing. CMOS chips do not produce the same image
quality as compared to CCDs and cannot match the

resolution of CCDs. Now-a-days, CMOS chips are used
only in low-end digital cameras and scanners. In
scanners and digital cameras, a lens or set of lenses are
used to focus an image onto the sensor—a CCD, PMT, or
CMOS chip. Sometimes people refer to digital imaging as
lens-less. This is not true. Without a lens to focus the
light, digital images would be blurry, just as in
photography. All scanners have lenses. In most cases,
the design of the scanner hides the lens (es) within the
body of the scanner. Scanners also have built-in light
sources to illuminate the items being scanned. The light
is either reflected (as with documents or photographic
prints) or transmitted (as with microfilm, photographic
negatives, or colour transparencies) by the item being
scanned, and the image is focused by the lens (es) onto
the imaging sensor. In the case of CCDs, the light falls
onto the little light sensors or photo diodes on the CCD.
These sites generate an electrical current, or voltage.

2. ANALOG-TO-DIGITAL CONVERSION
Once a digital image has been created and stored in
any media, there is a corresponding digital to analog
conversion that allows the computer to present the image
in a human readable form on either a display or printer.
Displaying an image on a computer monitor or printing the
image on a printer needs analog representation of a digital
image.

2.1 Basic Image Measures
There are three important measures of every static
digital image:

The paper was presented in the National Conference on Digitisation and Preservation organised by DESIDOC at Metcalfe House,
Delhi-110 054.

Resolution: The number of dots, or pixels (picture
element), used to represent an image. This is always
given as a measure of linear or area density (e.g., 300
dots/inch). Resolution, or spatial frequency, is the number
of times an image is sampled during the scanning
process. Resolution—the number of pixels in an image
can be described in a number of ways like dots per inch
(dpi) or pixels per inch (ppi).
Pixel Bit Depth: This measure defines the number of
shades that can actually be represented by the amount of
information saved for each pixel. These can range from 1
bit/pixel for binary (fax type) images to 24 bits per pixel in
high quality colour images.
Colour: There are many ways to represent, compress,
and distribute color images. Suffice it to say that the
smaller the image files size, the less accurately it renders
the original image.
The key to a successful digital conversion program is
the relationships among three concepts:
(i)

The purpose digitisation is going to serve.

(ii) Original document’s condition and status.
(iii) Technology tolerance for the analog-to-digital
conversion.
Information in digital form is more fragile. The recent
survey of the Web shows that the overall proportion of
Internet content is commercial and only six percent is
educational or informational. Digital images have become
commonplace in libraries and archives. With serious effort
to ensure long-term access to today’s digital image files,
organisations like library, archives, historical society, or
museum are earmarking a certain percentage of their
budget for digital preservation without which the risk of
loss is tremendous.

3. PRESERVATION
Digital preservation refers to the various methods of
keeping digital material alive for the future. Digital
preservation typically centres on the choice of interim
storage media, the life expectancy of a digital imaging
system, and the expectation to migrate the digital files to
future systems while maintaining both. Digital imaging
technologies create an entirely new form of information
from traditional documents. It is not simply another
reformatting option in the preservation tool kit. Digital
imaging involves transforming the very concept of format,
not simply creating a faithful reproduction of a book,
document, photograph, or map on a different medium. The
power of digital enhancement, the possibilities for
structured indexes, and the mathematics of compression
and communication together fundamentally alter the
70

concept of preservation in the digital world. These
transformations, along with the new possibilities they
place on information professionals, force us to transform
library and archival services and programs in turn.
Preservation is not just only for paper/palm leaves. In
the digital imaging environment it is indeed a matter of
challenge to define what preservation means? The digital
world poses significant challenges to, but does not
eliminate the need for responsible, effective preservation
activity. Digitisation offers many advantages to
organisations with large collection of documents/maps/
microforms/etc., Information from these can be accessed
by users directly without the human intervention.
Information content in digital form can be retrieved by
users remotely.
Digital image quality is improving day by day with
more advancement in research on this field. The brittle,
old, and fragile originals need not be consulted again and
again for research and the digital form of these can be
accessed by many at a single point of time for research.
The power of full-text searching and sophisticated, crosscollection indexing affords users the opportunity to make
new uses of digitised resources.
Digitisation of documents/books or cultural
resources requires a deep and longstanding
Organisational commitment in terms of investment in
equipment and software as compared to the traditional
preservation. Wherever large scale Digitisation
programme are being undertaken it should be a
prerequisite to decide definitions and standards for digital
preservation and policy for migration.
In the digital world, preservation is the creation of
digital products worth maintaining over time. The
persistence of digital products requires careful attention
to the maintenance of content (the bits and bytes)
functionality (how the bits work in a system). Preservation
in the digital world is not absolute, but depends on the
continuing transformative impact of the digital product on
the information work of end-users. Acquiring an imaging
system to enhance access to library and archives
materials is as simple as choosing the combination of offthe-shelf scanners, computers, and monitors that meets
immediate functional specifications.
With time, most of these small-scale, pilot projects
will fade away quietly and the initial investment will be
lost. The costs of maintaining these systems become
apparent, as vendors go out of business, and as patrons
become more accustomed to remote-access image
databases and the latest developments in the field. This
commitment is a continuing one, decisions about
preservation cannot be deferred in the hope that
technological solutions will emerge like a medieval knight
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

in shining armor. An appraisal of the present value of a
book, a manuscript collection, or a series of photographs
in its original format is the necessary point of departure for
making a judgment about preservation of the digital image
version.
Before initiating a digitisation programme, the
following should be kept in mind
Ø

The condition and status of the document being
converted.

Ø

The capabilities of the present technology for digital
conversion, and

Ø

The method by which the digital images will be
utilised.

The common application of Digitisation in an archive
or library is digital copies that can be used for ready
reference in lieu of consulting the original documents. For
Digitisation the use of an intermediate film or paper copy
to facilitate the scanning process may or may not be
necessary or advisable. Ultimately, the purpose of digital
image products is determined by the uses to which they
will be put, while preservation of original source
documents must be determined by their specific
preservation needs.
A major challenge in choosing methods from analog
to digital conversion is obtaining an in-depth
understanding of the source material and the techniques
being used for the same. The following should be taken in
to account before undertaking the job:
Ø

Format of the source (including size of object, its
structure, and its physical condition).

Ø

Physical condition and its impact on the ability of the
item to be handled during the conversion process.

Ø

Level of detail (including the colour of the paper ink
used etc.).

All conversion tools have limitations in terms of the
size of source documents they can handle with a given
level of digital resolution. “You get what you pay for”
typically applies in the selection of scanning equipment.
The principles of preservation of digital documents are the
same as those of the analog world, i.e., longevity, choice,
quality, integrity, and accessibility. When we talk of
preservation, archivists not only insist for alkaline paper
standards,
archival
quality
microfilm,
mass
deacidification, and more rugged magnetic media, but
also issues surrounding the life expectancy of storage
media, the very concept of permanence. The commitment

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

to quality standards, do it once, do it right, permeates all
preservation activity, including library binding standards,
archival microfilm creation guidelines, conservation
treatment procedures, the choice of supplies and
materials, and a low tolerance for error. The evolution of
preservation microfilming as a central strategy for the bulk
of brittle library materials has placed the quality of the
medium and the quality of the visual image on an equal
plane. In the pursuit of quality microfilm, compromise on
visual truth and archival stability is dictated largely by the
characteristics of the item/material chosen for the
preservation.
The control of digital quality standards is possible
now, just as it is for microfilm. In the digital world,
preservation is the action and access is the thing—the
act of preserving access. A more accurate construct
simply states “preserve accessibility”. Librarians and
archivists can influence vendors and manufacturers to
provide new equipment that is backward compatible with
existing systems. This capability assists image file
system migration in the same way that today’s word
processing software allows access to documents created
with earlier versions. Procedures manuals (or instruction
sheets) for selection, handling, scanning, metadata
creation, and quality control flowcharts or other workflow
diagrams, data element list the contents.

4. CONCLUSION
Since libraries and archives are actively integrating
digital technologies into acquisition, cataloging, systems,
and even preservation departments, perhaps it is
legitimate to consider these activities as costs that lie
outside of a conversion project. Copyright does not apply
to all works, and it does not last forever. It is intended as a
limited monopoly permitting authors to profit from their
creative efforts and, eventually, for the public to be able to
freely use creative works with the idea that such fluid use
will inspire new creation benefiting society at large. When
a creative work is not subject to copyright protection, it is
referred to as being in the public domain. If a use is a fair
use, then one may copy an otherwise protected work
without permission from the copyright owner and without
the use being deemed an infringement. Other countries
have a similar concept often called “fair dealing,” but this
is generally more restrictive and laden with administrative
requirements.
In view of the multifocussed challenges being posed
by Digitisation, the Government of India has very recently
formed a forum–National Digitisation Preservation
Programme [NDPP] to formulate different programmes
and polices for the same.

71

