DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2009, pp. 72-75
© 2009, DESIDOC

Special Paper

Preservation of Newspapers
Somnath Das
Times Group, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110 002

ABSTRACT
Newspaper is the mirror of society. Newspaper captures day to day life of a community and its citizens.
Under the headlines proclaiming great events are editorials, human interest stories, society news, sports
reporting, advice columns, obituaries, and business reports that as a whole tell the life story of the communities
in which those great events take place and the lives they affect. This is a valuable resource for scholars
and researchers for future resources. If newspaper is not preserved then no one can access information
in future. This paper gives procedures for preserving newspaper, and various tools and software that Times
Group is using for preservation of their publications.
Keywords: Preservation, newsprints, e-prints, microfilming, newspaper

1. INTRODUCTION
Thousands of newspapers are being published every
day. Most eventually find their way into trash bins, under
litter boxes, into bird cages, or, hopefully, into recycling
containers. The perception persists that yesterday’s
news is no news at all. For archivists, however, that
perception presents a tremendous challenge. The main
challenges to the archivists are increasing volume of the
newspapers and simultaneously decreasing space in the
office. Easy retrieval is also a big concern. Archivist has to
make the strategy for easy access before preservation.
Environment is another issue especially the environment
of our subcontinent is not favourable for preservation. This
is well known that low budget of the archive/library often
restrict archivists from luxury. The purpose of preservation
is to ensure protection of information of enduring value for
access by present and future generations1. Preservation
management is about risk management.

2. PRESERVING NEWSPAPERS
There are different ways of preservation of
newspapers. Earlier there was only one process of
physical preservation of printed newspapers. Still some
archives keep the printed copies of newspapers for future
reference. Another way to preserve information of
newspapers is to keep news clipping/press clippings for
future reference. Different newspaper archives keep the
news clippings in an organised way so that it can answer

the queries of the users. Good databases of press
clippings may be able to answer any query. Microfilm is
the most important thing in newspaper preservation.
Voluminous newspapers can be stored in a little microfilm
roll and this remain intact for next 500 years. In the age of
Internet and information revolution everybody wants
information in finger tips. Easy access and quick search
is the prime focus for any researcher. So, digital
preservation is the way to provide quick and easy access.
Different newspapers have started microfilm digitisation
projects and e-paper archives.
Newsprint is not a permanent quality paper because
of the wood impurities that remain in the paper after
processing. These include resins, tannins, and lignin.
Lignin represents the largest percentage of impurities.
Lignin itself is not an acid, but when exposed to light, high
humidity, and atmospheric pollutants, it promotes acidic
reactions in the paper. Acidity causes the fibers to
weaken and break and is the major culprit in causing
paper to deteriorate and become discoloured and brittle.
Lignin can be extracted from the newspapers but it is not
extracted by the modern newsprint producers. Ideal
environment for the preservation of newspapers is dark,
stable environment of 60-700 F and 40-50 per cent relative
humidity. Newspaper can also be protected by polyester
film encapsulation or plastic sleeves. Encapsulation was
developed by the Library of Congress to protect fragile and
brittle newspapers. The process involves placing the
sheet of newsprint between two clear sheets of polyester

The paper was presented in the National Conference on Digitisation and Preservation organised by DESIDOC at Metcalfe House,
Delhi-110 054.

film. The film is sealed around the edge with a double
stick tape or by machines designed to bond the film. The
papers which are encapsulated or placed in plastic
sleeves generate acidic gases and will deteriorate the
paper. Chemical stabilisation of acids in paper called
deacidification. This process is designed to neutralise the
papers acidity and leave an alkaline salt behind to absorb
acids. This chemical treatment does not stop
deterioration but it will slow the rate of deterioration.
Deacidification is recommended for all papers that are
encapsulated or placed in plastic sleeves.
While microfilming remains the most reliable means
of preserving the intellectual content of newspapers,
many institutions need to service and store newsprint for
long periods of time prior to filming and, in some cases,
may wish to store original copies on a permanent basis.
Most of the newspapers do not trust on binding and
keeping of old newspapers but some still keep the printed
records. Binding has been a frequently used method for
organising and storing newspaper files for many decades,
but it is not recommended. Apart from the expense,
binding of newspapers is often damaging to the text;
creates unwieldy volumes that are difficult to handle
properly. Space is the main problem for storing bound
volume of newspapers. If retrospective files of newspapers
used fairly frequently, the recommended method is to
store the papers flat in boxes. While buffered custom
boxes made to fit each newspaper file would be ideal.
Prior to boxing, the newspapers should be stacked
neatly, organised in chronological sequence and a finding
aid should be prepared that lists the titles and issues
held, to prevent excessive handling of the issues
themselves. The box label should contain the title(s) and
range of dates contained in the box, with a list of missing
issues attached to the inside of the box lid for easy
reference. The boxes will provide overall support and will
protect the newspapers from light, dust, and insects while
allowing easy access.

3. PRESS CLIPPINGS
Press clippings is another form of preservation. It is
the most important service in the newspaper library. The
process involves cutting and pasting of important articles
and their organisation in such a manner that one can
easily get access to the desired article. Different
newspapers follow different procedure for organising
newspaper clippings. For example, The Times of India
(TOI) follows the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC)
classification system while numbering article for the
press clipping database. Earlier press clipping used to be
organised in different files and placed in the library
shelves. Now time has changed and press clippings are
being digitised in different database management
systems so that one can search these databases even
from remote location. Most of the newspapers are
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

nowadays opting for digital press clipping service and
maintaining in-house database management systems for
keeping records. Important articles are selected,
classified, scanned, indexed and then stored in a safe
server. TOI has two archival systems namely, Times
Archival System (TAS), and DATASCAN. The TAS, an
oracle based in-house database which contains digital
news clippings of TOI, The Economic Times (ET) and
Delhi Times (DT) since 1997 to 2004. This database
follows a client server-based architecture model. Data are
safe as stored in two different servers located in Delhi and
Mumbai. TOI started DATASCAN database management
system in 1993. This is a C++ based application.
Important news articles of 11 competitive papers like The
Hindustan Times (HT), Indian Express etc. are being
preserved. The database has vast collection of 10 lakhs
news clippings available in the server. Two servers are
being devoted for this database and stored in a cool place.
Computer professionals take regular backup and look
after issues related to protection of digital data.

4. MICROFILMING
Microfilming is the most important thing in newspaper
preservation. It is also called microphotography which is
done by reducing the images by 25 times. Usually 35 mm
100 ft Microfilm roll is used for newspaper microfilming.
Microfilming is one of the most extensively used and
common practices in modern reprographic science. The
first newspaper to be microfilmed was the London
Evening News, filmed in 1853 to demonstrate the viability
of
microfilming
techniques.
During
1930s,
microphotography was recommended as a means of
preserving newspapers. That time the life expectancy of
microfilm was merely a decade. By the end of that decade
both the Library of Congress and the New York Public
Library had established full-fledged microfilming
programs. Nowadays standardised microfilm base is long
lasting. Life expectancy of polyester-based microfilm is
approximately 500 years. Microfilm has now become an
economical and reliable means of preserving newspapers.
There are various institutions that have standardised the
microfilm production and preservation.
There are number of advantages which made
microfilm archivist’s first choice for preservation of
newspapers. There is no issue with hardware or software
obsolescence and the microfilm reader is a simple
mechanical device with a light source and magnification.
Storage cost is very low and it is difficult to manipulate the
content of microfilm. Film offers excellent compaction and
it is lossless. Microfilming is a well researched area so
standards for microfilming are available. But some
challenges are also there. Rework is expensive because
it is not just a copy and paste factor. Brittle newsprint is a
major concern for microfilming old newspapers. Oversised
pages often create problem for taking exposure of the film,
73

and illustrations and colour images filming requires proper
density of the images.
There are different bases of microfilms used for last
several decades. Cellulose-based acetate microfilms
were used for library applications from the 1920s to the
1970s but their life expectancy was not so good. These
films were highly susceptible to chemical deterioration.
Preservation of acetate films is done by duplication onto
polyester-base film and treated with polysulfide solution.
Silver lock treatment is prescribed by International
Permanence Institute (IPI) as most effective polysulfide
treatment. This treatment is a special chemical bath that
makes silver film resistant to the effects of atmospheric
pollutants by converting most of the metallic silver that
makes up the image to silver sulfide. Metallic silver is very
susceptible to oxidation. It makes film chemically
resistant to damaging atmospheric agents, without
altering important film characteristics.
Silver lock treatment is used for restoration of the
microfilm. Another important film base is Diazo. This film
is used mainly for reference purposes, as it can sustain
heavy use without scratching. This is usually used for
duplication of microfilm. Diazo film is polyester-based film
coated with an emulsion of diazonium salts. Storage
requirements are somewhat less demanding than those of
silver-halide film; normally stored in a filing cabinet in a
climate-controlled office environment. It is not archival
quality microfilm, however, and should not be relied on for
records’ preservation purposes. Silver-halide produces
images of high quality and is used universally for original
camera negative (first-generation) microfilm. Its potential
life-expectancy of 500 years makes it the only film
suitable for archival records. Silver-halide films have rigid
environmental requirements, however, and deteriorates
rapidly if exposed to high temperature or humidity,
chemical agents or pollutants, or frequent handling. Its
primary use is as a security copy of the records, from
which other copies can be made in case of emergency.
This type of film is commonly selected for use in off-site
storage by companies or organisations with storage
needs.
Quality of the microfilms is being maintained by
checking reduction ratio of the images and density of the
image. Archive master is prepared and being used only to
create another print master in case the original print
master is damaged or lost. In some newspaper archives,
archive master is kept in remote central underground
vault. Print master is a second-generation direct duplicate
made from each archival master. It is used to create thirdgeneration positive service copies. Service copy is
intended for use for reference purpose.
Acid-free containers are required for microfilm roll
preservation. One roll per container is acceptable for
74

archival purpose. Containers are stored in metal cabinets.
Separate archive master, print master, service copy
should be kept so that master copy can not be used as
service copy. Microfilms are susceptible to environmental
conditions so films should be stored in a cool place.
Temperature and relative humidity should be 680 F/ 200 C
and 40-50 respectively. Nowadays easy access and quick
search is the prime focus in news archives. Microfilm
neither gives easy access nor provides modern search
facilities so digital preservation is the way to provide quick
and easy access. Digital archive is preferred by
newspaper houses because one can access the archive
even from a remote location. Checking of individual reels
is required for microfilm archive but there is no need to do
that in case of digital archive and items can be searched
by keyword only. Microfilm reader lacks modern search
facilities but digital archive is searchable with various
options. Reading experience is also not very good in
microfilm in comparison of digital archive.
For digitisation purpose microfilm is scanned.
Scanned images are then converted into digital TIFF
format. The newspaper is segmented into logical
components before XML file is then created for each
article or advertisement, and finally index of entire
collection is made to make the output searchable. The
finished product presents every edition of publication in its
original format. Most of the modern newspaper houses are
now considering the digitisation of microfilms. Besides
the digitisation of old microfilms modern newspapers have
come up with e-paper for Internet and for easy archival. Epaper gives access to the publication in its original format,
anywhere, anytime, 24X7 with just a Web browser and no
client software to download. It offers hybrid print and
electronic subscriptions to maximise the value to
audience and engage the audiences in multiple formats. It
helps in reduction of production and distribution costs for
digital subscribers. Users can easily search, print, and email articles and advertisements.
E-paper facilitates access to the interactive
advertisements and editorials and an online/offline
subscription that suits customer’s needs. E-papers have
become very popular and most of the newspapers make
them available on their websites. TOI has opted Olive
software for production and archival of its e-paper. TOI’s earchive gives total freedom of search and one can access
it from remote places also. For preservation purpose,
microfilm shows very low risk if proper film base,
processing, and physical environment is maintained.
Digital storage may have low to high risk as format and
preservation metadata determines the risk. Functionality
of microfilm is uncompromised but when compared to
digital storage. Microfilm storage is passive and there is
minimal intervention but in case of digital archive storage
is active and there is periodic mass intervention. While
microfilm’s damage depends on physical intervention,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

damage of digital archive is subject to undetected loss.
After all cost of microfilm preservation is very less where
as digital archive costs much more.
Some obvious questions now are: Is microfilm
obsolete? Should we go for digitisation only? When epaper is available then why microfilm? There are various
positive and negative points both in Microfilm preservation
and digital preservation but if budget permits then
newspaper archives should maintain both archives. Some
leading newspapers like TOI maintain microfilm archive,
digital archive as well as printed bound volumes of
newspapers.

IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
(JCDL ’01), 346-52.
3.

Recommended Practice for Microfilming Printed
Newspapers on 35mm Microfilm. ANSI/AIIM MS111994. Silver Spring, Md. Association for Information
and Image Management, 1994. (Available from AIIM
at: 1100 Wayne Ave., Suite 1100, Silver Spring, MD
20910)

3.

Guidelines for Selecting a Conservator. [Brochure]
Washington,
DC,
American
Institute
for
Conservation, 1991. (Available from AIC at: 1717 K
St., NW., Suite 301, Washington, DC 20006 Phone:
(202) 452-9545

4.

Encapsulation in polyester film using double-sided
tape. Technical leaflet. Andover, Mass., Northeast
Document Conservation Center, 1992. (Available from
NEDCC at: 100 Brickstone Square, Andover, MA
01810-1494)

5.

Sustainability of Digital Resources. TASI: Technical
Advisory Service for images, 2008.

FURTHER READING
1.

Conway, 1990. pp. 206

1.

Elkington, Nancy E. RLG Preservation Microfilming
Handbook. Mountain View, CA, Research Libraries
Group, 1992.

2.

Lorie, Raymond A. (2001). Long-term preservation of
digital information. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM/

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(1)

75

