DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 2, March 2009, pp. 7-14
© 2009, DESIDOC

Building Subject Gateway in a Shifting Digital World
Usha Mujoo Munshi
Indian Institute of Public Administration
IP Estate, New Delhi-110 012

ABSTRACT
The advancement and widespread adoption of the information and communication technology has expanded
the access to information. Alternatively, deluge of digital data, and the rate at which the repositories of
information are increasing are not affable because one needs to trace these individually. The paper addresses
these apprehensions and focus on interoperability of these digital repositories so that subject gateways could
be generated using these repositories to facilitate one-stop shop and easy access to galore of resources
contained in these digital repositories, thereby enhancing access to scholarly communications.
Keywords: Digital world, subject gateways, storage and communication networks, digital repositories, digital contents,
metadata, open access initiative

1. INTRODUCTION
Storage and communication networks and their
widespread adoption by government, business, health
care, and others offer the prospect of an age of abundant
information about various areas of research in the universe
of knowledge. The widespread adoption of the technology
has vastly improved the access to a range of varied data
sources. Undoubtedly, expanded use will greatly enhance
comparative research; and the ability to harmonise
datasets over time and geography unarguably will lead to
significant improvement in our understanding of societies.
Scholarly community faces a variety of problems in
discovery, access and delivery of pertinent information/
data in their respective areas of interest. The users want
specialised portals, interdisciplinary links, intelligent
integration of all types of information, and data, inclusion of
quality information, and single-point access to
information/data.
On one hand, a substantial number of organisations
have involved themselves generating digital contents of the
requisite datasets to address the immediate needs of their
user clientele in a more effective and efficient way. On the
other hand, it is not only unrealistic but unfeasible as well
to think of sufficing the needs of users and overcoming
their stresses of yielding good information crop of high
relevance and precision with shortest possible mechanism
from single or couple of such digital repositories. The
answer perhaps could be pooling resources from these
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

digital repositories. The next question that immediately
comes to the mind is that what if these repositories are
harvested by users, they could be embedded in deep web,
thereby unable to retrieve (even) the metadata.
Alternatively, with so much of data being digitally captured
and put on the web in the repositories and the rate at
which these repositories are growing, is adding the
information deluge that are not affable because of the fact
that one needs to trace them individually. This again is not
a sociable endeavour for scholarly community more so as
we are shifting more and more towards digital way. This
paper is an effort in this direction to address these
apprehensions and focus on interoperability of these
digital repositories, so that subject gateways could be
generated using these repositories to facilitate one-stop
shop and easy access to galore of resources contained in
these digital repositories, thereby enhancing access to
scholarly communications.

2. SUBJECT GATEWAYS—WHY DO WE NEED
THEM?
With large amounts of information available on the
Internet, users are finding it more and more difficult to
access the desired information. Several tools are being
designed to help users overcome the problem of ‘finding
requisite bit of information’. Subject gateways are one
such tool designed for a specific user group with interests
in a specific subject area. Subject gateways are gaining
popularity, as their design arises from the combined efforts
7

of the subject specialists who give their expert advice on
subject details.
As indicated above, that the growing number of digital
repositories that are available on the Web, is rendering it
difficult for the users to track individual sites in search of
necessary information. Many organisational repositories
have not been indexed by the search engines due to
various factors. As such, requisite mechanism by which
the inter-repository resources can be traced and surfed to
the top has been the need of the hour. A mechanism needs
to be developed by which the repositories can share the
resources and work in coordination, to provide a wider
domain pursuit to the users. The mechanism which
provides the ability to the information systems to work in
coordination has been termed as interoperability. Open
Archives Initiative (OAI) is one of the landmark efforts to
ensure the availability of the metadata of digital resources
of many repositories at the users’ end.

2.1 Subject Gateways—Definition
Subject gateways, interchangeably also called
subject portals, are primarily information gateways, or
subject directories. These gateways are portals to web
pages and online resources in a particular subject area.
They may link to documents, databases, sites, or news
items, and often provide some sort of online forum for
information exchange. Subject gateways may have a
search interface so that you can find what you want, or
they may simply be a browseable index of resources.
Instead of using a general search engine, using a subject
gateway can result in returning of more relevant web
pages from the search as they usually link to reliable web
pages. While, using a search engine, users need to
carefully go for an appraisal process about the information
retrieved from the web before relying on it as a basis for
further study or research. As such high quality/
recommended resources are being marked in such portals
or gateways.
A formal definition of the Subject Gateways, as given
by the Australian Subject Gateways Forum, is “Webbased mechanism for accessing a collection of high
quality, evaluated resources identified to support research
in a particular subject discipline”. It is a service, which is
accessed via a portal, through open standard protocols
(such as Whois++, LDAP, Z39.50, Harvest Broker), which
allow it to slot in seamlessly behind the scenes. What the
end-user sees is web-based, behind the scenes is more
structured service.1
According to DESIRE Project2, funded by the
European Commission, subject gateways find the
following description. “Selective subject gateways on the
Internet are characterised by their quality control. The core
activities of resource selection and description rely on
8

skilled human input (by librarians, academics and
experts) and are not activities that lend themselves to
automation.”3
Examples of such gateways include Scirus (for
scientific information only) at http://www.scirus.com/. It
facilitates search across 90 million selected science web
pages. If journal resources are also included, one would
cross-search 17 million science article abstracts from
services such as ScienceDirect, IDEAL, Beilstein on
Chem Web, Neuroscion, BioMed Central, US Patent
Office, E-Print ArXiv, Chemistry Preprint Server,
Mathematics Preprint Server, CogPrints, and NASA.
Other examples include: AGRIGATE (www.agrigate.
edu.au) and BUBL (http://bubl.ac.uk/link/sci.html).

3. SUBJECT GATEWAYS IN THE PRESENT
STUDY
In the present study, the development of subject
gateways or portals is to create such portals by harvesting
quality information rich digital repositories created and
maintained by various organisations/agencies. These
repositories are based on standard practices and using
well known standards that facilitate interoperability and
thus can allow harvesting of data from across the
repositories and provide a one-stop shop for information
access to resources that are relevant for information
requirements. These digital repositories, generally
institutional in character, are not merely the
bibliographical type repositories, but substantial portion of
such repositories contain full-text documents with
passable search features. The resources contained in
these repositories are open access resources, and by and
large the access to full text is open and free.
However, creating subject portals in this case would
need setting up of a Harvester service that is OAI-PMH
compliant, so that the metadata can be harvested which
provides a conduit to reach the identified relevant
documents. But before we actually touch upon the aspect
of generating subject portals, it becomes imperative at this
point of time to throw some light on critical factors for
success of sustenance and execution of gateways.

4. CRITICAL FACTORS
The critical success factors for a subject gateway or a
portal broadly encompass the following:


Collaboration



The application of standards



Cross-gateway searching



Interoperability
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

4.1 Collaboration
While collaboration is heart and soul of the subject
gateways, without which creating a subject portal will not
be a portal in true sense of the term, anyway. Unless there
are resources that can form integral part of the gateway,
otherwise how can a gateway be set-up? Hence NorthSouth and South-South collaboration is a must to do
practice required for populating the gateway with high
relevance, quality and substantial pool of resources.
Collaboration ensures the need to pool efforts early in the
gestation of the proposed service. One aspect that is very
core to gateways/portals is they are subjected to on-going
development process, that may amount to periodical
updation/modification/deletion/addition of resources only
then such gateways ensure an authenticated repository
for scholarly communication.

4.2 Standards
The application of standards is also equally important.
The fact that it is only the standard practices that will lead
to successful resource sharing in the digital environment
necessitates the use of standards, e.g., the standards to
be considered for metadata. There are several available
metadata schemas such as the Dublin Core being used
as a suitable baseline in many cases.
Cross-gateway searching is a vital feature to be
facilitated. For the support of cross-gateway searching,
there are standards such as Z39.50, for data export or
import, and proxies which query repositories
simultaneously across multiple servers. Extensions to
services such as cross-browsing require the development
of other standards, for example in the area of collection
description metadata. However, cross-searching and
cross-browsing could be facilitated by simple links
between existing pieces of information, rather than
building whole new structures which individual institutions
need to commit to, there may be some hitches in
committing this. It may pointed out here that the
ubiquitous standard which underpins all of the gateways is
the use of the hypertext transmission protocol in web
browsers for which the gateways interfaces are designed,
particularly the gateway projects in their early stages
would not have been successful, without this uniform
technology.

4.3 Interoperability
The interoperability aspect, is again a most
indispensable issue as that forms part of harvesting data
from across repositories, across million of records
contained in these repositories. What is interoperability in
real sense of the term and how it does what it can?
Interoperability is an inexorable in generating the subject
portals using harvesting services. Broadly speaking,
interoperability is the ability of systems, organisations and
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

individuals to operate together to achieve a common goal.
In digital libraries search interoperability is the main
concern. Therefore, more emphasis has been given to this
aspect in this study.
It may be worthwhile here to throw some light on the
aspect of what interoperability means. Priscilla Caplan4
has defined Search Interoperability as ‘the ability to
perform a search over diverse set of metadata records and
obtain meaningful results’. To bring such interoperability
among digital libraries, remarkable effort has been made
by OAI. OAI develops and promotes interoperability
standards that aim to facilitate the efficient dissemination
of content. It is supported by the Digital Library
Foundation, the Coalition for Networked Information and
National Science Foundation. OAI has its roots in an effort
to enhance access to e-print repositories (archives) as a
means of increasing the availability of scholarly
communication.

4.3.1 Metadata Harvesting Protocol
As the term denotes, the metadata harvesting
protocol signifies the set of rules or guidelines harvesting
metadata. In order to facilitate metadata harvesting, there
ought to be some prerequisites to develop metadata
harvesting protocol. As such agreement on: certain
aspects like Transport protocol—HTTP or FTP or other
such protocol; Metadata format—Dublin Core or MARC or
other such format; Metadata Quality Assurance—
mandatory element set, naming and subject conventions,
etc., and Intellectual Property and Usage Rights is
essential.

4.3.2 OAI-PMH
The OAI protocol for metadata harvesting provides an
application-independent interoperability framework based
on metadata harvesting5 that can be used by a variety of
communities who are engaged in publishing content on
the Web. It provides a set of rules that defines the
communication between systems like FTP or HTTP in
Internet. That is why even though the protocol actually
uses HTTP as a transport mechanism between digital
libraries, it is popularly known as the “HTTP of Digital
Libraries”.6
There are two classes of players in the OAI-PMH
framework: data providers, which administer systems that
support the OAI-PMH as a means of exposing metadata,
and service providers, which use metadata harvested via
the OAI-PMH as a basis for building value-added services.
The protocol based on HTTP and XML was developed
with an objective to ensure interoperability between e-print
repositories only. Later, in version 1.0/1.1 all document
like digital objects were also brought into its purview, and
finally the latest version 2.0 supports all kinds of digital
resources.
9

It may be noted that OAI-PMH is not a search engine,
or a search tool, or a database. It only provides set of rules
to move the metadata not the content of the digital
resource from one repository to another. The content
remains in the source repository only, and a repository
can act both as service provider or harvester and data
provider or only service provider or data provider. Besides,
the protocol is not restricted only to support simple
(unqualified Dublin Core), but can support any metadata
schema, which can be provided in XML format.

interest, involve certain key technologies to make the
system ready for take off. Some such aspects are briefly
touched upon here. As indicated earlier, that the two
classes of participants in the OAI-PMH framework are
Data Providers and Service Providers. In generic terms,
the role of both these participants can be performed.
Firstly, by creating the repositories that comprise of
intellectual output of the institutions and are generally
termed as institutional repository (IR). Such IRs can be
created using open source software. There are several
software now available under open source license that
comply with OAI metadata harvesting protocol and are
released and made publicly available.

The use of OAI-PMH is generally recommended due
to its very simplistic and convenient features. For
instance, implementation is quite simple as compared to
distributed search protocol (Z39.50). Besides, search
process is faster in centralised search mechanism
because the metadata collected from different repositories
are kept at local server and retrieved from there at the time
of search. On the contrary, in distributed search
mechanism (Z39.50) metadata is retrieved from different
repositories at the time end-user submits a search query.
Moreover, the service providers can modify the display of
collected metadata as per their metadata policy. The
interaction between service provider and data provider and
the process of metadata harvesting is broadly
schematically depicted in Fig. 1.

Some of these IR software are: ARNO, Tilburg
University, The Netherlands (http://www.uba.uva.nl/arno);
CDSware CERN, Geneva, Switzerland (http://
cdsware.cer.ch/); DSpace, MIT Libraries and the HP
Labs, USA (http://wv.w.dspace.org/); E-Prints, University
of Southampton, U.K. (http://www.software.eprints.org/);
FEDORA University of Virginia, USA (http://
www.fedora.info/); i-Tor, the Netherlands Institute for
Scientific Information Services (http://www.itor.org/en/
toon); and MyCoRe, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Germany (http://www.mycore.de/engl/index.html). A list
of such software is also available at http://www.soros.org/
openaccess/software. It may be mentioned here that
some of these software also support search and retrieval
of repositories in vernacular languages such as Indic
languages using UNICODE. For creation of digital

5. GENERATING SUBJECT PORTALS
Generating subject portals or gateways by harvesting
OAI complaint information resources in the areas of

ta r
Da vide
o
r
P

S
E
R
V
I
C
E
S

ns
e
sp
o

I
OA

Service Provider
(Aggregated Metadata
from Various Repositories)

ta r
Da vide
o
r
P

Re

OA
I

OA
IR
eq
ue
st

O A I Re
sponse

OAI R

eques
t

ta r
Da vide
o
r
P

t
es
qu
e
R
AI
O

R

p
es

on

se

st
que
I Re
A
O

R
OAI

OA I R
OA I R
e

nse
espo

ta r
Da vide
o
Pr

eque st

s pon

se

ta r
Da vide
o
r
P

Figure 1. A schematic representation of transactions between service provider and data provider.
10

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

libraries in vernacular languages using UNICODE, the
Unicode needs support from various quarters such as
operating systems, programming languages, application
software, word processors. For instance in the case of
compatibility of UNICODE and Dspace, the requisite
parameters are supported. Linux supports Unicode;
PostgresSQL supports Unicode; Java supports Unicode.
You only require fonts to display in the browser and you
need to modify Tomcat files.
Once these repositories have been created, they
ought to be OAI compliant, and interoperable, so that
others can also harvest them and use. Secondly, by
harvesting the quality IRs created by others by setting up
harvester using harvesting services. The second point is
more important for the present study as our main focus of
the study is based on this. This can be achieved as
follows.
It becomes imperative to talk about the key concepts
associated with the harvesting services. What is a
harvester and what it does is a question that we need to
answer.

5.1 Harvester
A harvester is a client application that issues OAIPMH requests. A harvester is operated by a service
provider as a means of collecting metadata from
repositories; where a repository is a network accessible
server that can process the OAI-PMH requests in the
scheduled manner. The data provider manages the
repository in order to expose metadata to harvesters.
To allow various repository configurations, the OAIPMH distinguishes between three distinct entities related
to the metadata made accessible by the OAI-PMH.
(i)

Resource: A resource is the object or “stuff’ that
metadata is “about”.

(ii) Item: An item is a constituent of a repository from
which metadata about a resource can be
disseminated. That metadata may be disseminated
on the fly from the associated resource, crosswalked from some canonical form, actually stored in
the repository, etc.
(iii) Record: A record is metadata in a specific metadata
format. A record is returned as an XML-encoded byte
stream in response to a protocol request to
disseminate a specific metadata format from a
constituent item.
It may be worthwhile to throw some light on two other
important aspects, i.e., unique identifier and selective
harvesting.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Unique Identifier: A unique identifier is used in OAI-PMH
request for extracting metadata from the item. It explicitly
identifies an item within a repository. Though, items may
contain metadata in multiple formats, however, the unique
identifier maps to the item and all possible records
available from a single item share the same unique
identifier.
Selective Harvesting: Selective harvesting allows
harvesters to limit harvest requests to portions of the
metadata available from a repository. The OAI-PMH
supports selective harvesting with two types of harvesting
criteria that may be combined in an OAI-PMH request:
datestamps and set membership. Harvesters may use
datestamps to harvest only those records that were
created, deleted, or modified within a specified date range.
To specify datestamp-based selective harvesting,
datestamps are included as values of the optional
arguments.

5.2 OAI Tools
There are several OAI-implementation tools, which
can be broadly grouped according to their role in the OAIimplementation process: 7-9


OAI data provider tools and scripts,



Digital library systems, and



OAI validation and harvesting systems.

5.2.1 OAI Data Provider Tools and Scripts
A wide array of technological resources serves the
needs of OAI data and service providers, ranging from
simple scripts to entire systems. OAI data provider tools
and scripts expose metadata via the OAI-PMH.
When selecting tools for managing metadata,
consider not only whether they meet minimum OAI
requirements (simple or unqualified Dublin Core format)
but also whether they include other features for increasing
the quality of shareable metadata. Some tools and scripts
in this group are:


Metadata Migrator Tool (http://metacluster.library.
emory.edu/mosc/upload.php)



OAI Static Repositories and Gateways (http://
www.openarchives.org/OAI/2.0/ guidelines-staticrepository.htm)



OAI FileMakerPro Repository Gateway (http://cic
harvest.grainger.ui uc.edulfmpgateway/



OCLC OAIC (http://alcme.oclc.org/oaicat/)



Open Journal Systems (http://www.pkp.ubc.ca/ojs)

11



Virginia Tech DLRL Projects (http://www.dlib.vt.edu/
projects/OAI)



eXtensivle Stylesheet Language Transformation
(http://www.w3.org/TR/xslt)



ZMARCO (http://zmarco.sourceforge.net)

5.2.2 Digital Library Systems
Digital library systems employ tools for creating,
editing, managing, and sharing metadata. The following
are a selection of these systems with strong OAI-data
provider capabilities. More vendors are now providing open
source versions of their tools. Some of these are:

5.3 Open Source Metadata Harvesting Tools10
There are several OAI Harvester software. A list of the
major OAI harvester software is given below for reference.


Arc (http://arc.cs.odu.edu/)



Citebase (http://citebase.eprints. org/cgi-bin/search)



CYCLADES (http://www.ercim.org/cyelades/)



DP9 (http://arc.cs.odu.edu:8080/dp9/index.jsp)



MelND (http://www.meind.del)



METALIS (http://metalis.cilea.it/)



ContentDM (http://www.contentdm.com)



my.OAI (http://www.myoai.com)



Collection Workflow Integration System (http://scou
t.wisc.edu/Projects/CWIS).



NCSTRL (http://www.ncstrl.org/)



Digital Library eXtension Service (http://ww.dlxs.org)



Purseus (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/vor)



DSpace (http://www.dspace.org)



Public Knowledge Project–Open Archives Harvester
(http://pkp. ubc. calharvester/)



Ex Libris DigiTool (http://www.exlibrisgroup.com/digi
tool.htm)



OAICA T (http://www.oelc.org/research/sojtware/oai/
cat.htm )



Fedora (http://www.fedora.info)

OAI Repository Explorer (http://re.cs.uct.ac.zal)

Greenstone (http://www.greenstone.org/cgi-bin/
Iibrary)







OAlster (http://oaister.umdl.umich. edu/o/oaister/)



OASIC (Open Archvies en SIC) (http://oasic.ccsd.
cnrs.jrl)



OAIHarvester (http://www.oelc.org/research/softwar
e/oai/harvester.htm)



DLESE OAI Software (http://dlese.orgloailindex.jsp)

5.2.3 OAI Validation and Harvesting Systems
OAI validation and harvesting systems collect and
display shareable metadata. Validation systems may be
used to explore metadata records before they are
harvested. Minimally, harvesters gather metadata records
so they can be indexed, searched, and browsed. The
easier the harvester is to use, the more compatible it is
with current systems. Ideally, harvesters should search
sets rather than entire repositories and use resumption
tokens. Some of these systems are:


OAITransform (http://www.dlxs.org/products/archiveby-CDROM/11a/Lib/src/bin/o/oaister/oaitransform/
OAI Transform)



Perl O-O Harvester (http://www.dlib.vt.edulprojects/
OAI/software/harvester/harvester.html)



PKP Open Archives Harvester (http://www.pkp.ubc
.cal pkp-harvester/)



Reap and OAI Harvester Object Library (http://
sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_ id=4
7963&package _id=46165)



Repository Explorer (http://www.dlib.vt.edulprojects/
OAI/software/explorer/explorer.html)

12

5.4 Open Archives Harvester: Installing and
Harvesting
In this study we would attempt to focus on one of
above indicated OAI Harvetser—Public Knowledge Project
(PKP)—Open Archives Harvester (http://pkp.ubc.ca/
harvester/) for discussion purposes. It may be pointed out
that many organisations have set up this harvester to
harvest OAI compliant repositories for facilitating subject
gateways in their areas of interest. A list of such
implementations is available at http://pkp.sfu.ca/
harvester-list.
It may be pointed out here that there are some
difficulties or challenges encountered in harvesting
metadata. For instance a metadata harvester needs to
start and stop retrieval at arbitrary points in the set to allow
parts of large collections to be downloaded. Much data is
corrupted and does not parse well using a tool and at
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

times most of the work requires transforming broken data
into usable sets.

5.4.1 PKP Harvester
The PKP Open Archives Harvester is a software used
to accumulate and index freely available metadata,
providing a searchable, web-based interface. It is open
source, released under the GNU General Public License.
It was created and is maintained by the Public Knowledge
Project, in Vancouver, Canada. Originally developed to
harvest the metadata from Open Journal Systems articles
and Open Conference Systems proceedings, the
Harvester can by used with any OAI-PMH-compliant
resource. It can harvest metadata in a variety of schemas
(including unqualified Dublin Core, the PKP Dublin Core
extension, the Metadata Object Description Schema
(MODS), and MARCXML). Additional schemas are
supported via plugins.
PKP search engine, the Harvester version 2.x
includes many search goodies. Searching is highly
scalable, it creates an inverted index for searching.
Flexible search interface allows simple searching and
advanced searching using crosswalk fields from all
harvested archives. Advanced searching of archives that
share the same schema is possible using fields as defined
in the schema. When creating crosswalks for searching,
administrator can define elements—text, date, or HTML
multiple select interface widgets.
PKP graphic user interface uses impressive graphic
interfaces, having an imposing design. It is easy to
navigate the site and find the administrative tools to
harvest archives and search. PKP user interface with CSS
and template-based HTML facilitates easy customisation.
The entire site, including harvester and search engine
works out of the box. The site installs easily into a LAMPbased server (Linux-Apache-MySQL-PHP4) without
writing configuration files or installing non-LAMP
dependencies. The code is readable and well
documented. This software is flexible, so it can be
installed on Windows using open source tools alone.
Harvesting in PKP can be managed through a web
page from a server running PHP and MySQL. In the
browser adding an archive and running it is simple. The
PKP OA harvester allows any institution to create their
own metadata harvester, which can be focused
specifically on gathering information from/or for their
research community.
By setting the harvester, a union catalogue of
potential digital resources is basically created, which
provide access to these digital resources by harvesting
their descriptive metadata or records using OAI-PMH (the
Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Harvesting). These digital resources can be picked on
selective basis depending upon the subject areas of
interest of the users or simply as per the institutional
mandate. It may be indicated here that generally these
resources do not surf to the top during navigation using
general search engines; these resources are often hidden
from search engine users behind web scripts. These
resources also known as the deep web or embedded web.
The owners of these resources share them with the world
using OAI-PMH. The harvester facilitates harvesting
metadata of documents from other repositories and
mounting it on a local server, while the actual document
rests in distributed mode on the respective servers. The
best example of such a facility can be accessed at http:/
/www.oaister.org/which currently provides access to
11,682,009 records from 777 contributors11. Other
examples include http://ir.isical.ac.in., which is a pack of
ISI repository and information services (IRIS) in which
HORUS (Harvesters for Open Repositories with Unlimited
Search) is a suit of information services based on OAIPMH (Open Access Initiative Protocol for Metadata
Harvesting) HORUS collects metadata from various digital
repositories dealing with subjects like computer
sciences, biological sciences, etc. and provides a singlestop search engine for full-text resources in the respective
subjects.
The philosophy of identifying the repositories lies in
the fact that once you have identified the repositories on
selective basis meeting your desired information
requirements, and indexed them on to your site, the
automatic refurbishing is taken care of as and when
additional/new records are added by the data provider in
the respective repositories.

6. PKP SOFTWARE INTEGRATION:
AUGMENTING IRS WITH HARVESTER
SUPPORT
Using OAI Harvester for metadata harvesting, the
repositories can be located and harvested for scholarship
purposes. It is necessary to exchange knowledge
between repositories; avoiding heterogeneity issues and
giving an interpretation of metadata harvested. While
setting up of harvester supports harvesting OAI-compliant
digital repositories created by other organisations/
institutions/ agencies, it also facilitates integration of
institutions intellectual output, so as to make provision for
searching across repositories including the ones created
by users. One model for implementing the complete set of
PKP software is for libraries to create an integrated site
that brings together their institutional repositories, along
with Open Journal Systems, and Open Conference
Systems. In addition, the Open Archives Harvester is used
to index and search the content of the site and also
harvesting OAI-compliant digital repositories, thereby
making it part of a global knowledge exchange.
13

By doing so, on one hand, this allows the library to
offer faculty members a way of depositing their work,
wherever it is published or whatever state it is in, as well as
supporting their involvement in the running of journals and
conferences. It also creates a single point of search for all
that the organisation is doing along these lines.
Taking example of an open source software such as
Dspace for creating digital libraries comprising the
institutional output or what is generally termed as IR, it is
possible to integrate Harvester for providing single-point
access to galore of digital repositories, the ones you have
created or which others have created.
As indicated earlier, a Harvester is basically a client
application that issues OAI-PMH requests It is operated
by a service provider as a means of collecting metadata
from repositories. DSpace has data provider
functionalities. Thereby augmenting DSpace with the
harvester support and then, importing DSpace in the
broader context of IR is feasible and more ingenious. For
instance, a good example of a library integrating this set of
open source software is the UTSePress (http://
epress.lib.uts.edu.au/) at the University of Technology at
Sydney, which provides access to the integrated services:
the services bundled here are Institutional Repository
(using DSpace), Journals (using OJS), Conferences (using
OCS), and Search (using PKP OA Harvester). Other
examples may include, IRIS (http://ir.isical.ac.in/) set up
at Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata which has several
components that include ORION (Open Repository of Isi
Online), and an IR comprising intellectual output of ISI
faculty and scholars. The IR is created using Dspace open
source software. Besides there is HORUS as discussed
above which is basically harvesting service of open
repositories using PKP-OA harvester. In addition there is
also provision for federated search.

various factors. The potential to integrate services is very
strong. The subject gateways have established a new
trend in collaboration, which can only revitalise library
service provision in the future. As change is inevitable, we
need to move with this change to support information
landscape for research and development or scholarship
purposes. The only constant in the changing environment
of provision of bytes has been the use of metadata itself.
Everything else is subject to change.

REFERENCES
1.

Australian Subject Gateways Forum (ASGF) http://
www.nla.gov.aulinitiatives/sg/gateways.

2.

DESIRE Project. http://www.desire.org/.

3.

Selection Criteria for Quality Controlled Information
Gateways, Work Package 3 of Telematics for
Research project. http://www.lub.lu.se/~traugolt/
OIR-SBIG.txt.

4.

Caplan, Priscilla. Metadata Fundamentals for All
Librarians. American Library Association Editions.
2003.

5.

The Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata
Harvesting Protocol Version 2.0. http://www.ope
narchives.org/OAI/openarchivesprotocol.html#Item.

6.

Rhyno, Art. Using Open Source Systems for Digital
Libraries. Westport: Libraries Unlimited. 2004,
pp. 26.

7.

Kellogg, D. Open source OAI metadata harvesting
tools. California Digital Library http://www.cdlib.org/
inside/projects/preservation/recall/harvesting.pdf.

8.

Tennant, R. Specifications for metadata processing
tools. California Digital Library, 2004 http://
www.cdlib.org/inside/projects/harvesting/metadata
tools.htm. Visited on 13 May 2007.

9.

Tennant, R. Bitter harvest: Problems and suggested
solutions for OAI-PMH data and service providers.
California Digital Library, 2004. http://www.cdlib.org/
inside/projects/harvesting/bitter_harvest.html.

7. CONCLUSION
To capitalise on availability of open access digital
repositories, and developing new services involving the
broadest possible group of information service providers is
of utmost priority. As such collaboration to research is the
mantra of the day. Such initiatives beyond doubt will help
to progress towards a stronger national information
channel infrastructure for an integrated research libraries
and information network. Where these resources are being
developed—across institutions/across regions—and
facilitated would provide for enhanced access to scholarly
communications that were hitherto not accessible due to

14

10. Open Archives Forum: Information Resource
Database.
http://www.oaforum.org/oafdb/listdb/
listsoftware.php#top.
11. OAIster. http://www.oaister.org/.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

