DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 2, March 2009, pp. 31-38
© 2009, DESIDOC

Gyanoday Portal: A Virtual Reference Point for
Management Knowledge Repository
Shantanu Ganguly
Indian Institute of Management, Prabandh Nagar
Off Sitapur Road, Lucknow-226 013
E-mail: sganguly67@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Librarians are constantly exploring various ways and means of supporting users in the emerging virtual
community. The paper discusses how technological developments in libraries have led to the emergence of
new service paradigms. Recent trends in electronic libraries, with particular reference to academic libraries
to provide value-added library services to support virtual communities. Paper discusses the dynamic nature
of reference services in the context of rapidly changing technologies and heightened quality of service/user
expectations, and explores the issues associated with planning virtual reference services in an academic
environment. With the usage of this Library Portal, the desktop user’s community of IIM Lucknow has been
greatly benefited.
Keywords: Gyanoday, knowledge repository, academic libraries, virtual reference services, electronic resources

1. INTRODUCTION
The proliferation of electronic resources in libraries
has enabled users to search information without
physically entering the library. Full-text databases,
digitised library resources, e-books and the web are buzzwords of the times. Librarians are exploring ways of
supporting users in the emerging virtual communities.
One way in which this is being done is by offering valueadded services, such as online real-time reference
(hereafter referred to as ORR) and Web-based instruction
to support remote access and navigation of a library’s
electronic resources.
Various means of offering reference services have
their individual advantages and disadvantages. In-person
visits, telephone, fax, e-mail and more recently, real-time
reference are best seen as being complementary to one
another and each suited to different situations. As Tenopir
states that “each mode of communication has its own
advantages and disadvantages, some questions being
better suited for e-mail than for telephone, and vice versa.
Multiple options for communication give options to help
users more appropriately1.
Although in-person visits are still the most ideal
reference situation for most librarians because the
reference interview can be easily conducted in proximity
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

to printed resources, verbal dialog is faster than web chat
and other forms of reference, ORR addresses the unmet
need of serving remote users.

2. INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
LUCKNOW
Indian Institute of Management Lucknow (IIML), is
situated at the outskirts of the historic and culturally rich
city of Lucknow. It was established in 1984, by the
Government of India, as a national level school of
excellence in management science. IIML’s mission is to
be a global, socially conscious and integrated school of
management, contributing towards management
development, both in India and abroad. Towards this, IIML
undertakes a diverse range of academic activities and
interventions aimed at creation, dissemination, and
application of management knowledge and practices.
These include: the Post Graduate Programme; the Fellow
Programme; the Management Development Programme;
Research Programmes; and Consulting Programmes.
IIML is also entering into collaborative arrangements with
leading business schools and research centres in India,
Europe, Canada, South and South-East Asia.
The Institute has the latest state-of-the-art computing
and class-room facilities, supported by a well renowned
31

resource centre comprising collection of books, journals,
films, and databases microforms, etc. The sprawling
campus of the Institute is spread over 200 acre. The well
manicured green lawns, flower beds and rows of trees
inspire the body, mind, and soul. Strategically located
murals and carefully christened buildings like Chintan (the
Faculty Block), Bodhgriha (the PGP Block), Manthan (the
MDP Block), Gyanoday (Library: The Learning Resource
Centre), Computer Centre (with state-of-the-art computing
facilities), and Samadhan (the Administrative Block)
motivate the thought process for concentrating on specific
areas of activities as well as integrate the overall process
of knowledge generation, application, and dissemination.

3. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ELECTRONIC
LIBRARY SERVICE ENVIRONMENT
The new information environment is characterised by
electronic communication, both synchronous and
asynchronous;
web-based
information
sources;
multimedia information sources; and is uncontrolled
largely as a result of the Internet facilitating information
creation, distribution and access. Documents with
hyperlinks to other related documents/information in
various web formats are now typical, and emphasise the
fact that any information accessed by a user is a minute
segment of a larger body of information on the web. In the
electronic environment, a library researcher has the
control of browsing the information in whatever direction
he/she choose. The 24x7 availability of the web provides
users with the opportunity to conduct library research
anytime. This has resulted in library users expecting 24x7
access to not only the library’s electronic collections, but
also online help or other forms of mediation if and when
needed. A sampling of typical user expectations in the
electronic library environment is listed below (these are
verbatim responses of users who were asked about what
they expected from their libraries):


Everything in full-text and downloadable or printable
form;



Faster service;



Service availability;



Easy access;



Virtual reference service, librarian available online
24x7;



Easy-to-use web resources permitting self-service;



A librarian who knows all subjects and all databases;



Everything should be in electronic format;



Several options/alternatives to choose from;

32



A website that works;



Ability to conduct all library transactions online (like:
library registration, request document delivery and
interlibrary loan, renew library items, etc.); and



A website search engine that can find what I want.

Many academic libraries are grappling with these
users’ demands and finding ways of meeting them is
increasingly being recognised as a strategic priority in
many academic libraries. This has led to the creation of
new services as well as service delivery modes. The
demand for electronic services in libraries is reinforced by
the existance of similar electronic services elsewhere.
Library users’ experiences with innovative and convenient
technology-based services elsewhere, may create an
expectation in them for similar/comparable services. For
instance, a user who prefers to conduct his/her banking
transactions remotely via the web may also prefer to
conduct library research remotely. Similarly, a user taking
distance education courses online, would need remote
access to library resources and services of the institution
offering the course, especially if he/she is taking the
course from a geographically distant location.
Technology can now support the creation, storage
and transmission of large volumes of information in
various electronic/digital formats. This has in turn led to
changes in information needs of users as they become
aware of the capabilities of technology in facilitating
access to these various forms of content. Kebede2 argues
that the unique/distinguishing characteristics of
information needs of users in the electronic environment
are a result of the differences in the “physical form” or
medium of information rather than the “content” because it
is the medium that differentiates information in print form
from information in electronic form. Therefore, the various
media available in an electronic library is a key factor in
the determination of user needs and preferences. Users
prefer convenient, easy-to-use information media, and
technology that is easily available, requiring skills that
they currently possess. Library environments with
advanced technology infrastructures offer a broader range
of electronic media, and their users are generally more
technology savvy than those in libraries with limited
infrastructures.
In addition to differences in technology skills and
competencies, the general profile of library users has also
changed significantly. Nowadays academic library users
could be local or remote students, traditional or nontraditional students who work full-time and are pursuing
their academic programmes via online methods, some
could be full-time students located on the college/
university campus, yet others could be full-time but
commute for long distances and visit their campus a
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

limited number of days per week. Others could be
international students pursuing courses solely via the
web. They may even live several time zones away from
the campus. The modern electronic library in an
academic environment is positioned to cater to the needs
of both in-person and virtual users. Emphasis in a typical
modern academic library is increasingly shifting to
electronic access to resources and services in support of
e-learning. Growing numbers of subscription databases
and new services such as virtual reference are the current
trend.

4. INTRANET-BASED LIBRARY PORTAL
When setting up an Intranet service, consider what
aspects of the service could be adapted to an Intranet
model and how it differs from a traditional service.
Significant is to identify as how to increase the efficiency
and the extended hours service would be available to the
users. Fine-tuning the contents of Intranet site content is
most important. Look at various options for web page
design, including doing it yourself and outsourcing the
work both within the organisation and externally. Look at
the ways of adding value to products such as databases
which are delivered via the Internet. Prioritise services to
ensure that the most used services are mounted first—
this requires consultation with the users to get it right. The
layout of the web pages is also crucial to ensure that they
are easy to use. Marketing the new service is also crucial.
Involvement of users in the planning and implementation
of service makes the service more acceptable. Users may
also require training depending upon their familiarity with
the new system.

5. FUNCTIONS OF LIBRARY PORTAL
The first thing is to decide is for what it will be used
for. A library portal should:


Bring the library service to user’s desktops.



Serve as a vehicle for delivering the library’s
databases.



Reduce the number of routine trips users have to
make to the library for things like collecting forms,
delivering forms, checking the journal display, etc.



Provide an alternative to paper newsletters or
notices.



Reduce paper use.

6. CONTENT MANAGEMENT OF LIBRARY
PORTAL
Most libraries’ Intranet or Internet sites include
information like opening hours, contact details, location,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

and library rules, and so on. These can also include
library forms, either in a printable form as a Word or PDF
document or as interactive forms which users can
complete and submit online.
However, Word files can be quite large and slow to
download. Another problem is the compatibility with the
users’ software version. Printable forms can therefore be
PDF format to enable the users to print them—it looks
like a printed copy. Users should be reminded that they
will need a PDF viewer such as Adobe Acrobat to view the
documents. It is also pertinent to provide a link to the
Adobe site (www.adobe.com) with information about
downloading it in case users do not have the Acrobat
reader.

7. KNOW YOUR USERS
While designing the Intranet site, it is necessary to
know the following about the users:


Who they are?



Where they will use the service?



When they will use it?



Why they will use it?

Table 1 shows the major stakeholders of the IIML
library. Identifying the users is easy if it is an organisation
with a discrete staff or client group. It becomes more
difficult if it is a public library, or if the site is to be mounted
on an Internet site rather than an internal one. In either
case, the type of organisation might mean that the users
are varied. Where the users will use the service also
depends on the nature of the organisation. Workstations
might be within the campus area and shared by several
stakeholders.
Since Intranets are not available externally efforts
should be made to accommodate the habits of the users.
Since the institute’s and the library’s policy did not allow
external access to the Intranet, a mirror was mounted on
the Internet site and access was made possible by userIDs and passwords. Why your service will be used
reflects the nature of your clients’ information- seeking
patterns. Based on our knowledge of how our user groups
work, we came up with several likely demands for our
service:


Preparation of course materials.



Writing research proposals.



Writing research reports.



Proposals preparation for different projects.



Consultancy projects.
33

Table 1. Major stakeholders of the IIML library

Stakeholders—Internal

Resources Accessed

Faculty members

Books, periodicals, electronic databases, e-books,
dvds, case studies, digital resources, online
journals, working papers, occasional papers,
corporate reports

Postgraduate programme students

Books, periodicals, electronic databases, e-books,
digital resources, online journals,

Fellow programme students

Books, periodicals, electronic databases, e-books,
digital resources, online journals,

Research associates

Books, periodicals, electronic databases

Visiting faculty members

Books, periodicals, electronic databases, e-books,
dvds, case studies, digital resources, online
journals, working papers, occasional papers,
corporate reports

Stakeholders—External
Members of corporate bodies/industry/Govt
bodies/autonomous institutions

Resources Accessed
Books, periodicals, electronic databases

Members of the NGOs

Books, periodicals, electronic databases

Individuals

Books, periodicals, electronic databases

Nothing beats asking the users what they would find
most useful. Our initial thoughts were that our users
would want to see:

Paul’s Philosophy of Quality Service, IIML coined its own
Philosophy of Quality Service described in Table 2.

9. MAKING THE SITE EASY-TO-USE



Links to databases.



Links to catalogue.



Links to online journals.



Library forms.



Make your style fit your organisation’s image.



Contact details of library staff.



Keep the same layout between pages.



Make your navigation buttons clear.



Managing links. Links can be made obvious using
colours and/or “hovering”.



Make links from site names, not their URLs. It is not
really necessary to include the URL in the text of
your page at all if you are making an active link to it.
Never make a link from a URL without including the
title of the linked page. It is meaningless for most
users.



If you make a link to an external site, it is a courtesy
to mail the Webmaster of that site. Should the page’s
address change, you may be notified.



It follows that it is a bad practice to change the
location of your own files which others may point to,
especially on an external site.

We had the content right, but the priorities proved to
be different. Our users told us that they need access to:


Databases.



Full-text journals.



Forms, especially an interactive document request
form.



Journal holdings list.



Contact details of staff.

8. PHILOSOPHY OF QUALITY SERVICE
Meg Paul3 has synthesised basic requirements for
quality service, especially in terms of the relationship
among staff, library or information services management,
and senior management in the parent organisation or
community. If all stakeholders in the delivery of
information can agree to subscribe to what Paul calls ‘A
Philosophy of Service’, the information service is well on
its way to succeeding in the provision of quality
information to its customers. Keeping in mind the Meg
34

The most important page in a site is the front, or
index page. It gives users a first hand impression of the
library. It has to be customised:

10. MARKETING THE LIBRARY PORTAL
Marketing your site is the next most important thing
after its content. Of all the marketing “Ps”, the most
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Table 2. Meg Paul’s influence on IIML library

Meg Paul’s Philosophy of Quality Service

IIML Library’s Philosophy of Quality Service

People come first.

Always give top priority to users both internal and
external.
Users’ satisfaction level—judges the accuracy
and reliability of the information.
Think and re-think services very seriously.
Before giving wrong answers to the users,
analyse twice and its repercussion in short and
long term.

Accurate and reliable information.
Serious about our high level of service.
Cannot afford to give one wrong answer.

Accessible and easy to approach.
Always doers and hard worker.
Keep the staff working for us happy.
Service is a state of mind. People must care
and should have a desire to do it right and do it
now.

Always on our toes and proactive to respond the
best.

The client is always right.
Everyone must be thinking about how to do
his/her job better and more effectively.

Innovative ideas for effective service.
Capacity building programmes for the
information professionals at all levels.

Enthusiasm and faith are necessary to remove
barriers and increase productivity and
decrease costs.

Team work and integration in services play an
integral role in the entire system.

important for a website is promotion. After all, you want
your users to know it is there - once they do, all that effort
you have put into designing an attractive and easy-to-use
site will ensure that they keep coming back to it!
Promoting our site was vital for us, as our Intranet site
was the only way our users were able to access several
core aspects of our service, including our catalogue,
newsletter, forms and help sheets. Your site can be
promoted by:


24x7 services through telephone call, personal
meet, e-mail, chatting, etc.
Work hard to cater the best service.
Staff motivation programme and job rotation is
carried out to break the monotony of work.

Using e-mail-sending letters with a brief description
of your site, making sure that your users know what
is in it for them, and include a hot link to it.



Attending meetings and telling participants what your
site has to offer them.



Demonstrate it at the meeting, if possible, but
remember to target your audience.



Sending out and displaying printed flyers or
brochures. If you can, use the same graphics or
symbols as your site to give users advance visual
clues as to what to expect.



Grabing people in corridors, the cafeteria, the car
park.

11. TRAINING THE USERS
Once you have made them aware of your site, you
may well need to train them how to use it. Training people
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

to use an electronic service has a few surprises in store
for the unwary! Periodically training sessions or
orientation programmes should be conducted to
development awareness as well as making them acquaint
to new electronic service environment. How to effective
researching using library portal is very important question
to be addressed.

12. GYANODAY: THE LEARNING RESOURCE
CENTRE
Keeping in view the vision and mission of the IILM,
the library has been established “to promote knowledge
generation and application through its effective
dissemination”. The library acts as the main learning
resource centre of the Institute and cater services and
facilities to meet the requirements of the Institute’s
teaching, training, research and consultancy programmers. The library of IIM Lucknow characterises what the
institute stands for—accessibility, vision and excellence.
This spacious 30,000 square feet two-story library is a
repository of knowledge, both historical and current.
Students can use this 24 h facility to cement the
knowledge they have gained by gaining an insight of its
implementation. Some of the prime objectives of the IILM
library are:


To support the learning process of the PGP/FPM/
MDP students through provision of knowledge/
information.
35



To meet knowledge/information needs of the faculty,
to support their teaching activities.



To meet knowledge/information needs of the faculty
and research staff to support their research activities.



To respond effectively, where possible, to the
knowledge/information needs of the Institute’s client
systems.

12.1 Gyanoday Portal: A Virtual Gateway to
Knowledge
Gyanoday has both internal and external users. Any
bonafide user, who is registered with the Gyanoday is
rendered utmost care and service. Looking at the growing
demand from the users and frequently changing
curriculum and teaching methodology of the faculty
members, IILM has not only automated its entire
collection, which is available though OPAC and WebOPAC, but also has developed new innovative e-based
services for the users. The entire library is wi-fi enabled
allowing bonafide users to use their laptops within the wifi range. With the advent in information and
communication technology (ICT) and also to cater valueadded information services to wide range of users, a
library portal has been developed to provide the entire
collection of resources on the user’s desktop (Fig. 1). The
resources and services provided through the virtual
gateway are shown in Table 3.

13. SERVICE DELIVERY MODEL OF
GYANODAY
Taking a leaf from Michael LeBoeuf's4 international
bestseller book, How to Win Customers and Keep them

for Life, management at IIML library have put together the
following facts gathered from various stakeholders to
study their expectation levels about the information
services:
Develop a user profile: Draw up a clear picture of who the
users and what their needs are. This activity will vary from
organisation to organisation. Basically the information
services staff is looking for demographics, personal
characteristics, and the professional interests. Much of
this will be discovered as the information services staff
attempts to profile the user's information needs for journal
routing, the selective dissemination of information,
automatic announcements about new purchases, etc. At
the same time, however, staff will record or at least take
note of personal quirks or requirements or any other
information that can be used to make the information
interaction flow more smoothly. At IIML, a user profile
database based on the requirements of the internal and
external users needs and requirements has been
developed. Over the years, the library personnel have
been trained to judge users' requirements.
Look at the information services unit through the user's
eyes: The library professionals of the IIML try to
understand the service from the user's point of view to
judge their satisfaction levels and expectations levels-like
what information the user is looking for? Whether he/she
has been provided correct information? The relevancy and
timely delivery of the information is must.
Beware of promises and unrealistic expectations: Just
spell out the truth to the user. One of our failings, as
information services professionals, is that we are
frequently prone to offer results that we can not possibly

Figure 1. Gyanoday portal for 24x7 access to resources.
36

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Table 3. Information services and e-resources through
virtual gateway
In fo r m a tio n S e r v ic e s

E -R e s o u r c e s

W E B -O P A C

E -jo u rn a ls

C u rre n t c o n te n ts

E -b o o k s

C u rre n t a d d itio n s

O n lin e d a ta b a s e s

F o rth c o m in g c o n fe re n c e
a le rts

In s titu tio n a l re p o s ito ry

B ib lio g ra p h y a n d
d o c u m e n ta tio n

V id e o lib ra ry

N e w s c lip p in g s e rvic e s

V irtu a l lib ra ry

P h o to g a lle ry

L in k s to o th e r im p o rta n t
re s o u rc e s s ite s

deliver. Or, in our enthusiasm, we underestimate the
amount of work involved in a commitment to a task. The
searcher, for example, who promises a list of citations in a
couple of hours forgetting that with one of the utilities
usually searched for this particular kind of information
there are frequent downtimes, will disappoint the user. In
the information interview, the searcher, if he or she wants
to change the perceptions of the user, would be advised to
offer the search results 'as soon as possible,' in which
case, if there is no downtime, the search process looks
positively rapid, and if there is a downtime, the user won't
be disappointed in his/her expectations.
Use problems as opportunities to demonstrate just how
good the information services unit can be: According to
LeBoeuf, users judge the quality of service in two basic
ways: how well you deliver what you promise and how well
you handle exceptions and problems. From the user's
point of view, whatever clientele needs, is an 'exception' or
a 'problem' that needs to be solved. Truly effective
customer services programme rewards, more than
anything else, a staff which is able to solve problems. If
the user could find the information on his own, without any
help, he/she certainly would do so. But for him/her, this
information need is an exception to the routine work of his
professional life, a problem to be solved, and the
successful information services operation is the one that
solves it for him. When the user is left to fend for him/her,
when the information services unit in his/her organisation
cannot find what he needs, as far as he/she is concerned,
the information services unit is of no use. IIML identified
the problems and took it as a challenge to solve it, and in
the process improved the services too.
Develop a unique relationship with your users and treat
each one as someone special: One of the reasons we
work so hard, in the information services field, to establish
an understanding of our users' perceptions and
expectations is that we want to know how we can serve
them better, what their particular needs are, and how we
can address those needs. This attitude is the driving force
behind the SDI programmes. User profiles and the other
similar techniques are also being used for establishing a
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

rapport with the users. In information services, one cannot
know too much about the users' information needs, and
as we incorporate this knowledge into the customer
services programme we establish for our users, we
discover those ways in which we can treat each of the
users as 'special.' At IIML since most of the internal users
and library service providers stay in the campus, personal
attachment and sense of belongingness always exist.
Keep in touch and keep them informed: One of the
greatest problems, for many customers in the information
services environment, is that they feel 'out of touch'. They
inhibit using the information service and about
approaching the staff for assistance because they fear
appearing ignorant about what services are available in
the information services unit. They do not want to disrupt
procedures that are already in place but on the other hand
do not know what procedures are in place. They generally
avoid 'bothering' the information staff with their queries.
The best antidote to this attitude (for that's all it is, and
nothing more) is a proactive campaign on the part of the
information services manager and staff to keep all users
informed. The usual vehicles being from the information
services unit are the articles and information guidelines on
the organisation's house organ, new acquisitions lists,
brochures about services available, etc. At the same time,
the users can be made to feel special. It is appropriate for
the information services staff, as part of its profiling of
users, to give them personal 'treatment: telephone them
or send a memo (or a photocopy of a title page or an
advertisement) if a new product or service has been
acquired and might be of use to them in their work. "Keep
posted their requirements, at least their requirements", is
the clarion call being followed at IIML library.
Large part of good service is showbiz: As part of the work
we do, information services professionals not only have to
make the users feel 'special' in their interactions with the
information services unit, we want to make them feel good
as well.

14. CONCLUSION
New roles and new service paradigms and new roles
for librarians are emerging as a result of new technologies
available for information access, processing, and
transmission. Implementation of this library portal in the
IIML has brought out a sea change in the way information
is being accessed now. But research is going on to bring
out more value-added services.
There is also a convergence of roles of librarians
within the library; librarians find that they are no longer
compartmentalised into limited roles of cataloging,
serials, reference, and instruction, etc. Nowadays, a
reference librarian plays the role of instructor, and also
works closely with online acquisition records to determine
37

what items are currently on order, selects library material
for inclusion into the collection, provides reference
services, and other related roles. Developments in
information access and delivery, reference, instruction
and technology facility in electronic libraries will continue
to define the new roles for librarians. Advancements in
technology will sustain the vitality of libraries in this
electronic era and will continue to define the profile of
services to come. The planning, development and
maintenance of our Intranet site has been an ongoing
cooperative effort between us and our users. We have
encouraged this, as not only does our site provide the
service which our users need, but also they feel that they
are part-owners of the service, and its production has
become a real team effort. In turn, our service is seen as a
central part of our organisation and our profile has been
considerably enhanced.

REFERENCES
1.

Tenopir, C. Electronic publishing: Research issues
for academic librarians and users. Library Trends,
2003, 51(4), 614-35.

2.

Kebede, G. The changing information needs of users
in electronic information environments. The
Electronic Library, 2002, 20(1), 4-22.

3.

Paul, Meg. Philosophy of quality service. The usercentered revolution: 1970-1995. In Encyclopaedia of
Microcomputers, Vol. 19. New York: Marcel Dekker,
Inc., 1996. pp. 143-99. http://www2.hawaii.edu/~nahl
/articles/user/user1 toend_toc.html

4.

LeBoeuf, Michael. How to win customers and keep
them for life. Berkley Trade, USA, 2000. pp. 256 p.

About the Author

Mr Shantanu Ganguli’s string of qualifications includes BSc (Botany), MSc (Ecology and Environment),
MLIS, Postgraduate Diploma in Management, and Postgraduate Diploma in Computer Application. He
has served in reputed organisations such as Delhi University, Voluntary Health Association of India,
National Productivity Council, Tata Energy Research Institute, and Indian Institute of Management,
Lucknow. With an experience of over 16 years in the field of library and information services,
Shantanu has been a consultant to several organisations for setting up their library and information
centres. He has published several papers in national and international journals, chapters in books,
annual indexes, bibliographies, etc. Currently he holds the position of Assistant Professor (Business
Communications) and Head, Knowledge Resource Centre, Indus World School of Business (IWSB),
Greater Noida, UP.

38

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

