DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 2, March 2009, pp. 55-60
© 2009, DESIDOC

Online Databases Usage by Research Scholars
of the Aligarh Muslim University
Abdul Mannan Khan and S.M. Zaidi
Department of Library and Information Science
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh-202 002

ABSTRACT
The study endeavours to find out the level of awareness and use of online databases as well as to
ascertain research scholar’s satisfaction with the infrastructure to support accessing online databases in the
AMU campus. A well structured questionnaire was administered to the research scholars of the AMU to collect
data regarding the awareness and use of online databases. The survey reveals that most of the research
scholars are aware of the online databases availability and largely use them for their research work and to
update subject knowledge. They fully agree that with the usage of online databases, the quality of research
work improves with enrichment of appurtenant contents and materials, leading to high quality manuscript. It
is however found that the main problems faced by research scholars in using online databases are lack of
information on online databases subscribed by university on their subjects/researches. It is also noticed that
nearly 50 per cent research scholars are satisfied with the infrastructure to support accessing online databases
in the AMU campus.
Keywords: Online databases, research scholars, database usage, Aligarh Muslim University, AMU

1. INTRODUCTION
Information has become a necessity for everyone,
and everybody needs information for some purpose or the
other. Education and research activities require more and
more information. Students need it for pursuing academic
studies. Teachers also need information for imparting
education to their students, professionals like doctors,
engineers, legal advisors, etc. need information for
pursuing their professions. Besides, the researchers,
especially in the field of science and technology need
information on continuing basis and are considered the
biggest users of information. Therefore, most of the
information systems and services have been developed in
academic institutions and universities to satisfy these
requirements of the researchers.
The emergence of the Internet, particularly the World
Wide Web, as a new medium of information storage and
delivery represents a revolution, which would have a
lasting impact on the publishing and information delivery
system in the 21st century. An increasing numbers of
publishers are using the Internet as a global way to offer
their publications to the international community of
scientists, reserchers, and technologists1. A database is
Received on 27 August 2008; Revised on 17 October 2008

a computerised collection of logically related set of data
or records about something that are stored, organised or
structured in the computer. It is the collection of data or
information stored in a form that may be accessed by a
computer and also accessed by more than one user in a
way that makes it easy to retrieve needed information2.
The study endeavours to find out the level of awareness
and use of online databases by the researchers in the
Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), a central university
funded by the UGC.

2. HISTORICAL ALMANAC OF ALIGARH
MUSLIM UNIVERSITY
Aligarh Muslim University is a residential academic
institution of international repute offering about 300
courses in traditional and modern branches of education.
It is modelled on the pattern of Oxford and Cambridge
universities and situated at Aligarh, 130 km South-East of
Delhi on Delhi-Calcutta railway and Grand Trunk Road. Sir
Syed Ahmed Khan, a great reformist, felt the need for
modern education and started a school in 1875 which
later became a college under the title of Mohammadan
Anglo Oriental College, and finally, Aligarh Muslim
University in 1920 by an Act of Parliament. AMU draws
55

students from all corners of the world, especially Africa,
West Asia, and South East Asia. In some courses, seats
are reserved for students from South Asian Association for
Regional Collaboration (SAARC) and Commonwealth
countries. The university is open to all irrespective of
caste, creed, religion or sex.

3. REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Most of the institutes and universities provide online
databases to their users to support teaching, research
and development. The literature shows that online
databases with their retrieval from network capabilities,
have been gradually replacing some of their printed
counterparts. Tenopir and King3 in their book have
discussed in detail the realities of electronic journals for
scientists, librarians, and publishers. They have taken an
historical perspective, providing best factual foundation for
understanding paper journals today as well as the
potential impact of new technologies. They have shown
the direction of authorship, publishing, library and
intermediary services, as well as scientists’ information
seeking and readership patterns. They have attempted to
develop some ‘themes’ that need to be considered in the
future.
Later, Tenopir and King4 in a study carried out from
1977 through 2001 have demonstrated that scientists
continue to read widely from scholarly journals. Reading
of scholarly articles has increased to approximately 120130 articles per person per year, with engineers reading
fewer journal articles on an average, and medical faculty
reading more. A growing proportion of these readings
come from e-prints. Most scientists in a discipline now
use electronic journals at least part of the time, with
considerable variations among disciplines. Evidence
suggests that scientists are reading from a broader range
of journals than in the past, influenced by timely
electronic publishing and by growth in bibliographic
searching and interpersonal communication as means of
identifying and locating articles.
Although the scholarly journals system has changed
dramatically in the past few decades, it is evident that the
value scientists place on the information found in
scholarly journal articles, whether electronic or print,
remains high. Still later, Tenopir5, et al. have further
studied the patterns of journal use by scientists. Access
to electronic journals and articles has involved three
system phases: an early phase following introduction of
electronic journals; an evolving phase, in which a majority
of scientific journals are available in electronic format, new
features are added to some journals, and some individual
articles are made available through preprint archives,
author web sites, etc; and an advanced phase in which
searching capabilities, advanced features, and individual
articles are integrated in a complete system along with
56

full text of core journals available back to their origin. They
also provide some evidence of how scientists’ information
seeking and reading patterns are affected by using
journals in these three system phases. Readership
surveys of scientists shed some light on how the three
phases affected use, usefulness, and value of articles
read; where articles are obtained; the format of articles
read; how they were found; and the age of articles read.
Bar-Ilan6, et al. conducted an extensive survey of the
senior academic staff of the Israeli universities on their
use of electronic journals and databases. The major
findings were that the use of electronic sources is already
widespread among the respondents and more than 50 per
cent found the electronic services indispensable.
Disparities were found between the usage patterns in the
different disciplines. Coombs7conducted a case study
under the title, ‘Lesson Learned From Analysing Library
Database Usage Data’, and found that library through
examining the usage data discovered that users were
utilising particular types of resources, from specific
physical locations, and accessing these resources from
website.
Falk8 reviewed library online databases of the United
State library and described the availability of online
databases for library patrons in the USA. His major
findings were: (i) online databases are now widely
available to library patrons in the United States, and many
patrons can tap into these databases from their own
computers (ii) larger libraries and library systems can
afford to offer their own choice of databases to their
patrons through their internet web sites. This study
provides valuable information to the information
professionals.
Singh and Gautam9 under the title, Electronic
databases: The Indian Scenario, focus on access to
information through online or CD-ROM media that has
remained a challenging effort for both the user and the
intermediary. It determined that information services/
products of all kinds that are being generated by various
agencies in the government, public and private sectors
are emerging out into the Indian Information market place.
It concludes that the nature of information delivery and
consumption is changing. Modern information technology
provides easy and fast access for almost everyone to use
the ever-growing amount of stored information in
international, national or local database. It further reveals
that many of the electronic databases are being created
and made available today in India for use both within the
country and outside. Calvert10 has evaluated the impact of
electronic journals and aggregate databases on interlibrary loan activities. His findings reveal that results are
not significant enough to justify searching, borrowing
requests in aggregate databases and changing current
inter-library loan procedure for searching request before
ordering. Mercado11 has discussed in his study the
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

changes occurring in online database searching with the
advances in telecommunication, development of faster
and more powerful computers, and the improvements in
user-friendly software. The study suggests that the library
users know how to search and learn critical thinking skills
for databases and keyword selection.
Odini has reported on a comparative study carried
out at the University of Sheffield that online searches have
considerable advantages over manual sources, but
manual sources still have some qualities which make
these valuable. The study recommended that the
databases should be selected on the basis of
compromise between high recall and high precision, and
ultimately between both of these and the cost.
12

4. OBJECTIVES
Objectives of the study were:
(i)

To find out the use among research scholars about
various online databases.

environment. So we decided to conduct the study for
measuring the use of online databases by research
scholars of AMU.

7. SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
The main purpose of this study is to find out the level
of use of online databases as well as ascertain research
scholar’s satisfaction with the infrastructure supporting
online databases in the AMU campus. The investigators
faced some of major limitations such as:
(i)

The present study consists of only of online
databases used by research scholars of AMU.

(ii) The geographical area is restricted to AMU only.

8. ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION OF DATA
8.1 Use of Online Databases

(iv) To know the problems faced by research scholars in
using online databases.

It is evident from Table 1 that the majority of research
scholars are aware about J-gate, Science Direct,
INSPEC, Compendex and Medline, followed by SciFinder
Scholar (72.22 per cent), Biological Abstract (70.83 per
cent), Web of Science (56.94 per cent), EBSCO
Databases (54.16 per cent) and MathSci Net (47.22 per
cent) databases. However, it is found from the analysis
that J-gate, Science Direct, INSPEC, Compendex and
Medline are most popular databases among the research
scholars of the purported university.

(v)

8.2 Purpose and Use of Online Databases

(ii) To assess the purpose and frequency of use of online
databases.
(iii) To examine the method of search and access of
online databases.

To ascertain research scholars satisfaction with the
infrastructure to support accessing online databases
in the AMU campus.

5. METHODOLOGY EMPLOYED
A set of well-structured questionnaire was developed
in the light of above objectives. This method was also
preferred as it is less time consuming and economical for
a scattered population. The total population size of
research scholars of AMU was 970. The selected
population for the study was only the research scholars
from science, technology and medical-based disciplines.
The questionnaires were personally distributed to the
research scholars in the month of May 2008. Out of 80
distributed questionnaires, 72 duly filled up were received
back showing overall response rate of 90 per cent. The
collected data were analysed, classified and tabulated by
employing statistical methods.

6. NEED AND SIGNIFICANCE
In the present era of information explosion more and
more publications are becoming web-enabled. The
environment is rapidly changing to electronic
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

As regards the purpose and use of on-line databases,
it is discernible from Table 2 that the research scholars
(94.44 per cent) mainly make use of on-line databases for
their research work followed by subject knowledge (84.72
per cent) and for career development (2.22 per cent)
respectively.
Table1. Awareness about online databases

Online Databases
Science Direct
Web of Science
Compendex
Medline
Biological Abstract
J-gate
SciFinder Scholar
INSPEC
MathSci Net
EBSO Databases
Any Other

Number of
Respondents
69
41
58
54
51
70
52
61
34
39
0

Percentage
95.83
56.94
80.55
75
70.83
97.22
72.22
84.72
47.22
54.16
0.00

(Multiple answers were permitted)

57

Table 2. Purpose of use of online databases
Purpose

Number of
respondents

Percentage

Research Work
Update Subject Knowledge
For Career Development

68
61
52

94.44
84.72
72.22

8.3 Frequency of Use of Online Databases
Figure 1 shows that largest percentage of the
research scholars i.e. (72.22 per cent) use on-line
databases daily, whereas very few research scholars
(15.27) use 2-3 times a week and weekly (12.5 per cent).
However, it is interesting to note that not a single research
scholar reported that he/she uses these sources
occasionally.

8.4 Place of Use of Online Databases
Table 3 reveals that majority of research scholars
(70.83 per cent) use online databases in departmental
lab, followed by computer centre (33.33 per cent) and
central library (23.6 per cent). The research scholars
reported that most of the online databases are not
accessed in library; it is accessed in either departmental
lab or computer centre. The researchers feel that the
license of access to online databases has been given to
departmental lab by the librarian for its maximum
utilisation.

8.5 Method of Search and Access of Online
Databases
Table 4 shows that a high percentage of research
scholars (84.72 per cent) search and access online

Frequency of Use of Online
Databases
Daily

13% 0%

2-3 times a
week

15%

Weekly
72%

Occasionally

Figure 1. Frequency of use of online databases.
Table 3. Place of use of online databases
Place of use of
online databases
Central library
Departmental lab
Computer centre
58

Number of
respondents
17
51
24

Percentage
23.61
70.83
33.33

Table 4. Method of search and access of online databases

Method of search
and access
Links through library
website
Links through
publisher website
Links through search
engines
Direct Links through
online databases

Number of
respondents
41

Percentage

02

2.77

55

76.38

61

84.72

56.94

(Multiple answers were permitted)

databases directly, followed by links through search
engines (76.38 per cent) and links through library website
(56.94 per cent). Links through publisher website receives
low priority.

8.6 Problems Faced by Research Scholars in
Using Online Databases
Table 5 shows that the main problem faced by
research scholars in using online databases is not many
online databases subscribed by university on their
subjects/researches constituting (45.83 per cent),
whereas no assistance is provided by Information
Professional constitutes (29.16 per cent), coverage of
online databases is not suited to their researches, is
(13.88 per cent) and Limited number of terminals, is
(11.11 per cent) are other problems faced by the research
scholars.
Table 5. Problems faced by research scholars in using
online databases
Problems faced by
Number of
research scholars
respondents
Not many online databases
33
subscribed by university on
my subject/research
10
Coverage of online databases
is not suited to my research
No assistance provide by
21
information professional
Limited access of terminals
08

Percentage
45.83

13.88
29.16
11.11

8.7 Level of Satisfaction with the Infrastructure
to support accessing Online Databases
As far as the level of satisfaction of research scholars
with the infrastructure to support accessing online
databases in the AMU campus are concerned, it is
discernible from Fig. 2 that 48.61 per cent research
scholars are ‘satisfied’ with infrastructure to support
accessing online databases, whereas 29.16 per cent are
neither satisfied nor dissatisfied. At the same time, 13.88
per cent are ‘dissatisfied’. In case of high-level
satisfaction and dissatisfaction only 5.55 per cent are
‘highly satisfied’ and 2.77 per cent are ‘highly
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

60
48.61

Percentage

50
40

29.16

30
20
10

13.88
5.55

2.77

0
Highly
Satisfied

Satisfied

Average

Dissatisfied

Highly
Dissatisfied

Figure 2. Level of satisfaction with the infrastructure to support accessing online databases.

dissatisfied’. On the whole, it can be deduced that the
infrastructure to support accessing online databases in
the AMU campus is good because nearly 50 per cent
research scholars are found to be satisfied.

9. FINDINGS
It is felt from the analysis that majority of research
scholars are aware about J-gate, Science Direct,
INSPEC, Compendex and Medline. The research
scholars are mainly found to have been making use of
online databases for their research work and to update
their subject knowledge. It is also seen that largest
percentage of the research scholars make use of online
databases daily. Majority of research scholars use online
databases in departmental lab whereas use of online
databases in central library is very low. It is further found
from analysis that a high percentage of research scholars
search and access online databases directly and by links
through online databases and search engines whereas
links through publisher website receives low priority.
The study identifies that the main problem faced by
the research scholars in using online databases are lack
of online databases subscribed by university on science
and technology as well as social sciences. It is noticed
that nearly 50 per cent research scholars are satisfied
with the infrastructure to support accessing online
databases in the AMU campus.

10. SUGGESTIONS
In order to strengthen the research activity in the
university, it is suggested that more online databases
need to be subscribed these are also the research
scholar’s expectations. Feedback should be sought from
the research scholars and the services need to be
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

evaluated to decide their utility. University should invest
more in online databases such as Web of Science,
Science Citation Index, and Social Science Citation
Index, etc. If, it is facing lack of funds, a charter of demand
should be put before UGC in 11 Plan or also through
special and development grants.
The need and use of information are two faces of the
same coin. The need is always expressed with the
purpose of use. Therefore, in information technology era
the research scholars need should be accorded priority,
and to know and identify the need, use evaluation studies
should be conducted, which will facilitate creation of
research oriented products and services.

11. CONCLUSION
The study is confined to awareness and use of online
databases in AMU in Uttar Pradesh. From the findings of
this study and the personal observation and knowledge of
researchers, several major conclusions can be drawn. It
was noticed that nearly 50 per cent research scholars are
satisfied with the infrastructure to support accessing
online databases in the AMU campus. But it also
identifies that the main problem faced by research
scholars in using online databases are inadequate online
databases subscribed by university on their subjects/
researches. The important issue is more financial
assistance for online databases. Although the University
is a member of UGC-Infonet Consortia and INSPEC for
accessing online databases and journals, but it is not
enough to fulfill the needs of the research scholars.
Therefore, it is recommended that AMU should join
Consortia’s both at national and international level to
share the electronic information resources and services.
In order to increase the use of online resources by the
AMU users, it is recommended that frequent “information
59

literacy” programmes should be conducted by the library
to educate the users on the effective use of internet and eresources.

REFERENCES
1.

Rowley, Jennifer. The question of electronic journal.
Edge Hill University College. UK, 2000.

2.

Xie, H.I. Online IR system evaluation: Online
databases versus web search engines. Online
Inform. Rev., 2004, 8(3), 211-219.

3.

Tenopir, Carol & King, Donald. Towards electronic
journal: Realities for scientists, librarians and
publishers. In Specials Library Association,
Washington D.C., 2000. pp 488.

4.

Tenopir, Carol & King Donald. Reading behaviour and
electronic journals. Learned Publishing, 2002, 15(4),
259-65.

5.

Tenopir, Carol, et al. Pattern of journal use by
scientists through three evolutionary phases. D-Lib
Magazine, 2003, 9(5).

6.

Bar-Ilan & Peritz, B.C. A Survey on the use of
electronic databases and electronic journals

accessed through the web by the academic staff of
Israeli universities. J. Acad. Librarian., 2003, 29(6),
346-61.
7.

Commbs, K.A. Lessons learned from analyzing
library database usage data. Library Hi-Tech, 2005,
19(3), 598-609.

8.

Falk, H. State library databases on the internet. The
Electronic Library, 2005, 23(4), 492-98.

9.

Singh, Anil & Gautam, J.N. Electronic databases:
The Indian scenario. The Electronic Library, 2004,
22(3), 249-60.

10. Calvert, H. M. The impact of electronic journals and
aggregate database on interlibrary loan: A case study
at Ball state university libraries. New Library World,
2000, 101(1153), 28-31.
11. Mercado, H. Library instruction and online database
searching. Reference Services Review, 1999, 27(3),
259-65.
12. Odini, M. The performance of manual indexes and
online databases in information retrieval. OCLC
Systems & Services, 1997, 13(1), 21-24.

About the Authors

Mr Abdul Mannan Khan is currently a senior research scholar in the Department of Library and
Information Science, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. He has been awarded P.N. Kaula-Basheeruddin
Medal. He has to his credit five articles published in different journals and conference proceedings.
Mr S.M. Zaidi is currently Head of the Department of Library and Information Science, Aligarh
Muslim University, Aligarh. He has to his credit research papers, books, and has participated in
a number of conferences and workshops.

60

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

