DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 2, March 2009, pp. 61-66
© 2009, DESIDOC

Advanced Applications of Data Warehousing
Using 3-tier Architecture
Praveen Sharma
Deptt of M.B.A (Systems) and Engg. Chemistry
Venkteshwar Institute of Technology, Indore-453 331
E-mail: praveen.s.sharma@email.com

ABSTRACT
Organisations be it industry or business or even educational institutes, need to improve their information
inventory system so as to survive in the competitive environment. The organisations have to increase their
efficiency and effectiveness in maintaining the cycle of activities, in their planning, decision-making processes,
and analytical needs. There are several ways to acquire this goal; one of it is with data mining which is able
to make a prediction using existing data in their database in order to forecast future demand. In addition, with
data mining they would be able to determine which activity is more important and what trend is prevailing.
An information system, which is based on both World Wide Web technology and a 3-tiered architecture, is
proposed herein to meet the above requirements. This paper is an attempt to provide the initial concept about
data mining model that most likely will be used in various department including libraries of the teaching institutes.
The initial concepts covered by the paper are the appropriate data warehouse schema; data mining tasks and
techniques that are best suited, and applications.
Keywords: OLAP, OLTP, data warehouse, dashboard, data mart

1. INTRODUCTION
Data warehousing is an algorithm and a tool to collect
the data from different sources and to store it in a single
repository to facilitate the decision-making process.
According to W. H. Inmon1, a leading architect in the
construction of data warehouse systems, a data
warehouse is a subject-oriented, integrated, time-variant,
and non-volatile collection of data in support of
management’s decision-making process.
This short, but comprehensive definition presents the
major features of a data warehouse. The four keywords—
subject-oriented, integrated, time-variant, and nonvolatile—distinguish data warehouses from other data
repository systems such as relational database systems,
transaction processing systems, and file systems.
Subject-oriented: A data warehouse is organised around
major subjects, such as customer, vendor, product, and
sales. Rather than concentrating on the day-to-day
operations and transaction processing of an organisation,
a data warehouse focuses on the modelling and analysis
of data for decision makers. Hence, data warehouses
Received on 1 September 2008

typically provide a simple and concise view around
particular subject issues by excluding data that are not
useful in the decision-support process.
Integrated: A data warehouse is usually constructed by
integrating multiple heterogeneous sources such as
relational databases and online transaction records. Data
cleaning and data integration techniques are applied to
ensure consistency in naming conventions, encoding
structures, attribute measures, and so on.
Time variant: Data are stored to provide information from
a historical perspective (e.g., the past 5-10 years).Every
key structure in the data warehouse contains, either
implicitly or explicitly, an element of time.
Non-volatile: A data warehouse is always a physically
separate store of data transformed from the application
data found in the operational environment. Due to this
separation, a data warehouse does not require
transaction processing, recovery, and concurrency
control mechanisms. It usually requires only two
operations in data accessing: initial loading of data and
access of data.
61

Data warehousing provides an interesting alternative
to the traditional approach of heterogeneous database
integration described above. Rather than using a querydriven approach, data warehousing employs an updatedriven approach in which information from multiple,
heterogeneous sources is integrated in advance and
stored in a warehouse for direct querying and analysis.
Major libraries have large collections and circulation.
Managing libraries electronically has resulted in the
creation and management of large library databases. The
interconnection of libraries and sharing resources across
libraries has resulted in the management of very large
databases. Most large and/or multinational industries
worldwide have exploited such opportunities by applying
data warehouse technology to their data repositories to
discover knowledge that had helped them to gain
competitive advantage through decision making. The
same can be done for libraries using the available large
databases. This paper identifies how the data warehouse
technology could assist libraries to discover knowledge
and improve services.

2. OPERATIONAL DATABASE SYSTEM
VERSUS DATA WAREHOUSES
Since most people are familiar with commercial
relational database systems, it is easy to understand
what a data warehouse is by comparing these two kinds
of systems. The major task of online operational database
systems is to perform online transaction and query
processing. These systems are called online transaction
processing (OLTP) systems, and cover most of the dayto-day operations of an organisation such as purchasing,
inventory, manufacturing, banking, payroll, registration,
and accounting.
Data warehouse systems, on the other hand, serve
users or\knowledge workers in the role of data analysis
and decision making. Such systems can organise and
present data in various formats in order to accommodate
the diverse needs of the different users. These systems
are known as online analytical processing (OLAP)
systems. The major distinguishing features between
OLTP and OLAP are:
(i)

OLAP system manages large amounts of historical
data, provides facilities for summarisation and
aggregation, and stores and manages information at
different levels of granularity. These features make
the data easier for use in informed decision making.
(iii) Database design: An OLTP system usually adopts
an entity-relationship (ER) data model and an
application-oriented database design. An OLAP
system typically adopts either a star or snowflake
model and a subject-oriented database design.
(iv) View: An OLTP system focuses mainly on the
current data within an enterprise or department,
without referring to historical data or data in different
organisations. In contrast, an OLAP system often
spans multiple versions of a database schema, due
to the evolutionary process of an organisation. OLAP
systems also deal with information that originates
from different organisations, integrating information
from many data stores. Because of their huge
volume, OLAP data are stored on multiple storage
media.
(v)

Access patterns: The access patterns of an OLTP
system consist mainly of short, atomic transactions.
Such a system requires concurrency control and
recovery mechanisms. However, accesses to OLAP
systems are mostly read-only operations (since
most data warehouses store historical rather than upto-date information), although many could be
complex queries. Other features which distinguish
between OLTP and OLAP systems include database
size, frequency of operations, and performance
metrics.

3. THE 3-TIER ARCHITECTURE
The data warehousing has three-tier architecture
(Fig. 1). The first-tier is known as the extraction and
transformation tier. The second-tier is known as middle or
connective tier, and the third-tier is known as data access
and retrieval tier.

3.1 Extraction and Transformation Tier

Users and system orientation: An OLTP system is
customer-oriented and used for normal transaction
like issue of book, and query processing by
librarians, teachers, and information technology
professionals. An OLAP system is more of planning
and decision-making oriented and is primarily used
by knowledge workers including managers,
executives, and analysts.

The extraction is the process of refining the data that
is collected from the different sources like internal
database of the organisation, external databases from
various departments of the institute, other leading
educational libraries in the city, etc. Two methods can be
used for the extraction of the data from sources, viz., bulk
extraction and change-based extraction.

(ii) Data contents: An OLTP system manages current
data that, typically, are too detailed and used to run
the day-to-day business of the institution library. An

The entire process of extracting data from multiple
sources, transforming it into a unique standard format and
finally the loading into the warehouse is referred as

62

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Meta Data
Multidimensional
View of Data

Client

Warehouse Data

Application/Datamart Server

DW Server

Figure 1. Three-tier architecture of data warehouse.

extraction, transformation and loading (ETL) process. The
transformation tolls helps in transforming the data in to a
particular format after extraction and before loading it in to
the warehouse.
Client


GUI/presentation logic



Query specification



Data analysis



Report formatting



Data access

Application/Data Mart Server

4. APPLICATIONS
The implementation of projects using inappropriate
technology has become a common practice. More often
than not, these projects end up with for lack of a better
term, confused systems as they meet some needs but
not others. The thing that keeps these systems alive is
the substantial investments of time and money. Even
than, after a while the money stops playing a role and
these systems end up ignored or replaced. To ensure that
data warehousing endeavours to not suffer the same fate,
it’s important to recognise where it makes sense to
implement them. The type of database architecture that
has recently emerged is data warehouse, which is a
repository of multiple heterogeneous data sources,
organised under a unified schema at a single site in order
to facilitate management decision-making2,3. The data
warehousing makes sense in two primary areas:
operational, and business intelligence applications.



Summarising



Filtering



Meta data



Multidimensional view

4.1 Operational Applications



Data access

Contrary to popular belief, successful data
warehouses are utilised for operational applications.
Library cards and usage reporting applications seem to
be the first operational applications to take advantage of
real-time data warehousing at places such as digital
libraries. To keep up with the library cards and usage
volumes, the libraries should focus from night batching
jobs to real-time or near real-time data processing. Data
warehouses are the natural choice for this type of
processing as aggregation and fast retrieval of large
amounts of data is what they do best.

DW Server


Data logic



Data services



Metadata



File services

3.2 Connective Tier
Data source rules and the programs applied for the
transformation, the data structure and contents are all
members of the meta data, which is known as data about
data. In the middle tier within the meta data, data
warehouse is a single and central repository of the
enterprise wide data of all possible subject areas.

3.3 Data Access and Retrieval Tier
OLAP tool allows the user to generate queries
against the warehouse database while reporting tool
helps to produce canned, graphic intensive, sophisticated
reports. The non-trivial extraction of actionable knowledge
from datasets is known as data mining.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Can a library grow up to a terabyte of data? In most
cases it does not as even the storage space of computers
used by most libraries are not in this range. Let us
perform a calculation to determine the storage
requirements for a library. If a catalogue consists of 200
characters it would use 200 kilobytes of data. If there are
1 million items then the storage requirement would be 200
million kB or 200 GB. If a library has 50,000 members with
each taking 200 kilobytes then the storage requirement
would be 10 GB. If a circulation record is using 40 bytes
per item and if 1000 item borrowing happens per day then
the storage requirement would be 40 kB. Over a year this
would accumulate to about 10 GB. Thus the total storage
63

requirement to manage electronic transactions will not fall
under the very large database category. Digital libraries,
also called electronic libraries, are being widely adopted
across many libraries and thus have moved from relatively
few people’s research interests to a wider application and
use. Digital libraries have integrated different information
sources and increased the use of information. Functions
of a library have grown beyond maintaining books,
magazines, and newspapers. Many libraries also provide
CD/video lending, and online searching, reservations and
browsing e-journals. Certain universities and libraries have
even moved beyond this level and provide full-text books,
multimedia manuscripts, and periodicals4. Newspapers
and technical documents are also available on the web
along with their print edition. Education is now moving
towards electronic learning environment5 and digital
libraries will play a major role in achieving it. A recent
development in the field is the step by IIM, Indore, to
interconnect all the libraries in Indore. Following are
among the benefits digital libraries would bring to the
libraries in particular and society in general6:


There will not be any boundaries in the distribution
and dissemination of information.



The performance of a library would increase
immensely while accessibility to all kinds of items
being provided through a single workstation located
anywhere.



Although dealing with more people and information,
the administrative overheads will be very minimal as
computers do most of the tasks without any human
intervention.

Data of a digital library should be organised in a
manner in which it could be analysed later. Classification
of data according to identified characteristics is one way
of achieving it. Classification will allow grouping of
discrete values such as by subject of a book. However,
estimation would be required to deal with continuous
values such as age groups of borrowers. Classified and
estimated data could be used to predict future behaviours
and decision making could be done accordingly.
Membership characteristics such as disability, ethnic
group income group, and social characteristics could help
to determine affinity groups. Services offered could target
such groups. For example, reduced membership fees or
special facilities may be offered to different affinity groups
to ensure that they are not neglected. Clustering is
another technique used to effectively organise information
by segmenting a heterogeneous population into a number
of more homogeneous sub-groups or clusters. Clustering
differs from classification as it is based on self-similarity
than predefined classes. For example, one may group
books based on author or publisher due to the high
probability of such books falling into the same group.
64

Referencing of the required information form the large
amount of redundant information available in a library can
be reduced using mining techniques. Searching through
classification of content of the library and acquisition of
books through data mining knowledge are among the
main benefits that a library would gain through the
management of large databases and data warehousing.
A library application would manage catalogues using
the database technology. Such applications are referred
to as e-catalogue. The entries in an e-catalogue are
reusable since a user could search for a catalogue entry
not only by author name but also by any other data field
such as title and publisher. Library application packages
such as LibSys and CDS/ISIS have enabled effective
management of e-catalogues. Other operational
applications include inventory management and service
provisioning, to mention a few. Many businesses have
moved to just-in-time inventory. Once provisioned for
some service, the billing clock starts ticking, so tracking
when the service was provisioned is significant. The
temporal element is the common denominator for
operational applications that can benefit from real-time
data warehousing. The complex analysis in the library
system can be easily done by using the multidimensional data. To facilitate complex analyses and
visualisation, the data in a warehouse is typically
modelled multi-dimensionally. For example, in a library
data warehouse, time of borrowing, borrower’s district,
age group and book category might be some of the
dimensions of interest (Fig. 2). Often, these dimensions
are hierarchical, e.g., time of borrowing may be organised
as a day-month-quarter-year hierarchy.

4.2 Business Intelligence Applications
A decision support system (DSS) is a tool used to
improve the process of decision-making in complex

Figure 2. A Multi-dimensional data cube.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

systems. A DSS can range from a system that answer
simple queries and allows a subsequent decision to be
made, to a system that employ artificial intelligence and
provides detailed querying across a spectrum of related
datasets. Amongst the most important application areas
of DSS are those complicated systems that directly
“answer” questions, in particular high level “what-if”
scenario modeling. Over the last decade there was a
transition to decision support using data warehouses7.
The data warehouse environment is more controlled and
therefore more reliable for decision support than the
previous methods. The data warehouse environment
supports the entire decision support requirements by
providing high-quality information, made available by
accurate and effective cleaning routines and using
consistent and valid data transformation rules and
documented pre-summarisation of data values. It
contains one single source of accurate, reliable
information that can be used for analysis. Most large and/
or multinational industries worldwide have already applied
data warehouse technology to their data repositories and
have discovered knowledge to gain competitive advantage
through decision making. Thus researchers in libraries
are trying to do the same to discover similar
opportunities8-11. For instance, a decision like “on which
books should a library invest to serve their members
better?” could be made after such discovery.
One of the current trends in business intelligence is
the implementation of corporate dashboards. The
sophistication of corporate dashboards is quite broad and
ranges from a report that lists several key performance
indicators (KPIs) to dashboards that mimic the look and
feel of automobile dashboards right down to the round
gauges with needles that fluctuate in real time.
Timeliness of the dashboards is driven by the data
freshness in the data warehouse. Dashboards that
display real-time data activity typically have a real-time
data warehouse behind them. The kind of information
reported by these dashboards is as varied as the
dashboards themselves. Financial information typically
takes first dibs followed by trend and operational
information. Financial information includes up-to-date
revenue, current exchange and interest rates, and stock
prices to mention a few KPIs. Trend reports typically
display KPIs across some pre-defined timeframe such as
rolling 24 hr view, while operational KPIs can include
equipment utilisation rates.
Customer relationship management (CRM) business
intelligence is an area that has been getting quite a bit of
attention and where real-time capability is a value- add,
especially in a web environment. The Internet is definitely
an area that can and should reap the benefits of real-time
data warehousing. Clickstream data generates
substantial transaction volumes that, in popular sites, can
easily eclipse credit card transaction volumes. These
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

data volumes alone justify having real-time data
warehousing. From a business intelligence perspective,
for clickstream data to make sense, it has to be
aggregated into predefined buckets to allow for click
activity analysis. Once again, data warehousing is the
natural choice for this type of processing.

5. CONCLUSION
Digital libraries have emerged over the last decade
and are being used beyond the research community and
selected institutions. Libraries should prepare to exploit
these digital collections for decision-making and provide
services to suit the digital society. This can be facilitated
by using the three tier architecture of data warehousing.
This three-tier approach has several advantages as the
data mining services can control the number of
connections to the warehouse as well as the number of
statements currently executed by the database system.
The middle tier can control the number and kind of data
mining tasks that are processed in parallel. This enables
the system to incense the usage of system resources for
data mining purposes, especially bandwidth and CPU
cycles. Second, the system can service users according
to their priority and membership in user groups. This
includes restricted access to data mining tables as well
as user specific response behavior. Third, a wide range of
optimisation strategies can be realised. The tasks of the
data mining services can be distributed over the client and
the middle tier. The middle tier can exploit parallelism by
parallel processing on the middle tier hardware and
parallel connections to the database layer. Additionally,
the data mining services can re-use the outcome of data
mining sessions and pre-compute common intermediate
results. In summary, the main advantage of three-tier
architecture is that mining can be done in a controlled and
manageable way for multiple users. Data warehousing
systems have become a key component of information
technology architecture. A flexible enterprise data
warehouse strategy can yield significant benefits for a
long period.

REFERENCES
1.

Inmon, W.H. Buliding the dataware house. QED
Technical
Publishing
Group,
Wellesley,
Massachutusetts.

2.

Chaudhuri, S. & Dayal U. An overview of data
warehousing and OLAP technology. SIGMOD
Record 26:1, 1997, March 65-74.

3.

Han, J. & Kamber, M. Data mining concepts and
techniques, edited by Morgan Kaufmann, V.
Harinarayan, A. Rajaraman, J.D.Ulman. In
Implementing Data Cubes Efficiently. Proceedings of
SIGMOD Record, 25(2), 205-16.
65

4.

Chen, H. The Illinois digital library initiative project:
Federating repositories and semantic research.
Available at http://ai.bpa.arizona.edu/hchen/docs/
DLI/

Data Mining Concepts and Techniques, Master of
Science Thesis, University of Florida, 2002.
8.

Wikramanayake, G.N. Impact of digital technology
on education, In Proceedings of 24th National
Information Technology Conference, Computer
Society of Sri Lanka, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 15-16
August 2005, 82-91.

Guenther, K. Applying data mining principles to
library data collection. Computers in Libraries, 20(4),
60-63.

9.

Baruque, C.B. & Melo, R.N. Developing digital
libraries using data warehousing and data mining
techniques, Available at http://www.pgl.ufl.edu/
events/pgl2/CBaruque/digital_libraries.pdf

6.

Source Book on Digital Libraries, TR 93-35, edited by
E. A. Fox. Dept. of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
University, 1993. Available at http://fox.cs.vt. edu/
DigitalLibrary/DLSB.pdf.

10. Dwivedi, R.K. & Bajpai, R.P. Use of data mining in the
field of library and information science: An
overview. 2004.

7.

Inmon, W.H. Building the data warehouse, 3rd
Edition, Wiley. Needamangala, A. A Library Decision
Support System Built on Data Warehousing and

11. Prakash, K.; Chand, P. & Gohel, U. Application of
data mining in library and information services. In 2nd
Convention PLANNER-2004, Manipur Uni., Imphal, 45 November 2004.

5.

66

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

