DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 2, March 2009, pp. 75-81
© 2009, DESIDOC

Future of Library and Information Centres in Knowledge Society
of India: The Expected Role of Knowledge Professionals
R.S.R. Varalakskhmi
Department of Library & Information Science
Andhra University, Vishakhapatnam-530 003
E-mail: rvsn1234@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
The emerging trends in digital technologies and their applicability to information handling activities added
new challenges to knowledge professionals in the way of providing qualitative services to its users. The paper
analyses the characteristics of contemporary knowledge society and identified the factors affecting next
generation libraries. Examined some of the significant issues in the present day Library and Information System
(LIS) like its structure, collection strategy, preservation, access to information, technological issues and modes
of communication, etc. It has identified the central role of knowledge professional, in the organisation and
dissemination of knowledge, striking a balance of physical and virtual realms.
Keywords: Knowledge society, future of libraries, knowledge professional, knowledge dissemination

1. INTRODUCTION

2. KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY

In the changing scenario of information environment
the knowledge professionals have to be more interactive,
collaborative and dynamic so that information can be
made available to all those who seek it regardless of
physical boundaries, formats, and time constraints. The
emerging trends in digital technologies and their
applicability to information handling activities added new
challenges to knowledge professionals.

In the 21st century, a new society is coming into
existence where knowledge is the primary factor of
production compared to capital and labour. Dr APJ Abdul
Kalam, former President of India in his talks to students
mentioned that1 “Efficient utilisation of existing knowledge
can create comprehensive wealth for the nation and also
improve the quality of life including better education,
health care, infrastructure and other societal needs. The
ability to create and maintain a knowledge society
infrastructure, develop the knowledge workers, and
enhance their productivity through the creation, growth,
and exploitation of new knowledge, will be the key factors
in deciding the prosperity of this knowledge society.
Whether or not a nation has developed into a knowledge
society is judged by the way it creates and deploys
knowledge in all the three sectors of the economy,
namely, Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services.”

They have to deal with a growing number of contexts
for information like e-commerce, competition intelligence
as well as the information needs of ordinary citizens. At
the same time they, are expected to deal with the needs
of the digital divide, the information poor and the illiterate.
Between the rich and the poor, the haves and the
have-nots, demanding business related needs and
survival needs, wireless access and lack of basic
electricity supplies, knowledge professionals must see
how well they can meet the requirements.
They have to foresee their continuing role in
contributing to the development of informed citizens,
incorporating and utilising new technologies that enhance
their endeavours. At the same time they should strike a
balance between the traditional role and the new roles.
Received on 24 November 2008

In knowledge society, knowledge forms a major
component of any human activity as a major creative force
and centre of economy. The developments in
technologies have facilitated the access and utilisation of
knowledge more effectively than before. Knowledge
environment facilitates collaborative knowledge building
and decision making. According to Wikipedia2 the
important features of knowledge society are:
75



With current technologies, knowledge societies need
not be constrained by geographic proximity.



The way people access information – from traditional
library visit to network access from place of his
convenience.



Current technology offers much more possibilities for
sharing, archiving and retrieving knowledge.



With the convergence of computer technology and
telecommunication, the digital media has overtaken
print media. There is rapid movement of technologies
towards nano storage and real-time access.



The transition of libraries from information storage
and retrieval to information facilitators and
aggregators. Instead of ownership of information the
present generation gives importance to access to
information.



From information precious library environment to
vast, readily and to some extent freely available
information society.



Libraries are going for consortia rather than standalone which made possible to have access to more
number of journals in science and arts.



Availability of full-text databases through
digitalisation helped to have open access to
information rather than closed access.



Therefore, in the new society the Library and
Information Centres (LICs) have to play role of facilitator
and aggregator and the information professionals have to
be adaptable and multi-skilled in order to survive in an
environment of constant and rapid change.

Collaboration made it possible for global access to
information. Now information can be accessed 24x7
instead of fixed hours.



The changing methods of information search, today it
is text or touch, but next generation search
technology is ought to include reflectivity, density,
tone, speed, and volume.5

3. FACTORS AFFECTING NEXT GENERATION
LIBRARIES:CHANGING PARADIGM



In this new information environment the user is
considered as consumer of knowledge.



Knowledge has become the most important capital in
the present age, and hence the success of any
society lies in harnessing it.

National Knowledge Commission (NKC) recognised
that access to knowledge is essential and stated,
“Access is one of the most fundamental issues in a
knowledge society.” NKC in its observation about
libraries3 stated that:


Library and information services are fundamental to
the goals of creating, disseminating, optimally
utilising and preserving knowledge.



Libraries are instrumental in transforming an unequal
society into an egalitarian, progressive knowledge
society.



Developments in information communication
technology (ICT) have enabled libraries to provide
access to all, and also bridge the gap between the
local, the national and the global knowledge.

The speed of present day microprocessors,
decreasing size of storage media and moving towards
nano storage, global access to Internet, increasing speed
of search engines in searching and retrieving information,
efficient computing devices have influenced the quality
and quantity of data which can be accessed from
anywhere at any time. Libner4 in his vision for the 2012
Library has described:
“we move from a single library to a network of
libraries; from one collection to distributed collections;
from the catalog interface to multiple interfaces; from
books and journals to information fields and streams
encompassing traditional and non-traditional forms of
scholarly communication. These include such diverse
forms and genres as preprints, traditional publications,
informal commentary, data sets, software applications,
maps, video clips, listserv archives, and web pages – all
accessible, at least in principle, anytime and anywhere.”
Some of the factors, which contributed to the growth of
next generation libraries are:
76

Thus digital revolution and networked environment
made the libraries without walls where data and
information can now be transmitted to all corners of the
world, and also accessed without geographical
restrictions. Now information is just like any other
commodity, which can be bought and sold in the market
place. Libraries have also started applying business
techniques such as ISO 9001:2000, re-engineering, Six
Sigma, etc. to manage the libraries. Here service motto is
takenover by business practices as libraries are looking
forward for income generation.

4. LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS IN
CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY—KEY ISSUES
Some of the significant issues in the present day
Library and Information System (LIS) are mostly
concerned with its structure, collection strategy,
preservation, access to information, technological issues
and modes of communication, etc.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

4.1 Buildings
During medieval times the main concern was
preservation of information, which required huge
monumental structures. Later preservation gave way to
dissemination of information and services to the user,
which lead to the functional buildings where holdings
comprised books, journals, newspapers, magazines,
audio- and video-cassettes, and compact disks. In an
automated environment further modifications were made
in space for computers. In the contemporary digital
environment the holdings are accessible to multiple users
from multiple workstations 24x7 that made ‘libraries
without walls’. This emerging ‘library without walls’ is
often described as existing in a space free world in which
users can search catalogues and access electronic files
at the click of a mouse on his desk top, without having to
walk through a library’s door in person.

4.2 Collections
In a traditional library the librarians had defined
collection development policy about the type of collection
to be maintained, but in the digital environment it is not
so. From the plethora of information available on the
Internet and the World Wide Web, what to be selected
and maintained is an important issue. The emergence of
e-publishing, self-publishing, open access publishing,
etc. further complicated the collection building policies.
Some of these new tools are described here:
E-publishing: Electronic publishing takes the format of
works published online, on a compact disk, e-mailed, or
provided in a file format compatible with hand-held
electronic readers. E-publishing is an alternate form of
publication, especially attractive to new writers, and
provides wider dissemination
Self-publishing: According to Wikipedia, “Selfpublishing is the publishing of books and other media by
the authors of those works, rather than by established,
third-party publishers6. Although it represents a small
percentage of the publishing industry in terms of sales, it
has been present in one form or another since the
beginning of publishing and has seen an increase in
activity with the advancement of publishing technology,
including xerography, desktop publishing systems, print
on demand, and the World Wide Web. Cultural
phenomena such as the punk/DIY movement, the
proliferation of media channels, and blogging have
contributed to the advancement of self-publishing.”
Open access publishing: It is the publication of material
to make it available to all potential users without financial
or other barriers. Many types of works can be published in
this manner. These include scholarly journals, known
specifically as open access journals, magazines and
newsletters, e-text or other e-books (whether scholarly,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

literary, or recreational), music, fine arts, or any product of
intellectual activity. Those publishing methods have


Enhanced existing modes of communication, e.g.
reduced costs, improved performance etc.



Provided alternate channels of communication that
would substitute the existing channels but would not
alter the process, e.g., journal subscription on print
and online.



Provided entirely new communication functions that
could achieve direct interactive communication at a
distance. e.g., online/e-journals

Other major changes in collection policy of
libraries are:
Access vs acquisition: The role played by librarians in
the past in providing information has changed to the one of
providing access to information. This requires the
selection of information (e.g., electronic collection,
Intranets and portals), the offering of access services to
remote users, as well as new types of tailor-made
information services. Access to a potentially informative
document depends on identifying, locating, and having
affordable physical access to it. This bring to the fore the
need for electronic document delivery services.
Licensing vs ownership: In a traditional library, the
collection is defined by physical presence and by
ownership. In the digital library, it must be defined by
access – since the items comprising the collection will
not be physically present, and will mostly be licensed
rather owned outright.
Management (user vs librarian): So far the library
professionals are managing the collections with
acquisition and organization. However, in the new
environment, the user manages his information
requirements without support from or dependence on
librarians in collection building. What they expect from
the library is to provide license for accessing paid sites.
Services: According to Drotner7 “The challenge facing the
physical libraries is intensified by the fact that many
traditional services performed there are taken over by
users of the virtual libraries. When the majority of
mundane services leave the physical library – and the
librarian’s desk – then librarians in the physical library can
downplay their functions in favour of virtual services; or
they can redefine their role from access and individual
service provision to users and facilitator of more sustained
collective learning processes.” Under such circumstance
user becomes the focus of attention and individual service
provision is a hallmark of professional competence.
Preservation (digital vs manual): Digital library has an
open architecture built on a collection of distributed
77

information repositories where the information is stored in
multiple formats which contains both metadata and data.
It provides seamless access to the heterogeneous
information sources and provides interoperability. It has
user-friendly easy-to-use interfaces and query facilities
and serves users better. The potential advantages of a
digital library over a paper library are - faster addition to
the data collection with better quality control, improved
search functionality and faster access to information
found, but also more freedom for individual users.
According to Bakker8
“Whatever may be the library environment the primary
task has always been - and will remain regardless of
changes of technology - to select, stabilise, protect, and
provide access to relevant and representative information
resources. The collection function, however, is expanding
to include a connection function. Selection is moving to
an environment in which a multiplicity of media is
available. A new facet of resource sharing is the
development of joint licensing agreements that permit
consortia of libraries to share responsibilities and costs of
providing access to electronic resources.”

4.3 Technical Issues
The changing forms and formats of knowledge have
paved way for new methods of its organisation. Copy
cataloguing, and shared cataloguing are the buzz words
today to have bibliographical control of the library
holdings. However, the technical issues involved are more
complex than it appears to be. Indeed many of the
bibliographic or full-text organisation techniques are
unfamiliar to library and information science
professionals.
Online Public Access Catalogues: A significant change
is the integration of all activities of the library together as a
coherent whole supported by library automation software.
OPAC has became a central source for many activities of
the library beyond just bibliographical control.
Metadata schemas: Further development is organising
digital and web resources using metadata schemas. The
librarians are familiar with bibliographic control, but the
schemas in HTML or XML made a known subject more
alien. In the traditional libraries, the user can consult with
the librarian, as an intermediary, to interpret the metadata
used for resource description, but in the web it is different.
The information is being provided by a wide range of
resource description communities, each with his own
metadata, and accessed through one portal.
Linking different datasets: ‘Linked data’ is a term used
to describe a recommended best practice for exposing,
sharing, and connecting pieces of data on the semantic
web. The practice emphasises web access to data using
existing web technologies such as URLs and HTTP. It
78

also emphasises links between related web resources.
Knowledge professionals not able to catch up the trends.
Institutionalisation/personalisation–portals: Portals
are a framework for integrating information, people and
processes across organisational boundaries, which
provide secure unified access point in the form of a webbased user interface, and are designed to aggregate and
personalise information.

4.4 Organisational Issues
Information professionals design and develop
knowledge products and services that promote learning
and awareness. Their tasks include the representation of
the various kinds of organisational knowledge; developing
methods and systems of structuring and accessing
knowledge; knowledge distribution and delivery;
amplifying the usefulness and value of knowledge; and
knowledge storage and retrieval.
Under the contemporary information society
improved means of communication and delivery have
forced libraries to pay more attention to collaboration as
an important element. This has led to increasing national
and international cooperation between libraries to improve
and accelerate inter-library document/information
access. However, in spite of the collaborative attempts,
most of the information in electronic form relies on
licensing for access by libraries. The combined buying
power of a consortium provides more collaboration and
better relationship among Library and Information
Centres. Above all it gives access to more electronic
scholarly journals. In India the best examples of the sort
are UGC Infonet, INDEST, FORSA, CSIR Consortium,
etc. Therefore, the organisational issue here is, to think
and work cooperatively with other libraries and system
vendors than as an individual.

4.5 Users
Libraries have to evolve measures continuously to
keep up with the changing needs of their users.
Knowledge professionals can provide better service
offerings by adopting new ideas and re-evaluating old
ones according to the need of its consumers. In 21st
century, the technological changes have influenced users
in their behaviour and needs.
Changing behaviour: Now first search for information is
not in the library but on the internet. Users are making use
of search engines to locate information rather than
seeking help from the librarian. Oblinger9 reported that
only 2 per cent of college students used the library
website as the starting point for research, and that 67 per
cent learn about electronic resources from their friends.
Changing needs: With the advent of knowledge
revolution and multiplicity of new knowledge by fusion and
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

fission the information needs of users are varied and more
complicated. Organizations are looking for qualitative
information to increase their products and to meet market
competitions.
Training and support: The sources of information have
extended far beyond books and periodicals to include
databases, online access to catalogues and
bibliographies, and to online information using Internet
and other telecommunications networks. To enable library
users to work with such tools, much more intensive
training and support is needed. As a result information
literacy programmes have become an integral part of
library package of services.

4.6 Information Services
The ever growing Iinternet collections provide access
to top-quality databases, literature search through
subject gateways, downloadable audio books and music,
and instant messaging reference services like ‘Ask A
Librarian’, ‘Online Reference’, ‘Digital Reference
Services’, etc. Owing to these developments library’s
services underwent change, focusing more on the
facilitation of information transfer and information literacy
rather than providing controlled access to it.
Marketing services: The essence of marketing involves
finding out what the users want and setting out to meet
those needs. Indeed it is a promotional activity than mere
selling. Therefore, knowledge professionals need to have
proper marketing plan and promotional strategies. Library
website, blog, e-mail, Internet, newsletters, and leaflets
can be used for promoting services and make known to
customers about the products and services available from
the library. The impact of technology, new methods for
information provision and declining budgets have meant
that marketing is now an accepted feature of library
services instead of depriving the users in access
information.
Information literacy: The primary task of knowledge
professional is to enhance the information literacy among
the users of an organisation. At present user’s may have
basic knowledge in searching for information, but there is
a need for teaching and training them in information and IT
skills in the advanced and more advanced searching.
Information literacy will provide the user the ability to
acquire and interpret information, to manage information,
to communicate information, and to apply information for
specific task.
Webliography: It is a list of documents available on the
World Wide Web. It denotes an enumerative list of
hypertext links surrounding a common subject or theme.
At the bare minimum, most webliographies collocate all of
the online resources pertaining to a particular topic.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

Value added, aggregator services: The LIS profession
is known for its capabilities of compilation, analysis,
compaction, consolidation type of services with the
application of indexing and abstracting skills. The
emerging environment also bestows a similar
responsibility for the e-resources through a single window
service.
“The aggregator provides a consolidated view of the
content in a single browser display or desktop
application. Such applications are also referred to as RSS
readers, feed readers, feed aggregators, news readers or
search aggregators”. Wikipedia10 There is a variety of
software available to gather, format and repackage
information on the web suitable to individual needs of the
users. A document that needs a mention in this context is
Martha L Brogan’s11 A survey of Digital Library Aggregation
Services.
Open access strategies: Escalating subscription price
of scientific and technical journals hade made it
impossible for the researchers to access information and
to produce new knowledge. Advances in technology and
in particular the Internet and the World Wide Web came
as a savior to the researchers as it made possible for
them to have open access to information.
Open access publishing: The scholarly communication
witnesses a new dimension, i.e., open access publishing.
The scientists opt to publish and share their knowledge in
open access and that lead to the success story of PLoS,
BioMed, etc. and thousands of peer-reviewed and nonreviewed open access journals. The scientists may
publish their articles in peer-reviewed open access
journals or in print journals; they also place them in the
central repository of full-text papers, both pre- and postprints, making the papers available to anyone with an
Internet connection.
Digital repositories: The great advantage of repositories
is that they help institutions to develop coherent and
coordinated approaches for capturing, identification,
storage and retrieval of their intellectual assets. These
intellectual assets go beyond normal publishing regimes,
and may include audio-visual objects, datasets,
presentations, learning materials, and research works.
This increases the ‘visibility’ of institutional research and
consequently the impact factor.

5. LIS PROFESSIONALS-NEW ROLES
In addressing the 25th Online Information Meeting in
London in December 2001, Richard Harrington12 the Chief
Executive Officer of the Thomson Corporation noted that
no profession had changed as much as that of an
information profession in the last five years with the
development of the range of Internet-based technologies.
79

He outlined the following added responsibilities that
information specialists now have as workers in the
“knowledge economy”:










Information gurus - guardians of information quality
and ensuring that users have access to information
from the most trusted sources.
Business managers - knowing how to deliver
appropriate information services (either from in-house
or by outsourcing) to meet the needs of the users.
Teachers/trainers - to ensure that the users (and
colleagues) know how to access relevant sources of
information.
Information advocates - serving as the information
“champion” for the organisation to influence
management and ensuring that everyone in the
organisation remains competitive by having the
information and tools they need to make decisions
faster.
System designers - to develop and design
appropriate systems for the delivery of information to
their users in an appropriate manner.

Biddiscombe13 assessed information professionals
as being those people who manage the conveyance,
organisation and dissemination of information to an
identifiable group of users in a professional capacity.
These
people
comprise
librarians,
computer
professionals and web developers. Biddiscombe notes
the following tasks for information professionals as:


Understand the needs of users and endeavour to
meet them.



Manage servers.



Manage e-mail and print accounts.



Populate and evaluate websites.



Select, organise and manage print and electronic
collections.



Offer training and guidance.



Provide network support – both physical and social.

Therefore, it can be summarised that in the new
knowledge environment knowledge professionals have
multifaceted role to play. These include:


Knowledge manager – to deal with tacit and explicit
knowledge.



Multi-media user – comfortable with a wide range of
formats.



Intermediary – with a good knowledge of sources and
user requirements.

80



Enabler/facilitator– proactively connecting users with
information they require.



Team player – working with colleagues in library, IT
services and academics.



Trainer/educator – taking on a formal role to teach
information skills and information literacy.



Evaluator – sifting free and paid for resources on
behalf of users.



Negotiator – dealing with publishers and suppliers.



Innovator – not just following the routine but also
looking at improved ways to deliver the service.



Fund-raiser – working for greater income from the
institution and beyond.

In the new millennium, the LIS professionals have to
embrace new tools, techniques and technologies for
reaching out to users. The professional have to handle
tacit and explicit knowledge to become knowledge
managers; it is the duty of the knowledge professionals to
develop and maintain full-text databases and digital
repositories. They have to possess skills in managing and
indexing digital user profiles and integrating them with
other information resources; developing and networking
the niche libraries and providing access to any type of
information available any where in the world. Kim14
encapsulated the role of knowledge professional in 21st
century as:
Knowledge professionals will have to move from the
background to the center of the organisational stage, to
jointly hold the reins of knowledge management with
users and the technology experts, to help steer and
shape the knowledge policies, structures, processes,
and systems that will nurture organisational learning.
Knowledge professionals should be able to extract, filter
and disseminate vital external knowledge.
They also will design and develop workgroup
application suites that are effectively platforms for
knowledge management. Finally, they will work side by
side with users in collecting and analyssing strategic
intelligence; and to act as trainers and consultants who
transfer knowledge gathering and research skills
throughout the organisation.” Therefore, the traditional
librarian, transformed as documentation officer,
information officer/manager needs to metamorphose as
knowledge professional to meet the demands of the new
millennium. To meet the present and future challenges,
knowledge professionals need to have theoretical and
analytical knowledge. They have to be creative, innovative
and responsive to keep up their presence felt in the
knowledge society.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

6. CONCLUSION
Today the LIS profession is witnessing the advantage
of library 2.0 movement where by inviting user
participation in the creation of both the physical and the
virtual services they want, supported by consistently
evaluating services. Library 2.0 demands libraries to focus
less on secured inventory systems and more on
collaborative discovery systems.15 It also attempts to
reach regular and potential users through improved
customer-driven offerings. In fact this movement is
harnessing the era of social networking, open source,
knowledge management, online publishing like wiki and
moving into library 3.0 arena. In future, libraries will
reinvent themselves by perfecting the path that they have
now begun. They will become more of a fusion of physical
and virtual realms. The precise role of the LICs will depend
on the organisation structure and knowledge needs. The
emphasis in roles of knowledge professional will likely to
change in accordance with needs of the user community
and the level of technological sophistication. As the
technology changes the role of LICs/knowledge centres
and knowledge professionals will continue to evolve.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The keynote address delivered by Dr A.L.Moorthy,
Director, DESIDOC at National Conference on Reorientation of Library Services in India organised by
APLA, Vijayawada during 18-20 August 2008 is the basis
for this article. I am grateful to him for the inspiration.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Kalam, A.P.J. Abdul. Lecture to the Students and
Guests, in Patna on Evolution of a Knowledge Hub. 8
February 2008. http://www.drabdulkalam.org/2008/
02/08/lecture-to-the-students-and-guests-patna/
Wikipedia: Knowledge Society. http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/knowledgesociety

3.

National Knowledge Commissions (NKC), India:
Libraries as Gateways to Knowledge. National
Knowledge Commission, New Delhi, 2007.

4.

Libner, Kelsey. Working the network: A future for the
academic library. http://alpha.fdu.edu/~marcum/
libner.doc (accessed on March 11, 2008)

5.

Moorthy, A.L. Re-orientation of library services.
Keynote address delivered at National Conference on
re-orientation of Library Services in India organised
by APLA, Vijayawada, 18-20 August, 2006.

6.

Wikipedia: Self Publishing. http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/selfpublishing (accessed on March 25, 2008)

7.

Drotner, Kirsten. Library innovation for the knowledge
society. Scandinavian Public Library Quarterly, 2005
38(2). http://www.splq.info/issues/vol38_2/07.htm
(accessed on 17 March 2008)

8.

Bakker, T. Resource sharing in a virtual library
environment:
User
oriented
collection
management.1999. http://www.sociosite.net/bakker/
resovirt.html. (accessed on 15 March, 2008)

9.

Oblinger, Diana G. Listening to what we are seeing.
In ALIA Information Online 2007. Sydney, 2007.

10. Wikipedia: Aggregator. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Aggregator (accessed on 31 October, 2008)
11. Brogan, Martha L. A survey of digital library
aggregation services. In Digital Library Federation,
CLIR., Washington, 2003.
12. Harrington, R. The changing face of an information
vendor.
http://www.thomson.com/Investors/PPT/
London_Online_2001.pdf. 2001. Quoted in Tedd Lucy
A. The What? and How? of education and training for
information professionals in a changing world: some
experiences from Wales, Slovakia and the AsiaPacific Region. http://cadair.aber.ac.uk/dspace/
bitstream/2160/189/1/jispaperrev
13. Biddiscombe, R. The development of information
professional’s needs for Internet and IT skills:
Experiences at the University of Birmingham.
Program, 2001, 35(2), 157-66
14. Kim, S. The roles of knowledge professionals for
knowledge management. http://www.ifla.org/IV/
ifla65/papers/042-115e.htm (accessed on March 15,
2008)
15. Maness, Jack M. Library 2.0 Theory: We6+b 2.0 and
its implications for libraries. Webology, 2006, 3(2),
Available at: http://www.webology.ir/2006/v3n2/
a25.html (accessed on March 18, 2008)

About the Author
Prof. (Mrs) R.S.R. Varalakshmi is working as Professor in Department of Library and Information Science at
Andhra University, Vishakhapatnam. She has over 22 years of experience in the field if library and Information
Science, and has published several papers in various national and international journals. Her field of
specialisation are application of IT to LICs, digital libraries, health science information systems, knowledge
management, marketing of information services and products.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

81

