DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 2, March 2009, pp. 82-84
© 2009, DESIDOC

Invited Paper

Digitisation and Digital Preservation
Jagdish Arora
Director, INFLIBNET, Ahmedabad-380 009

1. INTRODUCTION
It is a privilege for me to be here amidst you today for
delivering Valedictory Address for the National Conference
on Digitisation and Digital Preservation, the two topics
that I am most interested in and I have written extensively
on both the topics. May be that is why organisers of the
Conference found it befitting to call me to say last words
on it. They do not want any more writings from me on
these topics.
It is indeed befitting to tackle the two topics together
since digitisation and digital preservation are related to
each other in more than one dimension. One of the main
benefits of digitisation is to preserve rare and fragile
objects by enhancing their access to multiple numbers of
users simultaneously. The librarians have been
concerned about the digital preservation ever since the
first computer was introduced and its products and
services found its way into the libraries. The libraries have
been migrating and refreshing their OP AC records ever
since automation in libraries started. Since mid 1980s,
the libraries in India also started building their in-house
databases and began subscribing electronic resources
such as Current Contents on Disc (CCOD) as well as
other computer-based services that were delivered on
5 1/4 inch floppy discs. Several books in 1980s and 1990s
had accompanied floppy discs. These floppies are
already obsolete and floppy drives that were used for
reading these have completely disappeared. CD ROMs,
once respected for its longevity, are known to dysfunction
much faster than expected.
Moreover, in time to come, the CD ROM may
completely be phased out in favour of its more evolved
avatar, i.e., DVD ROM with greater storage capacity.
Institutions such as national archives, data archives, and
other cultural institutions with preservation as one of their
main mandate, have established digital preservation
programmes way back in late 1960s. These programmes
addressed the issues of preservation of technology and
digital contents that existed at that time (paper tapes,
punch cards, etc.).

Libraries acquire digital materials through different
channels that include buying digital contents from
publishers or aggregators and licensing access to online
databases and journals.
Moreover, libraries and institutions around the world
are taking projects to convert their analogue collections
into digital form with an aim to increase their access thus
far confined to the four-walls of their libraries, many a
times, without ensuring their long-term accessibility. The
crucial issue of moving a digitisation pilot to a fully
operational system with elements of preservation and
sustainability built-in, is generally not given serious
consideration that it deserve. The fact that the risk of loss
of data in digital form is much greater than any other
physical form is required to be addressed in greater
details.
There are enough evidences to suggest that many
potentially valuable digital materials have already been
lost and it incurs substantial costs to recover these digital
contents as observed in the following examples:


The Census Bureau saved the 1960 census on
Univac paper tapes that could be read only with a
UNIVAC type II-A tape drive. By the mid-seventies,
these paper tape drives were obsolete. When it was
decided to archive the information on computer tapes
containing the raw data from the 1960 federal census,
there were only two machines in the world capable of
reading those tapes: one in Japan and the other
already deposited in the Smithsonian as a relic.



NASA/NSFINOAA rescued valuable 20-year-Iong
TOVS/AVHRR satellite data documenting global
warming.



In the late 1960s, the New York State Department of
Commerce and Cornell University undertook the Land
Use and Natural Resources Inventory Project
(LUNR). The LUNR project produced a computerized
map of New York State depicting patterns of land
usage and identifying natural resources. It created a

The paper is the Valedictory Address by the author at the National Conference on Digitisation and Digital Preservation organised by DESIDOC during
11-12 December 2008 at Indian National Science Aacademy, New Delhi.

primitive geographic information system by
superimposing a matrix over aerial photographs of the
entire state and coding each cell according to its
predominant features. The data were used for several
comprehensive studies of land use patterns that
informed urban planning, economic development, and
environmental policy. In the mid-1980s, the New York
State Archives obtained copies of the tapes
containing the data from the LUNR inventory along
with the original aerial photographs and several
thousand transparencies. Staff at the State Archives
attempted to preserve the LUNR tapes, but the
problems proved insurmountable. The LUNR project
had depended on customised software programs to
represent and analyse the data, and these programs
were not saved with the data. Even if the software had
been retained, the hardware and operating system
needed to run the software were no longer available.

2. CHALLENGES FOR PRESERVING DIGITAL
CONTENTS
Although, the digital technology offers several
advantages over their print counter part, it along with other
associated Internet and web technologies are in a
continuous flux of change. New standards and protocols
are being defined on a regular basis for file formats,
compression techniques, hardware components, network
interfaces, storage media and devices, etc. The digital
contents face the constant threat of “technoobsolescence” and transitory standards.
Magnetic and optical discs as a physical media are
being re-engineered continuously to store more and more
data. There is a constant threat of backward compatibility
for products, including software, hardware and associated
standards and protocols that were used in the past. The
challenges in maintaining access to digital resources
overtime are related to notable differences between digital
and paper-based material. Some of the important
challenges for preserving digital contents are:


Dynamic nature of digital contents.



Machine dependency.



Fragility of the media.



Technological obsolescence.



Shorter life span of digital media.



Format and styles.



Copyright and intellectual property rights (lPR)
issues.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 28(2)

3. LONGEVITY
Density of media to record information has increased
exponentially over time while its longevity to store the
information has decreased proportionately. Density of
media to store information is inversely proportional to its
longevity.
Take for example, clay tablets, you can write only a
few sentences on a clay tablets, but it can survive for
centuries. Papyrus, paper with printed papers, has
greater density of storing information, but has lesser
longevity in comparison to clay tablets. The magnetic
media and optical media have highest storage capacity,
but are highly fragile and therefore longevity for these
media is much lower.

4. DIGITAL PRESERVATION STRATEGIES
Digital preservation activities can broadly be divided
into two components: (i) activities that promote the longterm maintenance of digital image, and (ii) activities that
provide continued accessibility of its contents. Several
strategies have been proposed but it is unlikely to find a
single solution that is appropriate for all data types,
situations, or institutions (Tristram, 2002). A set of digital
preservation strategies can be applied depending on the
lifespan of a digital object as mentioned below:


Long-term preservation: Continued access to digital
materials, or at least to the information contained in
them, indefinitely.



Medium-term preservation: Continued access to
digital materials beyond changes III technology
for a defined period of time but not indefinitely.



Short-term preservation: Access to digital materials
either for a defined period of time while use is
predicted but which does not extend beyond the
foreseeable future and/or until it becomes inaccessible
because of changes in technology.

Preservation in the digital world is a challenging task
for librarians and archivists. However, protocols, strategies
and technologies involved in digital preservation have now
been well defined and understood. Digital preservation is a
cost-intensive activity of continuing nature. Library,
archives, or museum cannot make a decision to adopt
digitisation with long-term preservation and storage of
research collections without deep and continuing
commitment to preservation by the parent institution. The
preservation in digital world is no more a prerogative of the
libraries, but has become the mandate of the parent
institution. The necessary financial and technological
commitments to maintain digital contents and to migrate it

83

to future generations must be an organisational
commitment. Failure to address to the well-defined digital
preservation problems and strategies may result in loss of
valuable digital data and may contribute to cultural and
intellectual loss resulting in exorbitant costs for recovery, if
at all possible. Librarians are compelled to meet the
research challenge to resolve the conflict between the
creation context and the use context to facilitate digital
information preservation.
Digital resources, undoubtedly have several
advantages over its analogue counterpart, however,
preservation is definitively not one of them. The fact that
the risk of loss of data in digital form is much greater than
any other physical form is well understood and addressed

to. Long-term preservation of digital information is plagued
by short media life, obsolete hardware and software, slow
reading time of old media, and defunct websites (Chen,
2001). Dr S.S. Murthy and his team have completed the
recommendations methodically.
The lesson learnt from the Conference, therefore,
should be that any digitisation project or digital resource
development project that we take up should have
components for digital preservation built into it with
institutional support built into it. The digital projects
sanctioned by various funding agencies are given for a
specific period of time. It is essential that the institutional
support is sought to ensure continuing availability of digital
contents.

About the Author

Dr Jagdish Arora is presently working as Director of Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET),
Ahemdabad. Dr Arora is recipient of the Fulbright Professional Fellowship in Library and Information
Science (1997-98), SIS Fellow (1999), Young Librarian of the Year (2001, SATKAL), Librarian of
the Year (IASLIC, 1999), and ILA-Kuala Best Librarian Award, 2004. He was the Principal Investigator
for several projects sponsored by agencies like AICTE, Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Ministry
of Information Technology (MIT), Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), the National
Highway Authority of India and University Grants Commission. Dr Arora has more than 60 research
articles to his credit in learned research journals and as chapters in books and conference proceedings.
He has organised several workshops and training programmes at the IIT Delhi. He was resource
person for several training programmes, refresher’s courses and workshops, and has also presented
research papers in several national and international conferences and symposia in India and abroad.

84

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(2)

