DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 3, May 2009, pp. 12-15
© 2009, DESIDOC

Improving Visibility of Libraries through SRU
A.K. Tyagi, Madhavi M. Dhanwantari, Aparna Raghuraman, and Priyanka D. Kalbhor
Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (Deemed University), Girinagar, Khadakwasala, Pune-411 025
E-mail: draktyagi@yahoo.co.in
ABSTRACT
Library users nowadays expect digital libraries to be searchable through a single search form. The
ultimate goal is to provide a high ranking search quality to enable access to documents containing relevant
information from all participating libraries. The Information Centre and Library at the Defence Institute of Advanced
Technology (DIAT), Deemed University (DU), at Pune, aims to ensure wide dissemination of knowledge, through
an innovative pilot project and achieve a gradual change towards indigenous knowledge storage. The present
work is intended to develop a client gateway using search and retrieval via URL (SRU) protocol for searching
SRU-compliant databases, keeping in mind trials done in information retrieval in the 1980s and 90s. The client
has been developed, tested and implemented successfully with some limitations. Efforts are on to extend the
facility for searching DSpace that conforms to industry standard for developing IR's. We are in the process
of developing and implementing a server for DSpace to make it SRU compliant. The client part however, has
been developed, and tested successfully, though with some limitations.
Keywords: Information retrieval standards, digital libraries, client gateway, databases

1. INTRODUCTION
Over the past few years, significant and important
changes have been seen in the field of published
knowledge. Using the latest information and
communication technology, digital libraries have become
a crucial component of global information infrastructure.
Scholarly information is now brought out in a variety of
forms, formats, and standards in which relevant
information is published. It is important to provide
challenging opportunities to the library and information
professionals, so that they have ample scope to prove
their capabilities, both in theory and in practice. The
wealth of information in different societies and institutions
is managed using heterogeneous systems, e.g., different
search engines, database management systems, and
platforms. This makes the task of information users
tedious as they have to visit different sites and learn
different search mechanisms of each system. Therefore,
it was strongly felt that there should be a mechanism that
can allow users to submit queries through a common
search form to various databases and get results in a
common format. A number of efforts have been made in
this direction and a sincere attempt has been made to find
a common solution for the same. We have achieved
breakthrough success using information retrieval
Received on 20 October 2008

standards in general, and search and retrieval via URL
(SRU) in particular, which can be accessed from our
website. This would eventually help information users as
well as library professionals in developing local databases
by harvesting the already available metadata.

2. INFORMATION RETRIEVAL STANDARDS
DIAT strives to provide network access to information
resources, including services as well as documents and
data to all users. The main issue was how to integrate and
optimise information management so that users can
quickly and easily locate what they seek amidst
resources numbering in the millions and beyond.
Presently, two systems namely, Suchika and DSpace are
in operation at DIAT. Our users have to visit various
databases separately, to gather relevant information.
Keeping their problems and requirements in mind, we
have attempted to provide a solution in the form of an SRU
gateway. The Z39.50 standard was introduced when
internet technologies were not so developed and hence
implementation was rather difficult. The standard was
implemented for a number of database services with
drawbacks, which implied that people aware of the
importance of information retrieval standards. Z39.50
defines a standard way for two computers to

communicate for the purpose of information retrieval1. The
computers may be different types of platforms. A Z39.50
implementation enables one particular interface to
access multiple systems, providing the end user with
nearly transparent access to other systems. The primary
goal of the protocol was to allow the user to access
remote database records by specifying criteria to identify
appropriate records, and then requesting the
transmission of some or all of the identified records. This
standard is intended for systems supporting information
retrieval services for organisations such as information
centres, universities, libraries, and union catalogue
centres. It addresses connection-oriented program to
program communication and does not specify a user
interface.

2.1 Search and Retrieve Web Services
Search and retrieve web service (SRW) and search
and retrieve URL service (SRU)2 are web services-based
protocols of the ZNG family that are built on the Z39.50 for
querying internet indexes or databases and returning
search results. Despite the differences in implementation,
both SRW and SRU are similar, since they both define a
similar set of commands (known as "operations") and
responses. SRU is actually SRW without the SOAP-ful
service. SRU adds a response schema parameter and is
intended for thin clients, where the browser is the
application. As such operations sent by SRU clients can
only be transmitted via HTTP GET requests. The results of
the SRU requests are XML streams.

3. SRU AND SRW-PROBLEMS AND
SOLUTIONS
SRW and SRU define a standard platform for Internet
search queries as well as the structure of the responses.
Even though the queries are the same, the syntax
implementing the queries is different. What is worse is the
structure of the responses. Each response not only
contains the search result but also a lot of formatting.
SRW and SRU address these shortcomings by
specifying the syntax for the queries and the results.
Such specifications open up Internet-accessible search
functions and allow for the creation of tools to explore the
content of the hidden web more efficiently and effectively.
SRW/U allows people and HTTP user agents to query
Internet databases more seamlessly without the need of
more expensive and complicated meta-search protocols.

encapsulated using SOAP and returned to clients. On the
other hand SRU is essentially a REST-ful web service.
Parameters are encoded as name/value pairs in the query
string of a URL. As such operations sent by SRU clients
can only be transmitted via HTTP GET requests. The
results of the SRU requests are XML streams, the same
streams returned via SRW requests sans the SOAP
envelope.

3.2 Search and Retrieve URL (SRU) Service
SRU is a web service-based protocol for querying
databases and returning results. Its requests and results
are similar to SRW but different in the way that the
queries are encapsulated and transmitted between client
and server applications.

4. SRU CLIENT GATEWAY
In this study, we have attempted to probe SRU in
detail and develop a simple client gateway to search the
SRU compliant servers using it. During Dr A.K. Tyagi’s
Fulbright Scholarship tenure at the Virginia Tech.
University, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA, he worked toward
developing a client gateway using SRU protocol for
searching SRU-compliant databases (Fig. 1).
The effort yielded fruitful results, where Dr Tyagi could
search heterogeneous databases including Suchika, but
only to a certain level. SRU-compliant databases through
common search form3 can be accessed from our website.
A new service can also be added and configured using the
same website link. As most institutes included are still in
the process to make them fully SRU-compliant, the
output in some of the databases can only be displayed in
XML format. Efforts are still on to apply a common style
sheet so that the XML output received from different
databases can be uniformly displayed. A number of SRU
test servers are available at the official website maintained
by the Library of Congress. During this, he found that

3.1 Differences between SRW and SRU
The differences between SRW and SRU lie in the way
operations are encapsulated and transmitted between the
client and the server as well as how results are returned.
SRW is essentially a SOAP-ful web service. Operations
are encapsulated by clients as SOAP request and sent to
the server. Likewise, responses by servers are
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

Figure 1. SRU client gateway at DIAT.
13

some servers worked partially and some not at all may be
because these are still in the implementation stage. The
comparison of various facilities available has been given in
the Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison of facilities and features

Name of the
Service

Features available

Record
Schema

NDLTD Union

Title, field, person,

Dublin

Catalog

subject, date,

Marc XML

Core,

identifier,

Figure 2. Suchika implementation.

description
Library of

Free text, Title,

Dublin

Congress

person, Subject,

Marc XML

Core,

date, ISBN
University of

Free text, title,

Dublin

Toronto, Canada

person, subject,

Marc XML

Core,

Date, ISBN
DIAT SRU Test

Title, Person,

Dublin

Server

Subject, ISBN

Local

Core,

The European

Title, Person,

Dublin Core

Library

Subject, Date

British Library

Title, Person,

SRU gateway

Subject, Date

Dublin Core

Pilot Service
DSpace@DIAT

Title, Person,

Dublin Core

Subject

4.1 SRU and Suchika
Encouraged by the success of SRU client gateway,
we tried to make the Suchika server SRU complaint so
that it could also be searched using the SRU client
gateway. The Suchika database contains the
bibliographic details of DIAT library holdings. The
database is based on the Common Communication
Format (CCF) schema. Microsoft Access 2003 has been
used as backend database management system.
Suchika has its own search engine for storing, processing
and retrieval of records. It provides the facility to search
the database over network using its web OPAC module.
As shown in the Fig. 2, when a user from the SRU client
gateway sends an SRU request, it is received by the SRU
server. It serves the SRU query parameters into local SQL
query and passes it on to the search engine. The search
engine submits the query to the database and returns the
search results. The results are then sent back to the SRU
Client as per the SRU parameters for display at the local
client machine. We have successfully tested the SRU
server and made it available to others for testing SRU
14

client gateway facilitates like adding a new SRU
compliant server3 and its supported parameters, and
using them at the time of search. So, once configured
properly, users in a library need not worry about the
functions supported by the service. We have not been
able to implement the complete protocol particularly when
the protocol itself is in the implementation stage. Still, we
are in the process of providing a facility to the users for
easy retrieval of required relevant information and in
addition to share our work. Those who have even a little
knowledge of any programming language can easily
modify the present SRU client gateway or develop their
own client with enhanced features using the available
code4. Presently almost all the major as well as smaller
libraries are computerised. SRU can play a major role in
improving their quality of records. The libraries that want
to improve their catalogue records can help themselves
through this gateway and make full use of this opportunity
for further development. The first implementation seen
was that records retrieved from an SRU server using SRU
clients could be manipulated and converted into local
schema and harvested into the local database with little
more efforts. This not only helped in improving the quality
of records, but also brought consistency in the databases
of more libraries around the globe.
The SRU server presently at DIAT has the following
limitations:


It returns the records in Dublin Core Schema in XML
packing and does not use any style sheet.



It supports only three field relations (all, any, and
exact).



It returns zero hits even if there is an error in the
query.



It accepts only words or phrases as search
statements. Parentheses in search statements are
not supported.



Only three search statements can be used in a
single search. These can be combined using any of
the three Boolean operators.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

5. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
At IC&L, attempts are always towards assessing and
finding solutions for problems in varying denominations.
We set out to re-examine the way in which we delivered
almost complete computerised services to our users. Our
main objectives were to:


Provide users with dynamic access to the library
resources



Offer better navigation of large sets of search results



Enhance the visibility and awareness of our available
resources, and



Facilitate the introduction of interoperable services

Figure 3. SRU Implementation on DSpace.

To ensure that we met the users growing demands
and focused on our objectives, a research project titled
Interoperable Defence Academic Institutional Repository
(IDAIR), was started wherein, all the institutional
documents of archival value were digitised and uploaded.
We have successfully completed the initial phase of the
project that includes the selection and installation of
suitable software for institutional repository (IR). Keeping
in view the available expertise and by elaborate
comparative study, it was decided that DSpace would be
suitable in a Windows 2003 environment. Presently, 300+
documents under different communities are available and
we aim to upload all the dissertations and research
papers (1000+ approx.) into it by the end of current fiscal
year. This is presently hosted on a test server5 and can be
accessed using our website. The IR is meant to allow
greater participation from the users. They could directly
submit their full-text documents in any form and help add
to the development of scholarly information. The
repository made the storage and retrieval procedure much
less strenuous and time consuming, yet it could not act
as the single source to fulfill all informational requirements
of the user. In case of DIAT, we presently have two
sources of information, i.e., Suchika database and
DSpace. Both are available through different search
mechanisms. Hence, the user will have to visit different
sites and use different search forms to gather relevant
information.

6. FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

5.1 SRU and DSpace

REFERENCES

The success of SRU client gateway and its extension
to Suchika greatly boosted our confidence and helped us
achieve breakthrough in implementing the same to
DSpace (Fig.3). Presently, the IR at DIAT that uses
DSpace can be searched using the SRU Client Gateway
maintained at DIAT server, however, with some limitations.
Now, we can implement a simple search facility in
DSpace. With this users can search DSpace@DIAT using
the client gateway. However, the results are still displayed
in DSpace format.

1. www.loc.gov/z3950/

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

The development and implementation of SRU client
and server protocol not only cleared our thoughts about
the implementation of a protocol, but also gave us the
confidence in building the application. We are sure that
we shall be able to make it fully searchable using the
client gateway and the results will also be displayed in a
common format. Furthermore, our attempts are now
focused towards finding a single channel to harvest
available metadata to form a catalogue. This would
approximately involve a period of one year. Whatever the
method, our goal continues to be the same; and that is to
ensure that we create a culture of lifelong learning and
take necessary steps to boost literacy levels in our
country.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Vice Chancellor
DIAT (DU), for his whole hearted support, and the
sponsoring agency ER&IPR (DRDO) for their financial
assistance without which this would not have been
possible. Dr Tyagi would like to express sincere and
heartfelt gratitude to his Guide and Mentor, Prof. Edward
A. Fox of the Department of Computer Science, Virginia
Tech. University, USA, for invaluable suggestions and
guidance.

2. http://www.loc.gov/standards/sru/
3. http://121.241.65.37/sru/sruServices.jsp
4. http://121.241.65.37/sru.zip
5. http://121.241.65.37/dspace

15

