DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 3, May 2009, pp. 29-35
© 2009, DESIDOC

Safeguarding the Digital Contents: Digital Watermarking
M. Natarajan and Gayas Makhdumi1
NISCAIR, 14, Satsang Vihar Marg, New Delhi-110 067
E-mail: m_natarajan@hotmail.com
1

Department of Library & Information Science, Jamia Millia Islamia University, New Delhi-110 025.
E-mail: gayas_makhdumi@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
Digital watermarks are one of the tools which helps to make the distribution of digital material more secure.
It is a kind of digital signal or pattern hidden directly in digital content. The paper deals with the multi-faceted
aspects of digital watermarking (DWM) technology. It also discusses the need for DWM with the properties
like robustness, security, invertibility, transparency, complexity, capacity, and verification. The key aspects
are given with the solutions for DWM. Few companies involved in DWM activities are discussed with the
technique of embedding with different types of watermarks. It discusses tool and techniques for images, text,
and other applications of DWM. The possible attacks on DWM and the organisations involved in developing
standards for it are described. It has been concluded that the protection of individual rights is a must, and
deeper understanding of the DWM will lead to the design of more reliable systems for safe-guarding digital
contents.
Keywords: Digital water marking, DWM, safeguarding, digital library, watermarking

1.

INTRODUCTION

The popularity of World Wide Web demonstrated the
commercial potential of offering multimedia resources
through the digital networks. Since commercial interests
seek to use the digital network to offer digital media for
profit, they have a strong interest in protecting their
ownership rights. The digital data can be processed,
accessed, and it can be transmitted very quickly using
networks. There are numerous technical, legal, and
organisational problems which arise when there is widescale use of digital documents. Digital information can be
copied any number of times from one medium to another;
they can be transmitted through networks, etc., all
without compromising the quality of the data. There is no
way to distinguish between an original electronic
documents and its copy. It is easy to change any part of
an unprotected electronic document. One possibility here
is to replace original signatures with cryptographic
methods.
Digital signature is data items formed by the
signatory and created from the document that is to be
signed. It relates the documents to the signatory in a
Received on 25 November 2008

secure and reliable way. The signature of one document
cannot be used to sign another, even if the two documents
in question differ by just a single character. Digital
watermarking has been proposed as one way to
accomplish this. Also advanced Internet services enabled
the users to create copy and distribute multimedia
products such as audio, video, and still images with much
ease and less effort, minimum or no cost, and in less
time. Though it encouraged trading on the Internet, but on
the other hand it has created the problem of illegal
copying or copyright infringement. E-commerce has
become a significant business with well-established
online shopping services, and online delivery of digital
media such as audio and video. Thus, protection of digital
rights assumed a primary importance in the digital age.

2.

PROTECTION

TECHNIQUES

Significant research has been conducted since 1996
on
copyright
protection
and
authentication.
Steganography, cryptography, digital watermarking, etc.,
have become the most relevant and significant topics for
research scientists and vendor consortiums. Because of
the massive illegal copying of media files, content owners
29

utilise various protection technologies like digital rights
management (DRM) and/or digital watermarking. DRM is
one of the way to protect and secure the rights of the
author (owner) on the contents of the product. DRM links
specific user rights to media in order to provide persistent
governance of user activities such as viewing, accessing,
and duplication. The management technique is aimed at
balancing information protection, usability and cost to
provide beneficial environment for all parties concerned. It
is achieved through the interaction of effective and
economic models, social values, legal policy, and
technology.
Copyright protection inserts authentication data such
as owner registration, buyer and seller information and
logo in the digital media without sacrificing quality. In case
of any dispute, the data of authentication is extracted
from the product and can be used as an authoritative proof
to prove the ownership or copyrights. Copyright
infringement includes the user activities beyond the fair
use of digital media. DRM is regarded as an extension of
copy protection measures1.

3.

data or cover could be any multimedia product such
as still images, audio data, video clip, or text
document. Watermark can be any useful information
to prove the authenticity of the owner. The host and
watermark are never separated so that the
embedding watermark is the key point in this DWM.
Once embedded, the watermark is invisible in the
host. The original content is called the cover or the
host and embedded message is known as watermark
and the resulting cover after watermarking is called
watermarked cover18.


DEFINITIONS

3.1 Digital Libraries






A Digital Library (DL) is a collection of services and
“information objects” that are available digitally.
“Information objects” can be defined as anything in a
digital format such as books, journal articles and
sounds, since DLs organise and present information
objects to users, and support them in dealing with
these objects.
The DL is the widely accepted term describing the
use of digital technologies to acquire, store, preserve
and provide access to information and material
originally published in digital form or digitised from
existing print, audio-visual and other forms.
The above definitions reveal that a DL is a source of
information, in different formats, e.g., text, video or
audio, and that such information is stored digitally.
Thus, the definition of DL is “a DL is a networked
repository of digital content”.

3.2 Digital Watermarking


A Digital Watermarking (DWM) is a form of
steganography in which copyright and other source
information is hidden inside a document, image or
sound file without the user’s knowledge, but copies
will retain the information. It can prove authorship and
track copies to the original owner.



A DWM is a digital signal or a pattern hidden directly
in digital content. The digital content known as host

30

The watermarking of the document involves the
transformation of the original into another form. It is
contrasted with public-key encryption, which also
transform original files into another form. It is a
common practice now-a-days to encrypt digital
documents so that they become un-viewable without
the decryption. Copyright infringements of digital
audio, images, videos, and 3-D models can be
detected by means of DWMs. They are invisible
signatures that are embedded in a document in such
a way that they are resistant to unintentional or
malicious modifications of document: only the
copyright holder owns the key that permits the
decoding and/or removal of the watermark 11.

Therefore the watermarking is a process that embeds
data into an object.

4.

DIGITAL WATERMARKING

4.1 Need for Digital Watermarking
Digital watermarks are one of the various strategies
which should help to make the distribution of digital
material more secure. A distinction can be made between
active and passive strategies:
(i)

Active methods, such as cryptography, directly
prevent unauthorized distribution of data; and

(ii) Passive methods, such as digital watermarks, serve
more as a method to provide proof of ownership
rights.
Unauthorised taping, reading, manipulating, or
removing of data might lead to financial loss or legal
problems for producers and creators. Thus, designers,
producers, and publishers of digital data such as images,
videos, audio sources, or multimedia material (for
example, games or virtual environments) need technical
solutions to deal with the problems associated with
copyright protection of their data. They require systems in
which digital data can be easily signed by authors/
producers to ensure and prove ownership rights on the
produced audio-visual material after it has been publicly
released9. DWM embeds secure invisible or inaudible
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

labels in multimedia data (such as images, audio, text,
video, 3-D graphics) for identifying copyright-related
information such as origin, ownership, use-control,
integrity, or destinations. The DWM is integrated with the
multimedia and tightly bound with the quality of the
content. The benefits of DWM for content protection is
twofold, viz., it provides evidence of illicit copying after the
event and discourages such misuse in advance10.

4.2 Properties of Digital Watermarking


Robustness describes whether the watermark can
be reliably detected after media operations, format
conversion, rotation, scaling or cropping. It means
resistance to build, non-targeted modifications or
common media operations.



Security describes whether the embedded
watermarking information can be removed beyond
reliable detection by targeted attacks. All watermarks
except annotation should provide high security.



Invertibility describes the possibility of extracting the
watermark after embedding it to restore the origin.
For example, integrity watermarks often need to
verify a file’s integrity and restore the original for
medical images.



Transparency relates to the properties of the human
sensory system. A transparent watermark causes no
artifacts or quality loss.



Complexity describes the effort and time needed to
embed and retrieve a watermark. This parameter is
essential if we have real-time applications. Another
aspect addresses whether the original data is
required in the retrieval process.



Capacity describes how many information bits can
be embedded. It also addresses the possibility of
embedding multiple watermarks in one document in
parallel.



Verification describes whether it has a private
verification, like private key functions, or a public
verification, like the public-key algorithms in
cryptography16.

4.3 Key Aapects of Digital Watermarking
(i)

Images, videos (raw or compressed) and 3-D models
can be marked.

(ii) The original document is not necessary to decode
and read the watermark. Only the copyright holder’s
key and the watermarked document are required.
(iii) The watermarks are resistant to multiple
watermarking, as well as to a variety of image
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

manipulations, such as JPEG and MPEG
compression, printing-rescanning, rotation, scaling,
cropping, filtering, color changes, etc.. in case of
videos, the watermarks are resistant to format
conversion, frame-rate changes, etc.
(iv) A time-dependent identification is supported.
(v)

The process is content adaptive to prevent any visible
artifacts.

(vi) The embedding/detection is based on a
cryptographic public key scheme. A third party may,
therefore verify in a legal dispute who has embedded
the watermark12.

4.4 Solutions for Digital Watermarking
DWM technology builds on the idea of hiding metainformation-like an owner’s signature-in physical material
in which content is represented, such as the pixels of an
image. This concept resembles watermarks in paper. In
the digital form, one can extract the embedded
information when necessary to show proof of ownership. It
is a multidisciplinary field that combines media and signal
processing with cryptography, communication theory,
coding theory, signal compression and the theory of
human perception.
Interest in this field has recently increased because
of the wide spectrum of applications it addresses, such
as in the Digital Versatile Disc (DVD) scenario or in the
Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI) for copy control. An
application-based methodology, can generally distinguish
among the following classes:
Authentication or copyright watermark: watermarks the
data with the owner’s or producer’s identification. This is
the enabling technology to prove ownership on
copyrighted material, to monitor the use of the
copyrighted multimedia data and to analyze where the
data is in use over networks and servers.
Fingerprint watermark: watermarks the data with
customer identifications to track legal or illegal copies
and detect the originator of illegally made copies.
Copy control or broadcast watermark: ensures copyrights
with customer rights protocols such as copy or receipt
control.
Annotation watermark: annotates the media data. This
kind of watermark can be used to embed descriptions of
the value, content of the data or dates.
Integrity watermark: ensures the data’s integrity and
recognizes manipulation. The advantage of all these
methods is that relevant copyright information becomes
part of the audio-visual object2.
31

5.

COMPANIES INVOLVED IN DIGITAL
WATERMARKING

There are many more companies working on DWM.
The above four are only as a sample.



Digital Copyright Technologies (DCT) Ltd, a start-up
company based in Zurich Switzerland, is one of the
technological leading companies in the copyright
protection and secure distribution of digital
multimedia data. Their technology is for multimedia
service providers (image or video archives) and for
small multimedia companies (photographers, graphic
designers)13.

6.







32

Nextamp was founded in 2002 as a spin-off from the
Thales group (formerly Thomson – CSF), which
started developing a video watermarking technology
in the mid 90’s. Nextamp developers and markets
cutting edge video watermarking solutions for the
broadcast industry. Nextamp’s open products are
designed to ensure graceful integration into existing
systems. Nextamp solutions are designed for
applications in production, post-production, asset
management, distribution and content tracking15.
Signum Technologies solutions range from simpleto-use plug-ins for use with graphics programs such
as Adobe Photoshop – for those users who work with
small numbers of images, through to highproductivity batch processors – for those with many
thousands. Signum Technologies provides a range of
advanced digital watermarking solutions for copyright
protection
(SureSign)
and
communication
applications embracing a wide range of business,
professional and institutional sectors. Choose an
application closest to your area of specialisation to
learn more about how Signum can make your
business more secure. SureSign provides protection
for many organisations who market high value visual
content via e-commerce solutions. The permanent
nature of embedded watermarks facilitates the
monitoring of published images—both in print and in
digital media—by linking traded images to stored
rights information. Users include museums, stock
photo libraries, broadcasters, news agencies,
photographers, illustrators, catalogue retailers and
publishers. For partner companies providing
SureSign watermarking functions within e-commerce
and digital rights management (DRM) solutions
please see Signum’s partner section below17.
Microsoft Corporation has been awarded a patent for
DWM that could be deployed even when digital music
is distributed with DRM protection. The technology
called “stealthy audio watermarking”, inserts and
detects watermarks in audio signals that can identify
the content producer, “providing a signature that is
embedded in the audio signal and cannot be
removed”, according to a filing with US Patent and
Trade Organisation (US Patent No. 7,266,697).

WATERMARK EMBEDDING

The concept of DWM consists of inserting
information into the host signal under the condition that
the modifications are not perceptible. In addition, it is
desirable to put maximum energy into the watermark to
achieve high robustness. This is a well known concept
from communication theory: To decrease the error rate,
the signal energy must be maximized. In mathematical
formulation, the watermark embedding process can be
considered as a constrained maximisation problem:
Maximise the watermark energy under the visibility
constraint. Although the problem is straightforward to
formulate, it is extremely difficult to implement because of
the visibility constraint, which is usually based on a highly
nonlinear model of the human visual system.
Watermark embedding can be performed in a variety
of ways. There are two main groups of watermark
embedding technologies: coefficient-based and systembased. Coefficient-based approaches are the most
obvious approaches since the embedding process is
performed by a direct modification of pixel values or
transform coefficient values. Examples of this group are
approaches based on pixel modifications in the spatial
domain, such as least significant bit watermarking where
the least significant bit of the pixel values are replaced by
the binary watermark values. The second group is less
obvious to understand because the watermark embedding
process is performed by slightly changing an existing
processing system. Example of this group is fractal
image watermarking5.

7.

TECHNIQUES FOR WATERMARKING

Watermarks were first used in Europe to identify the
guild that manufactured paper. They were like trademarks
or signatures and invisible. A watermark image becomes
visible as darker and lighter areas when the paper is held
up to the light. Digital watermarks for photographs work
differently than those used for paper. With images widely
available on the Internet, it is desirable to use
watermarks. A watermark is a secondary image which is
overlaid on the primary images and provides a means of
protecting the image. There are two types of watermarks,
viz., visible and invisible watermarks.
A visible watermark is a visible transcription image
which is overlaid on the primary image. Perhaps
consisting of the logo or seal of the organisation which
holds the right to the primary image, it allows the primary
image to be viewed, but still marks it clearly, as a property
of the owning organization. It is important to overlay the
watermark in a way which makes it difficult to remove, if
the goal of indicating property rights is to be achieved. An
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

invisible watermark is an overlaid image which cannot be
seen, but which can be deducted algorithmically. They
are hidden in the image and can survive image cropping
and file format changes. They are almost indestructible.
However, with the reader, one can display them and who
created the photograph and how to get in touch with them.
This is like free advertising. If someone sees your image
and wants to contact you about reusing it, they can easily
do so. To be effective in the protection of the ownership of
intellectual property, the invisibly watermarked document
should satisfy several criteria such as follows:

disadvantage of spatial domain watermarks is that picture
cropping can be used to eliminate the watermark. Spatial
watermarking can also be applied using color separation.

7.2 Techniques for Text Images



The watermark must be difficult or impossible to
remove, at least without visibly degrading the original
image.



It must survive image modifications that are common
to typical image-processing applications (e.g.
scaling, color requantisation, dithering, cropping,
compression).

Three types of coding techniques can be used text
images such as: i) text line coding ii) word space coding
and iii) character encoding. For text line coding, the text
lines of a document page are shifted imperceptibly up or
down. For a 40-line text page, for instance, this yields
2**40 possible code words. For word-shift coding the
spacing between words in a line of justified text is altered.
For character coding, a feature such as the end line at the
top of a letter, “t” is imperceptibly extended. An advantage
of these methods over those applied to picture images is
that, by combining two or three of these to one document,
two documents with different watermarks cannot be
spatially registered to extract the watermark. Of course,
the watermark can be defeated by retyping the text.



It should be imperceptible so as not to affect the
experience of viewing the image and

8.



For some applications, it should be readily
detectable by the proper authorities, even if
imperceptible to the average observer 3.

Watermarking techniques tend to divide into two
categories, text and image, according to the type of
document to be watermarked. First, watermarking allows
an image file to be”tagged” by embedding a unique and
permanent message into the object data. Once applied,
the embedded message cannot be modified. Such a
message can be used for various purposes eg. to indicate
date/time of creation, ownership, origin, identity of
content or revision status. Second, by applying a
sophisticated checksum ‘pattern’ into digital image data,
any subsequent change to the structure can be detected
and the site of the alteration within the document
pinpointed. This is done by calculating a ‘signature’ or
‘digest’ of the values of the object data, then embedding
this back into the object data using algorithms. Similarly,
confirmation of data integrity will be displayed or flagged
where the object file remains intact and unchanged. This
form of watermark is sometimes called ‘fragile’1.

7.1 Techniques for Images
The simplest (too simple for many applications) is to
just flip the lowest–order bit of chosen pixels in a grey
scale noisy modification. A more robust watermark can be
embedded in an image in the same way that a watermark
is added to paper. Such techniques may superimpose a
watermark symbol over an area of the picture and then
add some fixed intensity value for the watermark to the
varied pixel values of the image. The resulting watermark
may be visible or invisible depending upon the value (large
or small, respectively) of the watermark intensity. One
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

APPLICATIONS OF DIGITAL
WATERMARKING

A number of application areas, with different
requirements and limitations, have been envisioned for
data hiding. These include (i) Copyright protection and
finger printing; (ii) Authentication for data integrity check;
(iii) Covert communication; and (iv) Labelling and
annotations. In a practical application, the watermarking
techniques can also trace the illegal users (forensic
watermarks) so that the owner can approach the
regulating authority. In fingerprint watermarking the buyer
and seller information with date stamp can regulate
copyright infringement. Hence, without an effective means
for monitoring, tracking, and deterring the unlawful
distribution of content once it reaches consumers, the
bright expectation of content providers could not be
achieved8.

9.

POSSIBLE ATTACKS ON DIGITAL
WATERMARKING

An attack on a watermark can be defined as an
operation, (coincidental or hostile) that may degrade a
watermark and possibly make it unreliably detectable.
Some of the practical attacks include the following.

9.1 Compression Methods
JPEG is currently one of the most widely used
compression algorithms for images, and any watermark
should be resilient to some degree of compression.

9.2 Geometric Transformations
Transformations such as flipping, rotation, scaling,
cropping, and other transformations with compression.
33

9.3 Image Enhancement Techniques

16. CONCLUSION

Low-pass filtering including linear and non-linear
filters such as median, Gaussian, and standard average
filters, sharpening methods such as photo editing and
denoising, and histogram modification generally
associated with image smoothening, noise addition,
statistical averaging, collusion and image fusion6.

Protecting intellectual property is currently a “hot”
topic for scholars, for university administrators and for the
media and publishing industries. This has drawn lawyer,
legislators and computing service professionals. For fine
arts and manuscript sources, quality of representation in
the Internet and other digital images distributions is as
important to the curators as aspects more commonly
considered intellectual property rights. This can be seen
as an extension of an author’s right not to be
misrepresented. DWM is an exciting for researchers
because it is a new field and there is an opportunity to do
pioneering work. It exists for entertainment companies,
museums and libraries because it offers the promise of
better protecting their multimedia content from piracy. The
possibilities for digital watermarks in the fields of geoimaging and e-commerce are only just being realized.
Watermarking can support a broad range of imaging data
types whilst supporting industry standards security
implementations. It is transparent in use, does not
increase files sizes, and yet is highly robust, secure and
customisable. The technology has unique ability to
safeguard, both digital and printed work, and secures the
complete workflow with minimal impact on existing
processes. A deeper understanding of the theory behind
DWM will lead to the design of more robust and reliable
systems for a variety of applications.

10. STANDARDS
The Copy Protection Technical Working Group
(CPTWG) and Digital Audio-Visual Council (DAVIC) are
working hard to develop digital watermarking standards
that will allow wide deployment and acceptance of this
technology. Other visible initiatives are underway at the
International federation of Phonographic Industry (IFPI)
and the Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI) for audio
watermarking and at the DAVIC for watermarking in ecommerce. Standardization will likely happen in different
sectors such as physical media (DVD, CDs), online
media
delivery,
broadcasting,
and
document
authentication in the imaging industry14.

11. LIMITATIONS OF DIGITAL
WATERMARKING
Watermarking relies on a secret key, which serves as
a carrier modulated to transport a message and embed it
in the original content. The drawback is that knowing the
secret key implies the ability of modifying or removing the
watermark—which makes a public watermarking scheme
infeasible for the near future. This means that major
developments in copyright technology will be oriented
toward the rights of the individual, but exclude the
information demands of the general public7.

12. FUTURE OF DIGITAL WATERMARKING
Though publishers’ have been clamoring for some
means to protect their material on electronic networks,
there has been no rush yet to embrace any of the current
schemes. This could be just due to a period of inspection
and appraisal, but the opinion is that publishers and
scientists have yet to fully understand the practical
satisfactions associated with the problem.
As scientists purpose solutions and publishers
experiment with them and debate their merits, some
methods of watermarking will emerge as useful and
widely used. When that happens, there will also be the
emergence of external agencies for monitoring electronic
copyright infringement (much the same as there are
agencies for music and print copyright management). In
the meantime, the challenges is for the scientists to
develop ever more invisible, decodable, and permanent
watermarking methods and perhaps to meet even more
specification as they demand.
34

REFERENCES
1. Cappellini, V. et al. Information theoretic aspects in
digital watermarking (Editorial). Signal Processing,
2001, 8(1), 1117-19.
2. Dittmann, Jana & Nack, Frank. CopyrightCopywrong. IEEE Multimedia, 2000, Oct-Dec, 14-17.
3. Hernandez, Martin; Juan, R. & Kutter, Martin.
Information retrieval in digital watermarking. IEEE
Commu. Mag., 2001, August, 110-16.
4. Jonker, W. & Linnartz, J.P. Digital rights management
in consumer electronics products. IEEE Signal Proc.
Mag., 2004, March, 82-91.
5. Kundur, Deepa. Watermarking with diversity: Insights
and implications. IEEE Multimedia, 2001, 8(4), 46-52.
6. Page, Thomas. Rights management: Digital
watermarking as a form of copyright protection.
Computer Law & Sec. Rep., 1998, 14(6), 390-92.
7. Rao, N.V. & Pandit, S.N.N. Multimedia digital rights
protection using watermarking techniques. Inform.
Sys. Sec., 2007, September, 93-99.
8. Rosenblatt, Bill. DRM, law and technology: An
American perspective. Online Inform. Rev., 2007,
31(1), 73-84.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

9. Wolf, Patrick, et al. Complementing DRM with digital
watermarking: Mark, search, and retrieve. Online
Inform. Rev., 2007, 31(1), 10-21.

13. http://www.dct-ch.ch

10. Yeo, Boon-Lock & Yeung, Minerva M. Watermarking
3D objects for verification. IEEE Comp. Graph. Appli.,
1999, Jan/Feb, 36-45.

15. http://www.nextamp.com

11. http://www.alpvision.com
12. http://www.computerworld.com/action/

14. http://www.ifpi.org

16. http://www.nikkeibp.com/nea/may97/mayspecial/
index.html
17. http://www.signumtech.com
18. http://www.watermarkingworld.org

About the Authors

Dr M. Natarajan is a Senior Scientist at the National Institute of Science Communication And
Information Resources (NISCAIR),New Delhi. He obtained Doctorate in LIS from University of Madras;
Associateship in Documentation and Information Science from DRTC, Indian Statistical Institute,
Bangalore; and MSc in Mathematics. He also passed Computer Systems and Design from Thiagarajar
College of Engineering, Madurai, and PGDCA from SISI, Chennai. He joined INSDOC, Chennai, in
1981 and worked on Networking (SIRNET, MALIBNET), searching from national and international
databases, conducted many training programmes of INSDOC and UGC Refresher courses for LIS
Professionals and delivered lectures. He headed the position of Scientist-in-Charge of INSDOC,
Chennai, and Bangalore, and delivered special lectures at various places. He acted as Programmein-charge for IGNOU courses and still Councillor for IGNOU courses like MLIS and PGDLAN. He
is presently working as a Faculty for AIS course in NISCAIR. He has published more than 100
papers in national and international journals / conferences / seminars / Festschrift volumes, etc.
He is a Life member of many professional associations in India like ILA, IASLIC, SIS, SALIS, MALA,
Academy of Information Science, Mysore, etc. and ordinary member of TLA, RRC, etc.
Dr Gayas Makhdumi has done his PhD from Universtiy of London. He is a Commonwealth scholar
and currently the University Librarian at Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi. He has vast experience
in the library management and conducting the BLIS courses at Jamia. He also conducted many
UGC Refresher courses for Librarians with the help of Academic Staff College. He has published
many papers in national and international journals / conferences / seminars. He is a life member
of many professional associations in India.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

35

