DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 3, May 2009, pp. 36-42
© 2009, DESIDOC

Intrinsic Motivation of Librarians in University
Libraries in Karnataka
T.Y. Mallaiah and P.S. Yadapadithaya
Mangalore University Library, Mangalagangothri, Mangalore-574 199
E-mail: mallaiahty@yahoo.com; subramanyayp@lycos.com

ABSTRACT
This paper discusses major implications for intrinsic motivation and managerial process in university
libraries. The study is based on the primary data collected from 15 university librarians in Karnataka through
a pre-tested, structured, comprehensive questionnaire with a response rate of 100 per cent. It paper reports
on the intrinsic motivation of librarians in the university libraries of Karnataka in respect of their job, job
environment and organization in addition to identifying and analysing the key individual, work and organizational
characteristics influencing their performance expectations. It is hoped that this paper will help library
administrators in managing library personnel both effectively and efficiently.
Keywords: Employee motivation, work environment, employee relations, employee communication, responsibility,
recognition

1. INTRODUCTION
Libraries act as regular and up-to-date information
provider, which is managed by persons having different
motives, drives, attitudes, and perceptions. The users
also have diversified needs, requirements, perceptions,
and behavioural patterns. The professionals ought to be
responsible for understanding and appreciating these
differentials to sense, serve, and satisfy the users’
requirements. Only then, there would be compatibility of
interests between the professionals as the providers of
service and the users of information. This is the basic
objective of every library and all the efforts of the library
should be directed to realise this avowed objective.
Realisation of this objective calls for an understanding
that every action of human beings is associated with
motives and they automatically affect the resulting action.
The human resource in any organisation is its most
expensive but vital asset. Consequently, the future of any
organisation depends more on its staff than on any other
factor. The usefulness of service institutions like libraries
is measured by the services rendered by them to the
users and this in turn depends on the personnel who are
responsible for the efficient and effective delivery of
service. They acquire, organise, and disseminate
information. If the authorities tend to think of their service
almost exclusively, it is very likely that these functions
Received on 5 December 2008

cannot effectively be discharged unless they give due
weightage to those who manage them in universities.
It is imperative that human resource recruited and
selected have to be properly and adequately developed,
motivated, and maintained to provide quality service.
Library professionals, therefore, occupy a prominent and
decisive place in university libraries as compared to
material resources such as buildings, equipment, etc.
The reason is that human resources are animate with
attendant emotions, feelings, beliefs, expectations,
opinions, perceptions, attitudes, and other personal
traits. All material resources in a university library such as
buildings, equipment, books, and other kinds of reading
materials, finance, and managerial methods are
inanimate. The human factor will give the necessary
support and life to all the material resources to provide
useful service to the users. This is the central point of the
whole university system wherein one could find the
various functions performed and services rendered by the
library professionals. Library professionals should know
that one of the most effective ways to win the loyalty of
their staff is to make each employee feel that his/her work
is both important and appreciated. In addition to
possessing an employee-centred attitude, a library
supervisor should be equipped with certain competencies
in dealing with people, should have the ability to make
clear assignments and to delegate authority, should be

competent to instruct and to check completed work,
should know the most effective ways to correct as well as
commend, and should be able to discuss problems with
staff members in an atmosphere of mutual respect, trust,
confidence, goodwill, commonality of interest, shared
vision, and determination to excel.
Therefore, management of university library
personnel is of paramount importance. To realise library’s
unique function of serving as the one unbiased, nonpartisan bureau of information for the people, personnel of
the highest competence and integrity are essential. This
calls for proper management of university library
personnel with a sense of purpose, pride, and direction.
To increase efficiency, improve job satisfaction, and
raise the employee morale, it is essential that an
employee is viewed as physiological, sociological,
psychological, and egoistic creature. People bring to the
workplace, a crystallised and complex set of cognition,
personal feelings, desires, perceptions, and motives.
Thus, one is concerned with matters such as security,
relations with fellow workers, status, roles, and personal
needs. However, when an individual is unsettled about
these, his/her efficiency will be impeded. A person whose
various dimensions are harmoniously attuned will be more
effective in his/her working environment. In gist, the
workplace environment should provide a meaningful,
satisfying, and challenging atmosphere which will
unleash human potential within every individual.

1.1 Conceptual Framework
Herzberg’s1 two-factor (motivation-Hygiene) theory of
motivation work itself has got enormous potential to
increase an employee’s sense of intrinsic satisfaction.
There are two kinds of happiness: process happiness and
destination happiness. The real happiness resides in the
process of doing a particular work and not in the ultimate
outcome of that work. If an individual takes good care of
the process, the results will come automatically. This
necessitates positive mental attitude, self-discipline,
involvement, and commitment on the part of employees to
enjoy the process of carrying out a given task. The three
positive statements (work itself) reveal the extent to which
the respondent loved their work. If a person continuously
enjoys the work itself, it will certainly enhance his/her
perceived sense of personal worth or value.
Sense of personal worth and work itself are
essentially two sides of the same coin. The intrinsic
satisfaction emanating from the work itself on a regular
basis will supplement the stock of one’s own self worth. If
that individual fails to perform the work in the manner
expected by him/her, then the results would decrease the
level of perceived level of self worth. In this sense, loving
one’s own job and its proper performance will generate
incremental personal worth.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

In this kind of research, the available operational
measures are not adequate to directly understand
whether the respondents truly love their job or work.
Accordingly, the supplementary scale of sense of
personal worth containing three negative statements was
used. Therefore, there is no apparent overlapping between
work itself and sense of personal worth since both are
closely interrelated, yet slightly different. In fact, work
itself is a direct measure of one’s own love towards the
work, whereas, the sense of personal worth is a surrogate
(indirect) measure of the perceived outcome of loving the
work itself. For example, if an assistant librarian loves his/
her work itself on a continuous basis, then every
increment of personal worth will be added at the end of
every day to the existing stock of personal worth, and in
turn this will increase the level of his/her self esteem (self
respect and respect from others).

2. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the study were to identify the
motivation factors of librarians working in the university
libraries of Karnataka. The specific objectives of the study
were:
(i)

To assess key human resource management
process and systems prevailing in university libraries
such as employee communication, and involvement,
and human resource development, and

(ii) To identify and examine the major personal, work,
and organisational factors influencing motivation of
librarians.

3. METHODOLOGY
The study was mainly based on the primary data
collected from the librarians working in different university
libraries (regular and deemed) of Karnataka. All the 15
librarians in the academic and deemed universities in
Karnataka (Mangalore, Mysore, Karnatak, Bangalore,
Gulbarga, Kuvempu, Kannada (Hampi), Indian Institute of
Science (IISc), Indian Institute of Management (IIM),
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences
(NIMHANS), Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Technology
Karnataka, University of Agriculture Sciences of Dharwad
and Bangalore, and Manipal Academy of Higher
Education (MAHE) were selected for collecting their
opinion and views on the various aspects of the working
and management of libraries.
The study relates to intrinsic motivation of librarians.
Hence, the information, opinions, perceptions and
attitudes of these library professionals were collected and
analysed. A sincere attempt has been made to elicit a
consistent style of response. An attempt was also made
to ask close-ended questions. The questionnaires were
mailed to 15 librarians working in various universities of
37

Karnataka. It is heartening to note that all of them have
responded to the questionnaire.

(i)

Further, the filled in questionnaire was coded, and
each item in the questionnaire was analysed using
advanced statistical tools and techniques. Factor
analysis was carried out for measuring and assessing
intrinsic motivation of librarians.

(ii) People already in the library profession would be
advising their children/kith and kin to adopt
librarianship as a career.

4. REVIEW OF LITERATURE
A study by Norse2 has shown that low salary,
monotonous routine work, lack of initiative and
development compounded by limited avenues for
promotion were the causes of dissatisfaction. Presthus3 in
his study of librarians, found only a marginal degree of job
satisfaction among librarians. His investigation further
revealed that two thirds of the librarians would not choose
librarianship, if they were given another chance. Plate and
Stone4 noted that recognition and achievement were
considered as the biggest motivation. It was in the
context of American librarianship that human relations
theories first made their impact, notably in the work of
Plate and Stone, leading to the subsequent rise of
participative as opposed to authoritarian style of
management. Their results largely verified the theories of
McGregor and Herzberg, showing that the two biggest
motivators were recognition and achievements, and the
biggest dissatisfier was institutional policy and
administration.
Wahba5 in his study on motivation, performance, and
job satisfaction in libraries found that work as the highest
source of satisfaction, and satisfaction with work is highly
correlated with motivation. Correlation between job
satisfaction and job performance is not conclusive, but job
dissatisfaction leads to negative job performance such as
high turnover rate. Therefore, there is a need for future
studies on the quality of the work environment in libraries
and its ability to promote intrinsic satisfaction emerging
from within an individual.
Biscoe and Stone6 proposed to bring about a change
in the perception of library as a workplace, which would
enhance the quality of work in libraries. According to the
study conducted by Champawat7 McGregor’s ‘X’ and ‘Y’
theories were found to be relevant to Indian library
management. He carried out a study to find out the
relevance of McGregor’s theories of motivation. The
pioneering survey on motivation of university librarians in
India was conducted by Kishore8 for his research study in
Punjab University. Maslow’s theory of hierarchy of needs,
Herzberg’s two factor theory of motivation and Vroom’s
expectancy valence model of motivation were the basis of
his work. Sample consisted of 240 respondents from 28
university libraries located in 19 places. He hypothesised
that:
38

The choice of library profession, as a career would be
preceded by a vocational growth process.

(iii) Work efficiency would be related to both intrinsic and
extrinsic motivating factors.
For collecting the data, he used three tools: work
efficiency rating scale, Maslow’s security-insecurity
inventory, and structured interview schedule. The first and
the last tools were constructed by the investigator. His
statistical techniques used for the study were
frequencies, percentages and Chi-square and for
comparison, he used mean, standard deviation, and ‘t’
ratio. The results did not support the first and second
hypotheses and highlighted that there was a strong
correlation between motivational factors and work
efficiency. The study suggested more investigations on
the subject to arrive at clear and conclusive results.
Line9 advocated that to avoid demotivating the staff,
the demotivating factors ought to be avoided, namely, rigid
grading structures and hierarchies ignoring staff, brushing
aside suggestions, claiming credit for their ideas,
showing no interest in staff as humans, criticising but
never appreciating them, confusing and patronising staff,
giving them unclear job descriptions, and reporting lines
avoiding consultation, excluding them from any
involvement, and being negative.
Nkereuwem10 in his study indicated that Nigerian
academic library staff responds to monetary rewards.
Blackwell’s11 studies revealed that staff tended to be
dissatisfied with pay and opportunities for promotion and
liked more training and better communications.
Thapisa’s12, study of job content is yet another factor,
which help motivate employees. In his study of motivation
among librarians, he found that to motivate employees, it
is absolutely essential to study job content with a view to
enriching it. He analysed the relationship between
motivation, organisational structure, and work design. He
preferred teamwork approach to bureaucratic
management and introduced the triple-tier, dual concept
organisational structure. He described the features of an
effective system.
Rowley13 identified some of the issues that affect the
motivation of staff in libraries. He argues that such
motivation is central to a quality culture. As libraries
become more sophisticated in their approach to ensure
quality, self-motivation will become a central issue. He
briefly reviews the rational-economic model, the social
model, the self-actualising model and the complex model
as a basis for reviewing motivation of staff. Environmental
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

factors that had an impact on motivation include
approaches to financial rewards, culture and the diversity
of staff experience and roles. Possible strategies for
motivation include development strategies such as
appraisal, managing dissatisfiers, and financial and social
rewards. Shih’s14 studies of volunteer library staff in public
libraries in Taiwan found that the strongest motivation was
social responsibility and human relationships and that
there existed positive correlations between motivation and
job satisfaction. Abifarin’s15 investigation of the level of
motivation among librarians and para-professionals in
Nigerian university libraries reveal a general
dissatisfaction with training opportunities, professional
development, work environment, sabbatical leave,
communication, and management style. All the
respondents agreed with the frequency of development of
staff in their respective libraries. Further, Abifarian
suggests some practical ways of motivating staff. Among
these is the management style of university librarians
going out to see for themselves what is going on in the
various sections of the library. By this, librarians will be
able to observe their staff at work, talk to them in their
various sections on a regular basis and be able to carry
out on-the-spot assessment, listen to, and praise staff as
the case may be.

was used to extract factors. The factors, which had Eigen
value of more than one, were considered and the rest of
the factors were not considered as they had insignificant
Eigen values. The connotations of variables were
interpreted as seen through rotated component matrix.
Factor solutions can best be interpreted with respect to
the pertinent field of research as also the researcher’s
insight into the subject. The subjective interpretations are
sometime essential to reach meaningful conclusions,
which may often lead to new thought in the concerned
field. Thurston19 and Kim and Mueller20 have suggested
that one should look for subjective insights rather than
looking for merely numerical values. Keeping these
observations in view, the researcher had taken the
variables with bipolar loadings of 0.50 and above as
significant for each factor analysis.

5.2 Factor Analysis of Intrinsic Motivation
Employee motivation has two principal dimensions,
namely, extrinsic and intrinsic motivation. Extrinsic
motivation is influenced by various factors external to the
job and job environment such as salary, working
conditions, supervision, and organisational policies. On
the other hand, certain factors internal to the job and job
environment such as the work itself, perceived sense of
responsibility, recognition, achievement, and personal
advancement govern intrinsic motivation. It is worth noting
that intrinsic factors have greater potential to motivate the
employees than the external motivators do.

Gradisar and Cesnovar16 argued that successful work
for the attainment of the goals of the organisation did not
depend only on money. Davis’s17 study, whether staff was
motivated to provide library services to users and what
role, if any, motivation played, of public libraries in the
Cape Peninsula in South Africa indicated that in-service
training, study incentives, continuing education, and
performance appraisal played a role in motivating staff.

Factor analysis from the data set of six variables
suggests two factors to be generated that account for
77.94 per cent of the total variance (Table 1) in the scores.
The rest of 22.07 per cent of variance produced n number
of factors; these factors are insignificant because of low
Eigen values and low per cent of variance in the data set of
six variables. These factors explain two major subsystems of intrinsic motivation pertinent to library
workplace namely work itself and sense of personal
worth. These factors individually possess 54.09 per cent,
and 23.84 per cent of variance, respectively, and are
components of a major system called intrinsic motivation.

5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
5.1 Factor Analysis
Factor analysis was performed for determining the
intrinsic motivators and motivation of librarians. The
analysis has been discussed in terms of total variance
and rotated component matrix. Kaiser’s criterion Child18

Table 1. Total variance explained of intrinsic motivation
Component

Initial Eigen values

Extraction sums of squared loadings

Total

Per cent of
variance

Cumulative
Per cent

Total

Per cent of
variance

Cumulative
Per cent

1.

3.245

54.091

54.091

3.245

54.091

54.091

2.

1.431

23.844

77.935

1.431

23.844

77.935

3.

0.690

11.505

89.440

-

-

-

4.

0.475

7.915

97.355

-

-

-

5.

0.117

1.954

99.310

-

-

-

6.

0.041

0.690

100.000

-

-

-

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

39

The Kaiser’s rotated component matrix is given in Table 2
and the Scree plot of the same is presented in Fig. 1.
Factor 1: Work Factor is defined as work itself, which can
measure the attributes of the employee work motivational
factors and is presented in Table 3. As shown in Table 3,
work itself emerged as one of the main determinants of
intrinsic motivation of the employees. As a factor, work
itself is measured by three variables: (i) sense of personal
satisfaction, (ii) pride in doing the job, and (iii) creative
ways of doing the job.

and creativity with a view to enhancing the quality of work
performance. In turn, this experience will certainly
motivate the employee to take pride in doing the job to the
best of his/her ability, imagination and creativity.
From this analysis, it could be inferred that work
itself can be a powerful intrinsic motivating factor for the
simple reason that the jobholder is deriving the real
satisfaction in the process of performing meaningful,
satisfying, and challenging job duties and responsibilities
demanded by a specific job.

Most of the respondents reported that they took pride
in doing their jobs as well as they could feel a sense of
personal satisfaction derived from doing their jobs well
(0.939 loading). Majority of the respondents expressed
that they were motivated enough to think in terms of
developing better ways of doing their jobs both effectively
and efficiently (0.819 loading). Finally, large number of
respondents identified a sense of personal satisfaction
derived from doing their jobs well (0.778 loading).

Factor 2: Sense of Personal Worth, identified to be a
sense of personal worth, constitutes another important
determinant of intrinsic motivation of the employees. For
the purpose of this study, a sense of personal worth is
conceptualised as a construct (term) comprising three
aspects: (i) linkage between the quality of performance
and the self-opinion, (ii) being unhappy when the work is
not up to one’s own standard, and (iii) looking back on the
day’s work with satisfaction.

As a matter of fact, a job should be meaningful,
satisfying, and challenging to the jobholder in order to
inspire him/her for turning out superior work performance
and deriving greater level of job-satisfaction. Furthermore,
if the job contains greater motivational potential, the
employee will experience autonomy to use imagination

Based on the results presented in Table 4, it is worth
noting that majority of the respondents reported the reality
of rating themselves down when they did their jobs very
badly with factor loading 0.639. In addition to this, most of
them also felt unhappy when their work was not up to their
normal standard with factor loading 0.934. Many
respondents wished to look back on the day’s work at the
end of the day with a sense of satisfaction (0.835 loading).

Table 2. Rotated component matrix of
intrinsic motivation

Sl. No.

Components
Work itself

6. IMPLICATIONS

Sense of
personal worth

1.

0.778

0.038

2.

0.419

0.639

3.

0.939

0195

4.

-0.178

0.934

5.

0.409

0.835

6.

0.819

0.354

In summary, an employee’s sense of personal worth
will be increased only when he/she performs the job tasks
both competently and proficiently meeting one’s own
normal standard with a view to looking back at that
completed work with satisfaction. Hence, every job
should contain substantial potential to improve the
employee’s perception of personal worth. In conclusion,
higher the sense of personal worth provided by the work
itself, the greater the potential of motivating the
employees intrinsically (Fig. 2) and get superior work
performance.

3.5
3.0

Eigen value

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
.5
0.0
1

2

3

4

5

Component number

Figure 1. Scree plot of intrinsic motivation.
40

6

Every library professional is having a powerful
motivational fuse which should be plugged timely and
appropriately. Proper management of their intrinsic
expectations (of course hidden or subtle in nature) will
definitely go a long way in enhancing the perceived level of
intrinsic satisfaction. This would enable them to put
forward physical, mental, intellectual, social and spiritual
efforts to turn out superior work performance. An effective
performance management system will ensure the
provision of monetary and non-monetary (psychological)
rewards and recognitions schemes. Under such
circumstances, library professionals would experience
process happiness and enhancement of their selfDESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

Table 3. Factor I: Work itself
Sl. No.

Variables

Loadings

1.

I take pride in doing my job as well as I can

0.939

2.

I try to think of ways of doing my job
effectively

0.819

3.

I feel a sense of personal satisfaction when I
do this job well

0.778

Table 4. Factor II: Sense of personal worth
Sl. No.

Variables

Loadings

1.

I feel unhappy when my work is not up to my usual
standard

0.934

2.

I like to look back on the day’s work with a sense
of satisfaction

0.835

3.

My opinion of myself goes down when I do this job
badly

0.639

Motivation (1)
(Intrinsic, long-lasting, selfreinforcing)
Efforts (2)
(Physical, mental, intellectual
social, spiritual)

Satisfaction (5)
(Process happiness
and enhancement of
self-esteem)

Performance (3)
(Appraisal and performance
improvement)

Reward & Recognition (4)
(Recognition for the job well-done
monetarily and non-financially)
Figure 2. Intrinsic motivation-satisfaction cycle.

esteem. This cyclical process further motivates them to
be on the right track of superior service delivery. Just like
any other organisational intervention, motivating the
library professionals should be effectively aligned with the
nine key elements—people, structure, task, technology,
culture, strategy, systems, processes and environment.
That is why, one can only imitate the best practices of
motivating personnel but cannot duplicate. This is
precisely due to the tact that motivation is culturespecific, industry-specific, and organisation-specific and
context or situation- specific in nature. Hence, motivators
and motivation process are highly dynamic in terms of
contents and the context.

7. CONCLUSION
Work environment is continuously influenced by the
perceived quality of physical, social, and psychological
conditions available in the workplace. It is an indisputable
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

fact that work ethics (values, beliefs and norms of
behaviour generally manifested in the organisation) will
influence the work culture, and in turn, the work culture
will determine the quality of work environment. In this
sense, work environment is comparable to the super
structure and work culture and work ethics constitute the
solid foundation supporting the super structure.

REFERENCES
1. Herzberg, Frederick; Mausner, B. & Snyderman, B.
The motivation to work. John Wiely, New York. 1959.
2. Norse, Louise H. Speaking for the dissatisfied young
assistants. ALA Bulletin, 1937, 31, 629-34.
3. Presthus, Robert. Technological change and
occupational responses: A study of librarians. Office
of Education, Bureau of Research. Washington,
D.C.,1970.
41

4. Plate, Kenneth H. & Stone, Elizabeth W. Factor
affecting librarian’s job satisfaction: A report of two
studies. Library Quarterly, 1974, 44(2), 97-110.

12. Thapisa, A.P.N. Structures, efficacy and motivation
among librarians. Library Management, 1993, 14(5),
20-26.

5. Wahba, Susanne Patterson. Motivation, performance
and job satisfaction in libraries. Law Lib. J., 1978,
71(2), 270-78.

13. Rowley, Jennifer. Motivation of staff in libraries. Library
Management, 1996, 17(5), 31-35.

6. Biscoe, Eleanor Lynch & Stone, Elizabeth W.
Motivation and staff development. J.Lib. Admin.,
1980, 1(1), 55-72.
7. Champavat, C.S. Douglas McGregor visits Jaipur
Information Centre: More of ‘Y’ and less of ‘X’ is the
answer: A case study. Herald of Lib. Sci., 1981, 20(12), 28-37.
8. Kishore, Juggal. In Personnel management in
libraries. Ess Ess publication, New Delhi,1981. pp.
111-15.
9. Line, M. B. How to de-motivate staff: A brief guide.
Library Management, 1992, 13(1), 4-7.
10. Nkereuwem, E.E. The correlation between job
satisfaction, job attitudes and work behaviour among
the staff in academic libraries in Nigeria. Inform.
Services and Use, 1992, 12(3), 253-26.
11. Bakewll, K.G.B. Motivation of library staff. Library
Management, 1993, 14(5), 18-19.

42

14. Shih, S.H.A. Study on the library volunteers: Their
characteristic, participated motivation and job
satisfaction in the public libraries. J. Educat. Media
Lib. Sci., 1997, 34(4), 422-50.
15. Abifarin, A. Motivating staff in Nigerian University
Libraries. Library Management, 1997, 18(3-4), 12428.
16. Gradisar, V. & Cesnovar, N. What motivates librarians
working in non-profit making organisations?
Knjiznica, 1997, 41(2-3), 75-88.
17. Davis, G.R. Staff motivation versus service: A case
study. Cape Librarian, 1999, 43(3), 8-11.
18. Child, Dennis. The essentials of factor analysis. Holt,
Rinehart and Winton, London, 1972. 43 p.
19. Thurston, L.L. Psychological implications of factor
analysis. American Psychologist, 1948, 3, 402.
20. Kim, Jae-On & Mueller, Charles W. Factor analysis.
Sage Publications, New Delhi, 1978. 45 p.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

