DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 3, May 2009, pp. 49-54
© 2009, DESIDOC

Secure Authenticated Key Exchange Protocol for Credential Services
R.Balakrishna1, U. Rajeswara Rao2, and N. Geethanjali2
1

Department of CSE, Don Bosco Institute of Technology, Bangalore-570 064
2.
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science and Technology
S.K. University, Anantapur-515 003

ABSTRACT
Remote user authentication and key agreement system through smartcard is a viable practical solution
to validate the eligibility of a remote user and thus to provide a secure communication. This paper suggests
a Secure Authenticated Key Exchange Protocol (SAKEP) for Credential Services. The major intrinsic worth
of this scheme include that, the system do not require any verification table and the user is at liberty to choose
and change the password. Further, with this system, the computation and communication costs are lower
as the scheme adopts one-way hash functions, block ciphers and smartcard. In addition, the proposed scheme
offers mutual authentication between the server and the user by a nonce-based plan and is free from timesynchronisation problem. The proposed scheme is secured against Id-theft, also resists to replay attacks,
stolen verifier attacks, guessing attacks, reflection attack, and offers forward secrecy and known-key security.
Keywords: Key exchange protocol, KEP, authentication, smartcard, secure, ID-theft

NOMENCLATURE
Ui

:

The user.

IDi

:

The user identity.

PWi

:

The password of Ui.

h (.)

:

A one-way hash function.

Å

:

Bitwise XOR operation.

||

:

Concatenation.

Ek (y)

:

Encryption of y with k.

Dk (y)

:

Decryption of y with k.

1. INTRODUCTION
In the view of rapid advancement and utility of
computer network, achieving secrecy and authentication
becomes an important requirement so that the user
authentication can avoid access to unauthorised network
server. When a client choose a service with a server, the
transmitted messages between them has to be
maintained undisclosed, for which those schemes are
built with a session key and get protected so that their
subsequent communications becomes secured and
protected. The scheme proposed by Lamport1 to
authenticate a remote user over an unsecured channel,
Received on 5 September 2008

and several other such schemes proposed to improve
functionality, security and efficiency2-9, 11,12,14,15 are based
on static login-ID which is prone to leak partial information
from the user’s login message to the adversary. The
adversary in turn intercepts the login ID and later
manipulates it with other intercepted parameters and
forges the login ID. Therefore, employing a dynamic-ID for
each login can avoid the risk of ID-theft.
A typical remote authentication scheme consists of a
user and a server. Before a new user can use services of
the server, the user first has to register at the server to log
into server; the user has to submit identity and the
corresponding password to the server. The server in turn
computes the one-way hashing value of the user’s
password and compares the same with that stored with in
the verification table. The above approach incurs the risk
and cost of protecting as well as managing the verification
table and will prevent the replay attack.
As a remedy to the above problem, several other
authentication schemes without the verification table were
proposed2,3, 5-8, 10, 11, 12, 14 and these schemes possessed
inherent disadvantages like difficulty of memorising the
server generated random password or a long key. These
were effectively addressed by introducing “function to let
users freely choose passwords”2, 5-7,10,11,12,14. Hang12 reports
several internet frauds occurring due to unilateral
49

authentication. Thus, there is a need for stressing for the
mutual authentication between the user and server so as
to ensure the security of authentication2,5,6,9,10,14,15.
The above short comings are effectively addressed by
adopting smart cards in network security protocols and
also remote user authentication schemes owing to its low
cost, portability, efficiency, and the cryptographic
capabilities. Further, when these cards are preferred for
remote authentication and session key agreement
application, the following criterions becomes crucial:


C1: No verification table: No verification or password
table is stored in a server.



C2: Freely chosen password: Users can freely
choose and change their passwords.



C3: Low computation and communication cost: Due
to the power constraints and small flash memory of
smart cards, they may not provide a powerful
computation capability and high bandwidth.



C4: Mutual authentication: Servers and users can
authenticate each other.



C5: Session key agreement: Servers and users must
negotiate a session key to be used for protecting
their subsequent communications.

suffered with non exchangeability of session key. In view
of the above discussion, the present study is aimed at
proposing an efficient dynamic-ID based password
authenticated key agreement system using smart cards
which fulfills all criterions mentioned and also the
conditions of nonce-base.

2. THE PROPOSED SCHEME
The study proposes the dynamic ID-based password
authenticated key agreement using smartcards without
time concurrency. The salient features of the proposed
scheme are: registration is performed only once; login,
mutual authentication and session key exchanges are
executed every time as and when the user logs into the
system, and change of password may be invoked
whenever the user wants to change password.

2.1 Registration Phase
As the user Ui submits identity IDi and chooses
password PWi and submits IDi and h (PWi) to the remote
system through a secured channel, the remote system
performs the following steps:
Computes Ti = h (IDi || x) where x is a secret key of
the remote system.
Vi = Ti Å h (IDi || h (PWi))

In addition, the following few security criteria are also
essential for session key agreement9,10.


S1: Session key security: At the end of the key
agreement the session is known only to the user and
the server.



S2: Forward secrecy: A compromised long-lived
secret key cannot derive the session keys used
before.



S3: Known-key security: Only knowing a compromised session key cannot determine the other used
session keys.

Chien4, et al. proposed a novel user authentication
scheme that satisfied the above criterions except C5 that
suffered by a serious time synchronisation problem of the
user’s time and the server’s time to an extent of
undesirable range. The improved scheme of Jaung10
satisfied the session key agreement mechanism. Later in
2004, Das6, et al. came out with dynamic ID-based
remote user authentication scheme with unilateral
authentication using smartcards. Recently the
contributions of Liao11, et al. enhanced the security to the
dynamic ID-based remote user authentication scheme
that offered mutual authentication. But both the above

50

Bi = h (PWi) Å h(x) and Hi= h (Ti)
The remote system issue a smart card to the user
with the secured information {Vi, Bi, Hi, h (.), y} where y is
the server’s secret.

2.2 Login Phase
As the user Ui inserts smart card into the card reader
terminal, upon keying in the identity IDi and password
PWi*, the smart card performs the following,
(i)

Ti* = Vi Å h (IDi || h (PWi)) and Hi*= h (Ti*). Checks
whether Hi* = Hi or not. If yes, the legality of the user
can be assured and proceeds to the next step;
otherwise, reject the login request.

(ii) Generates a nonce Ni and computes
CIDi = h (PWi) Å h (NiÅ yÅ Ti)
Pi = Ti Å h (NiÅ y)
Qi = h (Bi Å NiÅ y)
(iii) Send a login request message m = {CIDi, Pi, Qi, Ni}
to the Server.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

2.3 Mutual Authentication and Session Key
Exchange Phase

3. SECURITY ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED
SCHEME

Upon receiving message m {CIDi, Pi, Qi, Ni}, the
remote system authenticates the user Ui based on the
following steps:

Security analysis of the proposed scheme for various
attacks are:

(i)

Computes Ti = Pi Å h (NiÅ y), h (PWi) = CIDi Å h
(NiÅ yÅ Ti) and Bi = h (PWi) Å h(x).

(ii) Computes h (Bi Å NiÅ y) and then compares it with
Qi. If they are not equal, the server rejects the login
request and terminates this session.
(iii) Generates a nonce Nj and computes Mi = h (Bi Å Ni
Å Nj Å y) and the session key sk = h (Bi ||Ni || Nj || y)
and send back the message {Esk (Mi), Nj} to the
user Ui. Upon receiving the acknowledgement
message. {Esk (Mi), Nj}, the user Ui performs the
following steps.
(iv) Computes the session key sk’ = h (Bi ||Ni || Nj || y)
and checks whether Dsk’ (Esk (Mi)) = h (Bi Å Ni Å Nj
Å y). If they are equal, Ui confirms that he/she
communicates with the valid remote system/server
and that the remote system has received sk
correctly, otherwise the connection is interrupted.
(v)

The user sends Esk (Nj + 1) to the server.

(vi) Upon receiving the reply message the server
performs Dsk’ (Esk (Nj + 1)) and compares it with Nj
+ 1. If it holds, the identity of the user is assured and
that both the server and the user have agreed on the
same session key sk.

2.4 Password Change Phase
This phase may be invoked whenever the user Ui
wants to change the password. Further the user can
easily change the password without any assistance from
the remote system.
The adversary updating passwords freely by stealing
smartcard are prevented in this proposed scheme and the
steps followed are:
The smartcard first follows the Step 1 of the login
phase requests the legality of the card holder by allowing
the card holder to resubmit a new password PWinew and
then Vi stored in the smartcard will be updated with Vi
new = Ti Å h(IDi || h(PWinew)). Similarly, Bi stored in the
smartcard will be replaced with
Binew=BiÅ h (PWi) Å h (PWinew), which yields h
(PWinew) Å h(x). Thus the password has been changed
with the new password PWinew and terminates the
operation thus rejecting the smart card.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

3.1 Password Guessing Attacks
The proposed scheme provides a shield against the
password guessing attack and is confirmed as follows:
Let the impersonate guesses Ui‘s password and is
PW*, the mutual authentication phase is performed as
follows.
The smartcard generates nonce Ni and computes
CIDi = h (PW*) Å h (NiÅ yÅ Ti)
Pi = Ti Å h (NiÅ y)
Qi = h (Bi Å NiÅ y) and sends a login request
message m = {CIDi, Pi, Qi, Ni} to the server. After getting
the message, S computes Ti = Pi Å h(NiÅ y), h(PW*) =
CIDi Å h(NiÅ yÅ Ti) and Bi = h(PW*) Å h(x). Computes h
(Bi Å NiÅ y) and then compares it with Qi.. However,
these two must be unequal as Bi = h (PWi) Å h(x) ‘“ h
(PW*) Å h(x). So, S can detect on-line password
guessing attack.

3.2 Replay Attacks
The replay attack is replaying the same message of
the receiver or the sender again and again. This proposed
scheme uses nonce to withstand replay attacks and is
confirmed as follows. After intercepting the previous login
request {CIDi, Pi, Qi, Ni} from the user Ui, the attacker
may replay the message to the server. Then the attacker
can receive acknowledgement message {Esk (Mi), Nj}
from the server after Step3 of mutual verification phase.
However, the attacker cannot compute sk without
knowing Bi and y. Similarly, when we assume that the
attacker replies a previous message {Esk (Mi), Nj} to Ui,
where Mi is associated with N1. Upon receiving {Esk (Mi),
N2}, Ui, computes sk’ = h (Bi ||Ni || Nj || y) and checks
whether Dsk’ (Esk (Mi)) = h (Bi Å Ni Å Nj Å y). It is
obvious that the equality cannot hold since Ni is not equal
to Ni*.

3.3 Server Spoofing Attack
In this proposed scheme, since the adversary can not
construct the session key sk without the knowledge of Bi
and y. After communicating with the masqueraded server,
the legal user can detect immediately and terminate the
session and therefore provides protection to the
authorised user against the masqueraded threats.

51

3.4 Stolen Verifier Attack
As the verifier table is not a part of the proposed
scheme it is an advantage in guarding the authentic user
against stolen verifier attack.

criterions are presented in the Table 1.
Table1. Functionality comparisons among the
proposed schemes and others
Criterions*

Proposed
present

Chien, et al.

Juang

Das, et al.

3.5 Insider Attack

C1

Not required

Not required

Not required Not required

In the registration phase, instead of plain text, the
password is submitted in the form of (PWi) the danger of
revealing the password to S is eliminated thus threat
against the insider attack is not completely elimininated.

C2

Portable

Portable

Portable

Portable

C3

Low

Low

Low

Low

C4

Agrees

Agrees

Agrees

Not
agrees

C5

Protects

Protects

Fails to
protects

Fails to
protects

C6

Exits

Not exits

Exits

Not exits

C7

Not exits

Exits

Exits

Exits

3.6 User Anonymity Protected
The user Ui will send the login request {CIDi, Pi, Qi,
N1} to the server in every login and even if the attacker
intercepts and tries to analyse the login, message is
infeasible to derive IDi from the login message due to the
Phase 2 mentioned above. Further, as the login message
is dynamic for each login and as the parameters of login
message, CIDi is associated with nonce Ni and
dynamically gets changed. Similarly, the values of Pi and
Qi that are related to nonce Ni also get changed thus
preventing the identity of the authentic user to the
adversary.

3.7 Security of Session Key
The functions of the security session key provided in
the proposed scheme are detailed in the following lines

3.7.1 Session Key Security
The session key is associated with Bi and y, which
are unknown to the adversary and hence, the session key
is known only to the user and the server.

3.7.2 Known Key Security
The session key is associated with Bi and y, which
are unknown to the adversary. Even though the past
session key sk is disclosed, the attacker cannot derive Bi
and y based on the security of one-way hash function.

3.7.3 Forward Secrecy
By compromising the secret key x, the adversary can
not compute Bi without PWi. Thus, the adversary can not
derive the session key sk, since it is computed by h (Bi
||Ni || Nj || y).

4. FUNCTIONALITY AND PERFORMANCE
ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED SCHEME

* C1: Verification table; C2: Freely chosen password; C3: Computation
and communication cost; C4: Mutual authentication; C5: Session key
agreement; C6: User’s anonymity; C7: Time synchronisation problem.

Table 1 shows that the proposed scheme has
improved functionality over other schemes and is more
secured and reliable than other scheme owing to the user
friendly time synchronisation compatibleness and
protection of subsequent communication by the
existence of session key agreement as well as protection
to the users against threats like hackers, etc. due to the
existence of user’s anonymity.

4.2 Performance
The comparisons of dynamic ID-based present
proposed scheme and other with respect to their
performance based on computational cost are presented
in the Table 2. The login phase of the proposed scheme is
built with seven hash functions while Chien, et al. require
each one symmetric key operation and exponentiation
operation. Further, in the proposed scheme, in the
authentication phase four symmetric key operations and
eight hash functions have been incorporated in place of
three symmetric key operations, three exponentiations
and two hash functions in Chien, et al. scheme. Thus it
can be concluded that the present proposed scheme
offers lower computation costs.

5. CONCLUSION
The paper presented an efficient dynamic ID-based
password authenticated key agreement scheme. The
proposed scheme has the following advantages.


The major intrinsic worth of this scheme include that,
the system do not require any verification table and
the user is at liberty to choose and change the
password.



Further, with this system, the computation and

4.1 Functionality
The comparisons of functionality of the proposed
scheme with that of other by considering the crucial
52

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

Table2. Performance comparisons among the reposed
schemes and others
Schemes

Present proposed
Chien, et al.
Juang
Das, et al

Computational
cost of login
phase

Computational cost of
authentication phase

7H

4S+8H***

1S+1E

3S+3E+2H***

1S+1E+1H

3S+1E+2H***

5H

3H

communication costs are lower as the scheme
adopts one-way hash functions, block ciphers and
smartcard.


In addition the scheme offers mutual authentication
between server and user which is a nonce based plan
that does not have any serious time-synchronization
problem.



The proposed system is secured against Id-theft,
also resists to replay attacks, stolen verifier attacks,
guessing attacks, reflection attack and offers forward
secrecy and known-key security.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are thankful to the management,
principal and faculty of Don Bosco Institute of Technology,
Bangalore, for the encouragement received throughout
this research work.

REFERENCES
1. Lamport, L. Password authentication with insecure
communication. Communication ACM, 1981, 24(11),
770-72.
2. Awasthi, Amit.K. & Lal, Sunder. A remote user
authentication with forward secrecy. IEEE Trans.
Consumer Electronics, 2003, 49(4), pp. 1246-48.
3. Chang, C. & Wu, T. Remote password authentication
with smart cards. IEEE Proceed.–Comp. Digital
Techn., 1991, 138(3), 165-68.
4. Chang, C. & Hwang, S. Using smart cards to
authenticate remote passwords. Compu. Mathe.
Appli. 1993, 26(7), 19-27.
5. Chien, H.; Jan, J. & Tseng, Y. An efficient and
practical solution to remote authentication: Smart
card. Computers and Security, 2002, 21(4), 372-75.
6. Chien, Hung-Yu & Chen, Che-Hao. A remote
password authentication preserving user anonymity.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
on Advanced Information Networking and Applications
(AINA ’05), 2005.
7. Das, M.L.; Saxena, A. & Gulathi, V.P. A dynamic IDbased remote user authentication scheme. IEEE
Trans. Consumer Electron., 2004, 50(2), 629-31.
8. Hwang, M.S. & Li, L.H. A new remote user
authentication scheme using smart cards. IEEE
Trans. Consumer Electron., 2000, 46(1), 28-30.
9. Juang, W.; Lei, C. & Chang, C. Anonymous channel
and authentication in wireless communications.
Computer Communications, 1999, 22(15-16), 150211.
10. Juang, W. Efficient password authenticated key
agreement using smart cards. Computers and
Security, 2004, 23(2), 167-73.
11. Liao, I.; Lee, C.C. & Hwang, M.S. Security
enhancement for a dynamic ID-based remote user
authentication scheme. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Next Generation Web
Services Practices (NWeSP’05), 2005.
12. Hwang, M.S. & Li, L.H. A new remote user
authentication scheme using smart cards. IEEE
Trans. Consumer Electronic, 2000, 46(1), 28-30.
13. Wang, S.J. Yet another login authentication using Ndimensional construction based on circle property.
IEEE Trans. Consumer Electronic, 2003, 49(2), 33741.
14. Lin, S. & Costello, D. Error control coding:
fundamental and applications. Prentice–Hall,
Englewood- Cliffs, NJ, 1983
15. Leveque, W. Elementary Theory of Number. Dover,
1990.
16. Shen, J.J.; Lin, C.W. & Hwang, M.S. A modified
remote user authentication scheme using smart
cards. IEEE Trans. Consumer Electron., 2003, 49(2),
414-16.
17. Leung, K.C.; Cheng, L.M.; Fong, A.S. & Chen, C.K.
Cryptanalysis of a remote user authentication
scheme using smart cards. IEEE Trans. Consumer
Electron., 2003, 49(3), 1243-45.
18. Lamport, L. Password authentication with insecure
communication. Communication of the ACM, 1981,
24(11), 770-72.

53

Invitation to Authors
If you are a library professional/information manager/information scientist/
information specialist/computer professional or a research scholar with a vision for
developments in information technology, including software, processors, storage
media, and devices having an impact on library and information systems and services,
we invite you to submit a paper for DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information
Technology (DJLIT) and enjoy the following benefits:


Expert editorial support: All papers are wetted by the eminent members of the
Editorial Board of DJLIT.



Critical review: All papers are peer-reviewed by the experts in Library and
Information Science.



Extensive abstracting and indexing for greater visibility: DJLIT is covered in
major indexing and abstracting services like LISA and Indian Science Abstracts.
The full text of DJLIT is being reproduced in electronic databases of HW Wilson
Company, namely, OMNIFILE Full Text Select and OMNIFILE Full Text Mega
as well as Indianjournals.com and Connectjournal.com.



Complimentary copies to the contributors.

Please send your paper/queries to:
The Editor(s)
DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology
House Bulletin Group, 4th Floor
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Defence Research & Development Organisation, Ministry of Defence
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
e-mail:dbit@desidoc.drdo.in

