DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 3, May 2009, pp. 55-58
© 2009, DESIDOC

Is Impact Factor True Evaluation for Ranking Quality Measure?
Khaisar Muneebulla Khan1 and Pradeep Hegde2
1

Department of Library and Information Science, Mangalore University
Mangalagangothri, Mangalore- 574 199
E-mail: khaisarmk@yahoo.com
2

ICFAI Business School, Bangalore-560 062
E-mail: pradeepvenoor@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The paper gives the background, meaning and the criteria of the impact factor explaining their terminologies
and calculations with examples. It discusses its advantages and the associated problems, and states on the
possible misuse and manipulation of the impact factor. The paper concludes with a caution not to finally rely
on the impact factor as the only valid measure to rank journal quality and productivity.
Keywords: Impact factor, citation analysis, librametrics, bibliometrics, informetrics, immediacy index, citation index,
quality measures

1. INTRODUCTION
Evaluating scientific quality is a difficult proposition
which has no standard solutions. Ideally, published
scientific results should be scrutinised by true experts in
the field and given scores for quality and quantity
according to established rules. However, in reality what is
called peer review is usually performed by committees
with general competence rather than with the specialist’s
expertise that is needed to assess primary research data.
Committees, therefore, tend to use secondary criteria like
crude publication counts, journals prestige, the reputation
of authors and institutions, and estimated importance and
relevance of the research field1, thereby making peer
review a rational process or
otherwise. On this
background, it is hardly surprising that alternative
methods for evaluating research are being sought, such
as citation rates and journal impact factors (IF), which
seem to be quantitative and objective indicators directly
related to publish science.
The citation data are obtained from a database
produced by the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) in
Philadelphia, which continuously records scientific
citations as represented by the reference lists of articles
from a large number of the world’s scientific journals. The
references are rearranged in the database to show how
many times each publication has been cited within a
certain period, and by whom, and the results are
Received on 5 January 2009

published as the Science Citation Index (SCI). On the
basis of the SCI and authors’ publication lists, the annual
citation rate of papers by a scientific author or research
group can thus be calculated. Similarly, the citation rate of
a scientific journal–known as the journal impact factor–
can be calculated as the mean citation rate of all the
articles contained in the journal2. Journal impact factors,
which are published annually in SCI Journal Citation
Reports, are widely regarded as a quality ranking for
journals and used extensively by leading journals in their
advertising.

2. MEANING OF TERMS INVOLVED IN THE
CONCEPT
The IF was devised by Eugene Garfield, the founder of
the Institute for Scientific Information, now part of
Thomson, a large worldwide US-based publisher. IF are
calculated each year by Thomson Scientific for those
journals which it indexes, and the factors are published in
Journal Citation Reports. Some related values, also
calculated and published by the same organisation, are


Immediacy index: the average citation number of
an article in that year.



The journal cited half-life: the median age of the
articles that were cited in Journal Citation Reports
each year. For example, if a journal’s half-life in 2005
55

is 5, that means the citations from 2001-2005 are 50
per cent of all the citations from that journal in 2005.


The aggregate IF for a subject category: it is
calculated taking into account the number of
citations to all journals in the subject category and
the number of articles from all the journals in the
subject category.

These measures apply only to journals and not to
individual articles or individual scientists (unlike, say, the
H-index). The relative number of citations an individual
article receives is better viewed as citation impact. It is,
however, possible to measure the IF of the journals in
which a particular person has published articles. This use
is widespread, but controversial. Eugene Garfield warns
about the “misuse in evaluating individuals” because there
is “a wide variation from article to article within a single
journal”3.

3. CALCULATION OF IMPACT FACTOR
The IF for journals are generally calculated based on
a three-year period, and can be viewed as an
approximation of the average number of times papers
published are cited in the two calendar years following
publication. For example, the 2008 IF for a journal would
be calculated as follows:
A = the number of times articles published in 2006-07
were cited in indexed journals during 2008.
B = the number of “citable items” (usually articles,
reviews, proceedings or notes; not editorials and lettersto-the-Editor) published in 2006-07.
The 2008 impact factor = A/B. However, the 2008 IF
will actually be published in 2009, because it could not be
calculated until all of the 2008 publications had been
received. Also, a convenient way of thinking about it is
that a journal that is cited once, on average, for each
article published has an IF of 1 in the equation above.

4. ADVANTAGES OF IMPACT FACTOR
Impact actor has many advantages and benefits for
researchers as well as information professionals,
knowledge managers and the librarians. These are;
(i)

It is sometimes useful to be able to compare different
journals and research groups.

(ii) ISI’s wide international coverage. Web of Knowledge
indexes 9000 science and social science journals
from 60 countries.
(iii) Results are widely (though not freely) available to use
and understand. They are an objective measure, and
have a wider acceptance than any of the alternatives.
56

(iv) In practice, the alternative measure of quality is
“prestige.” This is rating by reputation, which is very
slow to change, and cannot be quantified or
objectively used. It merely demonstrates popularity.

5. PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE
OF JOURNAL IMPACT FACTORS
There are a few inherent problems in journal IF. ISI
excludes certain article types (such as news items,
correspondence, and errata) from the denominator. New
journals, which are indexed from their first published
issue, will receive an IF after the completion of two years’
indexing; in this case, the citations to the year prior to
Volume 1, and the number of articles published in the year
prior to Volume 1 are known zero values. Journals that are
indexed starting with a volume other than the first volume
will not have an IF published until three complete datayears are known; annuals and other irregular publications
will sometimes publish no items in a particular year,
affecting the count. The IF is for a specific time period; it is
possible to calculate the IF for any desired period, for
which the web site gives instructions. Journal Citation
Reports includes a table of the relative rank of journals by
IF in each specific science discipline, such as organic
chemistry or psychiatry. Besides, there are many other
common problems or difficulties that are associated with
IF. These are:
(i)

Journal IF are not statistically representative of
individual journal articles and they correlate poorly
with actual citations of individual articles.

(ii) Authors use many criteria other than impact when
submitting to journals besides; Citations to “noncitable” items are erroneously included in the
database.
(iii) Self citations are not corrected and review articles
are heavily cited which inflate the impact factor of
journals.
(iv) Long articles collect many citations and give high
journal IF where as short publication lag allows many
short-term journal self citations and gives a high
journal IF.
(v)

Citations in the national language of the journal are
preferred by the journal’s authors and selective
journal self citation, i.e., articles tend to preferentially
cite other articles in the same journal.

(vi) Coverage of the database is not complete and books
are not included in the database as a source for
citations.
(vii) Majority of database has an English language bias
which is also dominated by American publications.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

(viii) IF is a function of the number of references per article
in the research field and that the journal set in
database may vary from year to year.
(ix) Research fields with literature that rapidly becomes
obsolete are favoured and depends on dynamics
(expansion or contraction) of the research field.
(x) Many studies have also indicated that the small
research fields tend to lack journals with high impact.
(xi) Relations between fields (for example, clinical vs
basic research) strongly determine the journal IF.

6. MISUSE OF IMPACT FACTOR
It has been very rightly observed by Seglan that ‘the
IF is often misused to predict the importance of an
individual publication based on where it was published’4.
Further, Hansson is of the opinion that ‘this does not work
well since a small number of publications are cited much
more than the majority, for example, about 90 per cent of
Nature’s 2004 IF were based on only a fourth of its
publications’5. The IF, however, averages over all articles
and thus underestimates the citations of the top cited
while exaggerating the number of citations of the average
publications. Academic
reviewers
involved
in
programmatic evaluations, particularly those for doctoral
degree granting institutions, often turn to ISI’s proprietary
IF listing of journals in determining scholarly output. This
builds in a bias which automatically undervalues some
types of research and distorts the total contribution each
faculty member makes. The absolute value of an IF is
meaningless. A journal with an IF of 2 would not be very
impressive in disciplines and fields like Microbiology,
where as it would in Oceanography. Such values are
many a times advertised by scientific publishers.
The comparison of IF between different fields can be
considered as invalid. Yet such comparisons have been
widely used for the evaluation of not merely journals, but
of scientists and of university departments. It is not
possible to say, for example, that a department whose
publications have an average IF below 2 is low level. This
would not make meaning for disciplines like Mechanical
Engineering, where only two review journals attain such a
value. Even in the sciences, it is not fully relevant to fields
like engineering, where the principal scientific output is
conference proceedings, technical reports, and patents.
Outside the sciences, IF are relevant for fields that have a
similar publication pattern to the sciences such as
economics, where research publications are almost
always journal articles, that cite other journal articles. IF
is not relevant to literature, where the most important
publications are books citing other books. Therefore, it is
justified that ISI does not publish a JCR for the
humanities.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

Since only the ISI database journals are used for
determining IF, it undercounts the number of citations
from journals in less-developed countries, and lessuniversal languages. Even though in practice they are
applied this way, IF cannot correctly be the only thing to
be considered by libraries in selecting journals. The local
usefulness of the journal is important for studies and
research than to consider the institution’s faculty member
is editor of the journal or on its editorial review board.

7. MANIPULATION OF IMPACT FACTORS
Manipulation in IF is possible on the basis of the
editorial policy of the journal. It is observed by Foster, that
‘A journal can adopt editorial policies that increase its IF6.
These editorial policies may not necessarily involved in
improving the quality of published scientific work. Journals
sometimes may publish a larger percentage of review
articles. While many research articles remain uncited
after three years, nearly all review articles receive at least
one citation within three years of publication; therefore
review articles can raise the IF of the journal. The
Thomson Scientific website gives directions for removing
these journals from the calculation. For researchers or
students having even a slight familiarity with the field, the
review journals will be obviously the best choice.

8. CONCLUSION
Impact factor may be a reasonable indicator of quality
for journals but there are some other potential proxies or
considerations to rate the journals like readership rates,
subscription rates, etc. IF performs comparably with
subscription and readership rates for foreign journals.
However, when a foreign journal is included, subscription
and readership rates lose much of their correlation with
journal quality, whereas impact factor retains its
correlation. This suggests that impact factor may be less
prone to biases than other available indicators and may
thus be a more strong measure of journal quality.
Impact factor is commonly used as a tool for
managing scientific library collections. Information
professionals/knowledge managers and librarians faced
with finite budgets must make rational choices when
selecting journals for their departments and institutions.
IF helps guide those choices by determining which
journals are most frequently cited?
Many citation studies in medical and related fields
have addressed IF’s validity as a quality measure for
clinical journals. Foster reported poor correlation between
impact factor and journal prestige as ranked by scientists
from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Further, there
are many studies conducted on librametrics,
bibliometrics, informetrics as citation analysis and
citation studies to determine the impact factor and
57

ranking of authorship, journal citation, productivities by
library and information professionals. However, we can
conclude that Journal impact factor has its own
limitations and we believe that further evaluation of
whether and how impact factor measures journal quality
is needed before it is widely adopted as a quantitative
marker of journal quality.

REFERENCES
1. Hansen, H.F. & Jørgensen, B.H. Styring af forskning:
Kan
forskningsindikatorer
anvendes?
Samfundslitteratur, Denmark, 1995.

3. Garfield, Eugen. Der Impact Faktor und seine richtige
Anwendung. Der Unfallchirurg. 1998, 101(6), 413-14.
4. Seglen, P.O. Why the impact factor of journals should
not be used for evaluating research. BMJ, 1997,
314(7079), 498–502.
5. Hansson, S. Impact factor as a misleading tool in
evaluation of medical journals. Lancet, 1995,
346(8979), 906.
6. Foster, W.R. Impact factor as the best operational
measure of medical journals. Lancet, 1995,
346(8985), 1301.

2. Garfield, E. Citation analysis as a tool in journal
evaluation. Science, 1972, 471-9.

58

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

