DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 3, May 2009, pp. 59-64
© 2009, DESIDOC

Application of Radio Frequency Identification Technology in Libraries
M.K. Galhotra1 and A.M. Galhotra2
1

Mata Sundri College for Women, University of Delhi
Mata Sundri Lane, New Delhi-110 002
E-mail: mkgalhotra@rediffmail.com
2

Department of Library & Information Science,
Dr B.R. Ambedkar University, Agra-282 004

ABSTRACT
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) systems were developed about 30 years ago. It is the latest
technology to be used in libraries for book identification, for self checkout, and for sorting and conveying of
library books and also for theft detection. These applications can lead to significant savings in labour costs
and increase in efficiency. They can also reduce data entry errors, enhance customer service, and lower
book theft and can provide a constant record update of media collections. The paper covers the components
and technical features of a modern RFID library system to provide a guideline for the evaluation of this system.
There are still many issues that must be addressed before RFID hits the big time. These include new technology
for efficiency in operations, electromagnetic security systems, IT infrastructure to handle large amount of data,
etc. Finally, the paper discusses the advantages and disadvantages of RFID system in libraries, and the extent
to which this technology has been introduced in a few Indian Libraries.
Keywords: RFID, radio frequency identification, electromagnetic, DSRC, dedicated short-range communication

1.

INTRODUCTION

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) systems were
developed about 30 years ago. They were used for “radio
tracking” of wild animals and evolved later into a
technology, which is used in many industrial applications
today. RFID is a technology that uses electromagnetic or
electrostatic coupling in the radio frequency (RF) portion
of the electromagnetic spectrum to uniquely identify an
object, animal, or person. RFID is coming into increasing
use in industry as an alternative to the bar code. The most
common applications are tracking goods in the supply
chain, re-usable containers, high value tools and other
assets, and parts moving to a manufacturing production
line. RFID is also used for security, payment systems,
and in libraries for circulation purpose. Thousands of
companies and libraries around the world use RFID today
to improve internal efficiencies.

2.

WHAT IS RFID?

RFID is a term used for a radio-enabled device that
communicates with or interrogates a tag or smart label,
which is embedded with a single microchip processor and
Received on 5 November 2008

an antenna. In a library environment, RFID technology
resembles a traditional bar code system. In bar code
system, RFID provides a means of assigning an ID to an
item and reading that ID to perform circulation
transactions or to take inventory1. RFID (sometimes also
called dedicated short range communication, or DSRC)
uses the radio frequency portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum to uniquely identify objects. Good old radio
communications and new efficiencies in fabrication and
miniaturisation go into RFID devices that can help
organise the production and delivery of goods, and enable
personal identification in efficient new ways.2
Like bar codes, RFID tags identify items. However,
unlike bar codes, which must be in close proximity and
line of sight to the scanner for reading, RFID tags do not
require line of sight and can be embedded within
packages. Depending on the type of tag and application,
they can be read at a varying range of distances. In
addition, RFID-tagged items can be read many times
faster than bar-coded items. According to the Harrod’s
Librarian’s Glossary and Reference book3 “RFID is an
alternative to the bar code that uses tiny microchips in
tags to hold and transmit detailed data about the item
59

tagged”. Dictionary for Library and Information Science4
defines RFID as “the use of microchips to tag library
materials and library card, enabling users to check out
items by walking through a self-service station equipped
with an antenna that emits low frequency radio waves”.

3. RFID APPLICATION IN LIBRARIES
RFID is the latest technology to be used in library for
book identification, for self checkout, and for sorting and
conveying of library books and also for theft detection.
The aim of using RFID technology is to increase the
efficiency, reduce data entry errors, and spare staff to
perform more value-added functions5. RFID is a
combination of radio-frequency-based technology and
microchip technology. The information contained on
microchips in the tags affixed to library materials is read
RFID technology regardless of item orientation or
alignment, i.e., the technology does not require line of
sight or a fixed plane to read tags as traditional theft
detection systems do. Distance from the item is not a
critical factor except in the case of extra-wide exit gates.
The corridors at the building exit(s), and can be as wide
as four feet because the tags can be read at a distance of
up to two feet by each of two parallel exit sensors. The
devices used for circulation and inventorying are usually
called “readers” while the ones used at building exits are
usually called “sensors.”
The technology used in RFID systems can replace
both EM (electromechanical) or RF and even the barcodes theft detection systems.

4.

HOW DOES AN RFID SYSTEM WORKS?

An RFID system consists of a tag, which is made up
of a microchip with an antenna, and an interrogator or
reader. The reader sends out electromagnetic waves. The
tag antenna is tuned to receive these waves. A passive
RFID tag draws power from field created by the reader and
uses it to power the microchip’s circuits. The chip then
modulates the waves that the tag sends back to the
reader and the reader converts the new waves into digital
data (Fig.1 ).

5. COMPONENTS OF AN RFID SYSTEM
A comprehensive RFID system has four components:
(i)

RFID tags that are electronically programmed with
unique information;

(ii) Readers or sensors to interrogate the tags;
(iii) Antenna; and
(iv) A server or docking station on which the software that
interfaces with the automated library system is
loaded. It is also possible to distribute the software
among the readers and sensors.
60

Figure 1. RFID management system.

5.1 RFID Tags
The chip and the antenna together are called an RFID
transponder or an RFID tag. The tag is made up of a
programmable microchip with an antenna. The antenna
enables the chip to transmit the identification information
to the reader6. The tag is a heart of RFID system. The tag
can be fixed in side the book’s back cover. Each paperthin tag contains an etched antenna and a microchip with
a capacity of at least 64 bits. There are three types: “read
only”, “WORM,” and “read/write tags.” Tags are “read
only” if the identification is encoded at the time of
manufacture and not rewritable. RFID tags can be read as
long as they are within range of a reader. It depends upon
the frequency of a tag. The frequency of a tag may be low,
high and ultra high5.
RFID systems are more expensive if they operate on
higher frequencies. Different frequencies also have
characteristics that make them more or less useful for
particular applications. Low-frequency RFID systems use
less power and are better able to penetrate non-metallic
substances. They are ideal for scanning objects with
high-water content such as fruits and liquids. Higher
frequencies typically offer better range and can transfer
data faster, but they use more power and are less likely to
pass through materials. Higher frequencies are useful for
air-to-air and air-to-ground communications.
The RFID tag stores data on a tiny computer chip.
The cheapest and most common chip will be the readonly chip, which is likely to carry only a serial number.
More expensive “read-write” chips allow new information
to be added to the tag or written over existing information
when the tag is within range of a reader. Writeable chips
will be useful in some specialised applications such as
maintaining maintenance records for vehicles or
appliances, but they are more expensive than read-only
chips and impractical for tracking less expensive items.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

Once an RFID tag has returned data to the RFID reader,
the data is then used in whatever way appropriate for the
task at hand. Probably, the most common RFID systems
will relate the serial numbers from read-only tags to other
relevant and useful information in secure databases. RFID
may be used to implement and record the sale of a
consumer good at a checkout stand, to allow a keycard
holder to enter a building, or for dozens of other
purposes.7

system includes several different kinds of readers, also
known as sensors when installed at library exits. These
are RF devices designed to detect and read tags to obtain
the information stored thereon. The reader powers an
antenna to generate an RF field. When a tag passes
through the field, the information stored on the chip in the
tag is decoded by the reader and sent to the server which,
in turn, communicates with the automated library system
when the RFID system is interfaced with it.

An RFID tag is a means of storing and retrieving data
through a radio frequency transmission to the chip inside
the tag. An RFID tag is simply an integrated circuit (chip),
which includes memory for data storage and a substrate
backing material with an antenna pattern. The chip can
typically hold up to 1,024 bits (128 bytes) of information.
In a typical library implementation, each book is equipped
with smart labels and library users are given library cards
imbedded with smart labels.

In a typical library application, RFID readers can be
installed at various strategic places to support different
functions that RFID tags can perform. Some of the typical
installations could be:

Tags or smart labels can be programmed to store (i)
unique accession number of documents; (ii) class
number of a document; and (iii) a unique security code for
EAS (Electronic Article Surveillance). While accession
number is used for carrying out functions of circulation,
stock verification and other library applications, class
number can be deployed for sorting documents according
to class numbers, and segregating then into bins for
different shelving areas. As mentioned earlier, the RFID
tags can also be used as antitheft devices in libraries.
Such applications of RFID are called Electronic Article
Surveillance (EAS). New forms of RFID perform EAS
functions as well, obviating the need for a separate
device8.



Workstation designed specifically for library staff to
facilitate the smooth handling of books and other
material having RFID labels/tags.



The security gates with Theft Detection System. Any
item that has not been checked-out either by staff
station or self check-out station will be detected as it
goes past these pedestals.



Self-service station with provision for checking out
books independently by the borrower without any
intervention of library staff. The theft detection
system of the smart label for that book is deactivated
to enable smooth passage from the security gate.



“Drop Box” where returned books are placed through
suitable slits by users themselves. As books are
returned through the Book Drop Facility located
suitably in a library, the smart labels are
automatically read, and both user record and Library
database gets updated.

5.1.1 Tagging Materials

5.3 Antenna

A library planning on doing its own tagging should
consider using volunteers in addition to its regular staff.
This reduces both the time and cost of tagging. Only
limited training is required; typically 15 to 20 minutes.
While there is little choice with regard to the placement of
tags on CD/DVDs and videotapes, there are many options
for tagging books. It is important to select a consistent
location for book tags. The inside of the back cover is the
recommended location because it is the fastest for righthanded tag installers to reach. One vendor recommends it
near the spine approximately three inches above the
bottom. That avoids possible interference from metal
shelves when inventorying9.

The antenna produces RF waves to transmit signal
that activates the transponder. Antenna is the channel
between the tag and the reader, which controls the
system’s data acquisition and communication. The
electromagnetic field produced by an antenna can be
constantly present when multiple tags are expected
continually. Antennas can be built into a doorframe to
receive tag data from person’s things passing through the
door.

5.2 RFID Readers
RFID readers or receivers are composed of a radio
frequency module, a control unit and an antenna to
interrogate electronic tags via RF communication. A

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

5.4 Server/Docking Station
The server is the heart of some comprehensive RFID
systems. It is the communications gateway among the
various components. It receives the information from one
or more of the readers and exchanges information with the
circulation database. Its software includes the APIs
(Applications Programming Interface) necessary to
interface it with the automated library system.
61

6. ADVANTAGES OF RFID SYSTEMS
6.1 Rapid Charging/Discharging






The use of RFID reduces the amount of time required
to perform circulation operations. The information can
be read from RFID tags much faster than from
barcodes and that several items in a stack can be
read at the same time.
The other time savings realised by circulation staff
are modest unless the RFID tags replace both the
EM security strips or RF tags of older theft detection
systems and the barcodes of the automated library
system, i.e., the system is a comprehensive RFID
system that combines RFID security and the
tracking of materials throughout the library; or it is a
hybrid system that uses EM for security and RFID for
tracking, but handles both simultaneously with a
single piece of equipment. There can be as much as
50 per cent increase in throughput. The time savings
are less for charging than for discharging because the
time required for charging usually is extended by
social interaction with users.
The use of RFID in libraries reduces the overhead of
both librarians and users by reducing the time spent
in charging/discharging and inventory check. In
addition to it, RFID tags are highly reliable making
almost 100 per cent detection rate and are scalable
for future expansion.

6.2 Simplified Self-charging/Discharging
Unlike barcodes the RFID doesn’t require direct line
of sight making it easy and convenient to use. And for
users using self-charging, there is a marked improvement
because they do not have to carefully place materials
within a designated template and they can charge several
items at the same time
(i)

It also reduces the man power utilisation in charging/
discharging, shelf management and inventory
management of library. The use of self-service kiosks
and book drops reduces the interaction of users with
library staff making them free to do other work.

(ii) Some RFID systems have an interface between the
exit sensors and the circulation system to identify
the items moving out of the library. Were a user to run
out of the library and not be intercepted, the library
would at least know what had been stolen. If the user
card also has an RFID tag, the library will also be
able to determine who removed the items without
properly charging them
Other RFID systems encode the circulation status on
the RFID tag. This is done by designating a bit as the
“theft” bit and turning it off at time of charge and on at time
62

of discharge. If the material that has not been properly
charged is taken past the exit sensors, an immediate
alarm is triggered. Another option is to use both the “theft”
bit and the online interface to an automated library
system—the first to signal an immediate alarm and the
second to identify what has been taken out.

6.3 High Speed Inventorying


A unique advantage of RFID systems is their ability to
scan books on the shelves without tipping them out
or removing them. A hand-held inventory reader can
be moved rapidly across a shelf of books to read all of
the unique identification information. Using wireless
technology, it is possible not only to update the
inventory, but also to identify items which are out of
proper order.



Due to faster transactions, the items are available as
soon as they are returned.

6.4 Automated Materials Handling


Another application of RFID technology is automated
materials handling. This includes conveyor and
sorting systems that can move library materials and
sort them by category into separate bins or onto
separate carts. This significantly reduces the amount
of staff time required to ready materials for reshelving.



Compared to bar code, which takes five seconds per
item for each transaction, RFID is more than three
times faster for quick database update.

6.5 Long Tag Life
RFID tags are far better than bar codes, as these are
not required to be scanned through some reader or
recorder, as required in bar-code. Finally, RFID tags last
longer than barcodes because nothing comes into
contact with them. Most RFID vendors claim a minimum
of 100,000 transactions before a tag may need to be
replaced.

7. DISADVANTAGES OF RFID SYSTEMS
7.1 High Cost
The major disadvantage of RFID technology is its
cost. While the readers and sensors used to read the
information are costing between Rs100, 000 to Rs150,
000, a server is costing as much as Rs 500, 000 to Rs
600, 000. The tags cost Rs 30 to Rs 45 each.

7.2 Easy to Deceive the Technology
It is possible to compromise an RFID system by
wrapping the protected material in two to three layers of
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

ordinary household foil to block the radio signals. It is also
possible to compromise an RFID system by placing two
items against one another so that one tag overlays
another that may cancel out the signals. This requires
knowledge of the technology and careful alignment.

7.3 Removal of Tags
RFID tags are typically affixed to the inside back
cover and are exposed for removal. This means that there
would be problems when users become more familiar with
the role of the tags. In Indian libraries, it is a major
challenge to keep the tags intact.

7.4 Exit Sensor (Reader) Problems
While the short-range readers used for circulation
charge and discharge and inventorying appear to read the
tags 100 per cent of the time, the performance of the exit
sensors is more problematic. They must read tags at up
to twice the distance of the other readers. The authors are
not aware of any library that has done a before and after
inventory to determine the loss rate when RFID is used for
security.

7.5 Invasion of User Privacy
Privacy concerns associated with item-level tagging
is another significant barrier to library use of RFID tags.
The tags contain static information that can be relatively
read easily by unauthorised tag readers. This allows for
privacy issues described as “tracking” and “hot listing”.
Tracking refers to the ability to track the movements of a
book (or person carrying the book) by “correlating multiple
observations of the book’s bar code” or RFID tag. Hot
listing refers to the process of building a database of
books and their associated tag numbers (the hot list) and
then using an unauthorized reader to determine who is
checking out items in the hot list.

7.6 Reader Collision
The signal from one reader interfering with the signal
from another where coverage overlaps is reader collision.
One way to avoid the problem is to use a technique called
time division multiple access, or TDMA. In simple terms,
the readers are instructed to read at different times, rather
than both trying to read at the same time. This ensures
that they don’t interfere with each other. But it means any
RFID tag in an area where two readers overlap will be read
twice10.

7.7 Tag Collision
Another problem readers have is reading a lot of chips
in the same field. Tag clash occurs when more than one
chip reflects back a signal at the same time, confusing
the reader. Different vendors have developed different
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

systems for having the tags respond to the reader one at a
time. Since they can be read in milliseconds, it appears
that all the tags are being read simultaneously.

7.8 Lack of Standard
The tags used by library RFID vendors are not
compatible even when they conform to the same
standards because the current standards only seek
electronic compatibility between tags and readers. The
pattern of encoding information and the software that
processes the information differs from vendor to vendor,
therefore, a change from one vendor’s system to the other
would require retagging all items or modifying the
software.

8. IS RFID BETTER THAN BAR CODING?
The big difference between the two is that bar codes
are a line-of-sight technology. A scanner has to see the
barcode to read it, which means that the people who scan
have to position the barcode towards a scanner for it to be
read. RFID tags do not need line of sight. RFID tags can
be read as long as they are within range of a reader. Since
bar codes are inexpensive and effective for certain tasks,
it is likely that RFID and bar codes will co-exist for many
years. Until now, RFID has been too expensive and too
limited to be practical for many commercial applications.
But if tags can be made cheap enough, they can solve
many of the problems associated with bar codes. Radio
waves travel through most non-metallic materials, and
can be embedded in packaging or encased in protective
plastic for weather-proofing and greater durability.
Since the application of RFID in libraries is only a
recent phenomenon, there are very few standards related
to it. It is very important to know the use and importance
of these standards. In the present scenario, RFID tags
and RFID readers are proprietary, meaning, tags by a
specific vendor can be read only by the readers supplied
by them. “The market is likely to grow exponentially if
some standards commonality is achieved, whereby RFID
equipment from different manufacturers can be used
interchangeably.”11
Some organisations have come forward to address
this issue by developing standards for specific
applications. The International Organization for
Standardisation (IOS) is working on standards for tracking
goods in the supply chain using high-frequency and ultrahigh frequency tags. Another organisation, EPC Global,
has its own process, which was used to create bar code
standards. Yet another issue hampering adoption of RFID
systems has been cost. Since large companies would
need thousands of readers to cover their huge
manufacturing plants, warehouses, and stores the cost of
deployment would be enormous12.
63

9.

RFID IN INDIAN LIBRARIES

While there are over 500, 000 RFID systems installed
in warehouses and retail establishments worldwide, RFID
systems are still relatively new in libraries. Several
libraries have successfully installed the RFID solution.
Since traditional security systems have proved to be less
effective than libraries desire them to be and RFID is more
effective in material management, one can safely say that
the RFID solution is here to stay. Automation and selfservice can help libraries of all size to achieve their
operations. RFID is the need to increase efficiency and
reduce cost. The products of six manufacturers of library
RFID systems are available in India through their
business associates Bibliotheca, Checkpoint, ID
systems, 3M, Edutech, X-ident technology GmBh
represented by Infotek software and systems in India, and
TAGSYS represented by Tech Logic, Vernon, Libsys in
India and VTLS. There are several other companies that
provide products that work with RFID, including user selfcharging stations and materials handling equipment.
RFID technology has been introduced in a few Indian
libraries like NASSDOC (New Delhi), University of Pune
(Jayakar Library, Pune), University of Jammu (J&K),
Indian Institute of Technology (Madras), Indian Institute of
Management (Indore), Bank of Baroda (Mumbai), Indian
Institute of Science (Bangalore), Indian Institute of
Technology (Kharagpur), Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic
Research (IGCAR, Kalpakkam).

10. CONCLUSION
The significant advantage of all types of RFID
systems is the non-contact, non-line of sight nature of the
technology. Tags can be read through a variety of
substances such as snow, fog, ice, paint, crusted grime,
and other visually and environmentally challenging
conditions, where barcodes or other optically read
technologies would be useless. RFID tags can also be
read in challenging circumstances at remarkable speeds,
in most cases responding in less than 100 ms. The read/
write capability of an active RFID system is also a
significant advantage in interactive applications such as
work-in-process or maintenance tracking. Though it is a
costlier technology (compared with barcode), RFID has
become indispensable for a wide range of automated data
collection and identification applications. Developments
in RFID technology continue to yield larger memory
capacities, wider reading ranges, and faster processing. It

is highly unlikely that the technology will ultimately
replace barcode, even with the inevitable reduction in raw
materials coupled with economies of scale; the integrated
circuit in an RF tag will never be as cost-effective as a
barcode label. However, RFID will continue to grow in its
established niches where barcode or other optical
technologies are not effective. If some standards of
uniformity are achieved whereby RFID equipment from
different manufacturers can be used interchangeably, the
market will grow exponentially.

REFERENCES
1. Lindquist, G. RFID in libraries–introduction to the
issues. In 69th IFLA General Conference and
Council, Berlin, Germany, 1-9 August 2003. http://
www.ifla.org
2. Harper, Jim. RFID tags and privacy: How barcodeson-steroids are really a 98-lb weakling. http://
www.cei.org
3. Prytherch, Ray. Harrod’s librarian’s glossary and
reference book. Ashagate, England. 2005.
4. Reitz, Joan M. Dictionary for library and information
science. Rain Tree, Chennai. 2004.
5. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RFID.
6. Singh, Gurdev. Introduction to computers for library
professionals. Ess Ess, Delhi. 2007.
7. Harper, Jim.
www.cei.org.

RFID

tags

and

privacy.

http://

8. Chadha, R.K. ICT in libraries: An overview. http://
www.cec-ugc.org/
9. Boss, R.W. RFID technology for libraries. http://www.
ala.org/ala/pla/plapubs/technotes/rfidtechnology.html
10. Hussain, Akhtar. RFID in libraries. IASLIC Bull.,
2007, 52(1).
11. Saiful, Amin. RFID tags. http://ncsi.iisc.ernet.in/
pipermail/lis-forum/2004-November/001433.html
12. RFID Technology. http://www.cxtoday.com/India/
Future_Technology/RFID_Technology/551-81807907.html

About the Authors
Mr M.K. Galhotra did his MCom from the University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, MLibISc from Kurukshetra
University, Kurukshetra and PhD from Dr B.R. Ambedkar University, Agra. He is currently working in
Mata Sundri College for Women, New Delhi.
Ms A.M. Galhotra is a research scholar at the Department of Library and Information Science, Dr B.R. Ambedkar
University, Agra.
64

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3)

