DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 4, July 2009, pp. 21-27
© 2009, DESIDOC

Access Management for Digital Repository
Md. Zahid Hossain Shoeb
Independent University, Bangladesh
58, Park Road, Baridhara, Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh
E-mail: zahid@iub.edu.bd

ABSTRACT
Access management illustrates the process of providing controlled, and secure access to resources.
It involves both authentication—the process of determining the validity of a user who claims to be, and
autorisation—the process of determining what resources a user is permitted to access. Access management
is significant as an important as well as one of the key services for the network infrastructure of digital
repository activities for a wide range of audiences. Like the digital collection of digital repository, it also
requires that the content be accessed and distributed as widely as possible to valid users around the globe.
Access management and control is one of the major concerns for digital content authority over the Internet.
Confidentiality and integrity of information cannot be ensured without a proper access management mechanism.
Though most of the Institutional Repositories or Open Access Repositories are satisfied with the current
mechanisms of the Open Source Software, which they use to build the repositories, restricted repositories
or digital libraries demand more security and authenticity. The paper discusses the current practices and
issues of access management for digital repositories including user authentications, user authorisation,
authentication, and the technology of secured digital communication of digital materials. This paper also gives
a basic idea about access management practices in Bangladesh by the digital content providers.
Keywords: Access control, authorisation, digital communication, digital repository, security, Bangladesh

1. INTRODUCTION
A digital repository is a mechanism for managing and
storing trustworthy digital contents. By focus,
repositories can be subject, institutional or commercial.
Repository of an institution can support research,
learning, and administrative processes as well as
purposes. Standards are followed by the repositories,
which ensure that its contents are accessible, and can be
searched and retrieved for use at a later stage. A wide
variety of contents may be included in digital repositories
for the multiplicity of purposes, and users. It is the
technical ability and the administrative policy which
decides what kind of materials goes into a repository.
Usually, contents can include research outputs such as
journal articles or research data, e-theses, e-learning
objects and teaching materials, and administrative data.
Some repositories only take in particular items like
theses or journal papers even as others gather any
reliable scholarly work produced by the institution.
Complex objects and other data files are also a part of
digital contents1. A true digital repository not only
Received on 2 February 2009

requires an organised collection of digitised content, it
also requires that the content be accessed and
distributed as widely as possible to legitimate users
around the globe. Access management and control is one
of the major concerns for content providers on the
Internet2.
Without a proper access management mechanism
confidentiality and integrity of information cannot be
guaranteed. Though different methods are practiced by
the content providers, not a single method is sufficient for
access management. However, the administrators of the
digital content providers prefer the best technology or the
procedures available globally, and always try to do some
innovative reliable jobs to provide better accessibility to
the users. In this paper, the author does not intent to
illustrate the underlying complexities, or defining any
technical architecture of the methods or systems, but has
attempted to explore the current practices being followed
for the digital repository.
The paper discusses the access management,
different types of user authentication, users authorisation,
21

authorisation of digital materials in digital repositories and
the current scenario of digital repositories in Bangladesh.

2. ACCESS MANAGEMENT
Access management is typically a combination of
users’ authentication and authorisation, access
permission operations, policies for license agreement,
and digital materials authentications, or digital rights
management (DRM). DRM is a system of solutions
created or designed as a means to prevent unauthorised
access, duplication, and illegal distribution of copyrighted
digital media. In online environment, the scope of DRM
can be leveraged to control access to and usage of digital
objects, and to impose restrictions on their misuse3.
Access management not only ensures security of
resources on servers but also during communication to
ensure authenticity and integrity of data. It is possible for
an unauthorised user to snoop on communication
between a user’s browser and a web server and hack
sensitive information. Occurrences of unauthorised user
getting access to important websites and defacing them
are not uncommon. Techniques of data encryption are
used widely for communicating sensitive information such
as user’s password and personal identification number
(PIN). Encryption renders data unintelligible and unusable
even if accessed by an unauthorised person.
Electronic content can be copied very easily, it is
essential to impose measures to control misuse of digital
content. Password-based access and IP authentication,
two most commonly used authentication methods, are
not enough to protect the contents from being duplicated
or shared. Access management is necessary for
commercial digital contents because their access is
restricted to its subscribers or licensed users. Even when
access to digital collections is provided openly, access
control is required for assigning responsibilities for
operations such as additions, updation, editing and
deleting or withdrawing content, and other tasks related to
digital collections. Other reasons to control access to
material in a repository may include confidentiality of
resources. Tracking of all changes is made so that the
collections can be restored if any system error occurred.
The user authentication, authorisation, and digital
material authentication are necessary in access
management as other matters are related to policy or
administrative decisions.

3. USER AUTHENTICATION
A user authenticates with his or her organisational or
personal identification. The identity provider passes the
minimal identity information necessary to the service
manager for authentication to enable an authentication
decision4. Digital identities are increasingly being used to
22

facilitate the execution of transactions in various
domains. When developing and analysing digital identity
technologies, it is important to consider the type and
objective of repository, type of digital content, security of
the system, security of communication channel, diversity
of users’ platform, number of users, even the perceptions,
and responses of end users also. The following
techniques are commonly used for user authentication.

3.1 Login ID and Password-based Access
The most common and familiar authentication
process is login ID and password-based access5. Log-in
is also called logon, sign-in, or sign-on to identifies
oneself to the system in order to obtain access. The
primary use of a computer login procedure is to
authenticate the identity of any computer user attempting
to access the computer’s services. To login to a system
usually requires a user name—a unique sequence of
characters the user chooses to represent him/herself.
Many websites now use e-mails as username. A
password, another sequence of characters, provides the
user with a key to the system and is kept secret from
others6.

3.2 IP Filtering or IP Authentication
This process is a packet filter that analyses TCP/IP
packets. It is a software routine to analyse and forward/
discard incoming data packets based on one or more
criteria such as address, range of addresses, and types7.
Institutions or organisations are encouraged to register for
accessing digital contents using IP addresses (ranges) if
they are static. This allows (i) seamless access (no logon
screen), (ii) usage statistics for the institution, (iii) greater
security as there is no misuse of usernames and
passwords, (iv) access to all computers thereby releasing
other terminals and staff time, and (v) direct recognition of
institutional networks by publishers and vice versa8.

3.3 Web Cookies
A cookie is a token that the web browser stores on
disk in the form of a small text file. Cookies can be used
by a server to recognise previously-authenticated users
and to personalise the web pages of a site depending on
the preferences of a user. Cookies provide a way to track
individual users’ usage of website9.

3.4 Web Proxy
The most common use of a web proxy is to serve as
a web cache. Most proxy programs like Squid, NetCache
provide a mechanism to deny access to certain URLs in a
blacklist, thus providing content filtering. A content
filtering proxy will often support user authentication to
control web access10. EZproxy is also a web proxy server
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

program that provides users with remote access to webbased licensed content offered by libraries. It is
middleware that authenticates library users against local
authentication systems and provides remote access to
licensed contents based on the user’s authorisation11.

3.5 Challenge-Response Authentication
This method is used to prove the identity of a user
logging into the network. When a user logs on, the
network access server, wireless access point or
authentication server creates a “challenge”, which is
typically a random number sent to the client machine.
The client software uses its password or a secret key to
encrypt the challenge using an encryption algorithm or a
one-way hash function and sends the result back to the
network (the “response”). The authentication system also
performs the same cryptographic process on the
challenge and compares its result with the response from
the client. If they match, the authentication system has
verified that the user has the correct password12.

3.6 Referring URL
From the point of view of a web page or resource, the
referer (HTTP referer), identifies the address of the web
page or URL, the more generic URI of the resource which
links to it. By checking the referer, the new page can see
where the request came from. Referer logging is used to
allow websites and web servers to identify where people
are visiting from for promotional or security purposes.
Though Referer is a popular tool to combat cross-site
request forgery, such security mechanisms do not work
when the referer is disabled. Referer is widely used for
statistical purposes13.

3.7 Biometric Technologies
Biometric is an automated method of recognising a
person based on a physiological or behavioural
characteristic. Among the features measured are: face,
fingerprints, hand geometry, handwriting, iris, retinal, vein,
and voice. Biometric technologies are becoming the
foundation of an extensive array of highly secure
identification and personal verification solutions. As the
level of security breaches and transaction fraud
increases, the need for highly secure identification and
personal verification technologies is becoming apparent14.

Authorisation also addresses the issue of responsibilities
assigned to different persons involved in development of a
digital repository/library and their respective authorities in
terms of addition, deletion, editing, and uploading of
records into a digital collection. Authorisation is more
challenging than authentication, especially for widely
distributed digital content providers.
Traditional access control architecture denotes an
access control policy as a subject (user) and is
authorised to exercise some permissions on an object.
This conventional model implicitly assumes that the user
population is known more or less. But in a digital content
environment, the user population is vast and dynamic.
Thus, conventional authorisation or ACM that rely on
knowing the user and associating permissions with them
fail significantly in digital repositories. So, digital
environment demands further challenges for the access
control15.
The access control policies are often based on user
qualifications and characteristics. In one of the early
works on access control in digital repositories or libraries,
Gladney16 proposed a scheme called DACM (Document
Access Control Methods), where the basic idea is geared
toward flexible access control with some extensions to
handle mandatory access control. Blaze has proposed
credential-based access control to address the problem
of unknown users17. In these models, a user has to
produce one or more testimonials certified by one or more
third parties. The credential provides information about the
rights, qualifications, responsibilities, and other
characteristics attributable to its bearer by the third
parties. These third parties need to be trusted by the
service provider. Winslett18 developed a credential-based
security and privacy-related system for enforcing access
control in digital contents of repository or system. Access
to systems containing protected information resources
must be managed based on one or multiple selections of
the alternative ACMs. The conventional methods are:


UBAC (User-based Access Control) also called
identity-based access control for defining
permissions for each user.



RBAC (Role-based Access Control) uses a profile to
map a group of users to resources.



PBAC (Policy-based Access Control) is a set of rules
that determine access rights.



CDAC (Content Dependent Access Control) limits
the rights of users based on content of resource to
specific fields (range) or cells (data point) typically
within a database.



CBAC (Context-based Access Control) includes
sequence of events that preceded the access

4. USER AUTHORISATION
While the process of authentication ascertains the
identity of a user, authorisation defines his or her
permission to access e-resources and extent of its
usage. Authorisation is granted to the successfully
authenticate users according to his/her rights information
available in the Access Management System (AMS).
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

23



VBAC (View-based Access Control) uses predefined interfaces (views) so that users only gain
access to sub-resources within allowed view.

way that they cannot be identified and manipulated.
Digital watermark must be robust enough to withstand
normal changes to the file such as rotation, filtering or the
application of compression algorithms such as JPEG that
discard some of the original data (lossy compression)20.



TBAC (Time-based Access Control) limits access to
resources based on time associations.

5.2 Digital Signature



PLAC (Physical Location Access Control) limits
access to resources by a given location.



NNAC (Network Node Access Control) limits access
to specific nodes or networks.



MAC (Mandatory Access Controls) are required
controls.



DAC (Discretionary Access Controls) are optional to
the user.

attempt to grant or deny access.

In addition, a risk assessment is needed to identify
the data or resource risk, and severity prior to establishing
the level and selection of access controls or authorisation
to digital contents19.

5. AUTHENTICATION OF DIGITAL MATERIALS

A digital signature is an electronic signature that can
be used to authenticate the identity of the sender of a
message or the signer of a document possibly to ensure
that the original content of the message or document that
has been sent is unchanged. Digital signatures are easily
transportable, cannot be reproduced by someone else,
and can be automatically time-stamped. The ability to
ensure that the original signed message arrived means
that the sender cannot easily reject it later. A digital
signature can be used with any kind of message, whether
it is encrypted or not, simply so that the receiver can be
sure of the sender’s identity and that the message arrived
intact. A digital certificate contains the digital signature of
the certificate-issuing authority so that anyone can verify
that the certificate is real21.
A digital signature scheme typically consists of the
following three algorithms:

To provide a range of solutions for identifying,
securing, managing and tracking digital materials, Digital
Watermarking and Digital Signature are very common in
use.



A key generation algorithm that selects a private key
uniformly at random from a set of possible private
keys. The algorithm outputs the private key and a
corresponding public key.

5.1 Digital Watermarking



A signing algorithm, which given a message and a
private key, produces a signature.



A signature verifying algorithm, which given a
message, public key and a signature, either accepts
or rejects.

Digital watermarking technologies allow embedding
of digital codes into different types of objects like audio,
video, still images, and printed documents. Digital codes
are imperceptible during normal use but readable by
computers and software. The major purpose of digital
watermarks is to provide protection for intellectual
property that is in digital format. This system does not
prevent copying, but ensures that any copies made of the
media will be traceable to a particular copy and perhaps
to a particular user. In this process—also referred to as
data embedding, information hiding, or simply
watermarking—a pattern of bits is inserted into a digital
image, audio or video file that identifies the file’s
ownership and can convey additional information like
copyright. The name comes from the faintly visible
watermarks imprinted on stationery that identify the
manufacturer of the stationery.
Unlike printed watermarks, which are intended to be
somewhat visible, digital watermarks are designed to be
completely invisible, or in the case of audio clips,
inaudible. Moreover, the actual bits representing the
watermark must be scattered throughout the file in such a
24

A signature generated from a fixed message and
fixed private key should verify that message and the
corresponding public key. It should also be
computationally infeasible to generate a valid signature for
a party who does not possess the private key22.

6. TECHNOLOGY OF SECURED DIGITAL
COMMUNICATION
For fast, reliable, authenticate access to digital
contents a secure communication channel is required.
Few secure technologies are:

6.1 Cryptography and Encryption
In cryptography, encryption is the process of
converting information (plain text or numbers) from its
normal, comprehensible form into an incomprehensible
encrypted format rendering it unreadable except for those
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

who possess special knowledge, usually referred to as a
key23. Encryption is used in DRM to restrict the use of
copyrighted material, and in software, protection against
reverse engineering and software piracy. Standards and
cryptographic software and hardware to perform
encryption are widely available. Software used for
encryption can also be used to perform decryption, i.e., to
make the encrypted information readable again.

encryption of data. The exchange process initialises
when a client connects to a TLS-enabled server
requesting for a secure connection, and presents a list of
supported encryption codes (ciphers and hashes). The
server agrees on one of such encryption codes that it also
supports and notifies the client of the decision. The server
sends back its identification in the form of a digital
certificate.

6.2 Digital Certificates

6.4 Simple Authentication and Security Layer

Digital certificates are electronic files used to
authenticate web resources, users, and organisations
over the Internet to ensure integrity of content. Digital
certificates are part of a technology called Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) that includes Certification Authorities
(CAs) such as GeoTrust, VeriSign, Commodo, etc. CA
issues, manages, and revokes digital certificates to
relying parties who use the certificates as indicators of
authentication, and clients who request, manage, and
use certificates24.

Simple authentication and security layer (SASL) is a
framework for authentication and data security in Internet
protocols. It decouples authentication mechanisms from
application protocols allowing any authentication
mechanism supported by SASL to be used in any
application protocol that uses SASL26. Authentication
mechanisms can also provide a data security layer
offering data integrity and data confidentiality services.
Application protocols that support SASL typically also
support TLS. SASL is an Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) protocol, Protocols currently supporting SASL
include Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP),
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), Post
Office Protocol (POP), and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
(SMTP).

Organisations that use digital certificates to
authenticate their users, maintain a database or directory,
using a directory access protocol called LDAP that stores
information about certificate holders and their certificates.
Digital certificates are based on public-key cryptography
that uses a pair of keys (private and public) for encryption
and decryption. It contains the name, a serial number,
expiry dates, copy of the certificate holder’s public key,
and the digital signature of the CA, so that a recipient can
verify that the certificate is genuine. These electronic
credentials assure that the keys actually belong to the
person or the specified organisation. Messages can be
encrypted with either the public or the private key and
then decrypted with the other key. The recipient of an
encrypted message uses the CA’s public key to decode
the digital certificate attached to the message, and then
obtains the sender’s public key and identification
information held within the certificate. With this
information, the recipient can send an encrypted reply.
Digital certificates form the basis for secure
communication, and client and server authentication on
the web.

6.3 Transport Layer Security
Transport Layer Security (TLS)25 and its earlier
version Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), are cryptographic
protocols that provide authentication and communication
privacy to ensure secure communication on the Internet
for applications such as web browsing, e-mail, Internet
faxing, and instant messaging. The protocols involve,
between client and server, exchange of public key and
digital certificates-based authentication, and symmetric

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

6.5 X.509
X.509 is a technical standard of the International
Telecommunication Union for the PKI 27. X.509 specifies,
amongst other things, standard formats for public key
certificates and a certification path validation algorithm.
Under the system, a CA issues a certificate along with a
public key to a particular name, or to an alternative name
such as an e-mail address or a DNS-entry. An
organisation’s trusted root certificates can be distributed
to all employees so that they can use the company PKI. It
is left to the browsers’ owners to determine which CAs to
trust. Moreover, it is customisable.

6.6 Security Assertion Markup Language
Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) is an
XML standard for exchanging authentication and
authorisation of data between security domains, i.e.
between an identity provider (a producer of assertions)
and a service provider (a consumer of assertions). SAML
assumes that a user has enrolled with at least one
identity provider28. This identity provider is expected to
provide local authentication services to the user. At the
user’s request, the identity provider passes a SAML
assertion to the service provider. On the basis of this
assertion, the service provider makes an access control
decision.

25

6.7 Open Digital Rights Language
Open Digital Rights Language (ODRL) is an XMLbased standard Rights Expression Language (REL) used
in digital rights and open content management systems29.
ODRL is managed by an open organisation open to public
participation. The Open Mobile Alliance has adopted
ODRL, and new mobile phone handsets support this
ODRL Profile.

6.8 eXtensible Rights Markup Language
eXtensible Rights Markup Language (Xrml) is also a
REL owned by ContentGuard. It is used to control the
content with the help of licensing policies. XrML is based
on XML and describes rights, fees and conditions
together with message integrity, and entity authentication
information. XrML provides a universal method for
securely specifying and managing rights and conditions
associated with all kinds of resources including digital
content as well as services. XrML 2.0 is extensible and
compliant with XML namespaces using XML schema
technology.

7. ACCESS MANAGEMENT PRACTICES IN
BANGLADESH
Different types of digital repositories contain a wide
variety of objects which need security, integrity,
authentication, and authorisation30. Most of the
technologies used for making, preserving or distributing
digital contents, contain built-in security mechanisms.
Sometimes, these are not sufficient for managing different
types of users with different interest and age. So,
customisation, third party technology, or more trusted
mechanisms are required followed by a combination of
different technology for better performance and for
suitable solution. As a developing country, Bangladesh is
a land of dense population, and is growing fast in
educational and non-governmental sectors. Unfortunately
in Bangladesh, other than Independent University,
Bangladesh (IUB), International Centre for Diarroeal
Disease Research (ICDDR), and BRAC University, not
many digital repository has been built. ICDDR and
recently BRAC University have established and hosting
institutional repository using DSpace the minimum
standard by functionality, usability and architecture. Both
ICDDR and BRAC university host their research and
scholarly output in their repository in small scale. The
digital library in School of Engineering and Computer
Science (SECS) of IUB is not a mature effort though the
initiative is good.

8. CONCLUSION
Access management is important for online
information management. Four aspects of access
26

management are users’ authentication and authorisation,
access permission operations, policies for license
agreement, and digital materials authentications or DRM.
The paper discussed the practices of access
management, especially authentication, and access
control of digital repository. More awareness is required
for using these repositories but unfortunately the
repositories are not focusing the users in Bangladesh,
and using login id and password-based access. However,
in this day of digital environment, more open access
digital repositories are needed for dissemination of digital
contents where there will be no physical boundary, and
round-the-clock availability of the resources and
multifaceted objects.

REFERENCES
1. Jones, R.
et al. The Institutional Repository.
Chandos, Oxford, 2006.
2. Ray, I. & Chakraborty, S.A. Framework for flexible
access control in digital library systems. In Data and
Applications Security, 2006, pp. 252–66.
3. Functional groups: Access management R & D. http://
www.inflibnet.ac.in/functionalgroup/openaccess. html
(accessed in June 2008).
4.

Towards understanding user perceptions of
authentication technologies. http://portal.acm.org/
citation.cfm?doid=1314333.1314352 (accessed in
May 2008).

5. Anton, A.I.; Jones, L.A. & Earp, J.B.. Towards
understanding user perceptions of authentication
technologies. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM
Workshop on Privacy in Electronic Society, Virginia,
USA. 2007.
6. Logging (computer security). http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Logging%28computer_ security%29 (accessed
in September 2008).
7. IP filter definition of IP filter in the free online
encyclopedia. http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.
com/IP+filter (accessed in March 2008).
8. FAQs on information resources. http://www.inasp.
info/file/188/faqs-on-information-resources.html.
(accessed in May 2008).
9. Web Handbook: Cookies. http://archive.cabinet
office.gov.uk/e-government/resources/handbook/
html/4-7.asp (accessed in September 2008).
10. EZproxy: OCLC–web and data services. http://www.
oclc.org/us/en/ezproxy/default.htm (accessed in
August 2008).
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

11. Proxy server. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_proxy.
(accessed in August 2008).

Control_ Final_ PDF. pdf (accessed in September
2008).

12. Challenge-response authentication definition. h t t p : / /
encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/Challengeresponse+authentication (accessed in September
2008).

20. About digital watermarking. http://www.willamette.
edu/wits/idc/mmcamp/watermarking.htm (accessed
in September 2008).

13. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Referrer
September 2008).

(accessed

in

14. Biometric technology: AIM global. http://www.
aimglobal.org/technologies/biometrics (accessed in
October 2008).
15. Bertino, E.; Ferrari, E. & Perego, A. Max: An access
control system for digital libraries and the web. In
Proceedings of the 26 IEEE International Computer
Software and Applications Conference, Oxford, UK,
2002.

21. What is digital signature? http://searchsecurity.
techtarget.com/sDefinition/0,sid14_ gci2 11953,00.
html (accessed in September 2008).
22. Digital_signature. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital
_signature (accessed in September 2008).
23. Stallings, W. Cryptography and network security:
Principles and practice. Pearson Education, New
Delhi, 2003.
24. Brands, S.A. Rethinking public key infrastructures
and digital certificates: Building in privacy. The MIT
Press, London, 2000.

16. Gladney, H.M. Access control for large collections.
ACM Trans. Inform. Sys., 1997, 15, 154–94, .

25. Transport layer security. http://www.mnet.state.mn.
us/mail/setup/tls.php (accessed in December 2008).

17. Blaze, M.; Feigenbaum, J. & Lacy, J. Decentralised
trust management. In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy. Oakland, CA,
1996.

26. Simple authentication and security layer. http://asg.
web.cmu.edu/sasl (accessed in December 2008).

18. Winslett, M. et al. Assuring security and privacy for
digital library transactions on the web: Client and
server security policies. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international forum on Research and Technology
Advances in Digital Libraries, Washington, DC, USA.
1997, pp. 140-51,.
19. Access control criteria for right to use automated
information
resources.
http://michigan.gov/
documents/Policy_1350_157471_7.40_Access_

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

27. X.509.
http://www.networksorcery.com/enp/data/
x509.htm (accessed in December 2008).
28. Security assertion markup language. http://www.
service-architecture.com/web-services/articles/
security_assertion_markup_language_saml
29. Open digital rights language Version 1.1. http://
www.w3.org/TR/odrl (accessed in December 2008).
30. XrML—The digital rights language for trusted content
and services.
http://www.xrml.org/about.asp
(accessed in December 2008).

27

