DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 4, July 2009, pp. 28-32
© 2009, DESIDOC

Enhancing Circulation Services Using E-mail for Alerts and Reminders
Priyanka Kalbhor and A.K. Tyagi
Information Centre and Library
Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DU), Girinagar, Pune-411 025
E-mail: draktyagi@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
The success of information service is more likely to be achieved by adjusting the services to meet specific
needs of an individual rather than trying to adapt the individual user to match the output of the information
system. This paper provides an insight into the e-services implemented by the Information Centre and Library
(IC&L) at Defence Institute of Advanced Technology DIAT (DU), Pune, keeping in view the users’ requirements
and their valuable suggestions. Paper also discusses the techniques and tools applied in further simplifying
the functioning of the circulation module and ensuring smooth communication between the staff and the users
in an otherwise automated library system.
Keywords: Circulation services, e-mail, alerts, reminders, Suchika, reservation system, overdue reminder

1. INTRODUCTION
More and more libraries are using computers for
better administration, maintenance, and to provide better
services to users. Library automation in the Defence
Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT), a Deemed
University, was started in a big way in March 2003, with
the implementation of Suchika software. The software
helped a great deal in taking care of almost all the library
activities like acquisition, articles indexing, serials
control, circulation, cataloguing, maintenance and,
OPAC (Online Public Access Catalog) as well as Current
Awareness Services (CAS). However, DIAT received
number of suggestions from the users to make the
system more user friendly leading to introduction of the
following new facilities:
(i)

Reservation of documents by users from OPAC
during search: User is allowed to reserve documents
during search, if document is already issued to
another user.

(ii) E-mail to the present borrower at the time of
reservation: Once a document is reserved, an e-mail
is sent to the present borrower informing him about
reservation of the document.
(iii) E-mail to user who reserved the document on checkin: Once a document has been returned by the
Received on 25 November 2008

present user, an e-mail is sent to the user who had
reserved the document informing him of the
availability of the document.
(iv) Alerts of overdue documents: Regular alerts are sent
to users whose return date is due in a few days. The
number of days for alerts is specified so as to avoid
overdue documents.
(v)

Overdue reminders: Overdue reminders are also sent
to users using e-mail informing them about the expiry
of return date and requesting them to return/renew
the document at the earliest.

(vi) Online fine calculation facility for the users: This
facility keeps users abreast of their document status,
i.e., fine calculation for overdue documents, which
they can check before coming to the library.

2. SUCHIKA: AN INTEGRATED LIBRARY
MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
The Information Centre & Library (IC&L), of DIAT
started using computers in 2002 with LibSys Ver. 4.x.
However, proper use of computers started in March 2003
with the development and implementation of Suchika
(Fig.1). Suchika is an SRU compliant1 network-enabled
multiuser integrated software having varied search
facilities. It is a Windows-based full-featured library

Figure 1. Suchika architecture.

software that provides an efficient and affordable solution
for automation in any library. Suchika supports the
following seven modules covering all library activities:
(i)

Acquisitions control: It includes requisitions from
users, vendors, approvals, order processing, bill
processing, accessioning, payment, etc.

(ii) Cataloguing or retrospective conversion of library
holdings and cataloguing of acquired documents
through acquisition control. It also facilitates
maintaining a record of written-off or withheld
documents, and also allows for recalling the
documents that have been lost.
(iii) Circulation
control
allows
easy
charging,
discharging, reservation and renewal of documents,
membership registration, cancellation, and issue of
‘no dues’ certificate. Further, it also supports issue of
reminders for overdue documents. There is barcode
support for issue/return of documents and stock
verification. Reminders are also sent for overdue
documents using e-mail. Reservation of documents
allows users to reserve a document even if it is
already issued to another user.
(iv) Serials control module helps in keeping track of
journals and serials that are on the subscription list of
any library. It helps maintain records of journals
received. Reminders are issued for non-supply and
missing issues. Moreover, it also gives information on
tentative dates of arrival of next issues. Besides, it
also helps in effective management of funds by
regular online budget monitoring.
(v)

Web OPAC mainly constitutes simple and advanced
search options for any type of user. This module
provides all search approaches such as keywords,
author, title, accession number, class number,

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

Boolean search, etc. OPAC also allows checking
accounts and history of borrowed documents. Other
functions include, list of new arrivals in the library and
password protected account details of every user.
(vi) Administration allows administrators to maintain
records of masters, users, and the central database.
It also permits users to access a particular module.
(vii) Articles indexing helps in development
bibliographic and full-text database.

of

2.1 Technical Specifications
Suchika uses MS Access 2000 database
management system on a Windows platform. Visual
Basic is the front end for client-based activities, which
include acquisitions control, cataloguing, serials control,
articles indexing, and administration. Circulation control
and Web OPAC is web enabled, i.e., these can be
accessed on a network using web browser. Web-based
activities are based on Java and Java Server Page (JSP)
using Open Database Connectivity (ODBC), and Tomcat
Web Application Server.

2.2 Limitations
All features in Suchika are completely user friendly,
simple, requires minimum user interaction, and
comprises features that are meant for efficient data
handling. However, inspite of all these features, users
observed limitations like no provision for recommending
books or other documents as per their requirements, no
provision to intimate users availability of the document in
the library, and reservation facility for books limited only to
the library. The emphasis rested mainly on user and
library interaction, thereby leading to improvisation in the
existing circulation module.
29

3. IMPROVEMENTS IN THE CIRCULATION
MODULE
3.1 E-mail Facility
One of our objectives was to incorporate e-mail
facility for sending information to users as and when
required. For this purpose, a specific program has been
developed using Java2 and JSP, which uses JavaMail API
(Application Programming Interface); JavaMail libraries,
i.e., mail.jar3; and JavaBeans Activation Framework
(JAF), i.e., activation.jar4 files. To implement mail, one
should have host id (e.g., www.diat.ac.in), and library’s
mail id (e.g., library@diat.ac.in) to send mail. Also,
institute should have its own mail server, i.e., SMTP
(Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) Server that is accessible
on a network. When an e-mail is sent, the client, i.e.,
library@diat.ac.in, connects to the SMTP server of the
sender, i.e., diat.ac.in, providing address of sender,
recipient, and message details. The SMTP server of the
sender then connects to the SMTP server of the recipient.
Recipient’s SMTP server then stores the message in the
inbox of receipts as shown in Fig. 2.

3.2 Reservation System
DIAT developed this module with the purpose of
enabling users to reserve documents from OPAC during
search in case all copies of the documents required are in
circulation. In this case, users can reserve documents. If
reservation of document is successful, an e-mail is sent
to the present borrower. This facility is restricted to
authorised users—only those users who have a login

Sends
Sender
E-mail

SEN
Senders
SMTP
Server

E-

Connect

name and password. When user comes across a
document, where all of its copies are in circulation, a
message ‘Reserve this Document’ is displayed providing
the option for the reservation (Fig. 3). If user wants to
reserve a document, he/she can do the same by clicking
on the ‘Reserve this Document’ link. This link opens a
new window, which asks for login name, i.e., member
code and password. After successful login, details of user
account are displayed showing the number of documents
already issued to the user (Fig. 4). To reserve a document
users have to provide the Accession Number of the
document in the given text box. When user clicks on the
‘Reserve’ button, the document is reserved. Upon
reservation, a mail is sent to the present borrower giving
title and accession number of the reserved document. On
return of the reserved document, user who had reserved
the document is informed by e-mail regarding its
availability. The document is then kept reserved for
collection for a specified period failing which it is open for
use by the other users.

3.3 E-mail Alerts Service
The service is being used to alert the users whose
documents are due for return in a few days, thereby giving
the users ample time to return/renew the document within
the given time period. Library sends daily alerts to those
whose return date is three days from the date of alert
sent. This can be done by clicking the Alerts link given
under ‘E-mail’ service in the circulation home page. Upon
clicking the Alerts link, the back end goes through a date
check comparing current date with return date of the
members. When alert mail is sent, a new window

CONNE
Receive
RSMTP
Server

Receive
E-mail

RECEIV
ES
Receiver
E-

Figure 2. E-mail facility: work function.

Figure 3. Reservation facility during search.

Figure 4. Details of member account.
30

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

displays the number of alerts sent and the number of
documents due for return (Fig. 5).

3.4 Overdue Reminder Service
It is very difficult to keep track of the overdue
documents and inform the user as and when documents
fall due for return even in an automated system. Therefore,
an Overdue Reminder Service (ORS) has been designed
and implemented. This program identifies and keeps
track of the overdue documents every day and sends a
reminder to the users.
Overdue reminders are sent daily to those users
whose documents are overdue. This is done by clicking
on the Reminders link given under E-mail service in the
circulation home page. Upon clicking Reminders link, the
back end goes through a date check comparing current
date with the return date of the members. An E-mail is
then sent to those members whose return date has

expired. When the e-mail is sent, a new window shows
the number of reminders sent to members and the number
of overdue documents (Fig. 6).

3.5 Online Fine Calculation System
Fines are only used to get books back on time and
make them available to others. An online fine calculation
system has been started with the purpose of keeping
users informed of their document status before coming to
the library. The My Account facility gives status of issued
documents, history of issued documents, reservation
status, if any, acceptance status, and requisitions for a
particular document given by other user. My Account of
every user has an added feature for fine calculation. If a
particular document has not been returned within the
given time period, fine is calculated and charged. The
expected return date and fine details are displayed in red,
indicating that documents were overdue (Fig. 7).

1. Alerts sent to member IATC 1670 for 3 documents
2. Alerts sent to member IATC 1807 for 2 documents
3. Alerts sent to member IATN 0217 for 4 documents

15. Alerts sent to member IATS 0227 for 1 document
Total 15 alerts sent for 29 documents
Figure 5. Number of alerts sent.
1. Reminder sent to member IATC 1421 for 2 documents
2. Reminder sent to member

IATC 1462 for 1 document

3. Reminder sent to member IATC 1662 for 4 documents

10. Reminder sent to member IATN0180 for 2 documents
Total 10 reminders sent for 20 documents
Figure 6. Number of reminders sent.

Figure 7. My account: Fine charges.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

31

4. CONCLUSION
Implementation of the e-mail service in Suchika has
brought along tremendous benefits to our library users
and given them more options to take advantage of library
services. For library staff, it has made our processes
more efficient and taken away the onerous tasks that
were often time consuming. The initiative has been
rewarding in building up rapport, and good customer
relations among our staff and the users. Efforts are on to
enhance e-services further to the next level of excellence
and continue to add value in teaching and learning.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank the Vice Chancellor, DIAT (DU),
Pune, for his support towards the IDAIR Project, and the
Directorate of Extramural Research and Intellectual

32

Property Right (ER&IPR), DRDO, for sponsorship and
financial assistance without which it would not have been
possible to progress so far. The authors would also like to
thank the other project team members who assisted in
achieving success in this endeavour.

REFERENCES
1. Tyagi, A.K. Development of dynamic client gateway
for testing and searching SRU servers. DLRL Dept. of
Computer Science, Virginia Tech University, USA.
(unpublished research work).
2. http://www.java.sun.com
3. http://java.sun.com/products/javamail/
4. http://java.sun.com/javase/technologies/desktop/
javabeans/jaf/downloads/index.html

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

