DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 4, July 2009, pp. 37-40
© 2009, DESIDOC

Preservation of Library Materials: Problems and Perspective
Adupa Sunil1 and K. Praveen Kumar2
1

2

Department of Library and Information Science, Kakatiya University, Warangal-506 009

International Institute for Population Sciences, Govandi Station Road, Deonar, Mumbai-400 088

ABSTRACT
In any civilised society library has a significant place for study, research, reference, and recreation. It
is a product of cultural maturation and storehouse of knowledge. Libraries extend horizons of knowledge.
The large-scale explosion of information has necessitated libraries to not only be well-stocked and wellorganised, but also to collect non-book materials such as motion picture, slides, magnetic tapes, CDs, DVDs,
etc. The preservation of these multifarious materials has necessitated changes in the form of preservation
efforts. This paper gives an overview of how to conserve library material.
Keywords: Preservation, library materials, destructive agents

1. INTRODUCTION
S.R. Ranganathan defined library, “as a public
institution or establishment charged with the care of a
collection of books and the duty of making them
accessible to those who require them. It is the
responsibility of the authorities to preserve the collection
and make it accessible to the public”. According to Sir
Hilary Jenkinson, “the care of collection of books means
protecting the collection from the damage of the four
enemies, viz., fire, water, insects, and human beings”.
Traditional techniques for safe guarding the library
material are inadequate. The diversity and complexity of
materials, ranging from ancient books to photographic
and magnetic images, cannot be solved by older, purely
empirical approaches. The preservation of library material,
impelled by the forces described above, is just beginning
to emerge as a distinct professional discipline. While
some indications of the field have been derived from the
closely allied profession like museum conservation, and
art preservation, conservation of library material lacks
formal, academic training programmes1, and library
administrators are just beginning to realise their
responsibilities toward preserving their collections as a
part of their profession.

2. DESTRUCTIVE AGENTS
The enemies of books can be classified into
conventional and non-conventional destructive agents.
Received on 19 February 2009

The conventional agents are temperature, humidity, light,
biological infestation, and pollution. The non-conventional
destructive agents are the organic constituents present in
paper, cloth, leather, and ink, etc. A typical book is made
up of paper (made up of wood); leather, which requires
glue for binding; and ink, which is acidic in nature. These
organic materials are susceptible to damage by a wide
range of destructive agents. Some of the destructive
agents are broadly classified into two categories, i.e.,
insects and microorganisms2.
Insects like white ants, cockroaches, ants, beetles,
bookworm, rodents, spider, bacteria, etc., eat wood and
leather fabrics of documents. The microorganisms like
bacteria and fungi bring complete degradation of the
material present in the libraries of humid tropics. They find
favourable conditions for their growth more easily in such
conditions.
There are other factors, which cause damage to the
library material. These are fire, human beings, and water.
Tearing and stealing are the major harm done by human
beings. The water leaking from the ceiling of the library
building can make the ink spread or wash it out
completely. It also causes stains when the pages dry up
after being dampened once. Chemical changes in paper
and some of the structural problems of books themselves
are compounded by unsatisfactory conditions of storage
and by careless or excessive use. Storage conditions are
critical for the longevity of books and documents, and
37

although counsels of perfection have to be balanced
against the realistically attainable, it is necessary to
consider the ideal conditions under which materials ought
to be kept.
Preservation is simply a mean of ensuring that
information is available when it is needed, and the
preservation of the physical object is only one of several
means by which that end can be attained. Therefore, ideal
environment has to be reconciled with the conditions in
which both librarians and users can work with the books
for the purpose for which they are intended, and also with
conditions which are technically attainable and
economically feasible3.

3. METHODS OF PRESERVATION
Preservation methods are adopted based on location,
weather, and environment. These conditions can be
attained using an appropriate environment and the various
other methods like chemical treatment, fumigation,
restoring faded links, bleaching, etc.4

3.1 Environmental Conditions
Much research has been done on finding out the ideal
condition of humidity and temperature for the storage of
books, and archival materials. Gallo an Italian chemist
suggested that the ideal humidity between 40 per cent
and 65 per cent, and the temperature between 18 °C and
20 °C are good for conservation of books5.
It is very difficult to control atmospheric conditions,
which are constantly fluctuating. The control of
temperature and humidity inside the room implies their
constant measurement. A number of sensitive
instruments are available for measuring temperature and
humidity. Some instruments are of the recording type and
make it possible to record temperature and humidity or
both over a length of time. Too much of relative humidity or
too little of it is equally dangerous. The recording
instruments help us to know the actual condition of
humidity. It is necessary to find out the humidity and to
maintain the right humidity. During the summer, relative
humidity falls below 50 per cent and the atmosphere
becomes dry. It is necessary to increase the content of
moisture in the air.

3.2 Fire
Fire may be prevented by banning smoking in the
library. Inflammable articles like kerosene, petrol, waste
paper should be kept outside. Electric wiring must be
enclosed in metal conducts to localise the effect of
sparks due to short circuits. Control switches for lighting
should be fixed outside the room and the mains should be
off when the stack area is closed. A good method of
38

limiting the fire is to partition the stack area into different
portions with metal partitions which have metal doors and
to isolate them from one another through shutting the
doors in case of fire. This will check the spreading of fire
and will help in its control. Sufficient number of fire
extinguishers should be kept at strategic points in the
library.

3.3 Human Beings
Readers, with a stealing inclination, can be checked
through preventive measures like spying and installing
thief-catching devices. The fundamental factor in
minimising unnecessary damage to the library material
also depends on the careful handling of the materials on
the part of both staff and reader. Videotapes or slides
regarding the handling of books should be shown to the
new employees and the readers. Books should never be
pulled off the shelves by head caps. When more than four
to five books have to be carried within the library, care
should be taken to reduce the possibility of dropping of
the books. Over sized books should be handled with
particular care. Books should not be jammed on to over
crowded shelves that may cause damage to binding6.

3.4 Chemical Methods of Preservation
Some standards should be followed while using
chemicals for preservation. Examination of the object
thoroughly and the isolation of deterioration factors must
be the starting point. Only standard materials must be
used. The methods and materials used should not
damage the original condition of documents. All
commercial products whose composition is unknown
must not be used. It is better to use pure reagents.
Caution is to be employed in deciding on restoration or
cleaning. For restoration of materials the least drastic
method should always be tried initially.

3.4.1

Preservation from Insects and Pests

Insects and pests can be controlled by chemical
treatments like fumigation and using chemicals in the
affected areas. The optimal range of temperature for
microorganisms to survive is 20 °C to 40 °C and for
insects is 20 °C to 30 °C. Termite’s infection starts from
the soil. To control termites, creation of chemical barrier
around the building using crude creosote in kerosene
(1:1) or Siedren in water (1:60) is recommended.
Dieldrins, insecticides like DOT are being used in the
public libraries to control a variety of insects. DDT acts as
a stomach poison to insects and affects their sensory
organs and nervous system and causing violent agitation
followed by paralytic death.
Gaseous poisons used for killing insects and
funguses are called fumigate. The process is called
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

fumigation. The gases penetrate the inner spine of
documents and kill all kinds of insects and fungi including
larvae. It is a good method to use on the documents
carrying fungus and larvae, which can produce mould and
growth of insects, which in course of time spreads to
other documents. If fumigation is done early we can
inhibit the future growth of mould and insects. In case of
insect attack, the fumigant used is paradichloro benzene.
A quantity of 1 lb for every 10 cubic feet of space of the
chamber is required. Para-dichloro benzene fumigation
chamber is a normal sized, steel cupboard available in
the market with perforated shelves. Para-dichloro
benzene is placed inside a dish at the bottom of the
cupboards. Air tightness of the shelf is achieved by
pasting strips of brown paper of ordinary thickness over all
the openings.

strengthening of the sheets with chiffon and through the
modern process of lamination.

4.3 Leather Book Binding
In the cases of leather book bindings, the decay
starts at the hinges of the book and can be noticed from
the top inside and takes the form of cracking. With time
and negligence the cracks spread and leather begins to
disintegrate. The decay is caused because leather has
the property of absorbing sulphur dioxide from the
atmosphere. Plenderleith holds the view that even leather
dressing gives only incomplete protection to the leather
against chemical decay and the replacement of the
natural protective agents is essential through protection.

4.4 Racking and Shelving
3.5 Restoring Faded Inks
Iron gal inks fade in adverse conditions because
tannin in the ink decomposes and disappears. The paper
containing the faded writing may be treated for few
seconds with a dilute solution of ammonium hydro
sulphide until the writing darkens. The faded writing may
also be treated with 3 per cent solution of tannic acid so
as to darken the iron oxide and bring back the writing.

3.6 Bleaching
The removal of general discoloration is necessary
very often to give the document freshness. A bleaching
agent, which is less injurious to the fibres of the
document material, is chloramines. It is invariably used
as 2 per cent solution in water.

4. PHYSICAL METHODS OF PRESERVATION
4.1 Lamination

The racks, shelves and containers also conform to
the exigencies of good storage that is resistant to dirt,
dampness, fire, and microorganisms. Proper choice of
material and design of racks, shelves and containers avert
the dangers to the documents. Racks should be made of
steel. They may be arranged width wise along the length
of the rooms. Steel racks may be suitably painted to avoid
rusting. Flat dishes of metal should be placed under the
legs of the racks and filled with water or insecticides
solution to prevent insects from going up the racks from
the floor. The shelf should be made of battens so that the
airflow is maintained underneath the archival material kept
on them. For long rolled documents, Jenkinson
suggested cantilever brackets built into the wall and
provided with teak battens. These racks may be placed
close together one above another, each taking one layer of
rolled maps, etc., of any length up to 5’. Jenkinson
suggested that cleaning space must be provided on every
floor keeping the document while the place is being
cleaned.

It is the process in which a document is embedded
between sheets of synthetic plastic film or tissue. The
synthetic plastic is the adhesive and the tissue paper is
the reinforcement. The adhesion of the synthetic plastic
may be brought about by using pressure and heat or by
using suitable solvent. The temperature required is about
140 °C to 150 °C for 22 to 36 kg/cm2. At this temperature
and pressure, the synthetic plastic cellulose accurately
melts and seals up firmly. This makes good
reinforcement.

4.5 Dust Removal

4.2 Repair

5. PRESERVATION OF NON-BOOK MATERIAL

A document may suffer a minor physical change
such as tears, wrinkling, scattered holes, and gross
deterioration such as abnormally large number of holes
and tunnels caused by insects. Latter case calls for the

Containers should be devised in such a way as to
prevent the documents from fraying and wrinkling.
Containers may be of metal, which are fire resistant and
long lasting. The more common containers are millboard

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

Dust accumulates quickly in our climate, so it is
necessary to remove it regularly. Dusting cannot be done
properly with cloth and broom, because particles of dust
rise into air and again settles down in some other part of
the room or in other shelves. To overcome this problem
libraries should use vacuum cleaners. Vacuum cleaners
also helps in saving a lot of time otherwise spent on
brooming and cleaning.

39

or strawboard. These may be made of glazed leather
board and fibreboard. Different sizes of boxes should be
kept for enclosing documents of different sizes. The
documents in the form of rolls may be protected at their
ends with fine unbleached linen and kept in a leather
board box of square section.
Illustrations may be placed in manila folders or
cellophanes envelopes and filled vertically in metal
cabinets. The maps should be placed horizontally in
shallow drawers and protected by heavy manila sheets.
These are also stored in vertical containers. These may
be mounted on cloth for resistance or may be
strengthened by lamination. The atlases are preserved
horizontally on roller shelves for easy withdrawal and
replacement. Only three volumes should be kept on one
shelf.

materials, the following steps have to be taken into the
consideration:


The latest preservation techniques have to be
followed.



The library professional must upgrade their technical
expertise by taking orientation and training
programmes on conservation of library materials.



Conservation techniques must find place in the
curriculum of library sciences courses.



Good governance and best technical support should
be adopted for the strengthening of preservation of
valuable books in libraries.



In the era of electronic information storage devices,
the digitisation of library books may solve the
problems of preservation of libraries to a greater
extent.

5.1 Conservation of Manuscripts
To preserve manuscripts in a good condition, it is
essential to maintain a controlled environment. Due to
climatic conditions in India, the manuscripts become
brittle and fragile. Biological organisms like mould, fungi,
silver fish, bookworms, and termites are dangerous to
manuscripts7. These can be preserved by insect repellant
chemicals like naphthalene balls, camphor, and bingo
bait. Environmental gases and chemicals used in paper
manufacturing are also harmful in the long run. Direct
natural and electrical light also causes loss of strength
and oxidation of cellulose in paper.
Fumigation is also carried out when necessary.
Fumigation with thymol vapours is very useful. Leaves of
manuscripts can be separated and placed in fumigation
chamber. The leaves can be given treatment for a longer
period to remove any trace of fungus. Manuscripts should
not be kept in steel cupboards and should be kept in
wooden cupboards8.

6. CONCLUSION
Conservation of library material is a priority and
emerging area. Every professional in libraries must draw
the attention of the policy makers to the proper
preservation techniques and their applications. For the
purpose of further development of preservation of library

40

REFERENCES
1.

Intner, S.S., Training staff
Technicalities, 14(7) 1994, 4-7.

for

preservation.

2. Hedstrom, Margaret. Digital preservation: A time
bomb for digital libraries. Computers and the
Humanities, 1998.
3. Mishra, L.N. Preservation and conservation of library
materials. Library Progress, 1983, 3(1-2).
4. Liu, J. Preservation of library materials in China:
Problems and solutions. Asian Libraries, 1999, 8(1).
5. Shepard, J. Preservation. Notes, 2000, 56(3), 574-80.
6. Kneale, R. A. Reclaiming the JAC library: Preserving
and conserving library materials. Information
Outlook, 2000, 4(7).
7. Samuel, J.G. Preservation of palm-leaf manuscripts in
Tamil. IFLA Journal, 1994, 20(3), 294-305.
8. Senapati, S.K. & Nagta, P.K. Preventive conservation
of library materials. Herald of Library Science, 1996,
35(3-4), 184-89..

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(4)

