DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 5, September 2009, pp. 18-23
© 2009, DESIDOC

DRDO E-Journals Consortium
A.L. Moorthy
Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
E-mail:director@desidoc.drdo.in; moorthyal@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The prohibitive cost of library material, especially foreign journals, pertaining to science and technology,
has always been a bane of information centres, especially in the developing countries, taking away large
chunk of their meager resources and therefore always a hindrance to provide better services to the users.
Libraries tried to bridge this gap by borrowing and inter lending required documents among themselves.
Advances in information and communication technology (ICT) have changed the publication scenario as well
as the mode of resource sharing due to availability of e-journals and online resources. Rise in number of
personal computers, Internet, and networks (LAN, MAN and WANs) besides augmenting the availability of the
material increased the speed with which the information is now accessible. ICT also facilitated the establishment
of library consortia for maintaining information resources together. In India, during the last few years, many
leading scientific and technical organisations have established consortia to share their human and electronic
resources. This paper briefly discusses the consortia initiatives taken at Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO), a premier research organisation of Ministry of Defence, engaged in the indigenous
development of cutting-edge defence technologies.
Keywords: DRDO, DESIDOC, library consortia, e-journals, science and technology, information explosion,
information and communication technology

1.

INTRODUCTION

Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO), Ministry of Defence, Government of India, is the
largest government-funded research and development
organisation in India with a chain of over 50 laboratories
(Fig. 1) and establishments spread across the country. It
is engaged in carrying out research and development of
cutting-edge technologies for protecting the frontiers of
the country. The vision of DRDO is to make India
prosperous by establishing world class science and
technology base and provide our Defence Services
decisive edge by equipping them with internationally
competitive systems and solutions. DRDO’s mission is to
design, develop and lead to production state-of-the-art,
sensors, weapon systems, platforms and allied
equipment for our Defence Services. It endeavours to
develop infrastructure, committed quality manpower and a
strong technology base in the country for self-reliance in
critical defence technologies and systems by
indigenisation and innovation while equipping the armed
forces with state-of-the-art weapon systems and
equipment.
18

DRDO has about 7000 active R&D scientists,
actively supported by technical and supporting staff. Over
the years DRDO has developed a number of products,
systems and technologies encompassing aeronautics,
armaments, combat engineering, electronics, materials,
life sciences, naval systems, and so on. Some of these
products include missiles like Prithvi, Dhanush, Akash,
Nag, Brahmos, and technology demonstrator Agni; main
battle tank Arjun, radars, sonars, torpedos, and various
other allied systems many of which have spin-off benefits
in civilian sector also. DRDO’s research output in terms of
publications compares well with the other leading
scientific institutions of the country. DRDO’s innovations
and its core competency in knowledge development are
functionally access-dependent to latest developments in
science and technology by its R&D scientific community.

2.

LIBRARY CONSORTIA

In the modern information-based society, the user
community has been demanding pinpointed, exhaustive
and expeditious information. To cater the information
needs of the researchers, libraries require facilitating
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Figure 1. Various DRDO laboratories/establishments.

accessibility to a variety of information resources
particularly the digital information in addition to the print
documents. The library and information professionals are
facing the problem of satisfying the high degree of users’
demands encompassing multidiscipline with the limited
financial resources to procure the multidimensional
formats of the documents. To solve this problem more
effectively, the librarians have been urged to adopt the
philosophies and technologies such as procurement of
digital content. The digital world is characterised by
access to information rather than holding the information.
The buzzword of present day digital environment is
‘Consortium’ that is intended to share the resources
through collaboration within the member libraries. This
facilitates the researchers to acquire information quickly
at a rate at which changes occur in the electronic
environment.
Journals are a vital source of information for the
scientific research and development. The number of
periodicals at present is estimated to be ~250,000. Of
these, ~25,000 are scientific, technical and medical
journals. Approximately 15,000 are refereed scholarly
periodicals, and ~12,000 of the refereed scholarly
periodicals are available online. Obviously, no single
library can afford to procure all journals even in a single
discipline. With the emergence of IT applications,
particularly Internet, there has been a major shift from
traditional print journals to electronic journals (e-journals)
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

in view of many advantages of the latter, i.e., fast, easy,
‘anywhere-anytime’ accessibility, share ability, hyperlinks
to related text, cost-effectiveness and obviation of the
storage problem encountered in the case of print journals.
As a result, the numbers of e-journals is fast growing and
at present ~15,000 journals are available in S&T areas
alone.
In recent times a group of homogeneous institutions
having a common focus (for example, higher education) or
of same organisation, for example, Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research are coming together to establish
consortium for accessing online content. A consortium
represents a new definition and scope of resource sharing
among a group of participating libraries. Consortium may
be defined as two or more institutions or organisations
that have formally agreed to cooperate or consolidate
certain functions to achieve mutual objectives. A
consortium may be formed on local, regional, functional,
or on subject basis. Libraries all over the globe are coming
together to form consortia taking advantages of the path
breaking developments in information, communication
and networking technologies with the objective to promote
faster, better and cost-effective means of providing access
to the information needed by the users.
A number of consortia are successfully facilitating
the research community, both on academic and R&D
front. At the international level consortia like Galilio,
19

users, growing user demands and information
explosion (while the average annual increase of
subscription prices of journals is 10 to 15 per cent, in
a consortium it is around 5 per cent, if negotiated for
three or more years).

OhioLink, TexShare, VIVA and SUNY Connect in USA;
CALIS in China; CONCERT in Taiwan and so on are
operational for some time now.

2.1 The Indian Scenario
The Indian National Digital Library in Science and
Technology (INDEST), All India Council of Technical
Education (AICTE) of the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource and
Development provides online access to 182 member
institutions covering IITs, central universities and
engineering colleges. This is an open ended consortium
facilitating educational institutions and provides access to
6,500 journals. IIT, Delhi is the focal point for its
management and administration.
Another consortium for the academic community is
the UGC-Infonet Digital Library Consortium, Ahmedabad.
It is a nation-wide network in partnership with ERNET
covering 157 universities under the University Grants
Commission (UGC) and providing access to over 5000
S&T journals, databases, etc. It is funded by UGC and
administered by INFLIBNET Centre, an inter university
establishment of UGC.
While the above two consortia serve primarily the
academic community, the CSIR E-Journal Consortium is
one of the successful consortia in R&D environment. This
is restricted to the institutions of CSIR and DST covering
about 56 establishments and providing access to nearly
5000 titles from S&T publishers. It is administered by
NISCAIR, New Delhi. The ICMR-ERMED consortium,
administered by ICMR and National Medical Library
provides access to 555 biomedical journals to all
institutions of ICMR; the CeRA Consortium of IARI
facilitates institutions under ICAR. In addition, HELLIS
Network of Health Universities (Bengaluru) and SpaceNet
of ISRO are also extending services to their respective
communities.

2.2 HOW CONSORTIA BENEFITS MEMBER
INSTITUTIONS?
Consortium is useful for creating a formal structure
for active resource sharing to achieve common goals.
Collaborative and collective developments take place with
in a consortium so that the participating members
develop, maintain and provide access to specific
collections. Subscriptions through library consortium:
(i)

Enhances access to electronic resources including
access to non-subscribed periodicals across the
organisation and/or institutions; many publishers
provide access to back volumes of five or more years.

(ii) Makes it possible to cope up with the ever rising high
prices of journals and other publications, increased
20

(iii) Provides more facilities at most competitive prices
from the publishers of e-publications because of the
bargaining power as more institutions are involved,
(iv) Provides wider access to the e-information resources
at lower prices (compared to individual subscription
prices) and at a mutually beneficial terms and
conditions for libraries and publishers.
(v)

Helps in meeting the high expectations of
researchers in the fast changing technological
environment.

(vi) Helps in greater resource sharing amongst the
consortium members.
In general, a consortium benefits all members with
flexibility in meeting the demands from library users, and
economy and effective management of resources. Many
scientific organisations in India have recongnised this
potential and have established or working towards
establishing consortia.

3.

DESIDOC’S INITIATIVE

Each DRDO laboratory has an independent and well
established library/information centre that is also backed
up with strategic information support from Defence
Scientific Information and Documentation Centre
(DESIDOC), a constituent establishment of DRDO. The
total expenditure by the DRDO laboratories towards
procurement of journals hovers around 20 crore per
annum. Looking the developments in national and
international scenario and the success of INDEST-AICTE
and CSIR-DST consortia in meeting the multifarious
information requirements of their users, it was felt that a
similar effort by DRDO would be beneficial to the R&D
community who need latest information on their
desktops.
With the objectives of providing DRDO S&T personnel
global access to the S&T literature through strengthening
the facilities for pooling, sharing and electronically
accessing the information resources; for facilitating online
access to the full text of the journals on 24X7 basis with
up-to-date information; and to cope up with the ever
increased users as well as growing users demands,
DESIDOC in the second half of 2007 took up the task for
establishing a mechanism for providing online access on
a consortium mode to e-journals across the Organisation.
An analysis revealed that over 1600 unique titles were
being subscribed by the DRDO laboratories from more
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

than 400 publishers. Among these, 964 titles were
subscribed by only one laboratory, 238 each by two
laboratories and 124 each by three laboratories; about 60
titles were highly popular with 10 to 40 laboratories
subscribing to these. From these, S&T journals of 25
publishers were short listed based on the number of titles
subscribed across DRDO labs. A proposal was submitted
in 2008 for subscription of about 770 unique titles covering
18 publishers. A Committee constituted for reviewing the
proposal recommended 13 publishers. Request for
proposals were invited from all the 13 publishers, but
some publishers responded late. Negotiations were held
with suppliers of 10 publishers.
The DRDO e-Journal Service came into being with
effect from 01 January 2009 covering 448 titles from 7
publishers, namely ACM Digital Library (47 journals,
magazines, transactions, etc), ACS (36), AIAA (7),
Elsevier Science Direct (195 titles), IEE+IEEE (157 titles
plus conferences, standards), Jane’s (5), and Science
(1). However, due to the limitation of sites available for
accessing titles of ACM (5), AIAA (10), Jane’s (30),
Science (13), and Elsevier Science Direct (access to 195
titles, 8 sites and access to their own subscribed titles in
34 other labs), a content browsing service was felt
necessary. J-Gate Custom Content for Consortium
(JCCC) Service was added to facilitate access to
contents of all the journal titles subscribed by 20 major
DRDO labs. JCCC service helps in obtaining a legal copy,
by post, of an article required by a user in a laboratory not
subscribing the title but is available in another laboratory.
The consortium operates through DESIDOC under a
Monitoring Committee comprising members from DRDO
HQ and laboratories. A Review Committee, under the
chairmanship of Chief Controller (R&D) with an overall
responsibility for making policies, negotiates with
publishers for promoting the consortium. DESIDOC
manages the subscription of all electronic resources for
all participating laboratories. A gateway (website) has
been developed for different publishers and will be hosted
on the DRDO website. The end user will access the eresources through the gateway instead of browsing
different publishers’ websites. The gateway will contain
the information on authorised list of journals (publisherswise), an alphabetical list of all the titles with a search
facility.

IEL), all the journals to selected laboratories (ACM,
AIAA), selected journals to all the laboratories
(Elsevier), and selected journals to selected
laboratories (Jane’s, Science).
Ë

Internet Protocol (IP)-enabled access in the labs;
where such facility does not exist, the access
through login and password.

Ë

Facilities to search, browse, view, and download with
an option to download in soft copy or print is allowed.

Ë

In case of any discontinuation or gap the publisher
shall inform the reason and the origin of
discontinuation/gap.

Ë

The designated users of each DRDO laboratory as
well as DESIDOC shall be given access to the
publisher’s server/database where user statistics is
logged into. Licensor shall allow access to download
the statistics to two designated staff of each user lab.
This access to the designated users of DRDO shall
be password regulated. Designated users will have
the privilege to download statistics with respect to
their labs. In the case of DESIDOC, Licensor will
ensure the complete access to usage statistics in
respect of all user labs.

Ë

Licensor shall provide usage statistics on monthly
basis to DESIDOC (all laboratories data) and also to
the respective laboratories (the lab’s statistics only).
Data shall be provided for each journal-wise, if
required.

Ë

All the DRDO employees will be bonafide users and
shall be allowed unlimited access, view, search,
browse, download, and print required for their use.

Ë

DESIDOC is the Implementing Agency of the
consortium.

Ë

Access to the back volumes with a minimum five
years base (calendar year) of full text of all the titles
shall be provided. In case of non-availability, these
should be provided for the available period.

Ë

In the case of termination or on the expiry of the
Agreement, the Licensor shall provide the
Implementing Agency (DESIDOC) the full text of the
e-journals for the period of agreement on the
prevalent formats on CD-ROM, DVD, etc., with the
retrieval software for network access. The
Implementing Agency shall have the right to duplicate
and distribute these among various user institutes of
DRDO.

Ë

In case of change in archival technology, the state-ofart archival technology shall be made available by the

3.1 Options
The Terms and Conditions are based on those of
CSIR Consortium. Salient features of the DRDO E-journal
Service (DRDO Consortium) as provided by the Licensors
are as follows:
Ë

Various options in the Consortium include all the
journals to all the laboratories (for example, ACS,

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

21

Ë

Licensor at no extra cost for archival of full-text data
of e-journals to higher version of technology as and
when it arrives.

When in the initial offer itself, the publisher has charged
for the whole content for access by all the laboratories, it
amounts to unethical and unfair practice.

The Licensor will conduct training sessions for at
least twice in a year in the five zones, namely, New
Delhi, Pune, Dehradun, Hyderabad, and Bengaluru at
no extra charges.

Consider this: there are two organizations both
engaged in R&D. While one publisher charges a particular
amount for 10 sites plus the Implementing Agency (a non
R&D lab) for 2009. The same publisher charges nearly
twice the amount for another organization for the same
number of sites (10 plus one non R&D Implementing
Agency). The reasoning is that the latter has a larger base
of subscriptions and that the charges for the former are
based on their base 5 years ago plus annual increase in
the prices (at 5 per cent). Same number of journals, same
number of sites, same year, but different rates! When
questioned, they reply that the rates quoted for an
organization are special to them only and not applicable
for others. While the prices charged for an item—say a
high end computer—of a highly reputed company are
same for all institutions in the country (save the marginal
discounts offered by dealers), why the same is not
applicable in the case of journals—same number of titles
for same number of sites for two organizations?

4. CONCLUSION
DRDO Consortium has been established based on a
necessity felt by the Heads of Libraries/Technical
Information Centres and discussed in the Meeting held on
12 December 2006. As a new programme, it has already
made a positive impact on the minds of the R&D
community of DRDO. Many laboratories now are
requesting enhancing the coverage of journals by adding
publishers
like ASME,
Emerald,
Professional
Engineering, Royal Society of Chemistry, Sage, Springer,
Taylor-Francis, Wiley, World scientific, etc. On the
economics side, DRDO laboratories could save nearly Rs
3 crore by availing of deep discounts offered for print
copies and by not subscribing to print copies. There is
also a request to include a couple of databases in
aeronautics and materials as well as popular standards.
Unlike academic consortia where the institutions are all
have a common focus, in DRDO each laboratory has a
different mandate and focus thus requires a different set of
journals. Already DRDO laboratories are having greater
resource sharing amongst them and providing increased
access to latest R&D developments on 24X7 basis to the
S&T community on their desktops with an improved,
qualitative and effective article delivery service.

4.1 Need for a National Federation of Library
Consortia
However, it is well known that the publishers like to
exploit the library community in various ways. Initially
many publishers offer online access to the journals
subscribed by an institution (or the entire collection of the
publishers) on trial basis. Once the R&D community is
addicted to the resources, they go for the service. After
some period, say 3 or 4 years, supported by the access
and downloads data, publishers demand more than the
agreed amount as renewal fee. Otherwise how can a
publisher offering a particular price for a consortium in an
all journals for all laboratories option, demand payment of
a certain additional amount towards downloads made
from non-subscribed journals by a few laboratories on the
plea that the journals were not subscribed by the labs?

22

It is well known that most publishers wish to
safeguard their total income from all the constituent
members of the Consortium. Also, the average
subscription prices of journals or the prices charged by
commercial publishers are generally more (by a few
factors) than the professional society publishers. While
the commercial publishers reap huge profits through high
prices of journals, the professional society publishers
charge moderately. Many commercial publishers simply
multiply the amount charged by the number of institutions
in spite of the fact that many institutions of an
organization are engaged in R&D with differing depths and
focuses, professional society publishers charge 10 per
cent (some times as little as 5 to 6 per cent) extra on the
print revenue from the organization.
Many such aberrations—or unfair practices—are in
vogue. This necessitates for creating a National
Federation of Library Consortia or Association of Indian
Library Consortia with members from each of the
Consortia. This can safeguard the interests of all the
institutions from various state or central or private sectors.
It can negotiate for fair and uniform prices for the services
across all the consortia besides checking unduly high
pricing. Alternatively, a Central Government agency on the
lines of Director General (S&D) can negotiate with each of
the publishers to rationalise the prices of online journals
for consortia. But the big question is who will bell the cat?

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

About the Author

Dr A.L. Moorthy is Director, Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC),
DRDO, Ministry of Defence. He obtained his MSc in Physics in 1976 and BLISc in 1978, both from
Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati; Associateship in Documentation and Information Science from
Documentation Research and Training Centre, ISI, Bengaluru in 1984; and PhD from Karnatak University,
Dharwad in 2000. His professional career started at the Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Srihari Kota,
ISRO, in January 1979. He joined the Defence Research and Development Oganisation at the Defence
Electronics Research Laboratory (DLRL), Hyderabad as Scientist in March 1984. Later he moved to
DESIDOC, Delhi in 1987. Dr Moorthy is a Life Member of several professional associations. He has
published about 45 papers and edited over 30 books/conference proceedings, special publications,
and is also on the Editorial Board of many professional journals. He is recepient of commendation
letter from Scientific Adviser to Raksha Mantri (1989), ILA-Kaula Best Librarian Award-2008 and
ILA-CD Sharma Best Paper Award (2008) from Indian Library Association. His current research interests
include open access, intellectual property rights in the digital era, and information retrieval.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

23

