DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 5, September 2009, pp. 24-30
© 2009, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture
P. Visakhi
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-110 114
E-mail: isakhi@iarsi.res.in
ABSTRACT
Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture is a e-Consortium of Agricultural Libraries under the Indian
Council of Agricultural Research for National Agricultural Research System libraries. The National Agricultural
Research System of India comprises Indian Council of Agricultural Research and Central/State Agricultural
Universities under Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Ministry of Agriculture, Govt of India.
The paper discusses the background, main features, and advantages of the consortium for e-resources in
Agriculture.
Keywords: Consortium in agriculture, indian council of agricultural research, national agriculture research
system, information and communication technology

1.

INTRODUCTION

National Agriculture Research System (NARS)
comprises 41 State Agricultural Universities, one Central
University, and Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR), which again comprises 49 ICAR’s Central
Research Institutes including ICAR headquarter, five
Deemed Universities, five National Bureaus, 12 Project
Directorates, 30 National Research Centres, 77 All India
Coordinated Research Projects and Networks, eight
Trainers Training Centres, and 562 Krishi Vigyan Kendras
(KVKs) [1].
Indian Council of Agricultural Research is a major
agricultural scientific autonomous organisation in the
country and unique in having concurrent responsibility for
research, education, and extension. Formerly known as
Imperial Council of Agricultural Research It was
established on 16 July 1929 as a registered society under
the Societies Registration Act 1860 in pursuance of the
Report of the Royal Commission on Agriculture. The ICAR
has its headquarters at Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi and is
an apex body for coordinating, guiding, and managing
research and education in agriculture including
horticulture, fisheries, dairy, and animal sciences in the
entire country [2]. ICAR has played a pioneering role in
ushering Green Revolution and subsequent developments
in agriculture in India through its research and technology
development that has enabled the country to increase the
production of food grains by four times, horticultural crops
24

by 6 times, fisheries by 9 times (marine 5 times and
inland 17 times), milk 6 times, and eggs 27 times since
1950-51, thus making a visible impact on the national food
and nutritional security. It has played a major role in
promoting excellence in higher education in
agriculture [2].

2. AGRICULTURAL LIBRARIES
An agricultural library is the special library, which
primarily renders service to the policy makers,
specialists, scientists, teachers, students, researchers,
and farmers in agriculture and allied subjects. It is the
nerve centre of all educational, research, trainings and
extension activities in agriculture. Its collection and the
clientele are discrete and pertaining to agriculture and
allied subjects only. Agricultural libraries have now
become highly complex centre with multiplicity of
functions catering to a wide variety of clientele having
divergent interests.
Every agricultural institute/university has got its own
independent library with self-contained budget and
resources to serve their users. Nowadays information
explosion, diversity of user needs, multidisciplinary
research, duplicity of resources, escalation in cost of
foreign journals, and financial crunch have made selfsufficiency which lead libraries to opt for resource sharing.
But advent of Internet, advancement of ICT facilities, easy
and 24x7 accessibility have made the libraries to opt for
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

consortium of e-journals to get maximum coverage of
journals to larger number of users with minimum amount
of budget. To maximise discipline-wise coverage,
relevance of journals to users, number of users relevant to
publishers, economics of pricing models given by
publishers for using additional advantages like unlimited
access, unlimited downloads, easy accessibility, any
where at any time accessbility, full-text downloads, etc.,
made the authorities of ICAR to think about formation of eConsortium under the Project of NAIP Component I: ICAR
as the Catalysing Agent for Management of Change in the
Indian NARS, Sub-component I: Information, Communication and Dissemination System (ICDS), Module I:
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the
name of CeRA (Consortium for e-Resources in
Agriculture) [3].
Sufficient infrastructure like hardware, software,
networking, bandwidth to download full-text of article with
images etc., are prerequisite of any e-Consortium. Since
these facilities are already provided by ICAR to all its
Institutes, Deemed Universities, State Agricultural
Universities and Central University in the first phase of
World Bank project National Agricultural Technological
Project (NATP 1998-2005) the ICAR straight away
considered to form e-Consortium under next phase of
World Bank project National Agricultural Innovation
Programme (NAIP 2006-2012). NAIP is the World Bank
assisted agriculture project being executed by National
Agricultural Research System (NARS) with lifespan of six
years, starting from 24 July 2006 to 2012.

3. FORMATION OF CONSORTIUM FOR
E-RESOURCES IN AGRICULTURE
CeRA was launched successfully on 30 April 2008 at
its headquarters at IARI with the following objectives [4]:
v

To develop the existing R & D information resource
base of ICAR institutes/agricultural universities, etc.,
comparable to that existing in world leading
institutions/organisations.

v

To create an e-access culture among scientists/
teachers in ICAR institutes/SAU.

v

To develop a Science Citation Index (SCI) facility at
IARI for evaluation of scientific publications.

v

To assess the impact of CeRA on the level of
research publications measured through SCI (Fig.1).

CeRA is being hosted at Unit of Simulation and
Informatics, A-0 Block, Lal Bahdur Shastri Building, IARI,
New Delhi-110 012. Its functioning is being monitored by
the following Committees:
Steering Committee
v

Advisory in nature.

v

Policy issues.

Negotiation and Monitoring Committee
v

Negotiate with publishers.

Figure 1. Home page of CeRA for IP-based user.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

25

v

Monitor progress of activities.

v

Working Committee
v

4. MAIN FEATURES/FACILITIES OF
CONSORTIUM

Discuss current activities.

Access to CeRA was initially given to the following
124 institutes through IP addresses:
(i)

Deemed Universities of ICAR: 05.

(ii) ICAR HQ (Krishi Bhavan, Krishi Bhavan I, Krishi
Bhavan II): 03.
(iii) ICAR Institutes: 42.
(iv) National Bureaus: 05.
(v)

Open J-gate: 613 ( It is an open portal).

National Research Centres: 21.

4.1 Springer Link
It is a platform of Springer and bouquet of e-journals
on different subjects like Biomedical Sciences, Life
Sciences, Agriculture, behavioral Sciences, Economics,
Chemistry, Material Sciences, Engineering, Humanities,
Social Sciences, Mathematics, Statistics, Veterinary
Medicine, Physics, and Professional and Applied
Computers published by Springer. Through this user can
access the full text of around 1300+ journals since 1996.
(Fig. 3) [5].

(vi) Project Directorates: 09.

4.2 Annual Reviews

(vii) State Agricultural Universities: 38.

Annual Reviews are authoritative, analytic reviews in
33 focused disciplines within the Biomedical, Life,
Physical, and Social Sciences etc. CeRA is subscribing
33 Reviews in agriculture including Biochemistry,
Biomedical Engineering, Biophysics, Cell and
Developmental
Biology,
Entomology,
Genetics,
Immunology, Microbiology, Nutrition, Pathology,
Pharmacology, Toxicology, Physiology, Phyto pathology,
etc., since 1990 onwards (Fig. 4) [6].

Out of 124 institutes, 114 institutes successfully
received access through IP address, but institutes/SAU
located in remote and north-eastern areas got access
through user name and password [4]. Consortium initially
entered into agreement for three years under centralised
funding and subscription of NAIP by maintaining print
subscription of individual libraries who are members of the
consortium for the journals of the following publishers on
Agriculture, Veterinary Science, Fisheries, Crop Science,
Computer Science, Soil Science, Animal Science, etc.
(Fig. 2).
v

Springer Link: 1300.

v

Annual Reviews: 33.

v

CSIRO Australia: 08.

v

ScienceDirect: More than 300.

4.3 CSIRO
CSIRO Publishing is an autonomous business unit
within Australia´s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO). It publishes globally
reputed journals on agriculture, the Plant and Animal
sciences, and Environmental Management. CeRA is
subscribing 08 journals in Agriculture and Plant Sciences
with complete package access (Fig. 5) [7].

Internet Cloud

CeRA

IARI as Service Provider

Publisher

End user

Client
Server
Figure 2. Schematic functioning of CeRA.
26

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Figure 3. Home page of Springer Verlag.

Figure 4. Home page of Annual Reviews.

4.4 ScienceDirect
ScienceDirect is the world’s leading scientific full text
database of Elsevier developed by articles/chapters from
more than 2,500 peer reviewed journals and more than
10,000 books. CeRA is subscribing 300+ journals from
the field of Agriculture and Biological Sciences (Fig. 6) [8].

5.

ADDITIONAL FEATURES/FACILITIES OF
CeRA

Apart from having above main feature of CeRA the
JCCC Service ( Journals Customs Content of Consortium)
of Informatics, which covers contents of about 28, 770
journals at present (likely to be increased by
approximately 50, 000 during the 2009) for all 123
member libraries is also available as an value added
service. This service is being covered from Consortia
journals, subscribed journals of member libraries, and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Figure 5. Home page of CSIRO.

also open access journals of open j-gate since CeRA
was implemented through consultancy of Informatics,
Bangaluru. Creation and maintenance of CeRA website,
promoting, organising user awareness programmes,
trainings to users and librarians are also part of its
consultancy activities.
When user try to access home page of CeRA, it will
be verified with the IP provided by CeRA to Publishers.
One official/Librarian has been identified as Administrator
from each institute/university and has been assigned
User Name, Password to open the admin login.
Administrator is also responsble for Document Delivery
Service. Members which could not get access through IP
address are provided with User Name and Password
separately. All fucntionalities available to Administrator
can also be accessed by user except “Admin”
functionality.
27

Fig 6. Home page of Sciencedirect.
Figure 6. Home page of ScienceDirect.

5.1 Functionalities/Facilities for Administrator
This module is accessible only to Consortia
Administrator or Institute Administrator [7]. The Consortia
Administrator has the following rights:
(i)

Create new members.

(ii) Edit the contact details, login details and IP details of
other members.

Usage Statistics: Service-, Journal-, Publishers-, and
User-wise usage statistics can also be seen from this
feature.

5.2 Journal’s Configuration
Through this service Administrator can see the list of
journals under open access, Consortium subscribed
journals and individual library subscribed journals covered
under JCCC.

(iii) View region wise consolidated report of Document
Delivery Request ( DDR).

5.3 Inter-Library Loan

(iv) View Statistics of DDRs sent.

Through this feature Administrator can have the
following facilities:

(v)

View statistics of DDRs received.

(vi) View and fulfill the DDRs received.
(vii) View the status of DDRs sent.
(viii) View Journals subscribed by consortia or his own
library subscription on click of “Journal Configuration”
button.
(ix) Get the usage statistics on click of “Usage Statistics
button”.
The Institute Administrator can have all the facilities
except (ii), (iii), and (iv) (Fig. 7).
Apart from the above privileges, institute
Administrator can also see the following functionalities
when login to “admin” functionality where facility is not
accessible to User.
User: Organisation-wise and state-wise institute’s details
can be seen.
28

(i)

Request received from users for document delivery
between any particular date with details such as
bibliographical details of article, requested by which
institute/university, request date, its status like
whether it is available in library or not available, if its
is available whether it is dispatched or it is pending.

(ii) Request sent by user from his own institute for
document delivery between any particular date or
range of dates with details such as bibliographical
details of article, requested to which institute/
university, request date, its status like received
communication from other library, whether it is
available in their library or not available, and if its is
available whether it is dispatched or it is pending.
(iii) Request received by his library from users of
different/individual institute for document delivery in
report form with details like institute’s name, number
of requests received, document delivery fulfilled or
pending or unfulfilled.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Figure 7. Screen shot of Administrator’s page.

(iv) Requests sent by user of his own institute to
different/individual institute for document delivery in
report form with details like institute’s name, number
of request sent, document delivery fulfilled or pending
or unfulfilled.
(v)

Consolidated report of both requests made and
received by own institute and their status in period of
different dates.

(vi) Consortium Administrator can see status of
document delivery of any library.

6.

FACILITIES FOR ADMINISTRATOR AND
USER COMMUNITY UNDER JCCC
SERVICE

The administrator and users have following facilities
under JCCC [7]:

6.1 Quick Search
User’s query like author, keyword, title can be
searched in all peer reviewed journals and/or professional
and industry journals. User can simplify his search by
selecting subject either by agricultural and biological
sciences, arts and humanities, basic sciences,
biomedical sciences, engineering and technology, and
social and management science or all subjects.

6.2 Advanced Search
It will search in all peer reviewed journals and/or
professional and trade journals in advanced features by
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

using booleans operators as well as title, keyword,
abstract, author, institute/address and selecting subjects
on agriculture, biological sciences, arts and humanities,
basic sciences, biomedical sciences, engineering and
technology, social and environmental sciences, etc., and
also by selecting publication year range or latest updated
like last one week or last one month.

6.3 Browse Journals
User can browse the journals by subject, title or
publisher in alphabetical order hyperlink.

6.4 My Journals
User will get the alerts of his interest after registering
his name by creating his profile with mandatory details.

6.5 Experiencing Problem
User can interact with Consortium administrator
through online chat about problem facing. When user
made query and retrieve search results each article/
journal will be indicated whether it’s a Consortium
Subscribed Journal (CSJ), Library Subscribed Journal of
CeRA members (LSJ) or Open Access Journal (OAJ). If it
is CSJ and OAJ, then user will have full text facility, if it is
LSJ then Request for Article feature will be displayed with
Name of the Institute where that particular journal is
available so that user can simply click on it for requesting
copy of an article so that request will go to particular
library’s admin account where this journals is available.
When Institute Administrator login into “admin” module,
29

the details of articles requested by user to his Institute/
University and requests send by his Institute to other
Institute / University and its status can be seen online to
enable him take necessary action accordingly. Above all
Consortium administrator has the right to see any
Institute Administrator module.

REFERENCES
1.

ICAR at a glance, Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, Annual Report 2007-08, New Delhi. pp. 110.

2.

Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture-2008.
IARI, New Delhi, 2008. pp.1-2.

3.

National agricultural innovation project, DARE/ICAR
Annual Report 2008-09. pp. 134-135.

4.

Organization and management, DAR /ICAR Annual
Report 2007-08. pp. 125 -131.

5.

NAIP Components: Report on National Agricultural
Innovation Project. Project Implementation Plan,
Chp. 1.6. Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
2006. http://www.naip.icar.org.in.

6.

Objectives of NAIP: Report on National Agricultural
Innovation Project, Project Implementation Plan,
Chp 1.3. Indian Council of Agricultural Research,
2006. http://www.naip.icar.org.in/

7.

NAIP Workshop, ICAR News, 26 July 2006. http://
www.naip.icar.org.in/

6.6 Members list
Institute members under this consortium are listed
alphabetically. By clicking on Institute the user can see
the details of administrator/librarian/contact person like
Department, Address, Phone/Mobile/Fax, E-mail,
Institutes Website, etc., for requesting for article or
document delivery.

7.

CONCLUSION

CeRA has helped in developing the world class R&D
information base of ICAR Institutes/agricultural university,
and an e-access culture among scientists/teachers.
Efforts are being made to bring journals of , John Wiley
and Taylor and Francis’s, and two journals of Nature.
ICAR may also subscribe Web of Science and
Indiajournals.com to further increase the scope of
information retrieval.

30

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

