DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 5, September 2009, pp. 31-35
© 2009, DESIDOC

Creating an Article Repository using LibSys: A Case Study
of JRD Tata Memorial Library
K.S. Chudamani* and H.C. Nagarathna
JRDTML, Indian Institute of Science, Bangaluru-560 012
*E-mail: ksc@library.iisc.ernet.in
ABSTRACT
Article Repositories are an integral part of present day digital libraries permitting global access to the
scholarly publications. An article repository system can be created using LibSys software, and help LibSys
users collaboratively create a federated search engine to share resources among themselves. This article
highlights the system used by the JRD Tata Memorial library of Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru for
providing open access to articles published by its faculty.
Keywords: IISc, institutional repository, open access, LibSys, knowledge management, web OPAC, resource
sharing

1.

INTRODUCTION

Institutional article repository is an integral part of
present day digital libraries. They provide a simple webbased mechanism to researchers to deposit and access
their research publications. Institutional repository (IR)
capture articles, books, reports, etc. with a view to
considering the long term preservation of an institutions
scholarly output. Articles from Indian Institute of Science
(IISc), Bengaluru, feature significant textual content and
annotated metadata like resource, date of publication,
author, title, year issue no., vol no., etc. In addition,
keywords, subject categories, etc., are available through
both online (web based) and offline clients. Creation of
such an article repository is possible by using LibSys
software, and involves a number of knowledge
management (KM) issues.

2.

KNOWLEDGE AND KNOWLEDGE
MANAGEMENT

Knowledge and knowledge management (KM) have
very close relation in many ways. According to Davenport
and Prusak, “Knowledge is a mix of framed experiences,
values, contextual information, expert might, and
grounded intuition that provides an environment and
framework for evaluating incorporating new experiences
and information…. It often becomes embedded not only in
documents or repositories but also in organisational
routines, processes, practices, and norms……” [1].
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Production of new explicit knowledge is dependant
on the results of several business transformations where
intelligent data and text mining algorithms, such as
decision trees, neural networks, case-based reasoning,
genetic algorithms, etc., applies to structure or
unstructured data and information. Data/text mining is
concerned with detecting new information in large
databases/large collections of text documents. Typical
data/text analysis includes identifying trends, discovering
relationships among terms and documents, categorizing
or condensing information.
In simple terms, KM is management of knowledge.
According to Tiwana [2], it enables:
v

Competitive advantage.

v

Business goals.

v

Business competencies.

v

Innovative products and or services.

v

Enhances relationships.

v

Improves work practices and processes.

All these tasks mainly need to handle tacit
knowledge (TK) and explicit knowledge (EK). Usually, TK
is not easily available for dissemination. It is in user’s
perception. In addition, TK is moving and enables
competition. On the other hand, Information Retrieval
31

Systems (IRS) enables a simple, web-based mechanism
to researchers to deposit (self-archive) and accesses
their research publications. They can also incorporate TK
to some extent by including documents like technical
reports, patents, etc. There are many world-renowned
open source IR softwares such as Eprints, DSpace,
FEDORA, ARNO, i-TOR, CDSWare, etc., available free of
cost, and have a host of features, unique facilities and
excellent capabilities, which the users could explore and
experiment upon. The need for deploying interoperable
open access IRs is essential for knowledge transmission.
Knowledge requires sharing and IT supports sharing. IT
has made information sharing possible through article
repositories, which are OAI-PMH compliant or otherwise.
LibSys is an OAI-PMH compliant as it is MARC
compatible. Further, Tiwana points out that KM is not a
technology problem, but is a process problem. This
implies that expert knowledge differs from organization to
organization. Libraries tend to tag knowledge sources
using their attributes. Some such attributes for entering
data into databases using libsys are:

However, in this article we are looking at creating article
repository only for providing open access for articles
published by IISc faculty. The article describes the
creation of an article repository using “article indexing”
module in LibSys. Before describing the actual repository
creation methodology, it is worthwhile to look at some of
the existing article repositories in India.

v

Bk: books

(iii) Web interface which is customer enabled.

v

Cp: conference proceedings

v

Th: theses and dissertations

(iv) All types of documents such as books, theses,
articles, etc. are accepted.

The above three can be merged and searched.
Knowledge management of institutional publications
has gained ground in these days of open access
movement. As pointed out by Sreekumar [3], a digital
repository is created to provide access to institutional
faculty lectures, class notes, publications, etc.
Sreekumar [3] and Poornima [4] have described IR
developed in their institutions using Dspace and Eprints,
respectively. For articles, separate database, which is
completely indexed, modified, and searchable can be
created using Libsys. There are many more attributes,
based on which one can build the collection. The method
of sharing the resources of various organizations through
the LibSys software is possible. This can enable Libsys
users to create collaboratively a federated search engine.
Resource sharing as already pointed out is an
important activity carried out by librarians. So far, they
were usually restricted to inter lending of books, journals,
document delivery service, i.e. supply of articles and
chapters from books to users on minimum payment
basis. The advent of repositories has enabled databases
of articles, books, etc., published by the faculty, staff, and
students searchable, browseable, and downloadable.
This is a first step towards free exchange of bibliographic
information. A home page for searching available
repositories can be created using Google or Scopus
search engine as displayed in National Centre for Science
Information (NCSI) and IISc library home page. A
federated search is in use for information mining.
32

3.

INSTITUTIONAL REPOSITORIES IN INDIA

According to Gayatri Doctor and Smitha
Ramachandran [5], there are 16 digital repositories in
India. Out of these, 10 are based on Dspace and six on
GNU Eprints
According to Prasad [6], about 30 institutions in India
are using DSpace (3rd position in the world). Some of the
important features of Dspace repository are:
(i)

Dublin core metadata.

(ii) Open archives initiative compliance.

(v)

simple workflow processes.

(vi) Full text searching.
JRD Tata Memorial Library (JRDTML) of IISc,
Bengaluru is one of the institutional libraries, which is also
using these features in its IR.

4.

JRDTML REPOSITORY

The library of IISc is one of the best scientific and
technical libraries in India. Apart from the main library it
has departmental libraries also. In 1995 the library was
renamed as JRDTML. IISc researchers now have online
access to electronic journals and bibliographic citation
databases under the INDEST-AICTE Consortium, and
have access to fairly a large number of journal archival
content from the resources.
JRDTML has been using the LibSys with all the
modules for the library house keeping operations. The
library’s online catalogue database has more than 1.50
lakh records of books (bibliographic information) and
information about 1, 72, 000 back volumes of periodicals.
Using LibSys OPAC, users can search the Library Online
Catalogue by author, title, subject, and keywords. The
users can know the latest additions of periodicals and
books through current awareness service. List of all the
articles indexes during a week, i.e., articles published by
the institute’s faculty and students (collected from various
databases) is generated. The JRDTML repository uses a
database search technology called article indexing in
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

LibSys. It focuses on efficient storage and fast retrieval of
short text entities. Basic functionality of LibSys has an
extended clustering mechanism that applies to search
results and a similarity search mechanism based on the
articles by IISc Authors. There is also a separate
repository developed by National Centre for Science
Information for the users.

v

Enable development services and information
exchange.

v

Improve interoperability and cooperation between
IISc author articles index by running cross-indexing
digital repositories.

v

Provide a tool that in use by the repository operation
to raise the visibilities, important of the LIBSYS
repository.

4.1 Eprints Archiving Facility (eprints@iisc)
NCSI has set up an Eprints archiving facility for the
IISc research community, using the GNU Eprints software
developed at the University of Southampton. This service
enables the Institute to archive their pre-prints, post-prints
and other scholarly publications.
In keeping with the objectives of the Eprints
movement and the Free Online Scholarship (FOS)
movement, we expect this service to facilitate the Institute
researchers in self-archiving and long-term preservation of
their scholarly publications, provide easy access to these
publications worldwide and improve impact of their
research. While eprints@iisc is accessible by anybody,
submission of documents to this archive is limited to the
IISc research community only. This repository and the
library repository described are complementary to one
another in the sense that the article repository of the
library lists forthcoming articles and the NCSI repository
collects cited articles. The repository creation process
using Dspace, Eprints, etc., needs acquisition of
knowledge of installing these utilities using tomcat,
apache web server, etc. It also requires the knowledge of
using the software meticulously by giving passwords to
users. Uploading the article from a remote point is
possible. Interoperability among LibSys ensures that the
fields are standardised within LibSys framework. Libsys
framework can crosswalk with MARC21 format. This can
be used to even store other types of knowledge sources
like lecture notes, etc.

5.

AIMS OF THE IISC LIBRARY
REPOSITORIES
Aims of the IISc library repository are to:

v

v

Improve interoperability and cooperation between
IISc author’s article, and index the running digital
repositories.
Provide a tool that could be used for the repository
operation to raise the visibility and importance of the
LibSys repository with in the campus.

v

Provide a detailed description of the institution author
article requirements of certified document and
publication services.

v

Document publication services as an institutional
repository.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Article repository proposes to facilitate improved
access, visibility and impact of IISc research output
through the establishment of a network. It is an open
access to digital research articles. It provides technical
support to R&D organizations and universities in the
country to set up their institutional research repositories.

6. LIBSYS REPOSITORY OF IISC
6.1 Creation of the Repository
According to Gayathri Doctor and Smitha
Ramachandran [5], factors for consideration while
developing an IR are: content, technology, users/uses,
legal aspects, sustainability, and funding. As already
pointed out, the content for IISc article repository are the
articles published by its faculty, the strategies adopted
were different from those of the others; usually, when
creating an article repository, articles of the authors are
searched from various sources and are made available
through the article indexing part of the software. ICT
technology enables the data to be available through the
web so that users accessing the library web-OPAC
anywhere can access bibliographic description along with
the content. Since this is an institutional repository, it
does not involve the copyright problems. The steps
involved in this are:
v

Duplicate checking.

v

Data entry.

v

Keyword assignment.

v

Editing.

v

Developing weekly list of additions.

The sustainability of the project is dependant on the
willingness of the staff or making the staff available for the
project.

6.2 Searching, Indexing and Retrieval
Any information retrieval system such as the OPAC
designed for any automated library has characteristics for
searching by author, title, content, keyword, etc. The
OPAC for any sources should enable browsing,
searching, multimedia linking to e-books, e-journals, etc.
If the user types in a keyword “structure” what exactly
33

user means or in what context it is being searched is not
known. The user proceeds with the search process in a
focused manner based on the display. If it fails to produce
satisfactory results, user makes use of other search
strategies. User may use hierarchical searching, content
searching or combine all these search strategies. Most of
these searching capabilities are established techniques
in library and information science field. Therefore, this
presentation confines to only multimedia aspects.

6.3 Multimedia
Multimedia, as found in fancy websites, is not the
real captivating feature. It has an important function, i.e.,
relating databases and websites. Multimedia relates to
video and text that surpasses all limitations of
language.The article indexing system of IISc provides the
facility to maintain a separate database containing the
articles in journals received in the library. It is also
available on OPAC. LibSys focuses on giving guidance to
IR operating to help them to support the open access
concept and supplying pre-and post-prints of journal
articles index that have already been published in
scientific journals. A maintenance functions provides for
building up the articles database in the LibSys software:
for addition of a new article, modify details of an article,
removal of an article, list article details, and option to print
the same.

6.4 Advanced Search Options and Data Mining
Database searches for the article in the database is
searchable by browsing any of the following: author, title,
sub/keyword, searching by title keywords, and
combination searches using Boolean operators (based on
words from any field). The keyword forms the basis of

ontology. Classification codes are not a search feature as
the repository has placed emphasis on keywords.
Figure 1 shows the screen shot of web-OPAC window for
article index.
The bibliographic data is present in various
databases, which the institute library subscribes and
hence there is no need for any approval by the author.
When a user detects an article of interests in the article
database within the web-OPAC database options, he/she
can open the article in a separate window. Article display
shows metadata directly with in the article text. For
example, after a recognised author’s name, a small “eresource” is displayable and clickable to display the
article for viewing.

6.5 Article Visualisation
Article visualisation increases the visibilities and
ease of use of open access scientific journals, thereby
promoting their increased usage and impact. Setting up
open archives is becoming a part of library activities, as
they are now more widely known as IR.

6.6 Latest Additions in the Article Database
The bibliographic function enables the generation of a
list of articles on a specific subject. The selected entries
are stored in a user defined ‘Biblio’ file.

7. ADVANTEGES
The following are the advantages of the IR:
v

Helps organisation’s in building intellectual capital.

v

Enables a single access point for the research output
of an institution.

Figure 1. Screen shot of LibSys article indexing page of IISc.
34

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

Figure 2. Screen shot of multimedia screen.

Figure 3. Screen shot of web OPAC.

v

Shows actual direction in its research activities.

2.

v

Saves the time of instant generation of research
report.

Tiwana, Amrit. Knowledge management toolkit,
Pearson Education Asia, New Delhi, 2000. Chp 6.

3.

SreeKumar, M.G., et al. Institutional repositories for
knowledge management in academic and research
Institutions. ICSD 2007, Bengaluru, pp. 260-273.

4.

Poornima Narayan, et al. Instiutional repository at
NAL: A case study, ICSD 2007, Bengaluru, 2007,
pp. 274-84.

5.

Doctor, Gayatri & Ramachandran, Smitha.
Implementing an institutional repository for
knowledge sharing in a management institution. In
International conference on future of networked
environment (IKONE), 3-5 September 2007,
Bangalore (Poster Session).

6.

Prasad, A.R.D. Institutional repositories: An over
view (a ppt presentation). In Open Access and
Institutional Repositories. One-day Workshop-cumSeminar, INSA, 13 May 2004, New Delhi.

v

Enables long term preservation of its scholarly
materials.

8.

CONCLUSION

Libraries who have procured Libsys software can
easily create the IR without the hassles of implementing
repository software. Since there are more than 1000
LibSys installations in the country, they can easily use
the article indexing facility in LibSys and create
repository. In addition, they can generate weekly list of
additions, compile a bibliography on a subject, etc.

REFERENCES
1.

Davenport, T.H. & Prusak, L. Information ecology,
mastering the information and knowledge
management, NY, OUP, 1997. pp. 3.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

35

