DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 5, September 2009, pp. 54-56
© 2009, DESIDOC

SHORT COMMUNICATION

Mobile Learning in Knowledge Development Scenario
Kapil Loomba and Pooja Loomba*
Gurunanak Dev University Amritsar-143 005
E-mail: kapil.loomba@gmail.com
*Lord Krishna College of Education, Sultanpur Lodhi, Distt. Kapurthala-144 626

ABSTRACT
Mobile devices like mobile phones, iPods and PDAs can have more processing power, and more interesting
applications than were commonly available on desktop machines a decade ago, and teachers and educators
are sensitising their potential to be used as powerful learning tools. However, the application of mobile phones,
in this globalised era of 21st century, in context of learning must take into account several factors. Above
all other things, we must consider how mobile learning can be used to provide learners with better opportunities
and enhanced learning outcomes. This paper describes the following areas related to mobile learning:
differentiation between e-learning and m-learning; classification of mobile learning activities, using the themes
“record, recall, relate and reprint” (the four R’s of mobile learning); the parameters for developing mobile
learning and categories of mobile-learning.
Keywords: Knowledge development, ipods, PDAs, four R’s, mobile-learning

1.

INTRODUCTION

In this technological era, educators and
technologists are keenly interested in how wireless and
mobile technology can enhance the way people learn and
interact with one another. It is true to say that these
mobile-learning (m-learning) technologies (e-learning
using mobile devices and wireless transmission) can
potentially provide significant opportunities for learning
and collaborative interaction. But unluckily technology is
showcased as demonstration systems in various
experimental e-classroom initiatives, and the penetration
in general settings is painfully slow. In addition, many mlearning technologies are often limited to content delivery
onto mobile devices, missing the rich potential for more
interactive learning paradigms.

2. M-LEARNING AND ITS MEANING
Mobile-learning is the next progressive step from elearning or is simply an advanced tool that integrates with
e-learning. In either case, m-learning is a new and unique
component of distance learning. Zaheer Polsani [1]
defined M-learning as “….a form of education whose site
of production, circulation and consumption is the
network”. He also revealed that m-Learning has its so
many applications in the different spheres of life, i.e.,
Received on 24 July 2009

business, industry, education, health etc. Durhand
Traxler [2] defined m-learning as “…any educational
provision where the sole or dominant technologies are
handheld.” He also quoted that m-Learning is the learning
through the use of mobiles where high technology is
utilized up to the optimum level from educational point of
view.
Lewis Sharples [3] defined m-learning as “…a
process of coming to know, by which learners in
cooperation with their peers and teachers construct
transiently stable interpretations of their world.” He
emphasized that mutual cooperation of the teachers and
the learners come in close affinity by the mobiles and
make so many interpretations and solve various dominant
problems of the world.

3. FEATURES OF MOBILE LEARNING IN
MODERN PERSPECTIVES
From technological perspective, handheld computers
and personal digital assistants (PDAs) are more
affordable today than before. With respect to pedagogical
perspective, m-learning supports a new dimension in the
educational sector. Followings are some of the major
salient features of m-learning:

±

Initiative of knowledge acquisition.

±

Mobility of learning setting.

±

Interactivity of the learning process.

±

Integration of instructional content.

±

Immediate and urgent need of learning.

These features of m-learning make it quite different
from the traditional classroom learning atmosphere where
all educational activities are carried out at a designated
time and place.

4. M-LEARNING VS E-LEARNING
In the modern age of technology, e-learning is being
replaced by m-learning, which is the new innovative tool in
learning process in educational institutions. An
elaborative definition by Urdan and Weggen [4] provided
sufficient basis to distinguish m-learning from e-learning:
term e-learning includes a wide range of applications and
processes, including web-based learning, virtual
classrooms and digital collaboration, etc.
E-learning can be defined as the delivery of content
via electronic media including Intranet, Internet,
Extranets, audio-video tape, satellite broadcast,
interactive TV, and CD-ROM. M-learning on the other
hand is a subject of e-learning. It is the macro concept
that includes online and mobile learning environments. In
this regard, Alexander Quin [5] explained m-learning as elearning through mobile computational devices: palms,
windows CE machines, even digital cell phone. He aptly
remarked that mobile learning is indeed an e-learning
because under this learning various electronic gadgets as
well as computer software are utilized to enhance learning
process.

5. PARAMETERS FOR M-LEARNING
The mobile-revolution is finally here in the form of mlearning, which is a natural extension of e-learning. In a
span of five years, mobile learning has made an
exponential leap from theory explored by academicians to
a real contribution to learning. Four basic parameters for
production and development of m-learning are:
±

±

Social interaction: The data can be easily sent to
friends, colleagues and others via short messages.
You can exchange data with other people and gain
considerable knowledge.
Connectivity: Connectivity plays an extremely
important role and is the backbone of m-learning.
With the help of this connectivity network, one can
connect to data collection devices, other mobile

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

phones, and to a common network.
±

Sensitivity to the context: M-learning has the ability
of gathering data unique to the current location,
environment and time, which includes both types of
data—real and simulated.

±

Portable: Since mobile phones can be carried
easily everywhere information access through this
platform is easy and quite fast.

6.

THE FOUR R’S OF MOBILE LEARNING

Mobile learning in the words of Durhand Sharples [5]
takes into accounts the learner’s mobility. m-learning is
equally valid when accomplished with a pad of paper and
a pen, if that is the appropriate resource for the mobile
learner. In comparison to “Three R’s” of the essential prenet generation skills (reading, writing and arithmetic),
there are “Four R’s” of net generation learning which
reflect the current socio-cultural shifts in thinking and
learning for an increasingly mobile 21st century. These
are:

6.1 Record: The learner as a gatherer and
builder of new knowledge
(i)

The learner may use a portable device to capture,
preserve, note, memorize or create information.

(ii)

The information may be recorded on the portable
device itself; or the portable device should serve as a
conduit for storing the information remotely.

(iii)

Underpinned by a constructivist Theory of Learning.

6.2 Reinterpret: The learner as an analyst of
existing data to discover new knowledge
(i)

The learner may use the portable device to discover,
process or enhance existing data so that it is
transformed into new information, or “remixed” to
enhance learning. In these conditions, the mobile
device enhances or supplements the learner’s own
senses or processing abilities.

(ii)

Underpinned by a constructivist Theory of Learning.

6.3 Relate: The learner as a user of existing
information and resources
(i)

The learner can use the device to communicate
directly and synchronously or access asynchronous
communication services.

(ii)

They can also recommend and share resources,
e.g., linking mobile devices (usually wirelessly) and
sending a file from one to the other.
55

(iii) Communicate and collaborative: underpinned by a
social Constructivist or Connectivist Theory of
learning.

±

Lack of common platforms, i.e., horizontal screens
with some handheld computers, and small scale
screens with mobile phones are difficult to operate.

7.

±

The market is fast moving so devices are becoming
outdated quite quickly.

±

When using wireless networks, bandwidth may
degrade with increasing users.

BENEFITS OF M-LEARNING
Some of the major benefits of m-learning are:

±

Mobile phones, PDAs or tablets holding notes and ebooks are lighter and can facilitate the whole mlearning process with ease unlike bags full of files,
papers and text-books.

±

Writing with a stylus pen is more effective than using
keyboard and mouse.

±

Mobile devices can be used anywhere, any time,
including offices, homes or when in transit.

±

These devices engage learners through mobile
phones, gadgets and games devices such as game
Boys. It makes the device invaluable.

±

This technology may contribute to combat the digital
divide, as mobile devices are generally cheaper than
desktop computers.

±

The size, shape, weight, and portability of mobile
devices have made them extremely effective for users
with permanent or temporary disabilities.

±

SMS can be used to access information to staff and
learners more easily and quickly than phone calls or
e-mails.

8.

DISADVANTAGES OF M-LEARNING

Despite the paramount importance of many benefits
of m-learning in education, there are the following
drawbacks also:
±

The memory or the storage capacity of m-learning is
limited.

±

Discharged batteries can result in loss of important
data as there is the need to charge regularly.

±

56

It is quite difficult to do job on graphics.

9. CONCLUSION
In the knowledge industry, globalization, privatization
and liberalization has too much affected the Indian
economic structure in general and education sector in
particular. ICT (information and communication
technology) has given birth to m-learning, which plays a
central role in enriching the learning experiences. The
learners in various countries who have been disconnected
with each other are having connections with any person at
any place and at any time. M-learning being the recent
technological innovation in classroom situations will help
teaching-learning experiences in the productive manner in
the future.

REFERENCES
1. Poslani, Zaheer. M-learning and its applications in
21st century. Asia Publishing House, New Delhi,
2003. pp.12-13
2. Sharples, Durhand.
Four R’s of learning in
technology. Macmillan Company, New York. 2000.
pp. 5-8.
3. Sharples, Lewis. A holistic approach of technology in
teaching. New York: McGraw Hill Book Co. Inc, 2005.
4. Quin, Alexander. E-learning. McGraw Hill, UK, 2001.
pp. 68-72.
5. Traxler. Durhand. M-learning: Its future perspectives
in the modern day age. Vikas Publishing House, New
Delhi, 2005. 110-13.
6. Urdan & Weggen. Digitalization of classroom learning
by m-learning and e-learning. Charles E. Morris
Publications, Ohio, 2000. pp. 56-58.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

