DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 6, November 2009, pp. 3-12
© 2009, DESIDOC

Electronic Medical Records Management Systems: An Overview
Lim Chee Siang Edmund, Chennupati K. Ramaiah* and Surya Prakash Gulla**
SBS Transit Ltd (East District)
15, Ang Mo Kio Street 63, Singapore-569 117
E-mail: LIMC0003@pmail.ntu.edu.sg
*

Dravidian University, Kuppam-517 425
E-mail: chennupati_kramaiah@yahoo.com

**

Medical Director and Senior Consultant Cardiologist
Care Hospitals, Market Street, Near Clock Tower, Secunderabad-500 034
E-mail: prakashgulla@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
Records document the actions of an organisation’s business activities. Nowadays, more and more
government agencies, companies and healthcare organisations are moving towards electronic records from
records on paper. In healthcare organisations, Electronic Medical Record (EMR) system is being used to
capture, organize, maintain and retrieve patient’s medical records. EMR system consists of a comprehensive
database used to store and access patient’s healthcare information. The EMR has replaced the existing paper
medical records as the primary source of information for healthcare purposes for all clinical, legal, and
administrative purposes. The paper aims to review the existing Electronic Records Management Systems
(ERMS) and assess the impact of EMR systems on the healthcare industry. This paper also discusses the
advantages and disadvantages of EMR systems and problems encountered while implementing and using the
systems by different groups of users.
Keywords: Electronic records, electronic medical records, electronic records management systems

1.

INTRODUCTION

Protection of records from destruction is an
important task as they provide us evidence of legal status,
ownership, accounts received and the particulars of
obligations required by the government agencies or
private organisations. These records can be either
electronic or in print forms and are critical because they
contain information required to continue functioning during
disasters or to re-establish operations after a calamity
has ended. According to McDougall [1], it is estimated
that there are more than 1500 businesses razed by fire in
Australia every year. More than 70 per cent of businesses
whose paper records and computer programs were lost in
fire resulted in the folding up of business after three years
of the fire. A large quantity of vital records were destroyed
in the USA due to the terrorist attack on 11 September 2009.
In the event of such disasters, if one uses electronic
records, most of the records can be saved compared to
paper records by maintaining backups at remote locations.
Received on 13 May 2009

Nowadays, more and more government agencies
and companies are relying on electronic records. This has
necessitated management and preservation of large
volume of electronic records by various agencies. ERM
initially evolved from the archives management. In records
management, the requirements for managing records
both in paper and in digital formats are similar and in this
context, the smallest unit is the folder. Both in electronic
and paper media, it refers to maintaining an individual
document as a file. Although, records in electronic form
saves us from a lot of hassles compared to paper records
but there are other factors to be considered in managing
them.

2.

WHAT ARE ELECTRONIC RECORDS?

Electronic records (ERs) are either born digitally or
converted from paper records using a scanner. ERs may
be a combination of text, graphics, data, audio, pictorial,
or other information representation in digital form that is

created, modified, maintained, archived, retrieved, or
distributed by a computer system. ERs are not just a
collection of data but also the consequences of an event.
Besides, records need to provide evidence of the content
and structure of the document; the context of its creation
is present and accessible. ERs can be created from
organisation’s financial, human resource and corporate
databases. Word processors (e.g., WordPerfect,
Microsoft Word), Spread Sheet (e.g., Excel), E-mail,
Computer-aided-Design (CAD) and Web publishing tools
(e.g., Dreamweaver) are the sources for the creation of
ERs.
ERs are part of an organisation’s memory that is
invaluable to the current and future functioning of an
organisation or a corporate body. To consider ERs as
formal records with intrinsic value, these must go through
stringent information management policies. For the sake
of reliability and authenticity, ERs must adequately
capture and describe the actions these represent. The
record should not only preserve the ‘content’ but also the
‘context’. Therefore, Stephens and Wallace [2] have
indicated that now most of the archival repositories are
undergoing transition from paper to electronic format.
Archival institutions worldwide have plans to protect the
integrity and ways to retrieve archival value of the ERs.
Every business organisation is unique and,
therefore, the type and level of value of the business’s
vital records will determine the amount of protection that
is required. Although a specific category of records may
not be vital, it does not mean that that type of record does
not require protection. Based on their value, the records
are classified into four types:
(i)

Vital records: Refer to records without which the
organisation could not continue or operate as the
records give evidence and legal status of the
organisation. It is also to protect the assets and
interest of the organisation, its clients and
shareholders, therefore, they are irreplaceable.
(ii) Important records: Refer to the categories that are
replaceable and can be reproduced at considerable
cost, time, and labour. Important records are those
having significant value for administrative functions.
These records are crucial for operation and smooth
functioning of the organisation and those including
financial statements such as general ledgers and tax
records.
(iii) Useful records: Refer to the category of records,
which may cause some inconvenience if lost but
could be easily replaced. Loss of these records does
not create any real problem in day-to-day operations
as these can be verified from other sources, either
internally or externally.
(iv) Non-essential records: These records are of little or
no value to the organisation and their loss or
4

destruction would not pose any inconvenience in the
operations of the organisation.

3.

LIFECYCLE OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS

According to the Public Records Office of the UK
National Archives [3], records, regardless of electronic or
paper form, need to pass thought certain phases from the
initial creation till the disposal stage [3]. To retain the
authenticity, integrity and reliability, ERs need to be
actively and properly managed according to the
established procedures. Figure 1 shows the various
phases in the lifecycle process of electronic records.
Creation and Capture
Dispos ition
Apprais al

Pr es ervation
Disposal

Figure 1. Lifecycle of electronic records.

(i)

Create and capture refers to the initial creation or
capture of a record within an established Records
Management System (RMS).
(ii) Disposition refers to the initial decisions that are
made on the estimated retention period for a record
when it is no longer active.
(iii) Appraisal refers to the decision-making process
based on a set of guidelines to determine whether the
record is kept in the permanent preservation or
destroyed.
(iv) Preservation refers to the strategies and methods of
migrating and keeping the records for future access
by upgrading to the latest hardware and software
platforms.
(v) Disposal refers to the process of transferring the
records to permanent archives, preservation or for
final destruction.

4.

STRUCTURE OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS

According to Victorian Electronic Records Strategy
(2003): to access people from all groups of management
to all types of records, ERs must have a common record
structure. While creating ERs, in spite of the
recommended structure to electronic records, the
following points also must be taken into consideration:
(i)

Self-documenting interprets and understands the
information in a record without reference to an
external documentation, which is based on ASCII
(American Standard Code for Information
Interchange) text. By doing this, documents can be
viewed on any computer.
(ii) Self-contained means that the structure contains all
information about the record. Information associated
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

with a record stored at one place will be easier to
manage than stored separately in the form of its
components.
(iii) Extensible means that the structure of the data can
be extended by adding new metadata or new record
type without affecting the basic structure of the data.
Recommended structure is expressed by using XML
(Extensible Markup Language). XML is a text-based
mark-up language and the specifications are easily
extensible.

5.

ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
ELECTRONIC RECORDS

Many government agencies are now creating more
records using computers than ever before. From a
records management perspective, ERs have the following
distinct advantages over their paper counterparts [4]:
Ë
Ë

Ë
Ë

Increase in speed of information exchange and
enables users to conduct more advanced searches.
Require little storage space resulting in cost saving.
Magnetic discs and optical media provide even
greater space savings.
Storage cost is much less than the equivalent
number of paper records.
Easy to copy and take very small amount of time.
The disadvantages of ERs include:

Ë
Ë

Ë
Ë

Presently, the lifespan of both magnetic and optical
media on which ERs are preserved is very short.
Hardware that is used to read data becomes
obsolete almost every 3-4 years and software
changes every three years.
Storing colour images need more disk space and that
resulting in incurring higher hardware costs.
ERs can only be viewed using computer, software,
and operating system.

ERs are viable alternative storage medium to paper
in terms of preservation of information and saving storage
space. While considering storage of ERs, thought must
be given to the choice of medium, the information content
(required in terms of resolution and depth), the equipment
needed to read, and the cost of long-term storage.

6.

CREATION OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS
IN VARIOUS ORGANISATIONS

6.1 National Archives and Records
Administration
National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA) has several projects related to records
management issues. The Electronic Access Project was
carried out during 1996-99 to enable users to search and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

locate documents in digital copies as long as they have
the Internet connection. The collections include those
from Presidential libraries and regional archives. NARA’s
Electronic Records Management System (ERMS)
database is called NARA Archival Information Locator
(NAIL). NAIL is an online research database, which
contains descriptions of more than 3,000 publications
that are available in microfilms and 4,40,446 archival
holdings that enable users to search the descriptions
through keywords or subject headings. About 1,24,000
digital records are available for researchers to view
through NAIL database.

6.2 Electronic Registry System
During 1995-96, National Computer Board (NCB) in
Singapore started a project known as Electronic Registry
System, which was common platform for all
governmental agencies at that time. The automation
project was initiated by a few government agencies led
by NCB. The purpose of the ERs Project was to
introduce ERS across all public sector organisations and
institutions, to reduce duplications in the development
and maintenance, and to achieve synergies of scale and
scope. The main objectives of ERs was: (a) to provide efiling of e-mails from within the GEMS (Government
Electronic Mail System) environment; (b) to digitise as
much as the existing physical registry system; (c) to
assist in work assignment and task management from
within the GEMS environment; (d) to file and provide
organisational structure in the stored documents; and
(e) to organise and monitor work assignments and allow
access to classified information/ documents/records.

6.3 Singapore National Eye Centre
Singapore National Eye Centre (SNEC) is a member
of Singapore Health Services (SingHealth), SNEC
introduced an electronic document archival platform to
manage its financial records in July 2003 [5]. Besides
financial records, other vital records like medical and
human resource records that are converted from paper
records to ERs through a strict imaging process that is
fully compliant to the Evidence Act (EA) of Singapore have
also been archived electronically. These electronic
images can be used with confidence as substitutes to
their paper counterparts. SNEC also reached another
milestone by gaining approval from Inland Revenue
Authority of Singapore (IRAS) to convert their physical
financial records into EA certified digital images which will
benefit in managing and safely keeping its vital records in
electronic form. This resulted in increased access, usage
and productivity where paper records do not allow multiple
accesses. Electronic Record Management (ERM) and
Electronic Document Management (EDM) are required by
most organisations regardless of public or private. The
two systems are closely related in their functions and can
be integrated in one software package that supports the
5

management of electronic information in different ways
but complements each other.
ERM provides a digital environment for capturing
electronic documents and applying standard records
management practices to manage them. It supports the
medium to long-term information management needs of
each organisation’s business. Besides that, it also
manages a corporate filing structure, document
classification within the filing structures, and formal
retention and disposition scheduling based on an
approved disposition and review schedule.
EDM emphasises on usability and is designed based
on business needs of an organisation to support the
operational functions. It has less emphasis on document
control and accountability. Fundamental difference
between these two are that ERM focuses on the access
and version control, audit trails, security, and back-up
whereas, EDM is the subset of Records Management that
concentrates on data collected on Web forms and internal
administrative systems. It is to ensure the accurate
handling of information hence EDMS is the aggregation of
the three technologies including imaging, electronic
foldering, and workflow management. Moreover, EDM has
components that possess optical character recognition
(OCR) and automatic identification abilities.

7.

PRESERVATION OF ELECTRONIC
RECORDS

With the enormous flow of ERs among all types of
organisations, preservation of ERs is an important
problem that many people are facing in the industry [6].
Preservation of ERs will focus mainly on the purpose,
access levels and multiple access, and duration of the
preservation period. The purpose refers to the owning
organisation’s intention of preserving the records and the
information content. Preservation of records is vital as
they can be kept for future references. So, many
departments and organisations began realising the
benefits of their corporate information. However, there
must be a clear direction on why records are to be
preserved and how long to be preserved?
Level of access is also crucial for ERs. Similar to
paper records, they can be classified as restricted or
confidential. Therefore, some ERs are available only to
the public and some to the entire organisation or
designated people of that organisation. The duration of the
preservation period is another concern to all organisations
and agencies. In most cases, the duration will not exceed
30 years but may be shorter or longer depending on the
policy of the organisation or agency. McLeod and Hare {7}
recommended the following standard file formats for longterm preservation: (i) PDF for plain text or XML documents;
(ii) SQL for spreadsheets; (iii) SQL for databases; and (iv)
TIFF for pictures.
6

8.

METADATA AND AUTHENTICATION

McLeod and Hare defined metadata as contextual
information of a record [7]. Metadata is structured
information that enables us to describe, locate, control,
and manage other information. McLean strongly feels
that Electronic Medical Record (EMR) is similar to any
types of electronic records [8]. EMR generates metadata
that is invisible to an average computer user however,
any alternations could be viewed under the “track
changes” feature of the program. Hence, doctors and
healthcare professionals who are authorised not only to
access the EMR but also to alter or edit the record.
Metadata could be used to track person(s) who
accessed the electronic record, what types of
information was being viewed and whether the record
was modified etc. Unlike paper records, visual
inspections are needed to detect any alternations.
Similar to paper records, ERs must be authenticated
prior to using them as evidence in court or business
transaction. Present technology helps us in knowing the
authenticity of ERs and identifies whether the documents
or records have been altered or tampered [9]. The
technologies that are used could also provide an audit trail
of the documents or records, even to the extent the
person altered who had created or signed the records or
documents could be traced. ERs are difficult to
authenticate as ownership, authorship, and validity need
to be ensured. The ability of tracking the path of ERs is
important as it can enable users to know whether when
and by whom the records were revised and where the
authentic version is stored.

9.

REVIEW OF MAJOR ELECTRONIC
RECORD MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

ERMS is a central management and storage
system for medical records that meets the legal
requirements of an organisation by retaining all the
important records. ERMS records document and
supports
the
operational,
performance,
and
administrative activities of hospitals. ERMS manages
these records for electronic storage and retrieval by
authorised staff of a hospital, allows elimination of paper
file copies, and prevents their inadvertent destruction.
ERMS could be used for any application in various
healthcare organisations however, this paper covers
medical ERMS more extensively.

10. ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORDS
SYSTEM
In the beginning, there was only hand written charts
which were time consuming and tedious. Illegible
handwritten charts not only took lot of time to undertaking
and interpret but also to more serious problems such as
errors in diagnoses, treatment, and billing.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

Advent of computers, lead to many ways to store
vast amount of information without requiring huge physical
storage space. They also offered the convenience where
several people can access the same information
concurrently and from different locations. In keeping up
with the complexity of managing the patients’ healthrelated information, the healthcare industry started
computerising these records over a decade ago.
EMRS Comprises a set comprehensive database
used to store and access patients’ healthcare
information. The EMRs replaced the paper medical
records as the primary source of information for
healthcare purposes including clinical, legal, and
administrative requirements. It is seen as a virtual
compilation of non-redundant health data about a person
across lifetime, including facts, observations,
interpretations, plans, actions, and outcomes. The
EMRS is supported by a network of systems that
captures, stores, processes, communicates, secures,
and presents information from multiple disparate
locations as per requirement. The system facilitates the
interaction among specialists or initial attending doctors,
patient, attendance of long-term care, and business
administration such as risk management and billing.
EMRS allows medical personnel to look at charts and
histories of patients without having to search for paperbased medical reports. With the use of document
imaging system, cataloguing can be done according to
its specific need. Moreover, patients’ charts can be
customised according to the preference of the medical
personnel. Besides that, it can also list the type of
medication and dosage on a patient’s file.
At the moment, there are many EMR systems
available in the market. Healthcare organisations are
normally caught in a dilemma either to purchase readymade or custom-made system. There is no system in the
market that could accommodate all the requirements of
any organisation. More initial investment is definitely
needed if the organisation decides to go for custommade system. As far as ready-made system, the
organisation will tend to adapt the system and see how it
could compliment to its operations. Whereas, for
custom-made system, the organisation will decide on
how the system is going to improvise on its current
workflow. Measuring tools such as checklist must be
developed to keep track of the entire implementation
process. Since the market is very competitive, vendors
are outshining each other with additional features to
attract potential buyers. The following are some of the
import EMR Management Systems that are being used in
various hospitals, health centres, clinics, etc. however,
longer list is given at Appendix 1.
NextGen (http://www.nextgen.com/proemr.asp): It is
suitable to cater small to large medical practise. This
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

system is good for healthcare providers, which would like
to manage administrative and clinical information. It is a
comprehensive system specially developed for over 20
different specialities such as neurology, urology,
orthopaedics, dermatology, etc., and has built-in user
friendly tools, which enable fast and easy customisation
of workflow and content options. The system could
improve quality, reduce risk, cut cost and increase
revenues of the user.
Visionary
Medical
Systems,
Inc
(http://www.
visionarymed.com/home.php): This system enables
better office efficiency and workflow of EMR by providing
fast access to the patient’s information. The use of
Microsoft architecture enables better stability and
integration with most software in the market. Besides
that, visionary could store critical information of a patient
such as medication, allergies, laboratory reports, charts,
etc. The system also has an easy-to-use Windows user
interface that helps the users in booking of medical
appointments, billing, financial, and operational
elements of a successful medical practice. Another
advantage of this system is that electronic claims can be
processed to insurance carriers of commercial or
government entities. This system is suitable for use
either for single or multiple practices.
AdvantaChart (http://www.advantachart.com/): This
system is a Window-based EMR application designed in
partnership with Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The
system is easy to use and is available at affordable price.
Besides that, this system could be used for workflow
process to streamline and to provide quality patient care.
The interface is user friendly and doctors and healthcare
professionals could record all phone calls, laboratory
tests, and hospitalisation records. The system is reliable
in which the information and charts of the patient could be
accessed from remote locations through an Internet
connection. This system combined imaging, data
recognition, and other leading edge technologies to
create, maintain, and access to patient records. It helps
in tracing patients; the movement of particular patient
could be monitored at every stage (from check-in till
discharge).
National Computer System (http://www.ncs.com.sg/
documents/Clipping_Keylines_NovDec-ncs1.pdf): This
system enables doctors and healthcare professionals to
share information of patients from hospitals and
polyclinics between the two clusters of public healthcare
providers (i.e. SingHealth and National Healthcare
Group). Electronic Medical Records Exchange (EMRX) is
a platform which enables the two healthcare providers to
share EMR of the patients that was created by either of
the cluster. With EMRX, patient’s discharge summary,
laboratory results, medical alerts, operation reports,
radiological and X-ray’s report’s and drug allergies could
7

be shared and unnecessary laboratory tests and
questions reduced. In the event of an unconscious
patient, it will be a great help to doctors because it will
provide existing medical conditions, histories, drug
allergy and medication given to similar type of the patients
before. This will greatly help the attending doctors or
healthcare professionals in properly diagnosing and giving
suitable prescriptions to the patient.

10.1 Advantages, Disadvantages and
Problems implementing EMRS
Nowadays EMR systems are widely used in
hospitals, nursing facilities, healthcare, clinics,
laboratory facilities, treatment centres, and physician’s
offices. The advantages of EMRS [10] are:
Ë
Ë
Ë
Ë
Ë

Ë
Ë

Ë

Convenience of use.
Remote access
Information is more organised and easier to read
compared to paper records.
Simultaneous access to multiple users.
Improved efficiency of processes such as data
collection, data management and data retrieval.
The disadvantages of EMRS are:
High initial investment.
Every error on the record can have a major impact
due to multiple people accessing to the same record
at the same time.
Failures in hardware or software can result in loss of
information.

10.2 Problems Implementing EMRS
Although many healthcare organisations enjoy the
benefits of EMRS, following barriers are there in
implementing the system: (a) decision to buy a readymade or custom made system according; (b) choosing
the right vendors and hardware/software; (c) participation
and involvement of healthcare professionals in the
implementation process; (d) insufficient financial
resources to invest in improved information technology;
(e) lack of time and human resource to retrain the staff for
switch into EMR; and (f) anticipated problems in
attempting to an integrated system. While implementing
the system, measurement tools such as checklist must
be developed to ensure that the implementation process
is on the right track, and security and confidentiality
issues must be clearly defined while developing the
system. The need for medical records is growing
everyday, vast amount of data are being created, which is
to be used for clinical, administrative and managerial
purposes. Therefore, many healthcare organisations are
switching to EMRS as they allow multiple authorized
users can simultaneously access to the same record
from one or different locations at the same time.
8

Nowadays, healthcare facilities are being provided by
different organisations from varieties of locations; in all
types of organisations EMRS helps in getting right
information at the right time for healthcare professionals.

10.3 Challenges of Conversion to EMR
However, there are some challenges while transiting
to EMR. According to Fairbrook it takes time to convert
records on paper to EMR because standardisation of the
office procedures are needed to ensure all staff adheres to
the same process while doing the each task [11]. The
transition period of a clinic could be as much as 12 to 18
months so productivity of the staff could also be affected
during that time. Transferring of information and cost
involved within and different healthcare groups are other
challenges for paper records conversion.

11. IMPACT OF EMRS ON HEALTHCARE
INDUSTRY
No doubts that most of the hospitals do not have a
complete paperless EMRS still from the admission of the
patient till the discharge many procedures have already
been computerised. Many administrative departments
(billing, financial management and abstracting of
medical records) of healthcare providers are being
automated besides, areas like laboratory tests, radiology
reports, issuing of medical certificates. Virtual Medical
Worlds had noticed that computer-based ERMS have
streamlined the automation of workflow and greatly
reduced the usage of paper up to 75 per cent [12].
Omtool, a leading document and information
handling solutions provider for managing the lifecycle of
medical records highlighted that the existence of EMR
must be in the format that all required users must be able
to share information timely [13]. Although, EMRS is able
to provide immediate access to the information of the
patients, privacy is also one of the factors that must be
taken into consideration. The U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services had introduced a privacy rule under
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(Patient Safety and Quality Healthcare, 2004) [14]. The
purpose of the act is to protect and safeguards the
information of the patients either physically or technically.
Due to the reliance on EMR, Business Continuity Plan
(BCP) is then become vital to all healthcare organisations
from catastrophe strikes. Hence, proper contingency
plan(s) must be provided for all healthcare providers in
case of any emergency so that normal operations could
be resumed within a stipulated time frame as information
of patient is confidential. Therefore, healthcare providers
should plan for storing “back-ups” in a secured offsite
location(s). As paper records are volatile and prone to
destruction, many healthcare providers should consider
to digitise their paper records so that they could be
accessed electronically in the event of any disaster(s).
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

In Singapore, SingHealth introduced EMR during the
year 2002 in three hospitals, four national centres as well
as eight polyclinics and then progressively implemented
the Electronic Medical Records Exchange (EMRX) over a
period of two years. With the implementation of EMRX, it
is estimated that more than 4000 patients are now
enjoying better patient care, improved drug safety, fewer
repeated tests resulting an integrated and seamless care
for the patients [15]. Since 2005, SGH has been film less
as all the X-rays are digitised and stored on a centralised
server which could be accessed by doctors and
authorised healthcare professionals from remote
locations. Besides SGM has advanced another step link
diagnoses to related articles from the two renowned
healthcare databases (OVID and The Cochrane Library)
which facilitate the research for rare or uncommon
diseases.

12. CONCLUSION
The introduction of EMR has significantly influenced
the management in filing, chart tracking, retrieving,
sharing data, etc. of medical records. Once the medical
records are in electronic form, in various operations the
basic functions of Healthcare Information Management
System (HIMS) would become very easy. EMRS allows
concurrent access to the data on the medical records to
multiple users. It also helps in saving physical housing
space of the hospitals, which is an expensive component
in all types of places. With the move towards a paperless
environment, HIMS professionals will need to focus on
efficient systems that provide accurate data timely,
reduce space, and help in managing records innovatively.
Besides the healthcare professionals, patients also reap
the benefits of good EMRS in terms of better quality of
care, improved drug safety and fewer repeated tests.
Having a successful EMRS will not only capture, store
and manage data effectively but also allow all authorised
personnel to access simultaneously so that everyone will
get maximum benefits from the system.

REFERENCES

4. Westchester County Government. Records
Management Issues: Retention of Electronic
Records, 1995. http://www.westchestergov.com/
wcarchives/electrnc.html#Adv (Retrieved on 25
February 2004).
5. Singapore National Eye Centre. News Archives:
Singapore National Eye Centre achieves IRAS
approved digital financial records in full compliance
with the evidence act, 2003. http://www.snec.com.
sg/news/press_archive_02072003.asp (Retrieved on
10 January 2008).
6. Coombs, P. The crisis in electronic government
record keeping: A strategy for long-term storage.
Library Computing, 1999, 18(3), 196-202.
7. McLeod, J. & Hare, C. How to manage records in the
e-environments. Routledge, London, 2006. pp.14-18,
22-23.
8. McLean, T.R. Electronic medical record metadata:
Do you know what’s in your record?. Inter. J.
Controversial Medical Claims, 2008, 15 (1), 16-18.
9. Adobe PDF for Electronic Records: White Paper,
2007. http://www.adobe.com/government/pdfs/pdf_
electronic_records_wp.pdf (Retrieved on 10 April
2008).
10. Nelson, B. The electronic patient record: Pros and
Cons. htt p:// jim my.qm uc.ac.uk/usr/i m0 1nels/
Subjbook.htm #A (Retrieved on 15 May 2004).
11. Fairbrook, D. The winding road to EMR adoption:
Challenges of conversion. Health Manage.Technol.
http://www.healthmgttech.com/f eatures/2007_
december/1207_ winding_road.aspx (Retrieved on 09
April 2008).
12. Virtual Medical Worlds: 2005 Healthcare technology
trends will have strong impact on small businesses,
ITSPA, 2004. http://www.hoise.com/vmw/04/articles/
vmw/LV-VM-12-04-23.html (Retrieved on April 28
2008).

1. McDougall, J. Planning ahead for your company
security. Inform. Quar., 1989, 5(3), 17-19.

13. Omtool solutions for healthcare. Omtool. http://
www.omtool.com/solutions/healthcareSolutions.cfm
(Retrieved on 22 April 2008).

2. Stephens, D.O. & Wallace, R.C. Electronic Records
Retention: New strategies for data lifecycle
management. Long-term data retention: Technical
guidelines and best practices, 2003. 72-79.

14. Patient safety and quality healthcare: Electronic
records, patient confidentiality, and impact on HIPAA.
h t t p : / / www. p sq h . c o m / o ct d e c 04 / d u dl e y. h t m l
(Retrieved on 28 April 2008).

3. Public Records Office of the UK National Archives.
Management of electronic records. http://www.
nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/principles4.pdf
(Retrieved on 15 April 2008).

15. Lim, R. Guess your next disease with technology.
h t t p : / / w ww. si n g h e a l t h . c o m . s g / N e ws r oo m /
NewsReports/2007/20070517_HIMSS07_BT.htm
(Retrieved on 15 April 2008).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

9

About the Authors

Lim Chee Siang, Edmund obtained his Diploma in Manufacturing Engineering from Nanyang Polytechnic,
Singapore specialising in Plastic Technology in the year 1998. He then worked with Ascent Media and HBO Asia as
Origination Controller for three years. Later he obtained his Bachelor degree in Engineering Management from the
University of Western Sydney in 2003 and MSc (Information Studies) from Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore in 2005. Edmund worked for short time with the National Library Board and then joined SBSt Ltd as the
pioneer batch of Controllers in October 2005 to handle Automatic Vehicle Management System and spearheaded
the Records Management Team during the start up phase. In the merge of the Operations Control Centre, Edmund
is appointed as the 2IC of the District Operations Control Centre assisting the AVP OPCC to manage the daily
operational functions and duties. In view of his vast experiences, he is also appointed as the Knowledge and
Training Officer of DOCC.
Prof. Chennupati K. Ramaiah is working as Professor in Library and Information Science at Dravidian
University, Kuppam. Before that he worked as Professor and Librarian at Muffakham Jah College of Engineering
and Technology, Hyderabad. Prior to that he worked as the Director, Centre for Information Science, Mahatma
Gandhi National Institute of Research and Social Action, Hyderabad. Dr Ramaiah also worked as an Assistant
Professor for six years with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore from 1999-2005. Prior to that Dr
Ramaiah was Deputy Director at DESIDOC, Delhi, a national information centre in Defence Science and Technology
in India. He has worked for 14 years in the DRDO, Delhi, as Scientist, and worked in various areas. He was a
Commonwealth Scholar for doing PhD in UK in the filed of Information Science in England during 1989-1993. Soon
after obtaining his PhD, he set up a multimedia lab and worked several years in designing multimedia applications,
presentations, and training materials. His formal education includes Masters degrees in Chemistry and Library and
Information Science. He is a member of many international professional bodies/ societies such as the Institute of
Information Scientists, Library Association, London; American Society for Information Science & Technology and
Association of Computing Machinery. He has published 75 papers and two books. Dr Ramaiah’s research interests
include multimedia and hypertext technologies, human-computer interaction, user interaces, designing e-books, epublishing, e-learning, archival informatics and bibliometrics.
Dr Surya Prakash Gulla is presently working as Medical Director and Senior Consultant Cardiologist, Care
Hospitals, Secunderabad. He obtained MBBS from Andhra Medical College, Visakhapatnam, MD from All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, and further specialisation in DM (Cardiology) from the Nizam’s Institute of
Medical Sciences, Hyderabad. He has published and presented more than 100 research papers in various national
and international journals as well as in national/international conferences and workshops both as a delegate and
a speaker/moderator. He is the recipient of the Prestigious Ugadi Puraskar Award in 1999 from the Madras Telugu
Academy for meritorious services in healthcare and Vikasa Ratna Shiromani Award in 2004 by the Society for
Friendship and National Unity, New Delhi “for selfless services to Mother India”. He also received the Distinguished
Service Award for his outstanding and dedicated community services and exceptional efforts to promote human
values and culture by Vishwamanava Samaikyata Samat, Vishwamandiram, Guntur.

10

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

Appendix 1

List of Electronic Medical Records Systems
S. No.

Name of the
ERMS

Company name and address

System’s features

URL

1

OmniMD

Integrated Systems
Management, Inc. 303 South
Broadway, Suite 101 Tarrytown,
NY 10591

The leading edge solutions for practicing
physicians and clinics for complete practice
workflow.

http://www.omnimd.com/htm
l/pOverview.html

2

SequelMed
EHR
(Electronic
Health
Records)

Sequel Systems, Inc. 225
BroadHollow Rd, Suite # 205E
Melville, NY 11747

It is an integrated solution and all-in-one
system inclusive of practice management
(SequelMed EPM), document management
(SequelMed EDM) and medical records
(SequelMed EMR) solutions that captures
and manages episodic and longitudinal
health records information by facilitating
comprehensive workflow tasking related to
all components of the health record with
appropriate timeliness and effective delivery
of healthcare services.

http://www.sequelmed.com/

3.

MedicsElite

Advanced Data Systems
Corporation, 255 West Spring,
Valley Avenue, Maywood, NJ
07607

The Ultimate Medical Practice Management
Software provider of Practice Management,
Electronic Medical Records (EMR) and
Radiology Information System (RIS)
software solutions, currently serving over
30,000 physicians and healthcare providers
in every medical specialty and practice size.

http://www.adsc.com/

4

PowerMed

PowerMed Corporation Phone:
207.772.3920 48 Free Street
Portland
Maine 04101

PowerMed Solo is a single user, nonnetworkable, subscription based version of
PowerMed Practice Suite, and includes
EMR, Billing, and Scheduling, with
additional specialty modules that can be
configured by the end user.

http://www.powermed.com/

5.

MediNotes

MediPro

MediNotes e is one of the most flexible
EMR software packages in the market
today. Templates and other medical content
objects have been designed for complete
control by the physician. MediNotes e links
with over 40 practice management systems
including Lytec Medical.

http://www.medipro.com/emr
/index.html

6.

Practice
Management
ULTRA
System

American Medical Software,
1180 S State Route 157,
Edwardsville IL 62025.

Practice Management ULTRA System for a
Complete Electronic Health Record the
“Ultimate” in Medical Office Software. This
fully integrated system is made up of the
following systems and modules: Electronic
Patient Charts System, Medical
Management System, Appointment
Scheduling System and Handheld Module.

http://www.americanmedical.
com/

7.

EMR
software
solutions
framework

Binary Spectrum
448, Abbott Road, Paramus
New Jersey–07652, USA

The EMR software program helps to create
a computerized patient record quickly,
which also includes progress notes,
treatment plans, etc. The automated
security measures built in an EMR makes
the product more attractive to the users
because of HIPAA compliance. EMR is
flexible enough to fit into an existing
practice without affecting the streamline and
smoothing the rough edges of the process.

http://www.binaryspectrum.c
om/HealthcareSolutions/Ele
ctronicMedicalRecords/elect
ronic-medical-record.html

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

11

12

8.

e-MDs
Solution
Series

e-MDs
9900 Spectrum Drive
Austin, Texas-78717

This is a standard for affordable and
integrated EHR / EMR & Practice
Management software solution. Designed
by physicians to improve care, reduce
errors and simplify business so that time
spent with patients is quality time
automatically billed and coded properly.

http://www.e-mds.com/

9.

MedicWare
EMR
Software

MedicWare products
6520 North Irwindale Avenue
Suite 215, Irwindale
CA 91702

MedicWare EMR system is one of the most
complete, efficient and affordable electronic
medical record software. MedicWare EMR
is medical office software that increases
profitability of your practice, improves
efficiency of your staff, and enhances your
patient care.

http://www.medicware.com/

10.

mrecord EMR

MRecord
4909 Watersedge Dr. Suite 218,
Raleigh, NC-27606

MRecord's electronic medical record
system is a healthcare automation system
to physician practices and preparing them
for the connected community.

https://www.mrecord.com/
emr.html

11.

A.I.med

A.I.med
Toll-Free: (800) 403-2330
Tel: (858) 268-1150
E-mail: info@acrendo.com

A.I.med is an electronic medical record and
practice management software system
created for smaller sized practices. With a
sophisticated backend system, users can
customize the EMR in real-time and access
it remotely.

http://www.acrendo.com/

12.

Abraxas EMR

Abraxas Medical Solutions 135
Technology Drive, Suite 200
Irvine, CA 92618

Abraxas Medical Solutions provides a single
software application for both electronic
medical records and practice management
(PM) using a single Microsoft-SQL
database.

http://www.abraxasmedical.
com/

13.

AdvancedMD

AdvancedMD® Software,
Inc.11781 South Lone Peak
Pkwy, Suite 110
Draper, UT 84020

AdvancedMD is a leading EMR and medical
billing software system. With a large
national customer base, this EMR caters to
primary care physicians as well as a wide
range of specialty physicians.

http://www.advancedmd.
com/

14.

AdvantaChart

AdvantaChart™Inc.
5948 Timber Ridge Drive, Suite
202 Prospect
KY-40059

AdvantaChart is a specialty-specific EMR
designed for small to medium OB/GYN and
Internal Medicine practices. Utilizing
innovative and proven technologies,
AdvantaChart is easy to use, reasonably
priced and known for unparalleled system.

http://www.advantachart.
com/

15.

athenaClinica
ls

athenahealth, Inc.
311 Arsenal Street Watertown,
MA 02472

athenahealth is suitable for medical
practices that combines intuitive web-based
practice management and EMR software,
payer and clinical intelligence and resultsoriented services.

http://www.athenahealth.
com/

16.

ChartLogic
EMR

ChartLogic Inc.
3995 South 700 East
Suite 200, Salt Lake City Utah84107

ChartLogic EMR is a unique charting
system driven by speech recognition
software which allows to document patient’s
information in less than 90 seconds.

http://www.chartlogic.com/el
ectronic-medical-recordsoftware.php

17.

e-Health
Method

eHEALTH
G-4 Sector 39, Noida
Uttar Pradesh-201 301, India

e-Health Method, Version P by Global
Medical Data, is a web-based EMR &
Practice Management system that features
scheduling, diagnosis/procedure capture,
claims submission/follow up, and patient
billing system.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

