DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 6, November 2009, pp. 33-38
© 2009, DESIDOC

Knowledge Management: Tools and Techniques
Syed Raiyan Ghani
Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical Institute, Bangaluru-560 059
E-mail: syedraiyan@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Knowledge management is not one single discipline. Rather it is an integration of numerous endeavours
and fields of study. This paper provides a framework for characterising the various tools and techniques
available to knowledge management practitioners. It provides an overview of a number of key terms and
concepts, describes the framework, provides examples of how to use it, and explores a variety of potential
application areas. The stress of knowledge management tools and techniques has been manoeuvred to share
knowledge through communication and collaboration tools which specify the shift from process to practice.
Keywords: Knowledge management, information management, retrieval-ware, web-based tools.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Both knowledge and knowledge management (KM)
are difficult to define. Academics in the field of KM
typically define knowledge as a derivative of information,
which is derived from data. Knowledge is information or
data, organised in a way that is useful to the organisation.
The central idea is that KM efforts work to create, codify
and share knowledge valuable to the organisation.
Another idea is that KM shifts the focus from process to
practice. It is using communication and collaboration to
improve how people do their practice (their job within an
overall process). KM is essentially defined by the need to
manage knowledge in an organisation like an asset. The
impetus for managing knowledge in organisations is the
realisation that the new economy is based on knowledge.
The most basic idea driving KM is that knowledge is a
strategic asset that must be managed. It should be
managed as an asset or resource, just like land, capital,
and labour. This is a shift away from how to simply obtain
knowledge to how to use it productively. Knowledge is to
be seen as an activity as well as an object; it is a product
and a process. It is something that must be created and
shared. KM is essentially about tacit knowledge (TK). It is
aimed at making TK explicit and then sharing that for
reuse across an organisation. The following can be
expressed as KM lifecycle:
Knowledge generation
Knowledge transfer.

Knowledge

codification

Received on 6 August 2009; Revised on 4 September 2009

KM initiatives are often expressions of part of this
process. Some are concerned with the first part:
knowledge creation, innovation or organisational learning.
Others are concerned with capturing TK for codification.
This means recording videos or feeding data into a
database. Knowledge transfer is sharing knowledge. This
means a database of information with access methods. It
can mean fostering networks of people for sharing
knowledge or creating knowledge maps showing who has
what expertise. There are different tools for the KM. It can
be divided into two parts: Information technologies tools
and Web-based (IT) tools. Web, in coming years, will
present a set of new tools for managing knowledge by
providing an extremely rich common language for
representing knowledge.

2.

KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT

2.1 Definition
Karl Sveiby [1] defined KM as, The art of creating
value from an organisation s intangible assets. Davenport
and Prusak [2] defined KM as, KM is concerned with the
exploitation and development of the knowledge assets of
an organisation with a view to furthering the knowledge
objectives.
Despres, Charles and Chauvel, Daniele [3] defined
KM as, The purpose of knowledge management is to
enhance organisational performance by explicitly
designing and implementing tools, processes, systems,

structures, and cultures to improve the creation, sharing,
and use of different types of knowledge that are critical for
decision-making.
According to the World Bank, KM is the
management of knowledge through systematic sharing
that can enable one to build on earlier experience and
obviate the need for costly reworking of learning by
making the same repetitive mistakes.

2.2 Evolution of Knowledge Management
The emergence of the term explicit knowledge and
the introduction of KM in the 1980s were new. It was a
natural evolution brought about by the confluence of many
factors. The developments that have led to present
perspective on KM come from many areas. Some are
intellectually based, while others are pragmatic and
rooted in the need to innovate to secure real-life
performance. KM can be described as the most recent
phase of an evolution from a managerial focus on data
management than information management and finally
KM. The three practices that have brought the most
contents and energy to KM are information management,
the quality movement and the human factors/human
capital movement [4].
Information management developed during the
seventies and eighties and is usually understood as a
subset of the larger information technology and
information science world. IT is a body of thought and
cases that focus on how information itself is managed
independent of the technologies that house and
manipulate it. It deals with information issues in terms of
valuation, operational techniques, governance, and
incentive schemes. Information, in this context,
generally means documents, data, and structured
messages. In broad terms, KM shares information
management s user perspective, a focus on value as a
function of user satisfaction rather than the efficiency of
the technology that houses and delivers the information.

3.

KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT TOOLS

The development of IT for organisations has
produced many successful ERP-type systems that
manage well-defined processes. But systems to manage
ill-defined, knowledge intensive processes have met with
less success. KM practitioners use a wide range of IT
tools to share, create, codify, and share knowledge. The
trend in the development of IT for organisations is toward
more communication and collaboration tools.

3.1 Requirement of Knowledge Management
Tools
The tools for KM are focused on assimilation,
comprehension, and learning of the information by
individuals who will then transform data and information
34

into knowledge. Knowledge is strictly linked and
connected to the individual (or group) who creates it, which
may cast doubts on the availability of information systems
tools to effectively support KM. Thus the visible part of
knowledge, what the literature calls explicit as opposed to
the tacit dimension of knowledge, is only information
regardless of the amount of the other individual knowledge
embedded into it [5]. Therefore, there is requirement of KM
tools, which can collect, catalogue, organise, and share
knowledge or transfer information (the explicit knowledge)
embedded in various forms and types of documents and
media. These reasons are [6]:
(i) Facilitate information contextualisation: To facilitate
information contextualisation, metadata on its
characteristics and integration within a specific
environment must be attached to it before storing. This
facilitates better retrieval and management for the
knowledge seeker.
(ii) Intelligently transfer information: Information transfer
must occur by taking into account the user, the content,
and the time of transfer. A tool that can optimise these
three aspects can truly provide information according to
the needs of the users, respecting one of the key
functional foundations of KM.
(iii) Facilitate social interactions and networking: Direct
communication and verbal knowledge transfer through
social interactions among individuals is the most natural
aspect of knowledge sharing. A KM tool supports this
social aspect and facilitates searching.
(iv) Present a customised human-computer interface: The
tools also support interface customisation and ease of
use. The human-computer interface, ease of use and
usability will drive intention to use and reuse the tools.

3.2

Tools available for Knowledge Management

A number of tools are available to support the
functionalities and processes of KM, which are listed
below:
(i) Tools to access knowledge:These tools provide access
to explicit knowledge that can be shared and transferred
through the enterprise information systems. For example,
Convera is a tool used for retrieval ware. It works on
powerful indexing systems to classify expertise based on
both content and collaboration dynamics and networks
within the enterprise.
(ii) Tools for semantic mapping: These tools are meant to
quickly support presentation of information, analysis, and
decision making. Ontology tools are also part of this
category as they enable users to organize information and
knowledge by groups and schemata that represent the
organizational knowledge base. For example, Anacubis is
a ground-breaking visual research and analysis software
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

for corporate researchers, analysts, and intelligence
professionals. It supports the visual discovery and
analysis of intelligence in both online and enterprise
information. Information is represented in the Anacubis
Desktop by icons and links. Users can also import,
create, analyse, and distribute visual representations of
their research and analysis.
(iii) Tools for knowledge extraction: These tools support
structured queries and replies. They help mining text by
interpreting relationships among different elements and
documents. For example, ClearForest Text Analysis
Suite is an advanced text driven business intelligence
solutions which apply intelligent mark-up to key entities
such as person, organization, location, as well as
detailed facts or events embedded within free-form text
such as news articles, web surveys, and HTML
documents.

maintaining a repository of materials associated with
every step of the process. For example, QuickPlace is a
Lotus s web-based shared workspace software for realtime collaboration among geographically dispersed
participants. Using QuickPlace, coworkers, suppliers,
partners, and customers can communicate online
immediately within a structured workspace created for
that purpose. An online workspace can make it possible
for people to work together more easily and less
expensively.

4.

EVOLUTION OF IT TOOLS IN
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT

4.1 Some Categories of IT Tools Commonly
Associated with Knowledge Management
Some categories of IT tools commonly associated
with KM are shown in Table 1.

(iv) Tools for expertise localisation: These tools enable
quick location of the knowledge holders in the enterprise
and facilitate collaboration and knowledge exchange. For
example, ActiveNet maintains a continuous, real-time
view of organisational activities. ActiveNet continuously
discovers each person s work activity and business
relationships by processing communications from such
sources as documents, discussion databases, e-mail,
instant messaging and digital workspaces.

Four different types of knowledge and the different
types of KM tools that can be used to manage or facilitate
knowledge transfer are shown in Table 2 [7]:

(v) Tools for collaboration work: These tools enable teams
to globally share dedicated spaces for managing the
project lifecycle; editing and publishing materials;
conducting live discussions and interactions; and

Web offers a very powerful platform for tools
supporting all stages of KM. The web allows for an
unprecedented degree of integration of different
representational and communicational media.

4.2 Categorisation of Tools Based on
Different Types of Knowledge

4.3 Web-based Information Technology Tools
for Knowledge Mangement

Table 1. IT Tools commonly associated with knowledge management
Technology
AI technology
Communication and collaboration systems group

Documents management system

Content management system
Intranet

Search engine
Learning system
Knowledge mapping tools

Description/examples
Expert systems, learning systems.
E-mail, teleconference, video conference, chat, IM, forum,
Listserv, groupware calendar, log, shared information spaces
workflow management system, group decision support system.
Management of electronic documents, a system to search,
edit, distribute, retrieve, archive and otherwise mange the
complete lifecycle of documents
Management of electronic content including multimedia files.
A network contained within the enterprise. It is used to share
information and computing resources among employee as well
as to facilitate group working.
Tool that searches the contents of a web.
Distance learning, e-learning and computer-based training.
Any resource that locates people by their knowledge; human
resources skill set inventory system.

Table 2. Types of knowledge and different types of knowledge management tools
Explicit knowledge

Know how

Know who

Tacit knowledge

System tools

Collaboration tools

CRM tools

Video conferencing

DBMS

E-mail

Social network analysis

Face-to-face facilitation

Data warehousing

Groupware

Knowledge portals

Other technologies

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

35

4.1.1 Traditional Database Tools
These tools attempt to allow users to create general
data properties implicitly within a database. They allow for
the creation of objects that have certain properties, can
communicate with other objects and so on.

4.1.2 Process Modelling and Management Tools
Processes that involve the transformation of
physical material have been the focal metaphor. Tools
have been built to support these processes encode
considerable knowledge of the process.

4.1.3 Workflow Management Tools
These are the process management tools for
information-intensive organisations. Workflow tools allow
for the specification of the movement of documents in
information processes.

4.1.4 Enterprise Resource Management Tools
Enterprise modelling tools are being developed to
provide all the modelling capabilities of ERP/ERM
systems along with the explicit representation of
organisational and environmental knowledge.

4.1.5 Agent Tools
These tools rely on agents, relatively autonomous
programs that can perform a variety of tasks. Agents may
be provided with the specifications of the information that
the user is interested in and these will then search the
web and specified other databases to find the information.

4.1.6 Search Engines, Navigation Tools and Portals
Some of the search engines perform automatic textonly searches while others relied on human interpreters
who would access web pages and then analyse and
classify them.

4.1.7 Visualising Tools
These tools have been developed to investigate the
structure of knowledge domain and knowledge within
domains. These tools have been used for data
visualisation in the areas of financial market to molecular
biology.

4.1.8 Collaborative Tools
These types of tools are provided for setting of
bulletin board and for real-time video conferencing,
whiteboards, and chat rooms.

5.

NEW TOOLS FOR INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT

A new group of web-based information management
tools has emerged based on freeform social software that
enhances individual knowledge work, group communi36

cation, and collaboration. Information management tools
for knowledge work and communication are not new. The
new tools open up one-to-one and group communication
to be viewed by many users if not the public. They differ
fundamentally from the old suite of tools in that they are
based on user participation and are mostly characterised
by participatory services, where users create content.
They usually allow users to manage and modify their own
data within a given system information that is usually
made public for others benefit. Thus the services get
better the more people use them. Organisation or
knowledge is drawn out of user actions like tagging or
visiting sites. But by far the most dominant characteristic
is that of participation. Participation is built into the actual
architecture of the tool or service offering.

5.1

Web 2.0

Web 2.0 is also (perhaps most) often described as
a group of people-driven tools that allow collaboration.
These include blogs, tags, mash-ups and, wikis.

5.1.1 Blog
Blogs are most commonly used as an online
version of a personal journal. Essentially, a blog is simply
a web page that contains periodic, chronological ordered
posts, additionally grouped by categories. Users visiting
the blog can often add comments to posts. Administering
a blog (updating it by adding new posts, creating links to
other web pages, adding pictures, categorising posts,
etc.) is extremely simple.
Setting up a blog can be more complicated but
keeping it updated and posting end-user comments to it
is very easy. User settings are typically highly
configurable. Because of the emphasis on reversechronological posting, blogs are often characterised as
promoting form over content. Blogs are most commonly
used as an online daily journal or personal KM tool. For
example, teenagers may post photos, poetry, game
scores and other content to share with their friends.
Others have used it as a log file, to record chronological
data like system updates.

5.1.2 Tags
Tagging is essentially a form of social book
marking. It allows users to tag or categorise web pages
with words they create. When tagging a particular page,
one can see words others have used to categorise the
page, thereby synchronising our own categories with
others to create an overall order. We can also see how
many others have tagged the same page, any notes they
wrote about that page, what other pages they have
tagged, add them to a network of contacts and contact
them. Tagging is also present in services like Flickr,
YouTube and Yahoo s MyWeb. Tagging is a way to let
structure emerge.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

5.1.3 Wiki
A wiki is fundamentally a web of interlinked pages
where each page typically contains a concept (a name)
and a description of that concept (an article). Users are
allowed to edit any part of the article, modify the
description, add new names, add external links and add
links to names (and their corresponding articles) that do
not exist yet (so that another user can fill in the
description of the new concept). They are extremely easy
to navigate in and add content to. User security is usually
set low, giving users as much power as possible to
change the content. Page changes, old versions of pages
and recent changes of pages are all well documented and
manageable by users and/or administrators. Wikis, have
become a tool for online collaboration and community
building. They are the best suited for building a knowledge
base from a variety of users input. The most well known
example of a successful wiki is Wikipedia.org, a free
online encyclopedia composed of articles written by the
general public.

6.

KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
TECHNOLOGIES

Creating a learning/knowledge-based organisation
can be done with the help of a new wave of ICT. Some of
the main technologies are:

6.1 Case-based Reasoning Systems
Case-based
Reasoning
Systems
(CBRS)
essentially consist of a case library and a software
system for retrieving and analysing the similar case and
its associated information. The case library has cases
covering a broad range of ideas across different industries
and business functions. Each case contains a
description of the underlying competitive situation, the
environmental conditions, management priorities,
experience, values that allow a certain strategy to
succeed, and moments of learning. A software system
helps index each case such a way that a search yields
modest number of similar cases. The system can
provide a complete explanation if the reasoning that has
lead to each recommendation. If there is no case that
exactly matches the given situation, then it selects the
most similar case. An adaptation procedure can be
encoded in the form of adaptation rules. The result of the
case adaptation is a completed solution but it also
generates a new case that can be automatically added to
the case library.

6.2 Group Decision Support System
On a group level, the act of sharing and exchange
allows learning as a group as well, but it also gives further
input in the sense that experiences lived by others are
used as input data for the creation of an individuals mental
model. One can see the immediate application with
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

sharing ideas and therefore in the creation of groups
shared mental model. This process of group learning
involves the individual, and is therefore a useful tool for
individual learning, but it dose not focus solely on
individual learning. A GDSS enables a group to work
interactively using the networked hardware and software
to complete the various aspects of the business process.

6.3 Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are tools derived
from artificial intelligence. They are also part of the new
information processing paradigm that simulates the
human brain. They are very strong tools in the pattern
finding and structuring, without any prior information. They
allow for the structuring of tacit knowledge, without
making it explicit, but nevertheless making it accessible.
ANNs are vehicles for creating best principles out of
best practices.

6.4

Semantic Search Engines and Link
Machines

A semantic search engine uses a kind of an overlay
of organization, based on keywords that are commonly
used together. The search engines scan the text that is
available and that is stored using a format that allows this
kind of search. The search engine creates a semantic
network of keywords, which allows translation of any
given natural language query in a number of most
probably related keywords. Then those keywords can be
related to pieces of text where they appear dominantly.
Once those keywords are identified, the text is codified
with the keywords, and the semantic table is made. The
system is then reading for both semantic queries and
semantic linking.

7.

CONCLUSION

The main idea driving KM is that knowledge must be
managed like an asset. This involves creating, codifying
and sharing knowledge. There isn t much agreement on
what a KM tool is either. This is partly because the term
has been overused and partly because a lot of different
tools that were not built to be KM tools per se are used
towards the overall goal of KM. There is a large group of
tools like content management systems, decision
support systems, and collaboration tools. The trend for IT
tools, especially those that contribute to KM, is towards
more communication and collaboration tools.
The new tools like Web 2.0 are unique because
they are web-based applications that are free and thrive
on user participation. They are tools that support
individual knowledge work, communication and
collaboration. Wikis are a prime example of such tools.
As a tool for KM, they most closely resemble a cross
between a content management system and groupware.
Corporate uses reflect this as they have been used in a
37

wide variety of ways that span the gamut from pure
content management to a mix of content management
and groupware too purely as groupware.

REFERENCES
1. Sveiby, Karl. The facts about knowledge. In
Knowledge management: Cultivating knowledge
professionals, edited by Al-Hawamdeh, Suliman.
Chandos Publishing, Oxford, 2003.pp. 32-33.
2. Davenport, Thomas H. & Prusak, Larry. Knowledge
mangement: Executive brief. In Knowledge
management and management learning: Extending
the horizons of knowledge-based management,
edited by Baets, Walter, 2nd Ed., Springer, USA,
2005. pp. 69-70.
3. Despres, Charles & Chauvel, Daniele. In Knowledge
horizons: The present and the promise of knowledge

38

management, 2nd Ed., Butterworth-Heinemann,
Boston, 2001. pp. 106-07.
4. Balmisse, Gilles, et al. Technology trends in
knowledge management tools. Int.. J. Know.
Manage., 2007, 3(2), 34-39.
5. Firestone, Joseph M. & McElroy, Mark W. Key
issues in the new knowledge management.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Burlington, 2003.
6. Miller, Ron. The evolution of knowledge management.
E Content, 2005, 28(11), 22-28.
7. Vizcaino, Aurora.
Developing knowledge
management systems from a knowledge based and
multi agent approach. Int. J. Know. Manage., 2007,
3(4), 33-42.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(6)

