DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 1, January 2010, pp.15-21, DOI: 10.14429/djlit.30.279
© 2010, DESIDOC

Use of IT–related Technologies in Hyderabad-based
DRDO Laboratories: An Evaluative Study
G.C. Mohanta and K.P. Thooyamani*
Defence Research and Development Laboratory
DRDO, Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad-500 058
E-mail:mohantag@yahoo.com
* Bharath University, Agharam Road, Selaiyur, Chennai-600 073

ABSTRACT
Improving productivity of knowledge workers is one of the major challenges in today’s global environment.
Information technology-related technologies have given a new fillip to increase the productivity of those who
are working in a knowledge-intensive organisation. This paper discusses the perspective of scientists of
Hyderabad-based Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) laboratories on usefulness of
IT-related technologies on their performance.
Keywords: Exploratory research, survey research, e-learning, information technology, information and
communications technologies, Internet, mobile and wireless ICT, weblogs, wikis

1. INTRODUCTION

Internet

Improving productivity of knowledge workers is one of
the major challenges for the companies in today’s global
environment1. An effort has been made here to identify ITrelated technologies those can improve productivity of
knowledge workers. A survey was done, for the first time,
to find out the perspectives of the scientists of the
Hyderabad-based Defence Research & Development
Organisation (DRDO) laboratories on the usefulness of ITrelated technologies, use of these technologies,
encouragement given to the scientists to acquire skills in
these technologies, trainings given to them in these
technologies and relative importance given by the
scientists for each of these technologies to improve the
productivity of scientists. Exploratory research was also
carried out to identify various IT-related technologies
which can improve productivity of the knowledge workers.
Thirty six processes, technologies and techniques have
been identified and study on the following eight IT-related
technologies out of these has been discussed in this
paper.

Mobile and wireless ICT

E-learning
Information technology
Information and communications technologies
Received on 9 September 2009; Revised on 12 November 2009

Weblogs
Wikis, and
Knowledge management

1.1 E-learning
E-learning is delivery of learning, training or education
programme by electronic means. E-learning involves the
use of a computer or electronic device in some way to
provide training, educational or learning material. It
includes computer-based training (CBT), web-based
training (WBT), electronic performance support systems
(EPSS), distance or online learning, and online tutorials.
E-learning provides the student or learner with information
that can be accessed in a setting free from time and place
constraints. The student can go through the lessons at
his or her own pace1. The major advantage to the students
is its easy access.

1.2 Information Technology
Information technology refers to both the hardware
and software used to store, retrieve, and manipulate
15

information2. IT is the study, design, development,
implementation, support or management of computerbased information systems, particularly software
applications and computer hardware3. The knowledge
workers can use IT to produce, manipulate, convert,
store, protect, process, transmit, communicate,
disseminate, exchange, retrieve, and use information in
its various forms.

1.3 Information and Communications
Technologies
Information and communications technologies cover
all technical means for processing and communicating
information4. It encompasses any medium to record
information—magnetic disk/tape, optical disks, CD/DVD,
flash memory, etc. besides technology for broadcasting
information—radio, television, microphone, camera,
loudspeaker, telephone, cellular phones, etc. The
advancement of ICT has enabled people to enhance their
potential in knowledge work. ICT has also made
information easy-to-access, user-friendly, and up-to-date.

1.4 Internet
The Internet has opened up many opportunities, from
finding out information, conducting communications
globally, e.g., through e-mail, voice mail, e-commerce,
online chats or instant messaging. A personal computer
connected to the Internet, whether through a dialup
connection, broadband or Wi-Fi, has become a vital tool
for communicating during the past few decades. The
knowledge workers through the use of ICT and Internet
have the information of the whole world at their fingertips.
The Internet allows the sharing of information across
functional, organisational, national, and global
boundaries. Productivity gains can be achieved by
Internet learning through a unique approach combining ecommunication, e-training, and e-assessment5.

1.5 Mobile and Wireless ICT
Mobile and wireless ICT include all mobile and
wireless technologies. The emerging mobile and wireless
ICT can support the mobile nature of the knowledge
workers’ job. These technologies can have considerable
impact on working practices, collaboration processes,
performance, and productivity. The mobile working
solution can combine wireless General Packet Radio
Service (GPRS) phones, Tablet Personal Computers,
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs), and Wireless
Broadband in the offices and homes. The emerging
mobile and wireless ICT will have a greater impact on
productivity due to its ability to support the mobile and
collaborative nature of today’s knowledge workers’ job6.

16

1.6 Weblogs
Weblog or blog is a website, usually maintained by an
individual, with regular entries of ideas, commentary,
descriptions of events, or other material such as graphics
or video7. Weblogs are personal “diary-like-format”
websites enabled by easy-to-use tools and open for
everyone to read8. There is a growing cluster of knowledge
weblogs used by professional as personal knowledge
repositories, learning journals, or networking instruments.
Used in this context, weblogs not only addresses the
personal needs of a knowledge worker but also creates an
opportunity for others to benefit from having emergent
ideas and personal notes captured in public spaces
instead of private collections. For a company employee
weblogs provide a unique opportunity to access usually
invisible trails of development and flows of ideas.

1.7 Wikis
A wiki is a website that allows the easy of creation
and editing of any number of interlinked web pages using
a simplified markup language. Wiki is a forum where
people share ideas. Wikis are often used to create
collaborative websites. The collaborative encyclopedia,
Wikipedia, is one of the best-known wikis. A wiki invites
all users to edit any page or to create new pages within
the wiki Website. A defining characteristic of wiki
technology is the ease with which pages can be created
and updated. Generally, there is no review before
modifications are accepted. The wikis can be used by the
knowledge worker to share ideas within the enterprises
and also to use as internal documentation for in-house
systems and applications9.

1.8 Knowledge Management
Knowledge management (KM) comprises a range of
practices used by organisations to identify, create,
represent, and distribute knowledge10. The tacit
knowledge is often subconscious, internalised, and the
individual may or may not be aware of what he or she
knows and how he or she accomplishes particular
results. Explicit knowledge is the visible knowledge
available in the form of letters, reports, memos, books,
literatures, drawings, etc. Explicit knowledge can be
embedded in objects, rules, systems, methods, etc.11.
While tacit knowledge is what is in our heads, explicit
knowledge is what we have codified.
A successful KM programme needs, on the one hand,
to convert internalied tacit knowledge into explicit codified
knowledge in order to share it. On the other hand, it also
must permit individuals and groups to internalise and
make personally meaningful codified knowledge they
have retrieved from the KM System.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

2. METHODOLOGY

4. FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

The questionnaire and interview techniques were
adopted for conducting the research. The structured
questionnaires were given to the select scientists of six
DRDO laboratories based in Hyderabad, India. The survey
was conducted to find out the perspectives of the
scientists on the following aspects:

Responses were received from 41 junior-level
scientists, 77 middle-level scientists, 20 top-level
scientists and 16 scientists responsible for HRD
activities. In all, 154 scientists responded. The findings on
the various parameters are given in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1
shows the percentage of scientists who agreed that
technologies help to improve productivity of knowledge
workers, use and encouragement given for acquiring skills
in various technologies in labs, and trainings given for
various technologies in labs. Table 2 shows the ranking by
all scientists together, based on the relative importance of
each technology to improve productivity of scientists.

(a) Usefulness of various IT-related technologies
(b) Use of and encouragement given by laboratories for
each of these technologies
(c) Trainings given for each of these technologies, and
(d) Relative importance given by the scientists to each of
these technologies for improving their productivity.
The questionnaires at (a) to (c) and (d) given to select
scientists on the above aspects for their responses are
given at Annexure 1 and Annexure 2, respectively.

3. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
The questionnaires were sent to junior-level
scientists, middle-level scientists, top-level scientists,
and scientists responsible for human resource
development activities. Twenty per cent of the scientists
from each laboratory were selected for their responses.
For further clarifications, in case of inadequate
information, the concerned scientists were interviewed.
The data was interpreted using MS excel. Each scientist
was given a code which was used to compile the data in
tabular form.

4.1 Use of IT-related Technologies, Improvement in Productivity and Training
Table 1 shows that scientists indicated that e-learning
(91.8 per cent), IT (91.3 per cent), Internet (91.3 per cent),
ICT and mobile and wireless ICT (82.9 per cent) and KM
(74.3 per cent) help to improve the productivity of
scientists. Scientists in lesser number indicated that
weblogs (36.7 per cent) and wikis (44.9 per cent) help to
improve the productivity. It can be inferred that the
majority of the scientists have indicated that most of the
technologies can improve their productivity of scientists.
Scientists also indicated that e-learning (61.2 per
cent), IT (66.7 per cent), ICT (63.4 per cent) Internet (85.7
per cent) and mobile and wireless ICT (85.4 per cent) and
KM (78.1 per cent) are used in labs or scientists are
encouraged to acquire skills in the same. Scientists in

Table 1. Responses of scientists on various parameters of IT-related technologies

IT-related technologies

E-Learning

IT

Internet

ICT

Mobile and
wireless ICT

Weblogs

Wikis

KM

Improving productivity

91.8 %

91.3 %

91.3 %

82.9 %

82.9 %

36.7 %

44.9 %

74.3 %

Used in labs

61.2 %

66.7 %

85.7 %

63.4 %

85.4 %

46.9 %

22.4 %

78.1 %

Trainings given

34.7 %

50 %

31.7 %

36.6 %

14.6 %

8.2 %

6.1 %

22.9 %

Table 2. Relative importance of IT-related technologies as given
by the scientists

Process/Technology/Technique

Value

Knowledge Management (KM)

1

E-Learning

2

Information Technology (IT)

3

Information and Communications Technologies (ICT)

4

Internet

4

Mobile & Wireless ICT

5

Wikis

6

Weblogs

7

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

17

lesser number indicated that weblogs (46.9 per cent) and
wikis (22.4 per cent) were used in their labs and they were
encouraged to acquire skills in the same. It can be
inferred that the majority of the scientists have indicated
that most of the technologies were used in labs and they
were encouraged to acquire skills in the same.

The identified technologies should be used
extensively in a knowledge-intensive organisation and
all the knowledge workers should be formally trained
in these technologies to improve their productivity.
Even though a number of studies have been carried
out in the past, there is presently no universal
acceptable procedure which can be applied to
measure the productivity of knowledge workers.

Table 1 also shows that scientists were trained in
e-learning (34.7 per cent), IT (50 per cent), ICT (36.6 per
cent), Internet (31.7 per cent) and mobile and wireless ICT
(14.6 per cent) and KM (22.9 per cent) in laboratories.
Only 6.1 per cent and 8.2 per cent indicated that they
were trained in weblogs and wikis, respectively.

As similar studies have not been done earlier, hence
it was not possible to compare these results with the
results of other researchers.
The possible limitation of the study is that the findings
are based on the perspective of the scientists
surveyed. This aspect of measuring productivity and
improvement of productivity using any specific
technology needs to be studied in future.

4.2 Relative Importance of IT-related
Technologies
Scientists were requested to assign value (1 to 5)
based on relative importance of IT-related technologies (1
is the most important and 5 is the least important). The
value assigned for each technology was added to get total
score for each technology. The ranking was assigned for
each technology based on total score for each. In case of
lowest score, the ranking 1 (highest) was assigned and in
case of highest score, the ranking assigned was 8
(lowest).
From the findings at Table 2, it was observed that
while KM has been given the maximum importance,
weblogs have been given the minimum importance. It is
also evident that the technologies in which fewer
scientists have been trained, their usefulness have been
appreciated by fewer scientists and their uses are also
less in the laboratories, therefore, scientists also have
given less importance to these technologies. Other
important finding is that the majority of the scientists were
not trained in most of these technologies.

REFERENCES
1.

Ron Kurtus. What is e-learning? http://www.schoolfor-champions.com/elearning/whatis.htm (accessed
on 9 September 2009).

2. Yadav, Ashis. What is the role of information
technology in Indian economy? http://sawaal.
ibibo.com/computers-and-technology/what-roleinformation-technology-indianeconomy-433564. html
(accessed on 9 September 2009).
3.

Information technology. Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information
_technology (accessed on 9 September 2009).

4.

Information and communication technologies. http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_and_communication
_technologies (accessed on 9 September 2009).

5. CONCLUSION

5.

Scientists indicated that most of the identified
technologies can improve the productivity of knowledge
workers and these technologies are presently used in
labs and scientists are encouraged to acquire skills in the
same.

Nader A. Nanjiani; Tom Kelly & Thomas M. Kelly. The
Business case for e-Learning. http://search.
barnesandnoble.com/The-Business-Case-for-ELearning/Nader-A-Nanjiani/e/9781587200861/?itm=2
(accessed on 9 September 2009).

6.

Beru Karin; Hemingway Christopher & Ashurst Colin.
The impact of mobile and wireless technology on
knowledge workers—An exploratory study. http://
aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1098&
context=ecis2005 (accessed on 9 September 2009).

7.

Blog. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog (accessed on
9 September 2009).

8.

Lilia Efimova. Telematica Instituut. Between passion
and work: Blogging practices of knowledge workers.
http://www.telin.nl/index.cfm?ID=385&context=386
&language=en(accessed on 9 September 2009).

The majority of scientists were not formally trained in
most of the identified technologies at the time of the
study.
The technologies in which fewer scientists were
trained, the usefulness of these technologies was
appreciated by less scientists and use of these
technologies was also less in the laboratories and
scientists also gave less importance to these
technologies. KM was given the maximum and
weblogs the minimum importance.

18

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

9.

Wiki. From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki (accessed on 9 September
2009).

10. Wikipedia KM Definition March 2008. http://www.
knowledge-management-online.com/wikipedia-km-

definition.html (accessed on 9 September 2009).
11. Tata steel—Knowledge management basics. http://
www.tatasteel.com/technologyupdate/km/km_
basics.htm (accessed on 9 September 2009).

Annexure 1

Questionnaire on IT-related Technologies
The scientists were asked to select any one choice indicated on right side of the questionnaires by ticking on the same;
each technology has three questionnaires as follows:
(a) E-learning is delivery of learning, training or education program by electronic means.
(i) In our lab, we have introduced E-learning system of education: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) E-learning helps to improve productivity of our scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our Scientists in E-learning: Yes/No/Can’t say
(b) Information technology refers to both the hardware and software that are used to store, retrieve, and manipulate
information.
(i) IT is extensively used by our scientists for solution of problems: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) IT helps to improve the productivity of our scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our Scientists in use of IT: Yes/No/Can’t say
(c) Information and communications technologies (ICT) include all technologies for the manipulation and
communication of information.
(i) ICT is used by the scientists for manipulation & communication of information: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) ICT helps to improve the productivity of our scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our Scientists in use of ICT: Yes/No/Can’t say
(d) Internet is a worldwide system of computer networks, in which users at any one computer can get information from any
other permitted computer.
(i) Internet is used by our scientists to get or send information: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) Internet helps to improve productivity of our scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our Scientists in use of Internet: Yes/No/Can’t say
(e) Mobile and wireless ICT include all mobile and wireless technologies for manipulation and communication of
information.
(i)

Mobile and wireless ICT enable our scientists to communicate in real-time with colleagues and superiors via multiple
electronic channels regardless of location: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) Mobile and wireless ICT helps to improve the productivity of our scientistsL: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our scientists in use of mobile and wireless ICT: Yes/No/Can’t say
(f)

Weblog or blog is a website, usually maintained by an individual, with regular entries of ideas, commentary,
descriptions of events, or other material such as graphics or video.

(i)

Weblog provides a unique opportunity to our scientists to access usually invisible trails of development and flows of
ideas: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) Weblog helps to improve the productivity of our scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

19

(iii) We train our scientists in use of Weblog: Yes/No/Can’t say
(g) Wikis is a collection of webpages designed to enable anyone who accesses it to contribute or modify content, using a
simplified markup language.
(i) In our lab, Wiki is a forum where scientists share their ideas: Yes/No/Can’t say
(ii) Wiki helps to improve the productivity of our scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our Scientists in use of Wiki: Yes/No/Can’t say
(h) Knowledge management comprises a range of practices used by organisation to identify, create, represent,
distribute and enable adoption of what it knows and how it knows it.
(i) In our lab, knowledge management system is: Formal/Informal/Not at all/Can’t say
(ii) Knowledge management helps to improve the productivity of our senior scientists: Yes/No/Can’t say
(iii) We train our scientists in knowledge management: Yes/No/Can’t say
The junior level scientists were given seven questionnaires as indicated above, except at (h). Middle level scientists
were given three questionnaires as indicated above at (b), (d) and (h). Top level scientists were given only one questionnaire
as indicated above at (h). Scientists responsible for HRD activities were given six questionnaires as indicated above at (a),
(b), (d), (f), (g) and (h). The type of questionnaire given to a particular level of scientist was based on the suitability of the
questionnaire to the level of scientist.

Annexure 2

Questionnaire on Relative Importance given to each Technology
Please assign the value 1 to 5, for the following technologies based on the relative importance of the same (1 is the
most important, followed by 2, 3, 4 and 5; 2 is less important than 1; 3 is less important than 2; 4 is less important than 3
and 5 is the least important) for improving the productivity of knowledge worker.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

E-learning ( )
Information technology ( )
Information and communications technologies ( )
Internet ( )
Mobile and wireless ICT ( )
Weblogs ( )
Wikis ( )
Knowledge management ( )
The questionnaires indicated above were given to all level of scientists.

20

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

