DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 22-25, DOI: 10.14429/djlit.30.280
© 2010, DESIDOC

Print vs e-Journal and Information Seeking Patterns of Users:
A Case Study of SPJIMR
Umeshareddy Kacherki* and Mahesh J. Thombare**
*

Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pashan, Pune-411 021
E-mail: ureddy@iiserpune.ac.in
**

Smt. Indira Gandhi College of Engineering, Koparkhairane, Navi Mumbai–400 709
E-mail: thombare.mahesh@rediffmail.com

ABSTRACT
The developments in information technology have made drastic changes in the way the information is
collected, stored, retrieved, and distributed. Electronic journal is one of the products of information and
communication technologies. The advancement of e-journal during recent years has given librarians a powerful
new resource to support learning and research. With availability of both forms of journals in the library, it has
become necessary to compare and evaluate effectiveness of e-journals and print journals from users’ and
librarys’ point of view. The paper discusses a case study done at SP Jain Institute of Management and
Research to find out the information-seeking patterns of the library users. The paper also discusses advantages
and disadvantages of e-journals and suggests that printed and e-journals are complimentary to each other.
Keywords:e-journals,informationandcommunicationtechnologies,printedjournals,SPJIMR

1. INTRODUCTION
Journals in a library play vital role in distributing
nascent facts and primary information to users. They
publish articles and papers on recent research and
development, particularly in the ever changing fields of
management, science, and technology. Advent of
electronic journals (e-journals) during recent years has
given librarians a powerful new resource to support
learning and research. Lot of journals, in all fields, both
printed as well as electronic, are currently available
electronically via web. Availability ranges from table of
contents to the full text. Some journals only exist in their
online format and others have both printed as well as
electronic versions1. The impact of e-journals on library
collection, services, and administration is complex.
Electronic version of journals changes the publication
system entirely. They provide easy access to a journal
and thereby save time. Keyword search ability,
accessibility at the time of publication, etc., are some of
the features of e-journals. Despite various advantages and
popularity, e-journals have failed to replace or displace
printed journals and act more as supplement to printed
Received on 30 July 2009; Revised on 28 Auguat 2009

journals. Today most of the e-journals appear as parallel
version of their print counterparts2.

2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
S.P. Jain Institute of Management and Research
(SPJIMR) is one of over 320 constituent institutions of
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. It is rated among the top 10 Bschools in the country. SPJIMR library is one of the
central place of knowledge in the institute and is an
essential component of the SPJIMR’s outstanding
research and education mission. With modern collection
of knowledge resources and innovative information
services, it plays an important role for students, faculty,
and the surrounding community in their intellectual
pursuits. As various research projects are carried out in
the institutes, journals play vital role in the library
collection. The library subscribes to 150 print journals. It
includes 100 Indian journals and nearly 50 international
journals specific to the academic and research needs of
the users. With the advent of the information and
communication technologies (ICT), SPJIMR library
started providing electronic access to a wide variety of
resources including full-text articles and journals.

SPJIMR library offers electronic access to more than
2350 journals, which include not just traditional scholarly
journals but also more popular journals, through its online
database and their print counterpart. Library is
subscribing to various databases like EBSCO, ISI
Emerging Market, CMIE Prowess, etc. With availability of
both forms of journals in the library, it became necessary
to compare and evaluate effectiveness of e-journals and
print journals from user and library point of view. A case
study to evaluate and compare the services of journals in
both formats was conducted at SPJIMR library.

6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

3. SCOPE OF THE STUDY

6.2 Information Seeking Patterns of Users

Scope of the present study was confined to the
SPJIMR library and its services. The study was further
limited to the small sample of 125 library users including
faculty, students, and research associates. Moreover, the
study’s applicability was also limited to the fact that
sample journals were selected from among a group of
highly-used titles available in print and electronic format
and its users. The results will help collection developers in
designing suitable policy and assess the technical
intricacies faced by the library staff in providing effective ejournal services. It will also help in designing the efficient
infrastructure requirements for managing journals in both
the formats.

Users use journals in different ways like browsing,
checking references, photocopying or printing, reading
related articles, reading entire journal, or reading
instructions to author. Information seeking pattern of
users varied with different media. (Fig. 1)

4. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
To assess and compare the use of printed journals
with e-journals.
To assess issues relating to the management of ejournals.
To assess the technical difficulties faced by the
users in utilisation of e-journal services.
To suggest measures to improve the existing ejournals facilities in SPJIMR library.

6.1 Format Preference
The format preference of journals by the respondents is
shown in the Table 1. Respondents were asked about
their preferred formats for journals. A substantial majority
(70 per cent) of users wanted journals available in both
electronic and print forms. A small percentage (21
per cent) preferred electronic only access, while even
fewer (8 per cent) wanted only print version.

Figure 1 shows that in case of e-journals, maximum
number (69 per cent of the respondents) use journals by
way of browsing, 26 per cent by checking references, 7
per cent by printing or photocopying, 31 per cent by
reading related articles, 3 per cent by reading entire
journals while only 2 per cent by way of reading
instruction of authors. Whereas in case of print journals
25 per cent of respondents use journals by way of
browsing, 30 per cent by checking reference, 30 per cent
by printing/photocopying, 12 per cent by reading entire
journal, and only 2 per cent by way of reading instruction
of authors. Maximum number of respondents (52 per
cent) use print journals by way of reading related articles.
From above data it is clear that e-journals are mostly used
by browsing on computer and very few readers read it by
taking prints. It is also observed that for reading entire
journal users mostly prefer print version of the journal
rather than e-journal.

6.3 Frequency of Use

5. METHODOLOGY
To fulfill the above objectives a simple survey was
conducted and a detailed and well structured
questionnaire was designed and distributed to the
selected 125 users of SPJIMR library. Out of 125
respondents, 90 were students, 10 research associates,
and 25 faculty members.

The data regarding the frequency of use of journals in
both formats indicate the awareness of the users towards
the journals. Figure 2 categorises the users based on the
frequency of use, i.e., daily, weekly, monthly and
infrequently.
Figure 2 reveals that in case of e-journals, while 30
per cent referred infrequently and 13 per cent referred

Table 1. Format preferences of users

Respondents

Print

Electronic

Both

No Opinion

Faculty

04 (16%)

03 (12%)

18 (72%)

00 (00%)

Research associates

00 (00%)

01 (10%)

09 (90%)

00 (00%)

Students

06 (07%)

22 (24%)

61 (68%)

01 (01%)

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

23

80%

69%

70%
60%

52%

50%
40%
30%

26%

25%

31%

30%

30%

20%

0%

12%

7%

10%
By Browsing

By Checking
Reference

3%

By Printing or
Photocopying

By Reading
Related Articles

2% 2%

Reading Entire
Journal

Reading
Instruction of
Authors

Print Journal

Electronic Journal

Figure 1. Information-seeking patterns of users.
40%

34%

35%
30%

25%

25%

27%
20%

20%
15%
10%
5%

30% 31%

13%

12%
5%

3%

0%

Daily

Weekly

Monthly

Electronic Journal

Infrequently

Never

Print Journal

Figure 2. Frequency of use.

never, 12 per cent daily, 25 per cent weekly and 20 per
cent monthly. Where as in case of print journals, 34 per
cent referred monthly, 5 per cent daily, 27 per cent
weekly, and 31 per cent infrequently. Only 3 per cent
respondents never referred print journals. Figure 2 depicts
that majority of users still not use e-journals regularly may
be due to inconvenience to use and unawareness about
electronic version.

6.4 Advantages and Disadvatages of
e-journals
Most of the literature describing the recent growth in
electronic journals emphasise three important factors;
money, technology and convenience, and speed. Even
though greatest paradox of print journal is that they act
more like archival and legitimising tools than as
communication tools, e-journals have the ability to reestablish the communication purpose of scholarly
publications, without loosing their archival or legitimising
values. Table 2 shows why users like e-journals. It shows
that most of the respondents (76 per cent) like e-journals
because of their timely access, 46 per cent for access to
their contents, 50 per cent for provision of hyperlinks to
contents outside the journal article, 61 per cent for the
electronic search capabilities, and 47 per cent for the
24

multimedia contents, which these journals provide.
Remote computer access attracted 36 per cent of the
respondents.
Table 3 explains that most of the respondents (31 per
cent) dislike the e-journal because it is more difficult to
browse, 17 per cent concerned about copyright issues, 11
per cent disliked it because it requires special
infrastructure facility as compare to print journal and
Table 2. Advantages of e-journals

Features

Respondents

Timely access

76%

Access to the same content

46%

Hyperlink to content outside the journal (XE
journal article)
Electronic search capabilities

50%
61%

Remote computer access

36%

Articles are displayed clearly and in easy-toread format
A user-friendly interface

32%
21%

Contains multimedia information

47%

Can be used simultaneously by more than
one user
Other reasons

17%
36%

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

internet operations available in the library which will in
turn help them to train the users.

Table 3. Disadvantages of e-journals
Features

Respondents

Need special infrastructure facility

11%

Are more difficult to browse than paper
journal
Result in excessive printing

31%

Require promotion and training

06%

Cause more concern about copy right issue

17%

Do not have sufficient journals and time
coverage
Other reasons

10%

11%

01%

results in excessive printing, 10 per cent respondents
think that institute do not have sufficient e-journals and 6
per cent dislike e-journals just because it requires
promotion and training to access it.

7. SUGGESTIONS
Based on the various observations and considering
users opinion regarding the improvement in e-journal
facility, the following suggestions are made.
Orientation/awareness programmes should be
conducted at regular intervals for the use of ejournals.
List of the journals available in the library should be
publicised by displaying it on library noticeboard and
on library website to increase the use of e-journals.
Users should be informed regularly about the new ejournal/s subscribed by the library.
To increase the interest among users regarding the
journals, content pages should be distributed to
users through e-mail.
Library homepage should give users access to the
individual journal’s homepages by hyperlinks, which
will help them in avoiding the hassle of remembering
the password or the URL.
Workshops and seminars should be conducted and
popular lectures should be arranged in every
department.
Different levels of user education programmes should
be arranged for faculty, researchers, and students.
The library staff should cooperate with the users and
help them in overcoming the technical difficulties
faced while using e-journals.
Proper training should be provided to the library staff
about the use of various databases, e-resources, and

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

8. CONCLUSION
Electronic journals opened up many exciting
opportunities and potentials for academic libraries.
e-journals have both advantages and disadvantages.
Librarians need to be able to identify and balance the
factor that would make e-journals a success in their
libraries. Looking at the present situation of information
explosion and competency in acquiring it, it is on the part
of the library staff to create more awareness about the ejournal availability among the users and provide them a
friendly environment so that they can make a better use of
the facility. The staff in the library requires training in
handling the e-journals and users need an orientation for
using them. Library staff should be provided proper
training, which will help them acquiring more
sophisticated searching and retrieval skills. The librarians’
role has to be redefined in view of technological
developments keeping in mind the best interest of users
and retrieval efficiency. Study shows that most of the
users choose to use the journal in both formats, print
journals are still as popular as e-journals. Therefore, even
in this digitisation era, e-journal may not completely
replace the existing print version but both will compliment
each other to meet the needs of the users.

REFERENCES
1.

Tony, Kidd. Serial management handbook: Practical
guide to print and electronic serial management.
Library Association Publishing, London, 2000.

2.

Groote, Sandra. Online journals: Impact on print
journal usage. Bull. Medi. Lib. Assoc., 2001, 89(4),
pp. 372-78.

3.

Lee, Stuart D. Building and electronic resource
collection:A practical guide. Library Association
Publishing. London, 2002.

4.

Sathe, Nila & Giuse, Nunzia B. Print versus
electronic journals: A preliminary investigation into
the effect of journal format on research processes. J.
Med. Assoc., 2002, 90(2), 235-43.

5.

Morse, David H. & clintworth William A. Comparing
patterns of print and electronic journal use in an
academic health science library. http://www.library.
ucsb.edu/ist/00-fall/refereed.html.

6.

MCcracken, Peter. A comparison of print and
electronic journal holdings in academic and public
libraries. Libri, 2003, 53, 237-41.

25

