DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 26-31, DOI: 10.14429/djlit.30.281
© 2009, DESIDOC

Use of Internet Resources in the S.V. University Digital Library
K. Surendra Babu*, B. Sarada and C.K. Ramaiah**
S.V. University, Tirupati-517 502
*E-mail: kongara.surendra@rediffmail.com
**Library & Information Science, Dravidian University, Kuppam-517 425
E-mail: chennupati_kramaiah@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The introduction of digital information resources on Internet has revolutionised the academic world. The
Internet is paving way for a great leap in the field of higher education and research. This paper is an attempt
to investigate the use of Internet resources by the academic community of the Sri Venkateswara University
(SVU), Tirupati. For this purpose a survey was carried out using questionnaire tool. The results show that
users from all branches of science are making use of Internet resources better than social sciences and
humanities. Providing training to its users at the beginning of each semester will improve its use and reduce
the problems faced by the library users. The paper highlighted the various problems and issues involved in
handling digital library and has given suggestions to improve the library services to meet the demands of the
users.
Keywords: Digital libraries, subject gateways, internet resources, e-resources, social sciences, humanities

Libraries are the lighthouses of information
dissemination, an important component of any
educational institution, and hub of learning activities
where students, researchers, and teachers can explore
the vast amount of information resources. The present
age is regarded as the ‘age of information’ and information
has become the commodity in today’s context of
information explosion where we are living in the
information society. Information has become an essential
requirement for every ones life. Each one of us requires
information for our day-to-day activities. In this context,
Library and Information Centres (LICs) are playing an
important role in extending the required latest information
services quicly to their users.

As electronic information and its access has grown,
selection of information sources has become complex.
When alternatives were limited, selection was primarily
based on the access and cost factors. As CD-ROM and
tape-loaded with electronic information became available,
local area networks (LANs) and interfaces became
important issues in their selection. Now with multiple
sources of information, human, demographic, and
technological factors have become important in their
selection process. In addition to these, factors like
training standards, password protection mechanism,
links-to-holdings, and full-text availability are the
parameters used by the users for the selection process.
Because of the dynamic nature of electronic information,
traditional selection criteria are not effective, so new
criteria must be developed or adopted.

In the 1960s and 1970s, librarians were using
electronic databases as a part of library services. In the
1980s, libraries started using CD-ROM versions of
electronic databases. In 1990s and from 2000 onwards,
Internet access and consortia approach of journals
subscriptions diversified the availability of electronic
information. Presently many libraries in India have
provisions to access the same electronic information in
multiple ways.

Internet has made tremendous impact on the
academic activities of the faculty members, researchers,
and the students. After the advent of Internet, a significant
transition is seen in users’ approach and the way they
seek information and the methods they use in research
and learning activities. This has become possible as
Internet provides a wealth of new course materials and
acts as a powerful supplement to the traditional ways of
studying and learning. Internet is now facilitating

1. INTRODUCTION

Received on 22 June 2009

electronic communication, exchange of ideas, and
collaboration in research globally. Internet can be
accessed for the latest developments in one’s area of
research at an amazing speed. It also plays a significant
role in distance education and conferencing and thus
transforming the academicians as facilitators in providing
guidance, drawing students, and steering observations.
The Internet, therefore, creates an excellent academic
environment where the academic community can perform
their activities in a rejuvenated manner.

2. RELATED RESEARCH
In 2007 Indian government has taken various
initiatives to increase PCs and Internet penetration all over
the country. Nowadays, people have started realising the
importance of Internet in their lives where it is not just a
communication tool but has become an enabling tool to
perform various tasks like e-learning, networking,
shopping, gaming, etc.
The low cost and multimedia features have lead to
tremendous growth (48 per cent) of PCs ownership
across India. With the result, Internet subscribers have
gone up to 32 per cent over 2008. But proportion of PC
owners with Internet connection has shown a decline in
growth from the last year. The widening of this gap is due
to the difference in growth rate of PC owners and Internet
subscribers. The gap might reduce once the Internet
connectivity with non-metro and small towns increases,
and digital divide and other private initiatives become more
effective1.
According to Internet Governance Forum, India had 81
million Internet users in 2008. India ranks fourth in the
world in terms of Internet users. The US with 220 million
Internet users, tops the world; China, with 210 million
users, comes in a close second followed by Japan with
94 million users2. About 9 per cent of the users are
accessing the Internet primarily for entertainment and
online transactions (e-commerce), which has steadily
increased in the recent past. It was found that the young
and older men and working women groups are using
Internet mostly. Out of these people, non-working women
are using Internet for searching of jobs and dating
purposes in significant numbers. The time spent on the
Internet increases with the age of the user. For example,
weekly school children spend an average of 322 min,
college students spend an average of 433 min, older men
spend an average of 580 minutes, working-women spend
an average of 535 min, however, non-working women
spend only 334 min per week3. School children and
college students find it more convenient to use cybercafé
as it is the cheapest source for accessing and also
providing them more privacy4. On the other hand, home
and office have gained popularity amongst young and
older men and working women as they find these access
points more convenient and cost-effective over others. The
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

content they seek also involves e-commerce applications
which need a secure network. This acts as a limiting
factor for them than cybercafé as point of access.
Broadband penetration is estimated to be at 3 per
cent in India; the country added only 750,000 broadband
connections between October 2006 and September 2007.
By February 2008, India had only 3.47 million broadband
subscribers, far short of the targeted 9 million by 2007 set
by the broadband policy. However, neighbouring countries
like China, South Korea, and Malaysia are far ahead of
India in the broadband penetration. India has 0.3
broadband connections per 100 persons, whereas South
Korea and China have much better penetration with 29.9
and 5.0 person per hundred, respectively5.
Lubans6, Uses of Internet and digital Information
Resources; Mercer7 and Rogers8, Use of e-Journals; Bird
et al9 and MacDonald and Dunkelberger10 Full-text
databases have studied various uses of Internet. The use
of digital information is gradually increasing in all subject
areas particularly in all branches of science and
technology.

3. SRI VENKATESWARA UNIVERSITY DIGITAL
LIBRARY
Sri Venkateswara University (SVU) came into
existence on 2 September 1954, for providing higher
education and research in all the branches of learning. It
was intended to fulfill the long felt need of the people of
Rayalaseema area in the state of Andhra Pradesh in India
for their educational advancement. The university library
was established in 1955 with a small collection of 6,700
books taken from the Sri Venkateswara College, Tirupati.
The present building of the library was inaugurated in July
1964 by the Late Dr S. Radhakrishnan, the then President
of India. SVU became the member of the UGC-INFLIBNET
in 2004 and implemented INFONET Programme. Under
this programme, the V-Sat facility was established in the
SVU Computer Centre to have access to Internet. The
INFLIBNET has provided 512 kbps connectivity to SVU.
The Computer Centre has provided Internet connectivity to
all the Departments/Research Centres/Institutes in the
university campus. To provide access to full-text ejournals available under UGC-INFONET Programme and
from Internet resources, SVU has established a digital
library by spending about Rs 23 lakhs. SVU digital library
has the facility to accommodate 40 users at a time with
25 computers for this purpose.

4. AIM AND OBJECTIVES
The aim of the present survey is to study the use of
Internet resources by the researchers at SVU, in the
fields of sciences, social sciences, and humanities to
determine its impact on their academic and research
activities. The specific objectives of the study are: (i) to
27

6.2 Use of the SVU Library

understand the purposes for which the Internet is being
used by the students, faculty members, and researchers;
(ii) to know if there is any relationship between prior
computer experience and the use of Internet; (iii) to
identify the commonly used search engines by the users;
(iv) to identify the extent of awareness of the important
sites in their subject fields; (v) to understand the
difficulties faced while using the Internet; and (vi) to make
suggestions for improving the services at the SVU digital
library.

6.2.1 Frequency of Visits to the Library
The respondents were asked to inform their frequency
of visits to the library. Less than half (47.5 per cent)
visited daily, over a fifth (22.5 per cent) twice a week, 16
per cent weekly and the remaining 14 per cent once in a
month.

6.2.2 Purpose of Visit to the Library

5. METHODOLOGY

Table 1 shows the various reasons mentioned by the
users for visiting the library. More than half of the
respondents (51 per cent) were visiting the library for the
latest articles published in current periodicals. Of the
total, less than half (47.5 per cent) were visiting for
keeping themselves acquitted with latest developments in
the field, 27 per cent for their MPhil/PhD dissertation
work, 22.5 per cent for writing papers, and 7.5 per cent for
teaching purposes.

The survey method, using questionnaire, was used for
the study to cover the maximum number of respondents
within the limited time frame and collate the information to
determine their responses. Keeping in view the objectives
of the study, a structured questionnaire was designed and
distributed to 100 users of the SVU digital library. Of the
total, 50 questionnaires were distributed to students, 40
to research scholars, and 10 to faculty members.
Subject-wise, 40 questionnaires were given to
researchers in the branches of sciences, 40 in social
sciences, and 20 in humanities. This was in proportion to
the total number of researchers working in these fields in
the SVU. All the users returned their responses.

6.3 Computer Experience vis-à-vis Use of
Internet
The majority of the respondent came to the SVU from
the rural areas. However, 93 per cent were having some
prior experience in handling the computers. Since
schools nowadays have this subject in their curriculum
77.5 per cent of the respondents have some kind of
exposure before joining the university. The remaining
people learned to handle the computers on their own after
joining the university. Majority of these felt that the
existing systems at SVU were good enough for their use.

6. DATA ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
6.1 User’s Profile
The respondents in this survey were students (50 per
cent), research scholars (40 per cent), and faculty
members (10 per cent). Of the total respondents, 42 were
undergarduates, 86 postgraduates, and 25 faculty
members. The majority of Internet users (65 per cent)
were from science, 20 per cent from humanities and
remaining 15 per cent from social sciences. The
humanities users outnumbered the social science users
in using the Internet. In general social science users need
more information and data for their research compared to
humanities users. The reason for this may be further
explored in future studies.

Table 2 shows that 63 per cent of the respondents
were using Internet for more than one year, 23 per cent for
more than 6 months, and 14 per cent since 3-6 months.
The science students were using Internet more as it has
larger impact on their education and research. All of them
have a positive attitude toward the Internet and got
required information for their academic, research, and
personal purposes. About 70 per cent of researchers in

Table 1. Purpose of visit to the library

Purpose

Users
Number

MPhil/PhD dissertation work

54

27

For writing research papers

45

22.5

Teaching

15

7.5

Scanning of latest articles published in current periodicals

102

51

Keeping themselves abreast with the latest developments

95

47.5

Others, if any please specify
Note: Respondents were permitted
percentage is exceeding 100.

28

Percentage

4
to

tick

more

than

one

2
answer

so

the

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

Table 2. Use of Internet

Period

Total
users

Students

Research
scholars

Faculty
members

More than
one year

63

32

24

7

More than
6 months

23

11

8

4

Between 36 months

14

8

4

2

the social sciences and 20 per cent of the researchers in
the humanities also agreed that Internet was very useful
and important for their day-to-day academic and research
work.
Of the total, 80 per cent of the researchers in
sciences use the Internet facility provided in their
respective departments. Rest went to cybercafés
because of timings problems in the university. Ninety per
cent of the researchers in social sciences surf internet at
their respective departments whereas 10 per cent of them
use at cybercafés. The majority of the researchers in
humanities who use Internet go to cybercafés due to lack
of facilities in their departments. This shows that SVU
digital library is unable to provide adequate systems to its
campus users compelling them to go outside to
cybercafés to use internet for their day-to-day information
requirements. This is not a good sign for the SVU library,
management should act quickly and provide more number
of systems to fulfil the users’ Internet requirements.
Ninety per cent of the Internet use is for academic
purposes by the researchers in sciences, whereas 30 per
cent in social sciences, and 5 per cent in humanities.

6.4 Frequency of Use
Figure 1 shows that more than a third of the users (35
per cent) use Internet daily followed by 30 per cent
weekly, 28 per cent monthly, and 7 per cent occasionally.
Overall it was found that majority of the respondents were
using Internet at least once in a week. This shows that
both students and research scholars are making greater
use of Internet facility more than the faculty members.

Also, 80 per cent of researchers in sciences used the
Internet for 3-4 h per week, whereas about 20 per cent for
about 8-10 h per week. In the social sciences, while 85
per cent of the researchers’ used Internet for 2-3 h per
week, 15 per cent of them used for an hour per week. The
use of the Internet by the majority of the researchers in
humanities was only 1-2 h per week.

6.5 Use of Internet Resources
Table 3 shows that almost half of the respondents (49
per cent) came to the SVU digital library to use e-journals,
followed by 33.5 per cent who came for theses and
dissertations, 13.5 per cent for e-books, 12.5 per for
Internet-based databases, 11.5 per cent for technical
reports, 11.5 per cent for standards and patents, and 4 per
cent for other purposes. Overall, the majority of the
respondents came to library to use e-journals which is
expected in the university environment where the main
focus is on research.
Table 3. Type of Internet resources

Type of resources

Users
Number

Percentage

Databases

25

12.5

E-books

27

13.5

E-journals

98

49

Technical reports

23

11.5

Theses and
dissertations

67

33.5

Standards and
patents

23

11.5

Others

8

4

6.6 Methods of Learning Internet Skills
A significant proportion of the users have acquired the
requisite skills to use the Internet through self-learning or
from colleagues (Table 4). It is important to know that only
30 per cent of the respondents participated in Internet
orientation programmes conducted by the SVU library.
This shows that the users are capable of learning on their
own. But the trend is not be very encouraging as it may
Table 4. Methods of learning Internet skills

Twice in
a week
30%

Method
Daily
35%

Occasionally
7%
Monthly
28%

Figure 1. Frequency of Internet use in the SVU library.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

Students Research Faculty
scholars members

Total

Formal training

8

7

2

17

Internet orientation
programmes by the
library staff
Assistance from
colleagues
Using
manuals/handbooks
Self instruction
through trial and
error

15

8

-

23

12

8

2

22

5

5

3

13

10

12

3

25

29

leads to lots of their time wastage and without any indepth knowledge of searching skills.

6.7 Internet Services at SVU
Digital library: Of the total university population, only
6 per cent of the users were making use of the digital
library services which is very poor utilisation of the
university resources. Out of which, 13 per cent were
students, 14 per cent researchers, and 25 per cent
faculty members. One of the ways of improving the
use is extending Internet connections to all the
departments so that the faculty members could use
Internet at their offices without coming to the digital
library.
Harvesters: It is found that 36 per cent of
respondents (20 per cent of students, 57 per cent of
researchers and 5 per cent faculty members) were
using this service.
Online journals: 39 per cent of respondents, including
50 per cent of students, 58 per cent of researchers
and 26 per cent of the faculty members, were using
this service. People were also using free e-journals
available at the Directory of Open Access Journals
(DOAJ) website.
UGC-INFONET journals: Of the total, 36 per cent of
respondents were using this service including 36 per
cent of students, 58 per cent researchers, and 26 per
cent faculty members.
e-journals: 23 per cent students, 50 per cent
researchers and 17 per cent faculty members were
useing e-journals subscribed through UGC-INFONET
service.

7. PROBLEMS IN USING DIGITAL LIBRARY
The respondents were asked to indicate the specific
problems faced by them while using Internet at the SVU
Digital Library. Table 5 shows that 52 per cent respondent
mentioned slow access as the main problem they faced.
Other problems they had encountered include lack of eTable 5. Specific problems faced by users

Type of Problem
Slow Internet access
Difficult in finding relevant
information
Overload of information on
the Internet
It takes long time to
download information
Lack of e-mail facility
Privacy problem

30

Number
104
23

Users
Percentage
52
11.5

34

17

61

30.5

68
28

34
14

Mail facility (34 per cent), slow download (30.5 per cent),
overload of information on the Internet (17 per cent),
privacy (14 per cent), and difficulty in finding relevant
information (11.5 per cent). Most of these problems were
due to lack of knowledge and experience in conducting
the information searches. Since SVU’s opening hours
and office working hours matched, the telephone lines
were busy, therefore, Internet access was normally
slower. For that the university should go for broadband
whose speed is much faster or alternatively for dedicated
lines. Once the university appoints a trained and
experienced system administrator, all these problems will
be minimised and users could be satisfied.

8. CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS
It is evident from the results that Internet has a great
impact on the academic community. The researchers in
various branches of sciences are making maximum use of
the Internet facility provided by the university. However,
researchers in other fields still rely on bibliographies and
printed journals. Researchers in social sciences and
humanities consider their departmental libraries are the
last resort for obtaining information. Although subject
gateways are available in their fields, they are not known
to the researchers so they are unable to find or locate free
online resources on Internet. In this context, library
should provide information literacy or short term training
programmes to research scholars and all the academic
staff so that they can take advantage of freely available
subject gateways on the Internet. For this purpose, firstly
the academic staff should be encouraged to use
electronic information sources for their studies and
research purposes. Secondly, the librarians should
provide proper training to use online information sources.
The most frequently used places for accessing the
Internet are the university library (70.1 per cent) and the
cybercafé (18.5 per cent). The majority of the respondents
(69.4 per cent) use the Internet mainly for educational
purposes and comparatively less number of respondents
(34.7 per cent) for entertainment or personal purposes.
The majority of the respondents used Internet for
consulting technical reports (54.3 per cent), e-books
(42.3 per cent), and e-journals (38.5 per cent). The most
common problems faced by the majority of the
respondents while surfing Internet were slow Internet
connection delaying in retrieving relevant information (69.4
per cent), and difficulty in finding the relevant information
(21.3 per cent). The majority (70 per cent) of respondents
felt that the Internet is more useful, preferred, informative,
easy-to-use, and less expensive information source that
help them in saving their time. More than half of the
respondents felt that dependency on the Internet has
increased. The majority of the respondents were satisfied
with the facilities provided by the SVU digital library.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

Based on the findings of the study, the following
suggestions are made to improve the use of the Internet
resources by the teachers and students:

Internet use and also useful for conducting regular
training programmes.
Electronic version of the journals may be subscribed
by the library in each subject area in which SVU is
offering courses.

More number of terminals should be provided in the
centre
Some computers with floppy disk/CD-ROM drives/
USB ports may be provided in the library so that the
users can download relevant information from the
Internet and take to their departments and read it
leisurely. That helps not only to them but also to
others in getting more time in searching information
on the Internet.

Entertainment websites should be blocked so that
students should not unnecessarily sit and block the
computers from use by others serious users.

REFERENCES
1.

A networked printer may be provided in the centre so
that the users can take print-outs. This facility may
be provided for all the users on payment basis. The
centre should reduce the existing printing charge
from Rs 2 to Re 1.

The Growing Cyber Universe in India. http://
www.squidoo.com/internet-india (accessed on 21
March 2009).

2.

http://www.getcounted.net (accessed on 21 March
2009).

3.

The present time slot of 30 min through advanced
booking may be extended to 1 h for the students.
Also the centre should be kept open from 9 am to
9 pm so that the systems can be optimally used by
the users.

Top 20 countries with the highest number of Internet
users. http://www.internetworldstats.com/top20.htm
(accessed on 21 March 2009)

4.

I-Cube 2007 Summary Report Final. http://www.
scribd.com/doc/917889/ICube-2007-Summary-ReportFinal (accessed on 21 March 2009).

The e-mail may be configured and a local e-mail
address may be provided to every user so that
downloaded information can be uploaded to their mail
boxes.

5.

Researchersam. Broadband in India–An insight.
Internet-India66rate or flag this page. http://
hubpages.com/hub/Internet-India (accessed on 21
March 2009).

The centre may start developing subject gateways in
different subject fields which will help students in
getting right kind of information.

6.

Lubans, J. Internet use among 3rd year students at
Duke University. http://www.lib.duke.edu/lubans/
study4b.html (accessed on 21 March 2009).

There is a need for extensive training programme on
regular basis at the beginning of each semester. This
is required for all the categories of library users so
that they can use Internet-based resources optimally
for their studies and research.

7.

Mercer, L. Measuring the use and value of electronic
journals and books, issues in science and technology
librarianship. http://www.library.ucsb.edu/ist1/00-winter/
article1.html (accessed on 21 March 2009).

8.

Rogers, S. Electronic journal usage at Ohio State
University. College and Res. Lib., 2001, 62(1), 25-34.

9.

Bird, Gwen & Heekin, Janet M. Survey on the use of
information sources in the field of aging. Bull. Med.
Lib. Assoc., 1994, 82(1), 30-35.

In future, the Internet facility should be extended to
the hostels and rooms of the teachers.
More computers with latest specifications and
multimedia kit should be installed so that users can
use Internet telephony, video-conferencing, chatting
and other useful services of the Internet.
A system administrator may be appointed for
providing right kind of help during their day-to-day

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

10. MacDonald, B. & Dunkelberger. Full-text database
dependency: An emerging trend among
undergraduate library users? Research Strategies,
1998,16(4), 301-07.

31

