DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 38-43, DOI: 10.14429/djlit.30.283
© 2010, DESIDOC

Digitisation in an Academic Library: A Success Story
at Tata Institute of Social Sciences
Muttayya M. Koganuramath and Mallikarjun Angadi
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Deonar, Mumbai-400 088
E-mail: koganuramath@rediffmail.com

ABSTRACT
Digital libraries were viewed as systems providing a community of users with coherent access to a large,
organised repository of information and knowledge. The ability of the user to access, reorganise, and utilise
this repository is enriched by the capabilities of digital technology. Digitisation has become important in worldwide
efforts to preserve, manage, and provide access to scholarly information. However, digitisation efforts require
significant financial investments in infrastructure and technology as well as in human resources for project
management. This paper discusses the practical experience of digitisation of two major projects carried out
in the library. First one is that of digitisation of 55 volumes (1952-2006) of Sociological Bulletin published by
the Indian Sociological Society, New Delhi and digitisation of 67 volumes (1940-2006) of Indian Journal of
Social Work published by Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai. The paper highlights the objectives of
the project proposals, justification and anticipated impact, plan for the digitisation, process methodologies for
digitisation, volume of work, etc. The paper also describes various steps involved in the digitisation process,
OCR software used and its advantages over other OCRs, search interface used, browsing and searching
facilities, navigation facilities provided in the CD, etc. Some of the past and present digitisation projects that
have been carried out in the library are also mentioned.
Keywords: Digitisation, developing world, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Indian Journal of Social Work,
Sociological Bulletin

1. INTRODUCTION
The information contained in traditional print
materials like books, journals, reports, published works,
minutes of the important meetings, manuscripts, cannot
be preserved forever for a number of reasons. As years
pass by, the information contained in them gets faded out,
the medium becomes brittle and finally becomes
unusable. Unless we have alternatives arrangement for
recapturing and reproducing it another format important
will be lost forever. Fortunately, technological advances
have provided us with suitable alternatives for preserving
such valuable information

Tata Institute of Social Sciences, being the premier
institute in the field of social sciences in India, fulfils the
mandate of producing knowledge and its dissemination in
the field of social work and social development. Sir Dorabji
Tata Memorial Library (SDTM Library), located in the main
campus, is a unique Knowledge Center, which offers
essential and specialised information resources and
services to meet the growing information needs by
developing user-based resources, organising information
resources, providing human and technologically
moderated access to information, and aiding and
facilitating users to identify, locate, obtain and evaluate
information.

Information technology has brought tremendous
changes in the way of the life of the human being.
Publication industry is no exception to it. To have wider
access and long-term preservation policy of scholarly
human knowledge many of the professional
organisations, and publication houses are moving
towards the electronic publication of their print resources.

In 2004, SDTM library set up a digital library (DL) with
the financial assistance from Tata Education Trust,
Mumbai to provide seamless access to social science
information to users in a networked environment by
creating digital contents. DL at the Sir Dorabji Tata
Memorial Library is one of the finest on social sciences in
the country as well as the South-Asian region. The

Received on 27 July 2009

establishment of this digital repository will also keep the
library on par with major social science libraries in the
world. The DL facilities include state-of-the-art
technologies like high-end desktop computers, digital
cameras, OCR software, scanners, high speed internet
connectivity, access to e-resources, etc. The library is
carrying out many digitisation projects, both in-house and
outside projects. The following are some of the digitisation
activities that are being carried out in the library.

2. PROJECT-1: DIGITISATION OF INDIAN
JOURNAL OF SOCIAL WORK
Institute of Social Sciences, a premier institute in the
field of social sciences, fulfils the mandate of producing
knowledge and its dissemination in the field of social work
and social development through several publications. One
of the major achievements of the institute is uninterrupted
publication of its refereed journal Indian Journal of Social
Work (IJSW) since 1940. The IJSW is published every
January, April, July, and October, and has entered its 68th
year of uninterrupted publishing, a record in journal
publishing. The major emphasis of the first issue was on
two aspects of child welfare—children in industry and
juvenile delinquency. The IJSW is widely used by
teachers, researchers, professionals in the field, and the
students, and has played a facilitative role in social work
education across the country. Research study findings
and theoretical conclusions of research are regularly
published in this journal.

2.3 Justification and Anticipated Impact
Presently, the reach of IJSW is limited to few who
have access to its hard copy. Surely there are thousands
of researchers and social scientists who will find this
source useful. Once the contents of IJSW are digitised, it
can be accessed from all across the world. Digitisation of
IJSW will have significant impact because:
It will provide a structured way to search IJSW
contents using keywords, author, title, etc.
IJSW will have seamless access across the world.
Its reach will be far wider and faster.
The contents of IJSW can be preserved forever.

2.4 Volume of Work
IJSW has over 67 back volumes. Each volume has
on an average 700 pages totalling to 46,900 pages
(approx). All the bound volumes are available with library.
Old volumes have become yellowish because of wear and
tear and natural aging process. These had to be
photocopied and then scanned.

2.5 Funding of the Project
The project was funded by the institute under the
BRS grants. A library professional with computer skills
was hired to carry out the project for 18 months.

2.1 Need for Digitisation

2.6 Stages of Digitisation

The need for digitisation of back volumes of IJSW
stemed from the following objectives:

Scanning: ABBY Fine Reader ver.8.0 software was used
for scanning. The following were the steps involved while
scanning:

To develop a world-class web ready searchable
database of IJSW contents.

Scanning of the printed documents using HP flatbed
scanner.

To expose to the world, the untapped and under
utilised contents of IJSW.

Running OCR for the scanned documents.

To facilitate quick retrieval of the contents of IJSW
with user friendliness.

Editing-removing the unnecessary characters,
redundant data.

To permit other world scholars to use the resources
for collaborative practical experimentation.

Spell-check using ABBYY fine reader.

2.2 Targets
All universities and colleges with a course in social
work.
All NGOs and non-profit organisations involved in
social work research education and practices.
All social work institutes across the world.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

Proofreading the documents page by page and line
by line for any missed character and removal of
redundant characters.
Save the final documents in RTF (Rich Text Format),
PDF (Portable Document Format), and batch mode
files–as a source file
GSDL Search Interface: Greenstone Digital Library
Software (GSDL) was used to provide searching facility.

39

Publishing on the CD ROM: Entire GSDL database
along with the software was published on CD using the
GSDL publishing facility.

2.7 Browsing Indian Journal of Social Work CD
Browsing from Main Page: The IJSW CD opens in
browser (tested for all popular browsers compatibility) and
contains information about guidelines for the contributors,
subscription/renewal, contact details, brief about the
journal, etc. On the first page links have been provided to
browse and search the journal (Fig. 1).
Browsing facility provides navigation from volume to
volume and issue to issue (Fig. 2). Links to full text has
been provided for all articles and book reviews from the
content page.
Browsing from GSDL: One can also browse the entire
content of the journal from GSDL.. Following are the two
ways of browsing through GSDL:
Browse articles by titles A-Z by clicking the title
button (Fig. 3).
Browse articles by author A-Z by clicking the author
button (Fig. 4).

2.8 Searching Indian Journal of Social Work
on CD
To search IJSW journal on CD, a search interface
has been provided using GSDL ver. 2.72 that works only
on Windows OS (Windows Vista/XP/2000/NT/98).
Greenstone is a suite of software for building and
distributing digital library collections. It provides a new
way of organising information and publishing on the
Internet or on CD-ROM. The steps to search IJSW are:
Go to My Compute’ and open the CD by right clicking
the CD Drive and select Open.

Figure 1. Main page.
40

Double click the application Server which opens
GSDL server in a separate pop-up window.
Click Restart Library button to start a default
browser. (Don’t close Greenstone Digital Library
version 2.72 pop-up window until the search is
complete).
Click Sociological Bulletin icon to open Search
Window.
A step-by-step instruction manual with screen shots
has been provided in the CD on how to open GSDL Search
Window. There are three ways to search the journal’s
contents:
Search the journal for a particular word(s) in the text.
Search the journal author-wise.
Search the journal title-wise.

3. PROJECT 2: DIGITISATION OF
SOCIOLOGICAL BULLETIN
3.1 About Sociological Bulletin
Sociological Bulletin, started in the year 1952, is the
official journal of the Indian Sociological Society,. It is now
published thrice a year: January-April, May-August, and
September-December. It carries reports on research
conducted in India and abroad by professional
sociologists and anthropologists. Over the last five
decades, the Bulletin has been advancing the frontiers of
knowledge about Indian society, its social institutions and
culture, and their structure and dynamics. It has been
contributing to our understanding of other societies as
well. The Bulletin meets the needs of higher education in
India and provides for specialists and non-specialists
alike. It also serves as an important source material for
students and researchers. Digitisation of the entire

Figure 2. Browsing page.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

Figure 3. Browse by title.

collection of Sociological Bulletin (Vol. 1-55) has been
completed by the SDTM.

3.2 Objectives of the Digitisation
The need for digitisation of back volumes of
Sociological Bulletin stemed from the following objectives:
To expose to the world, the untapped and under
utilised contents of Sociological Bulletin.
Quick retrieval of the contents of Sociological Bulletin
user friendly.
To allow other world scholars to use the resources for
collaborative practical experimentation.

3.3 Justification and Anticipated Impact
The digitisation achieves the preservation of
important sources forever, searching for information
becomes easy, accurate and quick, and digitised
information can be updated easily. Digitisation of
Sociological Bulletin will have significant impact because:

Figure 4. Browse by author.

3.6 Browsing Sociological Bulletin CD
The Sociological Bulletin CD (tested for all popular
browsers compatibility) contains information about
guidelines for the contributors, subscription/renewal,
contact details, brief about the journal, etc. On the first
page links have been provided to browse and search the
journal in alphabetically arranged author index and title
index (Fig. 5). Browsing facility provides navigation from
volume to volume and issue to issue (Fig. 6). Links to full
text has been provided for all articles and book reviews
from the contents page. The journal can also be browsed
from GSDL application.

3.7 Searching Sociological Bulletin CD
To search Sociological Bulletin on CD, a search
interface has been provided using GSDL software ver.
2.72, which works only on Windows OS (Windows Vista/
XP/2000/NT/98). GSDL provides a new way of organising
information and publishing it on the Internet or on CDROM. The steps to search the journal are:

It will provide a structured way to browse its
contents.

Go to My Computer and open the CD by right clicking
the CD Drive and select Open.

It will have seamless access around the world. Its
reach will be far wider and faster.

Double click the application Server which opens
GSDL server in a separate pop-up window.

3.4 Volume of Work
Sociological Bulletin has 55 back volumes. Around
15,000 pages have already been digitised. The entire
digitisation work was completed in 10 months.

3.5 Funding of the Project
The project was funded by the Indian Sociological
Society, New Delhi. A library professional with computer
skills was hired to carry out the project for 10 months.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

Click Restart Library button to start a default browser
(do not close Greenstone Digital Library version 2.72’
pop-up window until the search is complete).
Click Sociological Bulletin icon to open Search
Window.
A step-by-step instruction manual with screen shots
has been provided in the CD on how to open GSDL Search
Window. The journal can be searched by a particular
word(s), author-wise and title-wise.
41

Figure 5. Main page.

4. OTHER DIGITISATION PROJECTS
Parsee Literature Digitisation: 150 years old Parsee
literature of 10,000 pages has been digitised and made
available for the reference in CD-ROM format. The
literature was in Gujarati script. Entire 32 volumes have
been accommodated in three CDs.
Digitization of Theses and Dissertations: Apart from the
general collections, the library also holds a good number
of theses and dissertations submitted to TISS covering
diverse subjects of social sciences. It is this rich valuable
collection that has made the library unique in its own way.
TISS library has approximately 2500 Master of Arts
dissertations and around 500 doctoral theses.
Project Reports/Monographs/Technical Reports
brought out by Faculty: Digitisation of all the project
reports, monographs, course material brought out by the
faculty members is under progress. There are approx. 100
monographs with 15,000 pages that require digitisation.
Books: The Publication Unit at TISS has published over
100 books since 1940. All theses can be digitised to
convert them into e-books. Each book is of an average
300 pages.
Proceedings Volumes: Many national and international
conferences/seminars/workshops are being conducted
by departments, research units and library every year.
Proceedings volumes of these conferences/seminars/
workshops are a good source of information. Hence the
library has taken up the job of digitising all the
proceedings of the institute.

Figure 6. Browsing page.

the lessons learnt can easily be expanded to larger scale
projects. The authors plan to continue to work on bringing
more and more social sciences journals in the digital
format and look forward to streamline the research value
in the field of social science in India.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Authors are thankful to Dr S. Parasuraman, Director,
TISS for his guidance and encouragement and
suggestions throughout the project and also while
preparing this paper. Authors also express their sincere
gratitude to Prof. N. Jayaram, Dean, School of Social
Science, TISS and Chief Editor, Sociological Bulletin,
New Delhi for granting this project to TISS Library and
encouraging us to carryout the digitisation process.

REFERENCES
1.

Kuny, T. An introduction to digitisation technologies
and issues. Network Notes, 14. http://www.nlc-bnc.
ca/pubs/netnotes/notes14.htm (Accessed on 25
December 2008).

2.

Berger, Marilyn. Digitisation for preservation and
access: A case study. Lib. Hi Tech., 1999, 17(2), 146151.

3.

Whitt, Jennifer. & Hastings, S.K. The best of both
worlds: A digital preservation project. Lib. Hi Tech.
News, 2005, 10, 13-16.

4.

Eden, Brad. Getting started with library digitisation
projects: Funding your first (and subsequent) digital
projects. The Bottom Line Mag. Lib. Fin., 2001,
14(2), 53-55.

5.

De Ridder, Jody L. Choosing Software for a digital
library. Lib. Hi Tech. News, 9, 19-21.

5. CONCLUSION
Digitisation of contents, preservation, and digital
asset management has become the driving process. This
case study describes very small digitisation projects but
42

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

6.

Witten, Ian H. & Bainbridge, David. Creating digital
library collections with Greenstone. Lib. Hi Tech.,
2005, 23(4), 541-60.

7.

Krishnamurthy, M. Open access, open source and
digital libraries: A current trend in university libraries
around the world. Program: Electro. Lib. Inf. Sys.,
2008, 42(1), 48-55.

8.

Lopatin, Laurie. Library digitisation projects, issue
and guidelines: A survey of the literature. Lib. Hi
Tech., 2006, 24(2), 273-89.

9.

Graham, Theresa. Electronic access to and the
preservation of heritage materials. The Electro. Lib.,
2003, 21(3), 223-26.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

10. Witten, Ian. H.; Bainbridge, David & Boddie, Stefan. F
Greenstone: Open source digital library software with
end-user collection building. Online Inf. Rev., 2001,
25 (5), 288-98.
11. Rowley, James Daniel & Sherman, Herbert. The
special challenges of academic leadership.
Management Decision, 2003, 41(10), 1058-63.
12. Schaffler, Hildegard. How to organise the digital
library: Reengineering and change management in
the Bayerische staatsbibliothek, Munich. Lib. Hi
Tech., 2004, 22(4), 340-46.

43

