DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 44-48, DOI: 10.14429/djlit.30.284
© 2010, DESIDOC

Transforming a Traditional Library to Modern Library using Barcode
Technology: An Experience of Central Library, PEC University of
Technology, Chandigarh
Seema Vasishta and Maninder Kaur Dhanda
Punjab Engineering College (DU), Chandigarh-160 012
E-mail: seema313@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The article appraises the transformation of central Library of PEC University of Technology, Chandigarh
into a modern library using barcode technology. Appraisal has been made by comparing the prerequisites and
practices of the method used earlier with the prerequisites and practices being followed these days. The
benefits incurred by adapting the barcode technology have also been discussed along with the future plans
for the Central Library, PEC University of Technology.
Keywords: Barcode technology, modern libraries, tradational library, PEC University of Technology

1.

INTRODUCTION

Computer technology has helped libraries to perform
their jobs efficiently and to the ultimate satisfaction of
their users. Computers have revolutionised the work
culture of modern day libraries. The growth in number and
variety of computer-based technologies are playing
important role in the efficient working of a library. Barcode
technology is one such technology being implemented in
the libraries at an accelerated pace. Barcodes are selfcontained machine-readable identification labels with
information encoded in a series of black bars and white
spaces of varying widths that represent digits and other
punctuation symbols. These are readable only through a
reader or a scanner. A basic barcode scanner consists of
a decoder and a scanner. The basic operation of a
scanner is to scan a barcode symbol and provide an
electrical output that corresponds to the bars and spaces
of a barcode.
Barcode scanner acts in much the same way as a
keyboard. As the pressing of a key on the keyboard
sends a signal to the computer, reading the barcode
results in the same kind of signal sent to the processor in
the similar manner. It is necessary to understand here
that barcode by itself is not a system but an identification
tool that provides an accurate and timely support of data
transferring for sophisticated management systems.
Recived on 7 July 2009; Revised on 31 August 2009

There are three basic types of barcode scanners: fixed,
portable batch, and portable RF. Fixed scanners remain
attached to their host computer or terminal and transmit
one data item at a time as the data is scanned. Portable
batch scanners are battery operated and store data into
memory for later batch transfer to a host computer. Some
advanced portable scanners can operate in non-portable
mode too, often eliminating the need for a separate fixed
scanner. Portable RF scanners are battery operated and
transmit data online in real time. More importantly, the
real-time two-way communication allows the host to
instruct the operator what to do next, based on what has
just happened.

2.

OBJECTIVE

Present article appraise the transformation of a
traditional library into a modern library with the help of
barcode technology. Appraisal has been made by
comparing the pre-requisites and practices of the method
used earlier in the Central Library, PEC University of
Technology with the pre-requisites and practices being
followed these days.

3.

PAST SCHEMA

The pre-requisites and practices followed in the past
were:

3.1 Pre-requisites

4.2 Laser Printer

Most important pre-requisite is to prepare a book for
the issue. Earlier soon after the receipt of a new book, the
details were entered in the accession register. Technical
processing like cataloguing and classification were done
and routine practice of preparing book card for each and
every book was followed.

For printing barcodes, high quality of printing is
required. Defects in printing will lead to wrong reading or
nil reading of data, so laser printer is essential to achieve
the required precision in the barcodes.

3.2 Issue/Return System

Labels are printed on a customised A4 sheet of selfadhesive labels. These sheets have 65 labels per page
format and give a better quality and durable labels.
Lamination of bar-coded label is done with the help of
cello tapes. Although it is somewhat costly and laborious,
but it is necessary for the protection and long life of the
barcodes.

In the old system, Brownie System of issuing books
was being followed. Borrowers’ passbooks were given to
the users. However, there were different kinds of
passbooks for staff (faculty as well as administrative staff)
and students so as to easily distinguish between them.
All the records of issue/return were also maintained in the
duplicate borrowers card, which were arranged according
to membership number and kept at the circulation
counter.

4.

PRESENT ENDEAVOUR

Present system is a conglomeration of various
equipment, computer hardware and software.

4.1 Library Management Software
The software acts as an interface between the
computer and printer/scanner. Central Library, PEC
University of Technology uses LSEase Library
Management Software.
According to
Info-Tek
Consultants Pvt. Ltd, LSEase is an offshoot of LibSys,
the most popular and widely used library software in the
country. LSEase has a mixed blend of functionalities and
technology that abundantly meets the automation
requirements of any growing library which may not need
some special functionalities required in large universities,
public libraries, and special libraries.
LSEase covers all the operations of libraries of
different sizes including web-enabled search facility. It
continues to be outstanding in this market segment
because of international standards such as options for
MARC implementation, client-server architecture, facility
to run on various operating systems, multimedia support
such as images, videos, music, etc., from its parent
system LibSys. Easy to operate with user-friendly
worksheets, LSEase does not require any pre-requisite
programming or computer skills. LSEase, with an
excellent user interface, is interactive, screen-oriented,
and is menu driven. It has the facility to set user-defined
security at function level. The system is not only easy-tooperate, but also easy to implement. LSEase operates
effectively in different environments resulting in higher
productivity. The proprietary indexing features inherited
from LibSys give remarkably good response time for
bibliographic searches even for large databases.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

4.3 Barcode Labels

4.4 Barcodes
By and large one dimensional numeric barcodes are
prepared, except for the special collections like
bookbank. Figure 1 presents a typical numeric barcode
generated in Central Library, PEC University of
Technology.

4.5 Spine Labels
Figure 2 illustrates a typical spine label. It is placed
on the spine of the book about 1½ inch above from the
bottom. These label are also called smart labels as these
have both the call number and accession numbers.

4.6 Hand-held Barcode Scanner
Central Library PEC opted for a Charged Coupled
Device (CCD) hand-held barcode scanner (Welch Allyn
Model FBC-3820) for scanning the barcodes of the ID
cards and the books (Fig. 3).

PEC(DU)
87574

CHANDIGARH
Figure 1. Typical barcode

624.11234
D234H
87574
Figure 2. Smart spine
labels

Figure 3. Hand-held barcode scanner CCD

45

It is also referred to as a LED scanner, CCD is a
photosensitive component, often used in fax machines,
page scanners, and video cameras. To scan, the ‘nozzle’
of the scanner is simply placed on top of the barcode
symbol and a trigger on the underside of the scanner is
depressed. The scanning is automatic, although the
scanning range is seldom more than an inch or two. Small
size, lightweight and low cost than laser scanner are the
basic advantages of CCD scanners. Moreover, CCD
scanners have no moving parts whereas laser scanners
have oscillating mirrors that are subject to wear and
mechanical failure. CCD scanners use LEDs for
illumination, which is quite safe for direct viewing. Further,
CCD scanners have scan rates of 45 scans per second or
faster, which is as good as their laser counterparts.
Usually a keyboard wedge is used as an interface
between the CCD scanner and the computer. The CCD
scanner is plugged in between the keyboard and the
computer using a Y cable. The data from the barcode
appears at the computer’s keyboard port just as it has
been typed manually.

It is an ergonomic, rugged, and lightweight terminal
weighing only 245 g and withstands 4-feet drops to
concrete floor. It will be used to store the accession
numbers of scanned documents. Once its memory is full,
the stored data, i.e., accession numbers can be
transferred to the computer to clear its memory and
further scanning work can be continued.

4.7 Portable Barcode Scanner for Stock
Verification

Proper planning was needed to initiate such an
endeavour and its successfull implementation. Various
ways and means were used for completing barcoding of
all the already accessioned books. Central Library PEC
has different collections nomenclatured as

Use of portable scanner for the stock verification is
ideal. It serves the dual purpose of scanning the barcodes
and storing that data in its memory. Central Library, PEC
University of Technology has bought a hand-held portable
scanner (PDA Model No. PT630DWA-0L00A S/N5201552002) with a memory chip of 4.5 MB (Fig. 4).

4.8 Issue/Return System
The circulation module of the library management
software supports front desk operations like check-outs
and check-ins, renewals, students/membership records
keeping, etc. It provides an option to generate and print
barcoded ID cards (with an optional ‘add-on’ facility to
attach members’ photograph thereon). The system
monitors overdue items and generates reminders for the
same. Whole organisation provides greater flexibility in
operations. It also keeps a complete log of all circulation
transactions for future reference.

5.

PLANNING FOR PRESENT ENDEAVOUR

Main collection.
Bookbank (general).
Bookbank (SC/ST).
As the accession register of these collections have
parallel sequence in accession numbers, prefixes like GB
and SB have been used to segregate different collections
of Bookbank (General) and Bookbank (SC/ST),
respectively. After the application of computers to
automate the procedures of library, all bibliographic
details of documents received were entered in the
database. Barcodes were generated for each book and
pasted at the back of book along with the date slip. Side
by side, new books processed by Technical Processing
Section were also barcoded before release.
Comprehensive bibliographical databases for the available
documents have been prepared.

Figure 4. Hand-held portable scanner

46

Barcodes were prepared using the accession number
as the keyfield and the labels were printed in-house using
HP Laserjet printer. All the books in the library are
barcoded now. For the purpose of entering books in the
database, two Data Entry Operators were employed. It
took around three years to complete the process as
collection of the library is more than one lakh. The
process of data entry is still going on as new books are
being added regularly.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

5.1 Passbooks
As soon as the list of new students admitted into
various courses in the first year is received, data is fed
into the computers and barcodes are generated. Every
registered user is issued a passbook. Personal details
like Name, ID number, Class, Department, etc., with a
photograph are given in the first page. Photograph is
attested by the incharge. The circulation staff assigns a
unique membership code and activates users’ borrowing
status in LSEase. Barcode label is pasted on the
passbook. Barcodes on passbook have Roll Number as
the keyfield. Barcoded passbooks are issued to students
only after registration. These labels correspond to
following information in the user database:
Name.
Member code.

6.

date for return and accordingly the entire details are
displayed on the monitor. Due date is put on the date slip
and book card. With this the transaction is completed and
the book is issued to the member. The whole transaction
is automatically updated in the database.

7.

ISSUE OF NO DUES CERTIFICATE

When a user leaves the institute, his/her membership
is cancelled and library issues no dues certificate. This
process is time consuming and error prone in a manual
system. With the use of barcode technology, the member
will surrender his/her bar-coded Library Membership
Card. The library Management Software will scan the
database for any document issued in his/her name or
even any fine due. If nothing is due, no dues certificate will
be issued. Else, he/she will be asked to clear the dues to
get no dues certificate.

Department.

8.

FUTURE PLANS

Address.

(i)

PVC cards will be issued: PVC cards are an
attractive choice for printing Library Membership
Cards quickly and economically. Magnetic encoding
or two-dimensional barcodes printed onto the PVC
cards provide data entry and tracking. This practice
will also result in saving a large amount of stationary
for making borrowers cards and also saving of staff
time which would have otherwise been spent for filling
those cards. Figure 5 presents a typical PVC card.

(ii)

One barcode sweeping machine will be positioned at
entry gate of library to maintain user statistics.
Making entries in a register are usually timeconsuming. Users also show indifference towards
entering their particulars. Such kind of statistics is

ISSUE/RETURN OF BOOKS

As already mentioned, CCD scanner is used for
reading the barcode from the borrowers’ card and the
book instead of punching the accession numbers using a
keyboard. When the barcodes are scanned, the details of
both borrower and the book are displayed on the screen.
This reduces the error percentage at the circulation
counter, which may be resulted due to manual
processing. When a book is issued or received back from
a user, the counter staff scans the barcoded membership
number from the members ID cards. Then the barcode
from the book is scanned. The software computes the due

Central Library
PEC University of Technology
Sector 12, Chandigarh
Library Membership Card
Photograph

Name:
Category:
Department:
Address:
Validity:

Sr. Librarian (Head)
Figure 5. PVC card
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(1)

47

Barcode technology is fast and user-friendly.

useful for various purposes, particularly for
improvement in library services and to start a new
service.

Barcode will help in stock verification expeditiously
and easily.

(iii) Checking at the gate check post: When a user
leaves the library with the issued document, these
are checked at the exit gate. A terminal will be
installed at the Gate Check Post to efficiently utilise
the barcode technology. Since issue/return is done
online, the database is being updated automatically.
When user will leave the library, accession number of
document carried by the user will again be scanned
at the gate. In case of issued document the computer
will approve the exit. But, in case, someone is
carrying a document that has not been issued the
computer will given alarm or a message to that effect.

Barcode will help in maintaining duplicate borrowers’
card, which were occupying more space on the issue
counter.
Issuing of no dues certificate will become easy; it
was very cumbersome to verify from a manual
system.
It will facilitate preparation of reminders and fine lists
for overdue books.
It provides reliable statistics.
It adds to elegance and aesthetics of the front office
and its activities.

(iv) Barcode printer will be purchased to have more
precise barcodes.

9.

BENEFITS INCURRED FROM BARCODE
TECHNOLOGY

Barcode technology is most accurate and least
expensive way to identify and get data into the computer.
The extent of achievement in the library after introduction
of barcode technology is quite high. The following are the
benefits of the barcode technology:
Improved operational efficiency: Manual charging/
discharging of documents is very cumbersome.
Operational efficiency has improved a lot after using
the barcode technology as barcodes permit faster
recording of information.
Accuracy: In the manual system, the writing of
accession number and member code may result in
charging/discharging a wrong book to a wrong
member. But barcode scans accession number and
member code at the time of charging/discharging to
ensure the accuracy in transactions. It leads to an
error free data entry.
With the help of barcode issue/return of documents
can be done faster, which helps in saving the time of
both the user as well as library staff.
Barcode helps reducing in cost of preparing duplicate
borrowers card.

48

10. CONCLUSION
After barcoding the borrowers’ passbooks and the
books, the operations of circulation section have become
efficient and error free. Implementation of new technology
has certainly improved the image of the library among
users and developed a positive attitude towards library.

REFERENCES
1.

Jeevan, V.K.J. Barcoding for faster library
transactions. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2000,
20(3), 15-19.

2.

Manjunath, G.K. & Pujar, S.M. Barcoding of library
documents: Planning, techniques and tools. Annals
Lib. Inf. Studies, 2002, 49(4), 119-25.

3.

Syamalamba, R. Implementation of barcode
technology for library operations: The experience of
Maris Stella (Autonomous) Colllege, Vijayawada. ILA
Bulletin, 2005, 41(4), 23-25.

4.

Barcode basics. http://www.scanbarcode.com/web5/
barcode_basics.htm

5.

LSease Library management software. http://
www.libsys.co.in/lsease.html

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5)

