DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 3, May 2010, pp. 3-6
© 2010, DESIDOC

INVITED PAPER

Content-to-Context: A Built-in Culture of Librarianship*
H.S. Siddamallaiah
Principal Library and Information Officer, NIMHANS, Bangalore-560 029
E-mail: Sidda@nimhans.kar.nic.in

ABSTRACT
Collecting and connecting ideas is the basic mantra in all walks of information landscape including Content
Management (CM), Knowledge Management (KM) and librarianship (traditional or digital). The spectrum of
content on web, due to its read-write capabilities, varies from “least authenticated to most authenticated
content” such as no-reviewed, peer-reviewed, open-reviewed and systematic reviews including meta-analysis
(evidence-based) literature, both text-based and multimedia. This keynote covers various aspects of CM in
‘science of traditional librarianship’, ‘digital librarianship’ and ‘web-based librarianship’. The keynote also
discusses the integration (within and among) of technology, content, and users.
Keywords: Content management, knowledge management, peer-reviewed, meta-analysis, digital librarianship,
web-based librarianship, digital information landscape

1. INTRODUCTION
The Digital Information Landscape (DIL) includes both
structured and un-structured content on the web. The
spectrum of content in web, due to its read-write
capabilities, varies from “least authenticated to most
authenticated content” such as no-reviewed, peerreviewed, open-reviewed, and systematic reviews
including meta-analysis (evidence-based) literature, both
text-based and multimedia. Collecting and connecting of
ideas is the basic mantra, even in routine-life decisionmaking and intellectual activities like learning, knowledge
management (KM), and content management (CM)
including science and service of librarianship (traditional
or digital). Core activities of libraries are to collect, collate,
organise, preserve, and add values to enable users to
access and enrich the content. The core science of
librarianship is CM, which is its built-in culture right from
the pre-printing and printing era and now in digital/webbased era. In traditional librarianship, collection
development was restricted mostly to peer-reviewed and
authentic materials organised based on content (not on
physical characteristics of the content) using content
organising tools and techniques internationally
standardised.

2. CONTENT MANAGEMENT IN SCIENCE OF
TRADITIONAL LIBRARIANSHIP
Libraries, instead of simply placing the physical
documents (content + print media) en masse on shelves,

should organise these into smaller and similar content
(called class) and more manageable sub-class. The
‘Science of Librarianship’ creates linkages and symbiotic
relationship between similar content through its tools
(internationally standardised) such as classification,
cataloguing, indexing, name authority lists, and
controlled vocabulary terms. Libraries in digital
environment are treading towards smart and automatic
indexing. Still the application of name authority lists and
controlled subject headings is necessary instead of
simply providing access to information. Also, the tools
and techniques of library science should enable the user
to access relevant content, to put content to context and
evaluate them.

3. CONTENT MANAGEMENT IN DIGITAL
LIBRARIANSHIP
The digital librarianship (DL) was predominantly a
hybrid librarianship where print, analogue, and digital
media of information resources co-exist. DL was to
connect content in various media (print, analogue, and
digital). In fact, libraries are one among the first to apply
Information Technology (IT) and have been adapting on par
with the development/changing technology from time-totime. The application of IT, started with automation of
library functions and services including MARC (MAchineReadable Cataloging) development of bibliographic
database for both print and digital resources, automated
indexing techniques, free text searching and relevance

*Keynote address delivered by the author in National Conference on Content Management in Digital Era: Opportunities and Challenges, held at Kuvempu
University, Shimoga, Karnataka on 12 March 2010.

ranking of search output, thesauri, and authority lists to
bring like things together and to build a system of
knowledge. Among the activities most popularly and
essentially used are OPAC (Online Public Access
Catalogue), bibliographic database, and digitisation (in
compliance with copyright) of print and analogue
materials. While the core principles of librarianship is
collection, organisation, preservation, and dissemination,
computer technology coupled with Internet has changed
the way content is created, maintained, evaluated, and
distributed. In case of born digital information, particularly
on the web, the purpose was to bring together content and
indexing technology for searching and enabling “relevancy
ranking”. In web-based environment, the expectations of
users have changed, and Google has become the gold
standard.

4. CONTENT MANAGEMENT IN WEB-BASED
LIBRARIANSHIP
It is well known that web encompass more
information, more researchers, and more knowledge,
where libraries have to focus on creating more automated
tools to handle and process and to bring the community of
users into the process of aggregating and using
information. The content manipulation and management
of these materials is dictated by technology, format, and
licensing restrictions. In web environment, the content
management is treading content to context to connectedness to intelligence where libraries represent a smaller
player in the information universe and services are much
less centralised. However, web-based librarianship, unlike
in traditional libraries, is to provide users with link and
access to required/relevant information. Of course
traditional approach of library, which still holds good, is to
systematically collect, organise, preserve, and
disseminate all web-based content/e-resources. It is of
interest whether search engines, users connectedness,
semantics, and intelligence will replace libraries or not.
The content aggregation and resource knowledge at the
institutional-level are the important roles of library
professionals to meet the needs of institution-level users
for their learning, teaching, research, and practice. Also,
to manage e-resources, librarians need to thoroughly
understand various aggregated resources, licensing
terms, and providing access including educating users
about searching the appropriate resources. In traditional
librarianship, libraries acquire resources as content +
media, whereas in e-resources acquisition it is content +
media + access rights + copyrights.
The content services of web-based resources in
libraries were started by creating subject gateways and
alphabetic list of e-resources for easy access to users.
Later, Web 2.0 tools helped to connect users and
supported creation of content. Libraries are also back to
digital libraries solution where e-resources are integrated
to library automation system for aggregating e-resources
4

and linking full-text content both on catalogue, subject
directories and through bibliographic database. Also,
libraries have deployed remote access technology to IPenabled e-resources on institutional networks through
Athens and EZproxy. Libraries are also providing
simultaneous access to disparate resources through
federated search engines (search-engine of searchengines) to search across all resources, internal
catalogues as well as Open URL resolvers to provide
article-level link.
It is to summarise that the access to web content has
been evolved in consonance with the development of
technologies like directories and keyword-based
searching (web 1.0), community tagging and social
networking (web 2.0), natural language searches and
semantic search (web 3.0), and intelligent web with
reasoning (web 4.0). The web-based librarianship is also
related to Google age ‘Libraries in the Google Age’, and is
moving “from collections to service”.

5. LIBRARIANS IN WEB-BASED
ENVIRONMENT
Librarians have got opportunities to acquire and add
value to the content by supporting users with what and
where of content as users are poor in searching and
resource knowledge. Librarians have been helping and
teaching users about searching and imparting knowledge
about appropriate knowledge repositories. Libraries add
value to information using technology coupled with
librarianship to suggest, advise, and support users in their
quest for information and to encompass the ubiquitous
supply of information. Librarians assign relevance (of
course relevance is highly personal) based on the type of
requirements like history or current development, factual
or theoretical, peer-reviewed or provoking materials like
blogs, etc. In fact, librarians add value by organising
information, interfacing development, and synthesising
information. Most appropriate value addition is to lead
users “from finding to understanding”. In a way “search
process is also a learning process”, where searcher need
to identify and understand facets in the subject and
search process.
Librarians are working like ‘middleware between
content and technology; content, technology and users’.
Also, librarians are like ‘cloud computing’—linking
together large pools of disparate data and information
including coverage of inter-disciplinary development
(boundaries of subject is very thin). At the same time,
users on their own manage personal content tools,
publishable and subscribe-able RSS feeders, personal
web pages, blogs, and by creating wikis. Of course main
information flow matters to each person and is peer-topeer. Librarians or user (on their own) creates awareness
alert for needed information by understanding research
and further guidance. Every user is unique in learning and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

hence user interface cannot be generalised. It is found
that “a user interface for everyone is an interface for no
one.” There are many digital data tools that allow, perhaps
even encourage users to interpret, disseminate and work
with data and to be able to place it in context. As a result,
librarianship would move toward providing users with
“intelligent objects, not portals.” The development of
technology is to ultimately be “able to present themselves
rather than requiring intelligent systems to surround those
objects for them to be presented.” Ultimately, it is
collection of “intelligent objects not intelligent libraries”.
Hence, library services must add value to work processes
and must integrate information into workflow.

6. USERS IN TRANSITION OF LIBRARIES
Users are confronting the exponential growth of digital
content including scholarly content by commercial
publishers, open access publisher, and users content in
read/write web environment. The knowledge of present
users about the library is very poor and confuse as to what
it offers like ‘library as space’ (physical as well as web
space), ‘library as a resources centres’ (both physical
and digital), and ‘library as a service centre’. Of course
users are oriented better in traditional libraries to access
peer-reviewed popular publications (print or digital)—like
established books, journals and serials/monographs.
They are poor in identifying the new resources and
searching unfamiliar resources on web. Users are still a
googlers in first place.
It is well known that users interact with the resources,
add their thought and experience, come out with new
ideas, things or thoughts. The connectedness among
users (learners, teachers, researchers and practitioners)
in web-based information system is through content to
reader’s expertise, workflow and their use of special
equipment. However, users are restricted proportionately
to the accessible information, in digital information
system, limiting researchers to work with whatever is
digitally available—mostly last 20 years of digital
information. Information, earlier to 20 years is yet to be
digitised or linked to provide seamless access. Good
model of future should incorporate lots of old information
resources.

7. CONTENT-TO-CONTEXT
People are connected through instant messaging
(IM), virtual meeting tools (desktop video real-time tools),
open space hosting and facilitation; people are trying to
find community-creating tools and multimedia interactive
self-assessment tools. Web 2.0 enables people from
know-what to know-who. The philosophy is to make
contents in public presence (present everything inside on
open and shared outside), unless it is confidential or have
some legal constraint.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Content passionate people ‘to know with’, in virtual
environment web 2.0 tools like twitters is about people at
its root, not knowing whom to follow; RSS feeder allows to
follow contents and get to know people. It is important to
create context by connecting various content; create
connectedness through content and context; whereas
librarians work to achieve both using ‘science of
librarianship’ including creation of users-profile, filtering
information for relevance, add values by creating context
for the content and linking/access. In the Google age
librarians are struggling to add value and transform
collection to service provision. In Web 2.0 environment
users’ participate through their feedbacks, comments and
openness.
In fact, the traditional librarianship and web-based
librarianship (public digital space—Google and library
digital space) are not moving parallelly and meeting at
some point. To make these two parallel, will require many
affinity affecters, sharing attitude, mind mapping, mashup and open space technology, and virtual world
collaborators. After all, context creation, for institution
specific and activity specific, is very essential and
necessary to align and create consistency with value
proposition. The value proposition of web users is to make
them understand (why and what of content) to improve
understanding, connectivity and effectiveness in webbased environment, and content acquisition including
tools and spaces.

8. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The discussion is presented in three components—
libraries, web, and content in digital environment.
Libraries: are managing large amount of information,
whereas other stakeholders in information landscape lack
in specific data management expertise. Libraries are
efficient in storage, preservation, metadata creation, and
access for data. Library tools and technologies maintain
important chain connections between publications and
their data; data and scientific flow. Of course, librarians
need the expertise in the area of open access/open data
issues like licensing and data management
Web: is a network of nodes and links where users or
developers can create, annotate, link together, map, and
share information from variety of sources (nodes). Every
individual has certain comprehension characteristics, and
characterised by mental models on the process of trying
to understand the document (irrespective of the media);
there are some positive and negative influence which
corresponds to facts and relations within the content and
to maintain several tasks and trails at any one time. In
web-based learning system there are two cognitive load,
viz., coherence with related documents, and overhead in
using the technology.
5

Content: is the output of thoughts, idea, and knowledge
irrespective of the media or networks, whereas the web is
the media to communicate, share, play, and work with
others on networks around the world. In scholarly
communication, users should not bother about features
and functions of web not directly related to their core
activities. In fact, the scholarly communication is
enriched by creating/building the context and interactivity,
where technology at the back end is more helpful. To build
context and interactivity, for each and every piece of
information, web has huge array of variables like
organisation, menus, different types of content, user
permissions, media types, report generation, audits,
syndication, security, etc. In creating and making usage
easier, web facilitates interactivity and enables
customising access and linking to other content and
integrating these with workflow of users (with no IT
background). After all, users wants the information and

knowledge, not technology that works at the back end.
Web provides richer users interface, supports more
complex navigation of mechanism, which guides the user.
Web as an interactive platform enables publishers and
users to interact and respond on each of the article
published whereby even periodical literature becomes
encyclopedic in nature.
The fast technology development of Google emanates
debatable questions like what if Google disappears or
becomes monopoly or starts charging and becomes
expensive? Adding intelligence on the web, may lead
search to become redundant or superfluous; search will
disappear artificial intelligence will surpass human
intelligence. Web 4.0 is projected as web OS with built-in
intelligence to act parallel to human brain, including the
semantics of social connections and mind enhancement
technologies.

About the Author

Dr H.S. Siddamallaiah is working in NIMHANS as Principal Library and Information Officer. He has been involved
in various projects like development of National Neuroscience Information Centre (funded by DST, DBT, NIC, and
NIMHANS); full-text electronic database of three Indian Journals on CD-ROM; integration of e-collections (e-books
and 1710 electronic journals) to academic, research, and healthcare activities, etc. He is the expert member for the
curriculum development at universities in Shimoga and Thailand. He has also published many papers in national and
international journals and delivered lectures in various universities and national conferences.

6

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

