DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 3, May 2010, pp. 23-34
© 2010, DESIDOC

ADDIE: Designing Web-enabled Information
Literacy Instructional Modules
Indira Koneru
ICFAI University, 23 Nagarjuna Hills, Hyderabad-500 082
E-mail: indk68@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
Proliferation of information in varying forms, formats, and amounts mystify users evaluating the quality
and authenticity before consuming information. Unless the users are information literate, they will be deficient
in the requisite skills to access and retrieve information, organise and evaluate critically the retrieved information
and use it effectively for personal as well as professional accomplishments. Information literacy (IL) empowers
one with the required knowledge about information, its nature and available formats, skills to fetch the relevant
information by sifting the irrelevant information, and attitude for consuming and sharing information by ethical
means and practices. This article focuses on how to impart IL instructions using the potential technologies.
Among all the available options for imparting IL instructions, Web is preferred owing to its flexible nature to
reach out to the target groups wherever they are and whenever they want to access the IL modules. A diligent
effort is made to integrate ADDIE, the widely-used instructional design model for designing and developing
IL modules. INFOSEEK, the five-faceted model presented under Design Phase provides a content framework
for developing IL instructional programmes.
Keywords: ADDIE, INFOSEEK, information literacy, instructional design, learning content management systems,
lifelong learning, pedagogy, web-enabled modules

1. INTRODUCTION

2. INFORMATION LITERACY

Proliferation of information in varying forms, formats,
and amounts has made the contemporary era ‘information
intensive’ with manifold choices to access and retrieve
information. However, this requires the skills to exploit the
best choice among the myriad. Furthermore, the current
scenarios mystify users evaluating the quality and
authenticity before they consume information. All these
intricacies pose challenges to individuals in accessing
and retrieving information efficiently, sifting and evaluating
its authenticity, validity, and reliability for its effective use.
Here arises the need for Information Literacy (IL), which
nurtures critical thinking and discernment about the whole
gamut of information and its varying formats, prior to its
consumption.

Information literacy, evolved from bibliographic
instruction, library instruction, and user education
transformed sources oriented approach into processoriented approach. IL is an overarching concept that
“focuses on information use rather than on bibliographic
skills, that is, students must develop information
competencies to become effective learners”.1

This article not only signifies IL as the driving force for
lifelong learning but also delves into how to design IL
instructional modules using Analysis, Design, Development,
Implementation and Evaluation (ADDIE), an instructional
design model.

Received on 11 December 2009

Information literacy is the competency that empowers
one with the required “knowledge about information, its
nature and available formats; skills to fetch the relevant
information by sifting the irrelevant, and attitude for
consuming and sharing information, by ethical means and
practices”.2 In the context of IL, empowerment can be
defined as “providing users with the skills necessary to
find and exploit information that they need for work, study
and leisure”.3
Information literacy empowers one with task
accomplishing skills in part by Fluency with Information

23

Figure 1. Concept of information literacy.

Technology (FIT), in part by sound investigative methods,
but most important, through critical discernment and
reasoning. IL initiates, sustains, and extends lifelong
learning through abilities, which may use technologies
but are ultimately independent of them.4 IL, a set of skills
equips one with ‘technology fluency’ and ‘information
fluency’. Technology fluency or FIT enables one to
harness technology and its various tools. Whereas,
information fluency equips one with skills imperative for
understanding, seeking, locating, retrieving, evaluating,
consuming information efficiently and effectively to meet
his or her information needs and generate new
knowledge.

Values and Beliefs

UNESCO5 publication, Principles of AwarenessRaising for Information Literacy: A Case Study,
summarises the essential skills and values for effective IL
as:

Information literacy is not only significant to
individuals for various levels of education but even for
various occupations, daily decision-making, and problemsolving, thus enabling lifelong learning process.

General Skills

Increasing attention to IL is partly the result of
information overload especially related to the growth of
digital information, which has even caused a new ailment
called Information Fatigue Syndrome (IFS)6, and partly
because of the new focus on student learning in a lifelong
learning context.7

(a)

Problem solving.

(b)

Collaboration and teamwork.

(c)

Communication.

(d)

Critical thinking.

Information Skills
(a)

Information seeking.

(b)

Information use.

(c)

Fluency with Information and Communication
Technology (ICT).

24

(a) Using information wisely and ethically.
(b) Social responsibility and community participation.
The ability to read is a basic skill, but the ability to get
the right information is the survival skill in the information
era. It is IL that equips one with the ability to find the best
information among the myriad of sources and apply it to
make wise decisions.

3. SIGNIFICANCE OF INFORMATION
LITERACY

Information literacy and lifelong learning are
interrelated concepts. Both are “self-motivated and selfdirected, and do not require the mediation of an outside
individual, organisation or other kind of helper, beyond the
learner him/herself, although advice and assistance can
be helpful”.8
The current information and technology intensive
environment, with information exploding in multiple
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

directions in varying forms and formats, through multiple
media, creates a chaos among learners. This bewilderment is due to the deficiency in information competency.
Unless the learners and/or users are information
literate, they will be deficient in the thriving skills to
access and retrieve information, organise and evaluate
critically the retrieved information and use it effectively for
personal as well as professional accomplishments.
‘Information illiterate’ will have fewer opportunities to cope
with the current information age when compared to
‘information literate’.
UNESCO’s IFAP (Information for All Programme,
2006) accentuates, “Everybody should have the
opportunity to acquire the IL skills in order to understand,
participate actively and benefit fully from the emerging
knowledge societies”.8
Information literacy is a ‘prerequisite’ and ‘essential
enabler’ for lifelong learning. Lifelong learning is ‘all formal,
non-formal, and informal learning whether intentional or
unanticipated, which occurs at any time across the
lifespan’.9 Having realised IL as the driving force for
lifelong learning, LIS practitioners need to conceive plans
on ‘how to impart IL instructions’, harnessing available
technological tools for reaching out to innumerable
number of audience.

4. WEB-ENABLED INFORMATION LITERACY
PROGRAMMES
Technology infusion for imparting IL not only
acclimatises the learners to the e-ambience but also
facilitates ‘flexible access’ to IL modules. Flexible access
refers to access and use of information and resources at a
time, place and pace that is suitable and convenient to
individual learners rather than the teacher and/or the
educational organisation.10
Modes of IL instruction may range from stand-alone
courses to online tutorials through formal class settings,
one-on-one or small group sessions, written guides and
brochures, audio-visual presentation, and self-learning
packages (CD/DVD). Among all the available options for
imparting IL instructions, web-enabled tutorials are
gaining momentum owing to their inherent nature of
flexibility in reaching out to the target groups wherever
they are, and whenever they want to access the IL
modules. Moreover, ICT offers multiple tools and formats
to users, to access, retrieve, manipulate, analyse and
repackage information in a customised form to meet their
needs for effective use and scholarly communication.
Web-enabled IL programmes enable students to
access it anytime and anywhere, provided they have
Internet access. Tess Tobin and Kesselman11
summarises the advantages of web-based instructions
as:
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

±

Web-based instruction allows self-directed, selfpaced instruction in any topic.

±

Web-based Training (WBT) is media-rich training fully
capable of evaluation, adaptation, and remediation
that can provide the available tools to organise and
deliver content into well-crafted teaching systems.

However, before embarking on technology-integrated
education and information services, feasibility study is
mandatory. For making wise decision in this regard,
Bates12 presented a decision-making model ACTIONS
that stands for Access, Costs, Teaching functions,
Interactivity, Organisational Issues, Novelty, and Speed.12
Analysis of these factors helps us choose the appropriate
media and technologies and their suitable teaching
functions for developing and delivering the IL learning
resources. Knowledge and understanding of learning
theories and the pedagogical skills are indispensable for
LIS professionals to design, develop, and deliver (Webenabled) IL modules. For rendering web-enabled IL
instructional services, library and information practitioners
need to reengineer their ‘instructional strategies’ and
adopt e-pedagogy to break down the barriers, and the
time and space put forth for imparting library instruction
programmes.

5. INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN AND
INFORMATION LITERACY
Instructional Design (ID), a systemic process involves
needs analysis and the development of an effective
delivery system to meet those needs. In addition to the
development of instructional materials and activities, ID
involves developing reflective learning activities and
evaluation practices to engage learners so as to make
their learning process active and constructive.
Instructional Systems Design involves designing and
development of instructional specifications using
appropriate learning and/or instructional theories, to
facilitate effective learning. Adopting suitable learning
theory based on student-learning-style, enables
information professionals “to explore the possible link
between the way in which students experience IL and
their level of engagement (surface or deep) with other
assignments”.13
Information literacy rejects the traditional teachercentred learning model, rather, IL is based on active
learning model in which the student is at the centre of the
learning environment.14
Information literacy programmes should provide
learners with self-directed, independent and constructive
learning opportunities. Constructivism as learner-centred
approach enables learner to build his or her own
knowledge through engaging learner in active
investigation and thought. The Alexandria Proclamation
25

on Information Literacy and Lifelong Learning
recommends: “Implement active pedagogical practices
such as problem-based learning, service learning and
constructive learning that are both in support of and well
supported by the practice of IL”.15
Constructivist approach is preferred to impart IL
instructions as: (i) learning can be achieved by reflective
thinking to solve problems, wherein teachers act as
guides; (ii) learning is an active process of discovery and
categorisation, wherein learners build on their prior
knowledge and experiences to reach advanced level of
understanding.16
Constructivist learning enables the learner coconstruct meaning by exploring an environment, solving a
problem, or applying information to a new situation that
he/she helps to define. While designing and developing IL
instructional modules, LIS professionals need to embed
the pedagogical and andragogical techniques and
practices, which promote constructive learning among the
participants. Instructional Technologies Committee,
ACRL Instructional Section suggests the following tips on
the pedagogy of Web instruction:17
(i) Outline the objectives and outcomes clearly to
establish purpose and realistic expectations.
(a) Outcomes address the larger overall goal(s) of
student learning.
(b) Objectives address actions or learning behaviours
that will result from the instruction.
(c) Keeping this tip in mind helps to avoid the use of
technology for technology’s sake.
(ii) Provide a clear, intuitive structure that:
(a) Reflects the objectives of the instruction.
(b) Allows for different learning styles.
(c) Permits the student to self-pace and remediate.
(iii) Include active learning techniques to foster studentcomputer, student-student and/or student-instructor
interaction.
Some
techniques
to
consider
incorporating include:
(a) Promoting user-created content.
(b) Developing tools to aid
assessment and feedback.

in

student

self-

(c) Providing occasion for discussion.
(d) Creating collaborative opportunities to enhance
comprehension of concepts being taught.
(iv) Give attention to IL concepts rather than the
mechanics of a particular technology so that
(a) Skills learned will be more transferable to future
use.
26

(v) Incorporate contemporary language and topics, be as
succinct as possible, and don’t be afraid to entertain.
This strategy will:
(a) Establish relevance to students’ lives.
(b) Not overwhelm them with verbiage.
(c) Help to keep their interest.
(vi) Provide multiple ways to students to communicate
with the instructor and subject experts such as
librarians.
(vii) Whenever possible, make instruction course-related
so that it:
(a) Provides context for the concepts being taught.
(b) Makes the material more relevant to the student.
ADDIE, a widely-used instructional design model in
education and corporate training gives us ample scope to
integrate pedagogy (aforelisted), learning theories, and
other ID principles in IL instructional modules.

6. ADDIE
ADDIE enables to design and develop IL instructional
services based on needs analysis. The outcome of each
phase serves as an input to the subsequent phase. It is a
systemic model based on which several Instructional
Systems Design (ISD) models have been conceived.
ADDIE, the cyclic process (Fig. 2) involves:
(i) analysis of learners, their learning needs and goals; (ii)
designing the learning objectives, content, exercises, and
modalities for delivering the modules; (iii) development
modules and decide upon the format of the content,
sequence of delivery and type of learning process;
(iv) implementation, deploying over the web to reach out
the intended user groups; and (v) evaluation of the
prototype for its accessibility and usability.
Reviewing each phase to identify the merits and
demerits and/or hiccups, if any, is mandatory to evaluate
the effectiveness of the ISD. Review enables fine-tuning
and improving the instructional system. Fine-tuning of the
instructional systems may necessitate us repeatiton of
the processes analysis through development, thus
making instructional design a cyclic process.

6.1 Analysis
The tasks to be performed during analysis phase are:
(i) instructional need analysis; (ii) goal analysis;
(iii) learner analysis; (iv) task analysis; (v) context
analysis; and (vi) content analysis. Analysis of the
learners and their learning environment are vital for
instructional design. The target users and user groups,
their learning needs, language preferences, accessibility
to the learning platform need to be analysed. Language is
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Figure 2. Instructional systems design and development process.

a decisive factor in making IL instructional programme
effective. LIS practitioners need to ascertain the prime
medium of instruction for stimulating learners, thereby
engaging them in active and constructive learning
process.

instructional programme and availability of required plugin, if the modules are media-rich and media-dependent,
need to be determined. Analysis is not a simple process;
it is a skilled job for the LIS professionals to garner the
data requisite.

6.1.1 Instructional Need Analysis

6.1.4 Data Gathering Methods

Assessing learning or instructional need is a process
of identifying the gap between what is and what needs to
be, thereby, finding how to remedy the lack, whether it is
knowledge or skills.

Among the various data collection methods,
questionnaires, observation, interviewing focus groups
may serve the purpose. However, one may choose the
survey method and tool-based methods on the resources
depending on both staff and finances available. Data to be
collected to analyse the needs are on:

6.1.2 Goals Analysis
Instructional need analysis enables the designers to
analyse the course goals that define the knowledge,
skills, and attitudes to be acquired through the IL
instructional programme for improved performance.
Course goals for IL programmes can be: Improving the
learner’s ability to: search and retrieve relevant
information using different tools and channels available;
use information effectively and ethically for personal and
professional development; and cope with the changing
and complex information environs.

±

Who are the audience?

±

How many are the potential learners?

±

What is the need for instructional design?

±

What are the current skills of the learners?

±

What are the skill gaps?

±

What should be the course objectives and goals?

±

What are the desired outcomes?

6.1.3 Learner Analysis

±

The instructional goals and anticipated outcome can
be decided by the analysis of learners and their
knowledge and skill gaps. Since the web-enabled delivery
is preferred method to reach out innumerable audience at
any time, learners’ accessibility to the proposed

Where are the learners located geographically? Are
learners distributed throughout a geographical
location or within the campus?

±

What is the preferred mode of instruction? Is it
computer-aided instruction, web-enabled, audio/
vedio, or library brochures?

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

27

±

What is the preferred language?

If the time and other resources permit, one can go for
assessing learner attributes in a comprehensive manner,
as IL instruction modules are to be learner-centric,
making learning process effective.
During learner’s analysis process, focus should be on
their:
Cognitive Characteristics: learning and processing styles,
content knowledge, etc.
Psychosocial Characteristics: aptitude, learning motivation,
attitude towards learning environment and learning content,
socio-cultural attributes, beliefs, etc.

6.2 Designing Learning Modules
The design phase documents specific learning
objectives, assessment instruments, exercises, and
content. The data gathered during analysis phase can be
used for designing the instructional modules. Based on
the outcome of needs analysis, the objectives and
learning outcomes; the sequence and format of the
modules and content instructional delivery modes and
methods can be devised, which serve as the inputs for
developing the IL modules.
The activities to be performed in the design phase are:
±

Articulating learning objectives in performance
behavioural terms.

Physiological Characteristics: physical health, sensory
perception, memory registry, etc.

±

Developing structure of the content (content
framework).

6.1.5 Task Analysis

±

Deciding on the evaluation strategies to be developed
for assessing learning outcome.

±

Selecting the instructional strategy and delivery
media based on the needs analysis and learner’s
accessibility.

Task analysis involves the breaking down of the
complex learning tasks into simple performance-based
tasks. The learning tasks are simplified into to-doactivities that focus on gaining knowledge and skills
relevant to the instructional programme or course planned
for. The task analysis process enables the instructional
designer to design simple learning practices aimed at
improving performance, as decided during goals analysis.
Otherwise one may end up designing irrelevant learning
processes diminishing the chances of realising the
proposed course goals.

6.1.6 Context Analysis
Context analysis involves analysing the learning
environment analysis, wherein learning process takes
place. During context analysis, information is collected
on the learning environment available and accessible. The
following data help analysing the learning context, prior to
designing learning ambience, and develop learning
modules:
±

Do instructors and learners have access to
appropriate technology and necessary support?

±

Do learners have availability to the necessary plug-ins
for accessing the IL modules, if rich in media?

±

Do instructors have KSA (knowledge, skills and
attitudes) for updating the content, in accordance with
technological upgradation?

One can solicit this information either by traditional
survey methods or with the aid of available online tools
like discussion boards, student response systems, and
other such tools that are helpful to assess the learner
attributes based on which one can design the
instructional modules.
28

6.2.1 Learning Objectives
Learning objectives specify the anticipated outcome
and/or accepted performance of the learners or
participants. IL learning objectives derived from the needs
analysis can be as shown in Exhibit 1.
Each learning objective (Exhibit 1) indicates the
anticipated performance (learning outcome) of the
participants in behavioural terms. The aforelisted learning
objectives are general objectives for the IL instructional
programme. Similarly, learning objectives for each module
are to be developed by taking into consideration the three
elements of instructional and/or learning objectives:
(i) behaviour or performance to be accepted as evidence
that the learner has changed; (ii) the conditions under
which the behaviour will be demonstrated; and (iii) the
standards or criteria of acceptable performance against
which the success or failure of the learner will be judged.18
Learning objectives help in the choice of content
(instructional material, instructional and learning
activities, and learning evaluating procedures.

6.2.2 Content Framework—INFOSEEK
INFOSEEK, the five-faceted model is the content
framework proposed for IL instructional modules. Under
the INFOSEEK model, the five facets of IL structured as
five learning modules are:
(i)

Information fluency.

(ii) Search and retrieval.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Upon completion of the Information Literacy modules, learners will be able to:
(i)

Recognise the need for information.

(ii)

Demonstrate understanding of the nature of information.

(iii)

Use the Web, the Internet and associated information retrieval tools.

(iv)

Adopt best search strategy for searching and retrieving information.

(v)

Evaluate information retrieved based on its credibility, authenticity and currency.

(vi)

Organise information for further reference and use.

(vii)

Consume information effectively for decision-making and problem-solving.

(viii)

Update knowledge and upgrade skills in line with the changes in respective
functional domains
Share and communicate the research findings and innovative ideas and practices
among peer groups.

(ix)

Exhibit 1. Learning objectives.

(iii) Evaluating critically.
(iv) Effective and ethical use.
(v) Knowledge building and sharing and keeping current.
INFOSEEK aims at making the participants
‘information competent’. The proposed learning modules
enable a learner to understand the nature of information
and its various sources and formats; adopt a search
strategy proceeding from simple search to advanced
search procedures.
The five learning modules (Exhibit 2) aim at enabling
the learners to search and retrieve information efficiently
and to validate and evaluate the retrieved sources for
meeting his or her information need. Further, learning
content enables the learners to widen their knowledgebase by consuming information effectively and ethically
and disseminate information research findings through
scholarly communication.

6.2.3 Evaluation Strategies
At the design phase itself, attention is to be paid to
the evaluation criteria and strategy. Designing a blueprint,
giving weightage for each concept and process described
in each module is essential. Deciding on the type of test
(objective or subjective), type of questions (multiple
choice, quiz, activities, matching the test items, labelling
the components of a process, etc.) is equally significant.
Each learning module needs to be designed with reflective
learning activities that facilitate constructive learning
among the participants.
Reflective exercises aid in formative evaluation of the
learners, whereas for summative evaluation assignments,
exercises, and quizzes are to be designed. Summative
evaluation mechanisms, meant for assessing the IL skills
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

that participants acquired, are to be devised. For
evaluating participant’s performance a blueprint with due
weightage to the content, objectives and types of
questions is to be devised, which serves as a cynosure for
the developers.
While devising the evaluation blueprint, weightage
should be given to (i) content area (topics); (ii) objectives
(Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives—
knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis,
synthesis, evaluation help in constructing test items)19;
and (iii) types of questions. For designing a threedimensional blueprint, LIS professionals need to interface
with the instructional designer and subject matter expert
(information literacy).

6.2.4 Instructional Strategy and Media
Modes of instruction may range from stand-alone
courses to online tutorials through formal class settings,
small group sessions, one-on-one encounters, written
guides and brochures, course-integrated instructions,
audio-visual presentations, and online instructions. Since
chosen mode of instruction is online, ICT is the media to
be harnessed. Preferring electronic mode to impart IL
offers flexible access to multiple audiences, regardless of
time and space barriers. For instructional designers and
developers, web-based IL instructions offer flexible
content management options, enabling customisation of
IL modules in different levels and formats in accordance
with the learners and their accessibility and usability
options. Designing a user-friendly interface that facilitates
delivery of learning modules, easy navigation and access
to the IL instructional modules is equally important to
enhance the usability. Deciding Course Development
Team and the training required for Course Team and
Facilitators is also required during the analysis phase.
29

INFO

Information fluency
Understanding the nature of information
Information generation cycle
Primary, secondary and tertiary sources of information
Various forms and formats of information

S

E-resources
Search and retrieval
Gaining knowledge about the various information channels and search and
retrieval tools
Fluency with the various access tools
Catalogues (OPAC), bibliographies, indexes and abstracts, databases,
subject gateways, search engines, directories, digital repositories
Adopting appropriate search strategy
Formulating search expression
Broadening and narrowing search
Reformulating the search string

E

Evaluating critically
Assessing the quality of information retrieved
Credibility of information provider (author or publisher), and authenticity,
objectivity and currency of information

E

Effective and Ethical use
Consuming information for the accomplishment of tasks
Conserving Copyright to avoid plagiarism
Using citation styles (APA, MLA, Chicago Style etc.) for acknowledging the
source(s) used

K

Knowledge building and sharing; and Keeping current
Generating new knowledge in a form and format usable
Communicating research results and innovative ideas among the peer groups
via scholarly journals and virtual communities
Keeping current with and stay informed about emerging knowledge; new developments
and practices in the domain(s) interested.
Widening existing knowledge base
Registering with RSS feeds, Listservs (mailing lists), e-groups, virtual
communities and subscribing to RSS feeds, e-alerts, and e-newsletters relevant
to individual area(s) of interest.
Exhibit 2. INFOSEEK–IL content framework.

6.3 Development
The outcome of the design phase aids in the actual
creation and/or development of learning modules in the
development phase. Learning modules are developed in
the form and format as decided in the design stage. The
activities desired for developing modules are:
±

30

Developing learning modules based on the delivery
mode and media as decided during the design stage.

±

Developing learning activities with ample scope for
learners to reflective on.

±

Developing assessment tools to measure learning
outcome (both formative and summative).

Developing the instructional modules is a
collaborative effort. The members required for the
instructional programme development are:
±

Library and information professionals.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

±

Instructional designer.

±

Subject matter expert (SME).

±

Content author/developer.

±

Programmer/developer.

±

Graphic designer/media producer.

LIS practitioners, in addition to team up with the
developers, should also interface with the aforementioned
team members to develop an effective IL instructional
system.

and evaluation strategies are mutually supporting. During
evaluation phase both the instructional system developed
and the participant’s performance need evaluation. The
CIPP (Context, Input, Process and Product) Model20 is
the popular model used to evaluate educational and
instructional systems; whereas the Kirkpatrick’s Four
Level Model21 is the widely used model for evaluating
learner’s performance.
Evaluation stage is to determine the effectiveness of
learning programme and grade the learner’s skills. The
sub-tasks involved are:

6.4 Implementation

±

Determining instructional effectiveness.

During implementation, the developed instructional
materials are delivered using the chosen media. The
processes involve:

±

Evaluating course design and materials.

±

Assessing student’s skills (summative evaluation
using reflective exercises/activities) and awarding
grades.

±

Implementing
effectiveness.

±

Loading the content developed into the chosen
learning content management system.

revisions

for

improving

course

±

Training the facilitators and delivery team.

±

Interaction of instructors and facilitators with
students.

6.5.1 Evaluating Information Literacy Instructional
System

±

Pilot testing the learning system and modules
developed.

Evaluating IL instructional system is meant to assess
whether the learning system facilitates effective learning
and brings the desired outcome or not. Ensuring the
usability and accessibility is vital for effectiveness of the
instructional system. Learner interface should be
evaluated for guaranteeing hassle-free navigation and
usable leaning modules. CIPP, a systems model
facilitates evaluation of: (i) the learning context-needs
analysis; (ii) inputs—availability and adequacy of
resources, viz., money, material (infra-structure) and
men; (iii) process—formative evaluation of instructional
programme implemented; and (iv) product—summative
evaluation to gauge the effectiveness of instructional
products in line with the learning objectives. CIPP
evaluation model helps in strengthening the IL
instructional programme; updating the content, and
restructuring and redesigning the modules, if necessary,
for enhanced usability.

Various Content Development (Authoring) Tools, viz.,
Macromedia, Captivae, Lecora, etc., serve the said
purpose. Alternatively, Learning Content Management
Systems (LCMS) or Course Management Systems
(CMS), viz., WebCT, Breeze, Elluminate, Moodle, Atutor,
Brihaspati, etc., can be considered for managing and
delivering IL modules. The choice of an LCMS should be
based on its customisability, usability (ease-of-use) and
compatibility with all operating systems avoiding plug-ins
download for learners.
Both alpha testing and beta testing are significant to
validate the developed IL modules developed. Alpha
testing is meant for testing the various sub-systems, their
technical compliance, and usability, before deploying
“Information Literacy Modules” for use. Beta testing
involves testing the validity of the IL instructional systems
and modules by inviting not only participants but also
external groups such as SME and/or others with similar
project design and development experience and
expertise. Based on the feedback of focus groups,
needed amendments, i.e., refining the structure and
content are to be made so as to make the IL learning
modules more effective for the participants.

6.5 Evaluation
Thought evaluation appears as the final phase in the
instructional design process. It starts in the design phase
(preparing blueprint). Instructional or learning objectives
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

6.5.2 Evaluating Learners’ Performance
To determine learners’ performance, Kirkpatrick Four
Level Model accentuates to proceed through the four
levels, viz., (i) reaction, (ii) learning, (iii) behaviour, and (iv)
results. While designing and developing evaluation
strategies and techniques to measure performance
(learning outcomes) of the IL programme participants, the
criteria to be considered are their:
±

Capability in identifying ‘sources of information’.

±

Proficiency with the ICT tools and required software
packages (MS Word, PowerPoint, e-mail, etc.).
31

±

Efficiency in identifying keywords and adopting
appropriate search strategy.

±

Competency in using search tools and search
interfaces.

±

Capability in evaluating the quality of information
resources.

±

Fair practices adopted in conserving Copyright and
Intellectual Property Rights of the creators.

±

Knowledge about the citation formats, for
acknowledging the resources consumed, thus
avoiding plagiarism.

Whether the learning objectives set for the IL
instructional programme are achieved or not need to be
assessed using different evaluation techniques. Learning
activities and exercises and the quizzes within the
module enable formative assessment of learners. For
summative evaluation, assignments, individual and
collaborative group are to be devised to evaluate the
knowledge and skills learners imbibe.
All the afore-discussed instructional system design
and development phases are interconnected and interreliant and outcome of each phase serves as the input for
the subsequent phase. Consequently, reviewing (Fig. 2)
each phase is mandatory so as to ensure quality input to
the subsequent phase. Analysing instructional need and
identifying the knowledge and skills gaps of learners
facilitates defining learning objectives and designing
curriculum and deciding evaluation criteria and practices.
Outcome of the design phase in turn facilitates developing
IL modules in line with the learning objectives. The
developed modules are evaluated whether the learning
objectives set for the IL programme are realised or not.
The entire process from ‘analysis of needs’ through
‘evaluation’ constitutes the instructional design process.

Integration of instructional design theories and
principles enables LIS professionals to engage learners
through reflective, constructive, and collaborative
practices duly focusing on interactivity and ‘learning by
doing’. Integrating ADDIE to design IL instructional
systems enables LIS practitioners to develop effective
learning modules. Collaboration is a prerequisite for
planning, designing, and developing IL programme. LIS
practitioners need to collaborate with the faculty of
different disciplines, instructional designers, and
developers which in turn necessitates developing a
profound understanding of course design and
development plans, learning theories, learning styles,
pedagogical techniques, evaluation techniques to assess
learning outcome, etc.

REFERENCES
1.

Guidelines on information literacy for lifelong learning.
IFLA, the Hague, 2006. http://www.ifla.org/VII/s42/
pub/IL-Guidelines2006pdf (Accessed on 16 August
2006).

2.

Koneru, Indira. A study of information literacy skills of
BRAOU learners: Designing an integrated information
portal. PhD Thesis, Dr BR Ambedkar Open University,
Hyderabad, 2008.

3.

Hewer, S. What is Empowerment? School Library
Bulletin, 1999, 5(5). http://www.qualityresearchintern
ational.com/glossary/empowerment.htm (Accessed
on 4 April 2007).

4.

Abid, Abdelaziz.. Information literacy for lifelong
learning. In World Library and Information Congress.
70th IFLA General Conference and Council, 22-27
August 2004, Buenos Aires http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla
70/papers/116e-Abid.pdf (Accessed on 19 April 2006)

5.

Sayers, Richard. Principles of awareness-raising:
Information literacy, a case study. UNESCO,
Bangkok, 2006.

6.

Wilson, L. A. Information literacy: Fluency across and
beyond the university. In Library user education:
powerful learning, powerful partnership, edited by B.I.
Dewey, Scarecrow Press, Lanham, US, 2001.

7.

Virkus, S. Information literacy in Europe: A literature
review. Information Research, 2003, 8(4), 2-3.

8.

Horton Forest Woody. Understanding information
literacy: A primer. UNESCO, Paris, 2003.

9.

Ramsden, P. Learning to teach in higher education.
Routledge, London, 2003.

7. CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS
Information literacy empowers learners with the
knowledge (cognitive domain), skills (psychomotor
domain), and attitude (affective domain) required for
identifying, locating and retrieving relevant information
using appropriate tools and sources; critically evaluating
its quality, adopting needed criteria; consuming for
personal and professional use by ethical means and
practices.22 Information literate can be considered as
‘wise consumer’ and ‘self-reliant’ information user, laying
a constructive path for his or her lifelong learning. To make
library users as wise consumers of information, imparting
IL is the primary task of LIS professionals. LIS
practitioners can make the best use of technological tools
available. In addition to Learning Management Systems,
Web 2.0 tools enable designing and developing interactive
IL modules.
32

10. Naidu, Som. E-learning: A guidebook of principles,
procedures and practices, 2nd Rev. Ed. New Delhi:
Commonwealth Educational Media Center for Asia.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

http://www.cemca.org/e-learning_guidebook.pdf.
11. Tessi, Tobin & Martin, Kesselman. Evaluation of webbased library instruction programs. INSPEL, 2000,
34(2), 67-75.
12. Bates, A.W. Technology, open learning, and distance
education. Routledge, London, 1995.
13. Webber, Sheila & Johnston, Bill. Conceptions of
information literacy: New perspectives and
implication. J. Inf. Sci., 2000, 26 (6), 381-97.
14. Educause Centre for Applied Resarch. Integrating
information literacy into the academic curriculum.
ECAR Res. Bull., 2004, 18.
15. Alexandria proclamation on information literacy and
lifelong learning. UNESCO, 2005.
16. Guidelines on information literacy for lifelong learning,
IFLA, The Hague, 2006.
17. Tips for developing effective Web-based library
instruction. ACRL Instructional Section. http://www.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/about/sections/is/
iscommittees/webpages/instructionaltechnol ogies/
tips.cfm
18. Mager, R.F. Preparing instructional objectives.
Belmont, Pitman Learning, CA, 1975.
19. Taxonomy
of
educational
objectives,
the
classification of educational goals, Handbook 1:
Cognitive domain, edited by B. Bloom & David
McKay, New York, 1956.
20. Stufflebeam, D.L. Educational evaluation and
decision making. Peacock Publishers, Itasca,
IL,1971.
21. Kirkpatrick, D.L. & Kirkpatrick, J.D. Evaluating
training programs: The four levels, 3rd Ed., San
Francisco, Berrett-Koehler, CA, 2006.
22. Indira, Koneru. A study of information literacy skills of
BRAOU learners: Designing an integrated information
portal. PhD Thesis, Dr BR Ambedkar Open University,
Hyderabad, 2008.

33

Invitation to Authors

If you are a library professional/information manager/information scientist/information
specialist/computer professional or a research scholar with a vision for developments in
information technology including software, processors, storage media, and devices having
an impact on library and information systems and services, we invite you to submit a
paper for DESIDOC Journal of Libray and Information Technology (DJLIT) and enjoy the
following benefits:
±

Expert editorial support: All papers are vetted by the eminent members of the Editorial
Board of DJLIT.

±

Critical review: All papers are peer-reviewed by the experts in Library and Information
Science.

±

Abstracting and indexing for greater visibility: DJLIT is covered in major indexing and
abstracting services like LISA and Indian Science Abstracts. The full text of DJLIT is
being reproduced in electronic databases of HW Wilson Company, namely, OMNIFILE
Full Text Select and OMNIFILE Full Text Mega as well as Indianjournals.com.

±

Complimentary copies to the contributors.

Please send your paper/queries to:
The Editor
DESIDOC Journal of Library and Information Technology
House Bulletin Group, 4th Floor
Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Ministry of Defence
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
E-mail:djlit@desidoc.drdo.in

