DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 3, May 2010, pp. 35-42
© 2010, DESIDOC

Indian Integrated Plant Taxonomic Information System:
A Conceptual Framework
Partha Sarathi Das* and Bhupendra Singh Kholia
Botanical Survey of India, Sikkim Himalayan Regional Centre, Gangtok-737 103
*E-mail: parthabsi@yahoo.co.in; bskholia_bsi@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
Taxonomic is one of the oldest and basic scientific work on living organisms. This basic research is the
foundation for all modern fields of research. Taxonomic research has generated huge amount of knowledge
in India which unfortunately is scattered and unorganised largely due to lack of coordination between different
scientific government and non-government organisations. This paper highlights the value of taxonomic
information, problems faced in accessing the information and proposes the need for the development of an
Integrated Plant Taxonomic Information System (IPTIS) at national level to meet the growing needs of taxonomic
information.
Keywords: Botanical Survey of India, databases, Indian Integrated Plant Taxonomic Information System
(IIPTAXIS), information systems, libraries, plant taxonomy, systematics

1. INTRODUCTION
The Swiss botanist, A.P. De Candolle coined the term
taxonomy in Geneva in 1813. Taxonomy is basically a
sub-division of an agglomerate subject termed
Systematics. Systematics has been variously defined by
many authors. But the most preferred definition is given
by Simpson, who defines systematics as “the scientific
study of the kinds and diversity of organisms and of any
and all relationships among them”.1 In other words
systematics is the study of biological diversity and its
origins, focusing on understanding evolutionary
relationships among organisms, species, higher taxa, or
other biological entities such as genes, and the evolution
of the properties of taxa including intrinsic traits,
ecological interactions, and geographic distributions.
Systematics is also concerned with the development of
methods including numerical methods, for various
aspects of phylogenetic inference and biological
nomenclature/classification. A.P. De Candolle defined
taxonomy as the study of the laws and principles
underlying a system of classification.2 The term
classification has a dual meaning in taxonomy, as it does
colloquially. It refers to both, a process and a product. As
a process, it is an act of grouping and ranking organisms
based on criteria of relationship, and as a product, it is the
resultant hierarchy of taxa. The importance of
classification to biology and society results from both the
Received on 10 November 2009

process and the product of classification.3 Classification
consists of two associated activities, namely,
identification and nomenclature. It involves referring an
individual specimen to a previouly classified and named
group.4 The naming of groups of organisms and the rules
governing the application of these names is called
nomenclature.5 Swingle made a distinction between
systamatics and taxonomy with the latter regarded as
dealing with phylogenetic classification, and the former
being broader to include taxonomy and nomenclature.6
Many biologists still equate taxonomy with systematics.7
In fact, Crowson concludes that “the words classification,
systematics, and taxonomy are now commonly treated
as synonyms, an example of the confusion and the
carelessness in the use of words which is prevalent in so
much modern writing”.8 Table 1 outlines the methodology
of systematics. Following the nature of other scientific
disciplines, plant taxonomy has also inter-disciplinary
approach. Plant taxonomy applies a number of subjects
tool to diversify into varoius domains of research like
Cytotaxonomy, Chemotaxonomy, Molecular Taxonomy,
Numerical Taxonomy, Taxonometrics, etc.

2. VALUE OF TAXONOMIC INFORMATION
In 1992, 150 government leaders signed the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which recognised the
crucial role of taxonomy in promoting sustainable
35

Table 1. Outline of methodology of systematics
I. A cc u m u la tio n o f C o m p ar a tiv e D a ta
A . F ro m th e O r ga ni sm
(i) S tru ct ur es
(ii ) Pr oc e ss e s (in te ra c tion s am o ng stru c tur es)
B . F ro m th e O r ga ni sm - En vir on m e n t In ter ac ti on s
(i) D istrib u ti on
(ii ) Ec o lo g y
II. U se o f c o m p a ra tive D a ta to A n s w e r Sp ec ific Q u e s tio n s
A . C la s sifi c atio n ( m o st pr ed ictiv e s yste m o f cl ass i fi c atio n at al l le vel s)
(i) M e th od a nd re s ul t o f g r ou pi ng o f in d ivid u als
(ii ) Le ve l in t h e ta x on o m ic h ie ra rch y a t w hi c h th e g ro up s sho u ld be ra nke d
B . P ro cess o f Evo lu tio n
(i ) N atu re an d o ri gi n o f i nd ivid u al var iati on
(ii ) O rg an isa tion o f g e ne tic va ria tion w ith in po p ul at io ns
(ii ) D iffer e ntia tio n o f p o pu la tion
(iv) N a tu re of r ep ro d uc tiv e is o la ti on a nd m o de s o f s p ec iat i on
(v ) H yb ri di zati on
C . P h ylo ge n y
(i) M o d e
(ii ) T im e
(ii i) P la ce

Source: Stuesst, F. (2002). Plant taxonomy: systematic evaution of comparative data, p.7

development.9 The impact of taxonomic information has
both theoretical and practical implications. For ease of
discussion, we can divide the usefulness of information
generated by the taxonomists into two catagories,
namely scientific and societal.

2.2 Societal Value
Societal usefulness can be described as:
±

The most important societal value of taxonomic
information is in its role in conservation of natural
resources, loss of biodiversity, and upholding the
issue of sustainable development. As Herdberg puts
it: “In a world with rapidly increasing population
pressures and accelerating exploitation it is
imperative to utilise biological resources sagaciously
on a sustained yield basis, and to this end we must
have all adequate knowledge of its flora”.11

±

Systamatics helps to identify the new economic plant
resources like food, medicinal plants, and industrially
useful plants to enrich our existing knowledge base.
Thus, it has an immense potential to ensure global
food security, sound health, and boost our agriculturebased economy.

±

Biological control of exotic plants, searching solution
for land reclamation, phyto-remediation, etc., can be
done utilising the taxonomic information.

±

Before any industrial projects, building any dams,
canals, etc., systematists plays an indespensible
role by advising on possible ecological impact on
organisms through Evironmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) studies.

±

The knowledge and techniques gained by the
systematists through study of relationships of wild
species can often be used to improve our existing

2.1 Scientific Value
Scientific usefulness can be described as:
±

±

One of the most pertinant contributions is the role
that taxonomy plays as the “data processing system
for biology”.10 Taxonomy allows construction of
framework with the millions of pieces of data collected
by the taxonomists from the natural world to arrange
the total available biological information, the data
about life. In simpler terms, taxonomy inventorises of
catalogues the sum total of plant and animal biomass.
Systematics also helps to understand the process of
evolution, which is information used by other areas of
biology. The microprocesses of evolution including
individual variability, population variation, reproductive
isolation, modes of speciation, etc., are revealed
through systematic studies.

±

Systematics studies also help reveal patterns of
evolution or phylogenetic relationships, which
stimulate ideas on the origin of life, the development of
ecological zones through geological time scale.

±

Ecology, Phyto-geography, Palaeobotany, etc., are
virtually dependent on the data generated in
systematic studies.

36

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

cultivated food crops by similar methods of
cytogenetics and artificial selection.
±

Identification and documentation of ethnobotanical
information.

3. STAKEHOLDERS OF TAXONOMIC
INFORMATION
The consumers of taxonomic information are the
taxonomists
themselves,
scientists,
ecologists,
environmentalists, agriculturists, industrial sectors,
policy makers, engineers, government bodies and all
others who require biodiversity-related information.

4. PRESENT SITUATION AND PROBLEMS
The present taxonomic information infrastructure in
India is not at all satisfactory. The various sources of
information are scattered and mainly limited to individual
institutions. As there is no common platform for sharing
these important taxonomic data at the national level,
timely retrieval hampers research and development. The
only visible initiative taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests (MoEF) is the establishment of the
Environmental Information System (ENVIS), which is a
decentralised information network consisting of 76
network partners out of which 46 are subject-specific and
30 are on State-related issues. This information network
basically caters to general enironment-related information
demands and do not include any comprehensive national
floral or taxonomic inventory.
There are some ENVIS institutional taxonomic
specific centres like Botanical Survey of India for Floral
Diversity; Centre for Ecological Sciences; IIS for Western
Ghats Biodiversity; GB Pant Institute of Himalayan
Environment and Development for Himalayan Ecology;
and Foundation for Revitalisation of Local Health
Traditions for Conservation of Medicinal Plants.12 But the
content of these databases are either region-specific or
area specific. For example, the Centre of Floral Diversity
contains information on rare and endangered plants,
medicinal plants, allergic pollen, experts and RET taxa.,
assessment of coastal plant diversity in Indian mangroves
in India, wetlands, etc.13 Therefore, the consumers of
taxonomic data are facing enormous problems, known as
‘taxonomic impediment’: The taxonomic impediment is
because:
±

More than any other science, the domain of
systematic biology is utterly dependent on the
historical literature of published descriptions of
species; publication in print still determines the
legitimacy of naming the credit for new discoveries.
Therefore, proper access to retropective published
literature is very important but due to its scattered

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

nature, at present the researchers are facing
difficulties in retrieving.
±

Lack of any centralised database, there are chances
of duplication of research.

±

Time lag.

±

Biopiracy.

5. INFORMATION SYSTEM: THE CONCEPT
Information Systems are type of communication
systems, which select, organise, store, and disseminate
public knowledge to the users as per objectives laid down
by the Information Programmes. An information system is
composed of all the components that collect, manipulate,
and disseminate data or information. It usually includes
hardware, software, people, and communication
systems. Activities pertaining to an information system
include inputting of data, processing of data into
information, storage of data, and information and
production of services and products.
Before setting up any information system, there
should be a declared information programme, which
specifies the objectives to be achieved, infrastructure
required, and sources of funds for setting up the
information system.

6. INDIAN INTEGRATED PLANT TAXONOMIC
INFORMATION SYSTEM: PROPOSED
STRUCTURE
An information system on plant taxonomy integrated
with taxonomic details, identification tools, traditional
knowledge and economic perspectives can probably be a
big step towards effective dissemination of huge amount
of taxonomic data being generated at the expense of
public exechequer. It will not only bridge the gap between
the info-rich and info-poor sectors of the society but also
enrich the nation in its scientifically intellectual capital.
In the Fourth National Report in the Convention on
Biological Diversity, Government of India has also
identified one of the areas that need urgent attention of all
concerned stakeholders in the Indian context is
“Integrated database development at all organisational
and management levels to effectively utilise the data sets
as one of the important tools for decision support
systems and establishment of a national information
system”.14 The system will act as a common platform for
collection, processing, storage and dissemination of
taxonomic information, and digital repository of national
phytodiversity will not only reduce “taxonomic
impediment’’ in research but also encourage conservation
and sustainable development. Utilisation of information
system has also been demonstrated by Annon15 as:

37

Appropriate Information Technology

improved Information Management

Stronger research planning, monitoring and evaluation

Better research

More benefits to the taxonomists

7. OBJECTIVES OF INDIAN INTEGRATED
PLANT TAXONOMIC INFORMATION
SYSTEM
The main objectives of IIPTAXIS are:
(a) Designing and organising user-oriented and automated information system.
(b) Retrieving relevant data and information system in a
user-friendly way.
(c) Providing data and information support to research
and action-aimed for sustainable national
development.
(d) Dissemination of information globally through
network.
(e) Sharing the resourses at an optimum level.

8. MODEL OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEM
The apex body would be Botanical Survey of India
(BSI) along with its 11 regional centres under MoEF. It will
coordinate with the other network partners like Botany
Departments of varoius Universities; National Botanical
Research Institute, Lucknow; GB Pant Institute of
Himalayan Environment and Development; and
Agricultural Universities. BSI Headquarters will host the
main server. All the regional centres will house server
class machines for every regional database. All servers
will be pooled together to access databases of respective
regions though a centrally monitor server grid technology
using VPN (Virtual Private Networking). The public
access to the database may be provided through a central
server or distributed network with metadata on a web
portal. The regional centres will have a crucial role in
collecting, processing, managing, monitoring, and
coordinating taxonomic data generated by the respective
centres in the states under its jurisdiction. In other words,
BSI will act as a national clearing house with respect to
38

taxonomic data. Figures 1 and 2 depict the model of the
proposed Plant Taxonomic Information System and
different modules of the Information System, respectively.
The network will comprise: Libraries network; Herbarium/
Museum network; and Botanical Gardens network.
The information system will comprise several
centralised databases. A database may be defined as a
collection of inter-related data stored together without
redundancy to find multiple applications. It is in fact, an
array of data organised in a logical manner with minimum
functional and maximum tolerable redundancy, indexed in
a way most optimal for the kind of application the user is
interested in. The database environment can be classified
into operational environment and decision-support
environment. The primary aim of operational environment
is towards online performance and data intregity, whereas
the decision-support environment is aimed at user
flexibility. Relevant data can be populated to form the
follwing types of databases:

8.1 Database of Indian Plants
India ranks 10th among the major plant rich countries
of the world. Three out of the 34 biodiversity hotspots, viz.,
Himalaya, Western Ghats and Sri Lanka and Indo-Burma
are in the region. In India, there are about 17,527 vascular
plant species including 67 gymnosperms and 1200
pteridophytes. The cyptogams includes 2500 bryophytes,
2223 lichens, 14500 fungi, 7175 algae and 850 viruses
and bacteria. India, known for its rich heritage of biological
diversity, has so far documented over 45,500 species of
plants in its 10 bio-geographic regions. Besides, it is
recognised as one of the eight vavilovian centres of origin
and diversity of crop plants, having more than 300 wild
ancestors and close relatives of cultivated plants, which
are still evolving under natural conditions.14 Keeping this
rich diversity in view, the following databases may be
populated:
±

Database of live collections conserved in BSI and
other gardens.

±

Database of phytodiversity of protected areas.

±

Database of phytodiversity of fragile ecosystems.

±

Database of ethnobotanical information (plant based
folklores).

±

Database of medicinal plants.

±

Database of gymnosperms.

±

Database of pteridophytes.

±

Database of bryophytes.

±

Database of lichens.

±

Database of fungi.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Figure 1. Information system model for plant taxonomy in India.
Abbreviations: MoEF: Ministry of Environment & Forests; CNH: Central National Herbarium; AJCBBG: Acharya Jagadish Chandra
Bose Botanic Garden; ISIM: Industrial Section of Indian Museum; ERC: Eastern Regional Centre, Shillong; SHRC: Sikkim Himalayan
Regional Centre, Gangtok; CRC: Central Regional Centre, Allahabad; NRC: Northern Regional Centre, DehraDun; AZRC: Arid Zone
Regional Centre; WRC: Western Regional Centre, Pune; BGIR: Botanic Garden of Indian Republic, Noida; DRC: Deccan Regional
Centre, Hyderabad; SRC: Southern Regional Centre, Coimbatore; ARC: Arunchal Regional Centre, Itanagar; ANRC: Andaman & Nicobar
Regional Centre, PortBlair; NBRI: National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow; TBGRI: Tropical Botanic Garden & Research
Institute, Palode, Kerela; NBPGR : National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi; GBPIHED: GB Pant Institute of Himalayan
Environment & Development, Almora; ARI: Agharkar Research Institute; FRLHT: Foundation for Revitalisation of Local Health Traditions;
NRSA: National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad; CCMB: Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

39

TLIS

HIS

Taxonomy Library
Information System

Herbaria/Museum
Information System

IIPTAXIS

BGIS

TIS

Botanical Garden
Information System

Taxonomy
Information System

International
Databases
Figure 2.

Modules of Indian integrated plant taxonomic
information system.

botany, and other related areas produced by the Indian
scientists and researchers. Classical and rare
retrospective taxonomic literature may be digitised and
made available through this platform. Family-specific
bibliographies with minimum bibliographic elements may
be compiled to channelise the huge information flow. The
most controversial issue of making primary research
output into open access (OA) can be debated at all levels
to come into a consensus. In fact, the Working Group on
Libraries of the National Knowledge Commission set up
by the Government of India recommendes that: to enable
equitable and universal access to knowledge resources, it
is important to create more digital resources which can be
shared. The concept of an “information commons” i.e.,
“resources shared by a community of producers and
consumers in an OA environment” needs to be promoted.
It strongly recommends that peer-reviewed published
research papers resulting from publicly funded research in
India must be available through open access channels,
subject to copyright restrictions.20 In this regard, BSI
Libraries could act as a National Repository of
bibliographic records related to plant taxonomic literature
with uploading and downloading facilities.

±

Database of algae.

±

Database of Indian trees.

±

Databases of economically important plants like fibreyielding, oil-yielding, etc.

±

Databases of rare and classical full-text taxonomic
literature without copyright.

±

Database of indicator plants.

±

Databases of books (with location).

±

Database of phytoremediation plants.

±

±

Database of invasive plants.

Database of journal articles with restricted access
from arrangement with publishers.

±

Database of grey literatures
proceedings, reports, etc.

The bibliographic databases may be of the following
types:

8.2 Virtual Herbarium
The herbarium plays a key role in floristics and for
many is regarded as synonymous with traditional
taxonomy (herbarium taxonomy). The essence of a
herbarium is that like other museum collections, it
provides the physical vouchers of living organisms,
knowledge of which is essential for our understanding,
conservation, and use of plant diversity. Herbarium
collections provide baseline data about the extent and
distribution of plant diversity.16-18 They also provide a nearpermanent record of taxonomic concepts and the ways in
which they have changed for a particular taxon.19 The
herbarium of the future will be dramatically different and
the concept of “virtual herbarium’’ has already come into
being. It comprises primarily an interactive web front-end
linked to a shared scientific names database with remote
Internet links to distributed specimen and other taxon or
specimen-associated datasets in the herbaria.

8.3 Bibliographical Database
Bibliographical database will integrate all the
publications related to taxonomy, systematics, ethno40

like

conference

8.4 Image Database
Image databases will consist of illustrations,
drawings, and photographs of plants for aiding
identification process.

9. LIBRARY DATABASE
Library databases will integrate all the bibliographic
details along with location of the holdings not only in BSI
libraries, but also in other partner institutions. The union
catalogue thus formed will be a comprehensive record of
the nation.

9.1 Redefining the Roles of BSI Libraries
Under the proposed information system, BSI libraries
will have to take proactive role in integrating the following
elements of the information system in unison:
(i)

National Botanical Journals Consortium partnering all
the 11 regional centres to reduce duplication and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

optimum utilisation of funds. In this regards, CSIR
model can be followed. In this connection, Madan S.
Rana has proposed a consortium for all the MoEF
libraries.21
(ii) Union catalogue of all the books, monographs,
journals and other documents of all centre libraries. In
this regard, initiative has already been taken to set up
a network of BSI libraries by the National Informatics
Centre, New Delhi, by using e-Granthalaya, open
source software developed by NIC.
(iii) Setting up of an institutional repository gathering all
the research output by the scientists and its
availability in OA by using Open Source software like
Greenstone, Dspace, etc.
(iv) Digitisation of pre-linnaean publications. heritage
publications and drawings should be digitised and
could be part of Biodiversity Heritage Library Project
(draft report of the Task Force constituted under Prof.
Madhav Gadgil to make recomendations to the
Government of India for strengthening of Botanical and
Zoological Surveys of India).
(v) Collection of local grey literature on floristics diversity.
(vi) Digital archive of tour reports undertaken by the
scientists for survey and exploration.
(vii) Compilation and documentation of bibliographies on
specific families and genera.
(viii) Union catalogue of theses and dissertations.
(ix) Digital archive of projects undertaken, reports, and
the outcome.
(x) CD–ROM library of photographs of plants for
identification.
(xi) Development of a special classification scheme and
controlled vocabulary for effective information
management in plant systematics and taxonomy.
(xii) Coordination with state-level institutions and agencies
involved in the research for procuring literature.

±

Databases of taxonomists active in this field of
research.

±

Directory of institutions along with their addresses,
active research areas, and information about projects
undertaken and completed.

12. BOTANICAL GARDENS NETWORK
It will be a database of all the experimental botanical
gardens, orchidariums under BSI, and other institutions.
Besides the Database services, other information
services like translation service, referral services,
document delivery services, current awareness services,
selective dissemination of information service, press
clipping, bibliography services and various communication service between the peer groups like Blogs,
Forums, etc., can also be integrated. The information
retreival can be affected by developing a cross-platform
common search engine extracting all related information
from all the databases for a particular query. This National
Database should be linked with major international
databases like International Plant Name Index (IPNI),
Index Fungorum, Algaebase, etc.

13. CONCLUSION
Indian Integrated Plant Taxonomic Information
System will certainly be able to fill the information
voidness in the field of plant taxonomy and related areas.
The collection, processing, storage, and dissemination of
taxonomic data can be done systematically to the right
person at the right time. IIPTAXIS will not only serve the
information need of the nation but also can go a long way
to mitigate environmental degradation, promote conservation along with sustainable development.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are thankful to the Scientist-in-Charge,
Botanical Survey of India, Sikkim Himalayan Regional
Centre, Gangtok, and the Director, BSI, Kolkata for
providing the facilitites, encouragement, and support.

10. DATABASE OF ENDEMIC AND RET
SPECIES OF INDIA

REFERENCES

The unique features of the plant diversity, among
others, include 60 monotypic families and over 6000
endemic species. Recent estimates indicate the
presence of over 256 globally threatened plant species in
India.14 Therefore, access to authenticate information in
this regards will help to justify conservation efforts.

2. Candolle, A.P. De. Theorie elementaire de la
Botanique, Paris, 1813.

11. SECONDARY SERVICES
The secondary services generally direct the users to
the primary sources should include the following
databases:
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

1. Simpson, G.G. Principles of animal taxonomy.
Columbia University Press, New York, 1961.

3. Stuessy, Tod F. Case studies in plant taxonomy:
Exercises in applied pattern recognition. Columbia
University Press, New York, 1994.
4. Jardine, N.A. Logical basis for biological
classification.Syst. Zool., 1969, 18, 37-52.
5. Stuessy, Tod F. Plant taxonomy: The systematic
41

evaluation of comparative data. Columbia University
Press, New York, 1989.

15. Annon. Guidelines for ARIS network. ISNAR,
Netherlands, 1993.

6. Swingle, D.B. A handbook of systematic botany.
Ed. 3, McGrawHill, New York, 1946.

16. Boron, B.M. Societal and scientific information needs
from plant collections. In Sampling the green world,
edited by T.F. Stuessy & S.H. Sohmer. New York,
1996.16-27.

7. Lawrence, G.H.M. Taxonomy of vascular plants.
McMillan, New York, 1951.
8. Crowson, R.A. Classification and biology. Atherton
Press, New York, 1970.
9. Gwinn, N.E., et al. The biodiversity heritage library:
Sharing biodiversity literture with the world. IFLA
Journal, 2009, 35(1), 25-34.
10. Heywood, V.H. Taxonomy in crisis or taxonomy is the
digestive system of biology? Acta Bot. Acad. Sci.
Hung., 1973, 19, 139-46.
11. Herdberg, O. Systematic botany, plant utilisation,
and biosphere conservation. Almqvist & Wiksell,
Stockholm, 1978.
12. Annual Report 2007-2008. Ministry of Environment &
Forests, India. ENVIS, New Delhi, 2008.
13. ENVIS Centre on Floral Diversity. Howrah: Botanical
Survey of India. http://www.bsienvis.org/
14. Fourth National Report to the Convention on
Biological Diversity. MoEF, New Delhi, 2009.

42

17. Golding, J.S. & Smith, P.P. A 13-point flora strategy
to meet conservation challenges. Taxon, 2001, 50(4),
475-77.
18. Metsger, D.A. & Byers, S.C. Introduction in managing
the herbarium interdiscplinary approach, edited by
D.A. Metsger & S.C. Byers. Washington D.C.,
1999.
19. Heywood, V. Floristics and monography–an uncertain
future? Taxon, 2001, 50(4), 361-80.
20. Report of the Working Group on Libraries. National
Knowledge
Commission,
India.
http://www.
k n o w l e d g e c o m m i s s i o n . g o v. i n / d o w n l o a d s /
documents/wg-lib.pdf (accessed on July 30, 2009).
21. Rana, Madan S. Consortia-based access to
electronic resources for MoEF libraries: A proposal. In
Library Vision 2020: Profession and education, edited
by V.P. Singh, et al. Paper presented at the 4th
National Conference of Central Govt Library
Association, 3-5 September 2009. CGLA, Dehra Dun,
2009. pp.113-19.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

