DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 3, May 2010, pp. 43-50
© 2010, DESIDOC

Information Literacy through Web 2.0 Integrated WebOPAC:
An Experiment at Jaypee Group of Institutions
Shri Ram
Jaypee University of Information Technology, Solan-173 215
E-mail: shriram2576@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Application of Web 2.0, ‘The Second Generation of the Internet’, has become one of the fastest growing
communication technology and being adopted by corporate and service sector. The same is the case of library
and information science service centres. Increasing popularity of Web 2.0 technology provides a prime
opportunity to engage patrons in the virtual environment. It attracts users to communicate with similar interest
people through networking and present myriad of resources and information in the form of multimedia, blogging,
tagging, bookmarking, messaging, and social networking. This paper discusses some of the implication of the
Web 2.0 application as an information awareness tool about the resources available in library and connecting
to the other Jaypee Group of Educational Institutions.
Keywords: Web 2.0, WebOPAC, ICT applications, Web applications in libraries

1. INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
have changed the face of traditional library. The
developments in and widespread adoption of web
technology, web services, web-based search engines,
federated search,1-2 meta-search3-4 and other internet
tools and services along with emergence of Google
Scholar®5 in the retrieval of scholarly information have
reduced the patrons’ dependency on library. The
emergence of Web 2.0 technology has added an element
of flavour to the user’s expectation to get tailor-made
information.
Facing the challenges due to advancement of internet
technologies, libraries are adopting new technologies of
the web to provide better information services and match
the user’s expectations. Librarians realising that not only
do their systems need to offer better discovery tools, but
also, to address users’ needs adequately, the systems
must supplement the discovery process with precisiondelivery tools. Librarians need to change their roles and
the ways in which they provide services in response to the
recent developments in web technologies. Furthermore,
libraries need to make the research process engaging,
and integrate it into users’ normal workflow. Library
automation processes in early seventies, in developed
countries, and late eighties, in developing countries, were
Received on 9 November 2009

started to automate and smoothen the work flow of the
library services.6 Later in nineties, Internet changed this
automation process in the new direction leading to webbased services. Again, during the last five to eight years,
the Web 2.0 has revolutionised information communication in the form of faster information sharing,
networking, and multimedia-based services. The evolution
of social networks and social sharing has posed a
challenge to libraries to adopt this technology in their
routine services to meet users’ expectation and
immediate information delivery.7 In this context, the
recent success of YouTube is not surprising. User’s
perception of FaceBook, Instant Messaging, E-mail,
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) Feeds, and Tagging are
results of such innovations in web technology.8 These
developments and increased usage of web-based
services have become necessity in the daily operation of
the library activities.

2. NEED OF WEB-BASED SERVICES IN
LIBRARY ACTIVITIES
Librarians need to understand why users prefer other
sources of information despite their respect for and trust
in a library’s resources. This change in user’s perception
and their preference for Internet tools and services such
as web search engines, e-mail, blogs, and RSS feeds are
43

the outcome of several factors. First, users assign great
value to the ease of use, ease of access, and speed that
characterise Internet tools and services. Although web
search engines may lack the options available through
library catalogues and scholarly databases, and may be
less accurate, the web search engines are more fun to
work with; offer immediate satisfaction and are easy to
learn and use. Libraries must always think about
innovative ways to reach out to students in an academic
environment. Students have an unprecedented amount of
information available to them, through Internet. Existence
of this perceived wealth of information resource has
caused significant decrease in in-person visits to the
libraries. Furthermore, this decrease has accompanied
by a parallel tendency by student to overlook the often
more reliable electronic content by their libraries in favour
of free information they find using commercial search
engines. Users tend to prefer online material whenever
possible and consider web tools more appropriate for
finding and obtaining online information. Some web
search engines have even started adopting or developing
library-like features such as OpenURL awareness6 and
the refinement tools of Google Scholar and provide these
in a user-friendly way to suit the expectations and
expertise of the targeted audience.
Facebook is a free-access social networking website
to provide a variety of services such as displaying an RSS
feed, searching an outside resource, or catalogueing a
person’s recently read books, to name a few. Libraries
have taken a couple of approaches as they develop
applications for FaceBook. The primary function of most,
if not all, library applications is to provide a mean of
searching the library’s catalogue from a FaceBook profile.
However, some libraries have gone beyond providing this
basic service and have added additional features to their
applications.9-12
Most library applications are simple catalogue search
applications, but these can be further enhanced as
reviews and discussion group of library books read by
individuals, curriculum discussion, etc. Some
applications provide a few links to library resources like
Ask a Librarian (online chat and e-mail reference
services), etc. along with display of other library’s
applications as a simple webpage, which includes a
catalogue search box, links to several library resources
including course readings, Inter-library loan (ILL) request
forms, and online book renewals, as well as a small
library news feed. All these links takes the user to pages
created specifically for Web 2.0 applications.13-15
Jaypee Group of Institutions have established three
state-of-the-art technical universities and institutions, one
college of education, one post graduate college, one
diploma college, two industrial training institutes and 16
schools. The academic excellence is met by highly rich
learning resource centres equipped with modern library
44

technology such as 3M® library solutions and automation
software. For the purpose of the automation process an
international standard library software is being used. The
group has taken care, especially Internet-based
WebOPAC, to integrate the information for the purpose of
resource sharing of all the centres—located at three
distant locations of India—Jaypee Univesity of Information
Technology, Solan (Himachal Pradesh), Jaypee Institute
of Information Technology University, Noida (Uttar
Pradesh) and Jaypee Institute of Engineering Technology,
Guna (Madhya Pradesh).

3. METHODOLOGY
Web 2.0 technology has been adopted for the purpose
of the information communication among the Jaypee
Group of Educational Institutions. All the institutions
libraries are using Alice for Windows® Library
Management Software for management of data. The group
is working on integration of different web features in to
WebOPAC for maximum utilisation of the resources at
individual institution as well as inter-institution levels. To
reach this objective the group has upgraded this software
to Liberty3®, a totally web-enabled library management
software. The profiles of the each document is being
created through centralised cataloguing system. For this,
the group has taken initiative to fill all metadata entries of
the resources with maximum information including
images of the document (Fig. 1).
Images of the each document have been saved
according to the ISBN numbers, which has helped to link
resources to ‘Syndetic’ Solution Indexed Content
Enrichment (ICE),16-17 an application which links the
resource having the facility of providing information
pertaining to cover image, book reviews, table of contents,
summaries, first chapter, excerpts, series information,
author notes, etc. While searching the OPAC (http://
172.16.73.16/scripts/afwiinq.dll) through standalone
machine as well as WebOPAC, user can see all the
details of the documents plus images. At this point of time
the user can submit his/her review, feedbacks, and rating
the particular document referred by him by logging with
his/her account (Fig. 2). This review and feedbacks are
monitored by the librarian through catalogueing section of
the main menu (Fig. 3). Once this review is approved, it is
reflected at each OPAC terminal and can be used for
judging the importance of book for further analysis and
referencing by other students.
Whenever the library database is searched from
WebOPAC, the result obtained is same as of standalone
OPAC (Figs. 4 and 5). This WebOPAC system is being
used by all the Centres for locating references and being
utilised for ILL extensively, avoiding duplication of the
resource, in turn, saving budget, and immediate supply of
the document at desired location in the form of ILL, and
any other preferred means.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Figure 1. Profile of document and reviews in catalogue.

Figure 2. User authentication on review page entry of the OPAC where users can post reviews on document searched.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

45

Figure 3. Screen shot of a user’s feedback and reviews though main catalogue menu.

Figure 4. Details of the document as accessed from WebOPAC where user can navigate to other Web 2.0 applications.

4. BENEFITS OF WEB 2.0-ENHANCED
WEBOPAC
With the application of Web 2.0 technology,
especially FaceBook in WebOPAC, the group has
provided unique avenue between the library and its users
as a librarian could notice trends and preferences within
its user’s reading activity and suggests books that would
fit individual tastes (Figs. 4 and 5). Conversely, the user
could see what is being added to the library or what has
46

been highlighted through the library FaceBook page. This
could be an ideal forum for book discussion group for
specialised streams and courses. Alternatively the library
FaceBook is also helping in:18-24
±

Marketing of information resources.

±

Enriching library online catalogue with the power of
Web 2.0.

±

Giving patron exciting new content, tag clouds
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Figure 5. Linking of various Web 2.0-enabled online resources subscribed by library through WebOPAC.

including recommendations, and ability to write
reviews.
±

Able to keep patron’s interact.

±

Bibliographic indexes, RSS feeds, open access
repositories.

±

E-mail alerts.

±

Identifying associated information similar documents
on other sites such as Amazon, Google Books etc.

±

Collaboration with similar artifacts such asGoogle
Documents.

±

Disseminating results—Open access repositories,
webinars.

±

Institutional reputation, heightening corporate and
personal brand.

±

Growing a referral network of the related documents.

±

Increase visibility, which improves influence and
effectiveness internally within organisation as well as
externally.

Library has also developed a Library Toolbar (Fig. 6)
with the help of Conduit.com25-26. The single click library
toolbar has incorporated various tools and services
provided by the library such as linking of subscription of eJournals (IEEE, ACM, Emerald, ASCE, Springer,
DELNET), Digital Library, WebOPAC, RSS Feeds, New
Arrivals, Chat with the Librarian, Link to Educational
Radio Channels and Video Programs such as National
Program on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL)27, Email notifications and links of popular national and
international news dailies along with its RSS feeds, etc.
This toolbar is being comprehensively used by the users
around the globe. The results of the utilisation of the
Toolbar are given in Figures 7, 8, and 9. Figure 7 gives an
idea regarding the frequency of use of various service
components provided by library. It can be noticed from the

Figure 6. Library toolbar of JUIT.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

47

Figure 7. Usage click of various components of library toolbar.

Figure 8. Active users of library toolbar.

table that the digital library service component of the
library toolbar is being used maximum through library
toolbar. Reason behind this can be the subscription of
various e-resources such as IEEE Xplore, ACM, Emerald
Management Package, ASCE, and Springer journals
through INDEST consortia of IIT Delhi and AICTE along
with DELNET for ILL and Digital Library of e-Books from
SIAM. Awareness to these scholarly materials and
utilisation is one of the major concerns for each librarian in
this Internet era. This toolbar has provided an avenue for
single-click link to the subscribed services so that the
users need not to remember and type the URL of these
products each time in their browser. The other services
that are getting better utilisation are WebOPAC (single
click link to library resource database), RSS Feeds,
Radio Link, Chat with Librarian and New Arrivals of the
48

month. Figures 8 and 9 give an idea about the daily active
user of library toolbar, total number of new installation of
toolbar since it has been developed.

5. CONCLUSION
Each tool of Web 2.0, when applied within library
system in a long-term perspective, beginning with user
investigations of what users may claim on library and in
turn being continued with propagation of information and
training about information and knowledge dissemination,
help them understand what Web 2.0 in turn Library 2.0 will
give them. A library that uses Web 2.0 technology hopes
that the use of the resources to which they provide
access will increase, thus justifying their investment in
their electronic holdings. The following Web 2.0 tools are
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

Figure 9. Daily new users since started.

being used or will be used by Jaypee Education System
to promote library services among users:
±

YouTube to show library publicity with the recent
development in library activity with multimedia
document creation and linking such as National
Program on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL)
an initiatives of Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
and Kharagpur. These real-time high quality
educational videos of IITs are available on YouTube
(http://youtube.com/iit/)

2. Oberhelman, David D. The time machine: Federated
searching today and tomorrow. Reference Reviews,
2006, 20(3), 6-8.
3. Sfakakis, Michalis. Eliminating query failures in a
work-centric library meta-search environment. Library
Hi Tech, 2009, 27(2), 286-307.
4. Loew, Robert. Approaches for personalised
knowledge retrieval. Internet Research, 2007, 17(1),
49-60.
5. http://scholar.google.com.

±

Flicker to deliver pictures and resource navigation
about the new arrivals, most read, etc.

±

Podcasts to deliver information about the
announcement and educational promos on different
subject by agencies.

±

FaceBook used for reference service and document
feedback.

±

e-Surveys to be applied to user investigations and
satisfaction level of use of Web 2.0.

±

LinkedIn/Plaxo to extend library services.

±

RSS and Blogs for content alerts.

6. Mahmood, K. The best library software for developing
countries: More than 30 plus points of Micro CDS/
ISIS. Lib. Soft. Rev., 1997, 16(1), 12-16.
7. Copper, Elisa F. Social Networking in Libraries. New
Lib. World, 2007, 108(7/8), 4803.
8. Jane Secker. Social software and libraries: A
literature review from the LASSIE project. Program:
Eelectro. Lib. Inf. Syst., 2008, 42(3), 215-231.
9. Jefferies, Scott. Social cataloguing tools: A
comparison of application for librarians. Library Hi
Tech News, 2008, 10, 1-5.

REFERENCES

10. Sadeh, T. Time for a change: New approaches for a
new generation of library users. New Library World,
2007, 108(7/8), 307-16.

1. Joint, Nicholas. Managing the implementation of
federated search tool in academic library. Library
Review, 2009, 58(1), 11-16.

11. Apps, Ann & MacIntyre, Rose. Why OpenURL. D-Lib
Magazine, 2006, 12(5). http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may06/
apps/05apps.html.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

49

12. Harris, Andrew & Lessick, Susan. Libraries get
personal: FaceBook applications, Google gadgets
and myspace profile. Library Hi Tech News, 2007, 8,
30-32.
13. Scale, Mark-Shane. FaceBook as social search
engine and the implications for the libraries in the
twenty-first century. Library Hi Tech, 2008, 26(4),
554-56.
14. Graham, Jamie M.; Faix, Allison & Hartman, Lisa.
Crashing the Facebook party: One library’s
experiences in the students’ domain. Library Review,
2009, 58(3), 228-36.
15. Maxymuk, John. Whose space?. The Bottom Line:
Managing Library Finances, 2007, 20(2), 97-100.
16. http://www.bowker.com/syndetics/
17. http://www.bowker.com/index.php/component/
content/article/552
18. Joint, Nicholas. The Web 2.0 challenge to Libraries.
Library Review, 2009, 58(3), 167-75.
19. Mi, Jia & Nesta, Frederick. Marketing library services
to the net generation. Library Management, 2006,

50

27(6/7), 411-22.
20. Hammond, T.; Hannay, T.; Lund, B. & Scott, J. Social
bookmarking tools (I): A general review, D-Lib
Magazine, 2005, 11(4). http://www.dlib.org/dlib/april05/
hammond/04hammond.html
21. Lund, B.; Hammond, T.; Flack, M. & Hannay, T.
Social bookmarking tools (II). D-Lib Magazine, 2005,
1(4).http://www.dlib.org/dlib/april05/lund/04lund.
html.
22. Charnigo, L. & Barnett-Ellis, P. Checking out
Facebook.com: The impact of a digital trend on
academic libraries. Inf. Technol. Lib., 2007, 26(1), 2334.
23. Raskin, R. Facebook faces its future. Young
Consumers, 2006, 7(2), 56-58.
24. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook
25. Jones, Elizabeth. Developing a library toolbar. Library
Hi Tech News, 2008, 25(9), 7-9.
26. http://www.conduit.com
27. http://nptel.iitm.ac.in/

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(3)

