DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 2, March 2010, pp. 15-25
© 2010, DESIDOC

UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium:
Present Services and Future Endeavours
Jagdish Arora* and Kruti Trivedi
INFLIBNET Centre, Ahmedabad-380 009
*E-mail: jarora@inflibnet.ac.in

ABSTRACT
The higher education system in India is very large and complex. India has the third largest higher education
system in the world behind China and the United States, comprising more than 471 universities, 22,064 affiliated
colleges, and 5.21 lakhs faculty. The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium, launched in 2004, provides
differential access to 5,790 journals to 160 universities covered under 12B Act of the UGC. The article
describes major activities, operations, and services of UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium. It briefly
describes resources subscribed, major items of negotiation and terms of license, core member universities
and associate members, access management technologies, etc. The article outlines governing structure,
committees, participating universities/institutions and their roles. It elaborates on methods used for promotion
of e-resources amongst member universities. The article briefly touches upon the economics of the UGCINFONET Digital Library Consortium and outlines model for implementation of college consortium. Lastly, the
article elaborates on future endeavours of the UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium.
Keywords: Library consortium, UGC-INFONET digital library consortium, cost recovery, e-resources

1. INTRODUCTION
The higher education system in India is large and
complex. India has the third largest higher education
system in the world behind China and the United States
comprising more than 471 universities, 22,064 affiliated
colleges, and 5.21 lakh faculty. In the academic year
2008-2009, the total number of students enrolled for the
formal system of education in university colleges and
colleges, was 123.77 lakh including 15.89 lakh for
universities and 107.88 lakh for affiliated colleges1.
However, all educational institutions in India, especially
the universities, face acute shortage of funds to subscribe
to international scholarly journals. It is estimated that a
typical university in India subscribes to less than 200
international journals. Moreover, some of the Indian
universities do not subscribe to any international journals
at all. While there are more than 50,000 peer-reviewed
scholarly journals, all research institutions and
universities in India put together had combined
subscriptions to only around 1,500 journals in print till
recently2. Many smaller colleges and institutions
subscribed to fewer than hundred journals. Most colleges,
including those imparting postgraduate and doctoral
programmes, do not have financial resources to subscribe
Received on 30 December 2009

to international journals, their subscription list includes
few Indian journals and a few popular magazines.
However, the accessibility to international journals in
Indian universities and technical institutions has improved
many-fold with setting-up of a few Government-funded
library consortia. Prior to setting-up of these consortia,
the access to e-journals was restricted to a few premier
institutions like IISc, IITs, IIMs and a few central
universities who were subscribing to a few e-resources
including bibliographic databases on CD ROM, a few ejournals accessible free with subscription to their print
versions and a negligible fraction of journals on
subscription. After launch of the Indian National Digital
Library in Engineering Sciences and Technology
(INDEST-AICTE) Consortium in 2003 and UGC-INFONET
Digital Library Consortium in 2004, availability and
accessibility of e-resources increased phenomenally in
centrally-funded technical institutions (IITs, IISc, IIMs,
IIITs, etc.) and universities, setting in a new culture of
electronic access and browsing in educational
institutions. Besides, INDEST-AICTE Consortium and
UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium, a number of
library consortia have emerged in India in the past five to
six years, including CSIR E-journals Consortium, DAE
15

Consortium, MCIT Library Consortium, FORSA
Consortium, IIM Consortium, CeRA (Consortium of eResources in Agriculture), RGUHS-HELINET Consortium,
DRDO E-Consortium, DeLCON, and ERMED Consortia.
The article describes major activities, operations and
services of UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium. It
briefly describes resources subscribed, major items of
negotiation and terms of license, core member
universities and associate members, access management technologies, etc. The article outlines governing
structure, committees, participating universities/
institutions and their roles. It elaborates on methods used
for promotion of e-resources amongst member
universities. The article briefly touches upon the
economics of the UGC-INFONET Digital Library
Consortium and outlines model for implementation of
college consortium. Lastly, article elaborates on future
endeavours of the UGC-INFONET Digital Library
Consortium.

2. OVERVIEW OF UGC-INFONET DIGITAL
LIBRARY CONSORTIUM
The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium, one of
the largest consortium in India, was launched in
December 2003 by Dr APJ Abdul Kalam, the then
President of India to support education and research in
universities. The Consortium provides current as well as
archival access to 5,790 peer-reviewed journals and 10
bibliographic databases from 23 publishers and
aggregators in different disciplines to academic
community in universities comprising faculty, staff,
researchers and students. These e-resources cover
almost all subject disciplines including arts, humanities,
social sciences, physical sciences, chemical sciences,
life sciences, computer sciences, mathematics,
statistics, etc. Besides, other subject areas like law,
management, education, etc., are also proposed to be
added in the near future. The Consortium subscribes to
the entire collection (or bundle) of e-journals from most of
the publishers included in the Consortium except for three
publishers wherein the subscription is restricted to Cell
Press and Current Opinion journals in the case of
Elsevier’s Science Direct, Library Science Collection in
the case of Emerald, and Blackwell Journals in case of
Wiley InterScience. Differential access to these
resources is offered to 160 member universities based on
their needs and activity profile as per the recommendation
of the National Steering Committee. The Consortium is
also planning to subscribe to Web of Science for its
member universities.

3. ACCESSIBILITY OF RESOURCES
SUBSCRIBED UNDER THE UGC-INFONET
DIGITAL LIBRARY CONSORTIUM
The Consortium subscribes to 18 full-text e-resources
and 10 bibliographic databases from academic societies,
16

university presses, commercial publishers and
aggregators. While all full-text resources subscribed by
the Consortium contain electronic journals, bibliographic
databases contain abstracts of articles published in
journals, conference proceedings or chapters in books
along with links to the full-text e-resources. Details of
resources subscribed and accessible to the universities
under the UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium are
given in Table 1. Phase I in the last columns stands for
first 50 universities that were given the benefit of access to
e-resources in 2004, Phase II stands for next 50
universities that were included in the Consortium in 2005.
Remaining universities were included subsequently in
2006-2007.
Access to electronic resources is IP-enabled for the
member universities. Users in member universities do not
require “Login ID and Password” to access resources
accessible to their universities, instead, the resources are
accessible to them from anywhere on their Campus
network. Currently, the Consortium is working on
Shibboleth-based access management technology with
an aim to provide off-campus access to e-resources to
day-scholars as well as to faculty from their homes or
when they are travelling.

4. SUBJECT-WISE DISTRIBUTION OF
JOURNALS OFFERED BY THE
CONSORTIUM
The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium covers
almost all areas of learning that are pertinent to courses
offered by member universities including, Arts and
Humanities, Social Sciences, Physical and Chemical
Sciences, Life Sciences, Computer Sciences,
Mathematics, Statistics, etc. Subject-wise distribution of
journals available through the Consortium is given in
Table 2.

5. MEMBERSHIP
The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium has
the following two types of members:

5.1 Universities Under Purview of UGC
One hundred and eighty five universities including 14
new Central Universities, Inter-University Centres of the
UGC, and Deemed Universities under direct purview of
UGC, are entitled for getting e-resources through the
UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium. Of 185
universities, 160 universities that have been given Internet
connectivity under the UGC-INFONET Connectivity
Programme, are being provided differential access to eresources as given in Table 1. Remaining 25 universities
will be covered in the near future. However, some of these
universities are highly specialised dealing with subjects
like Urdu, Sanskrit, Hindi, and Law, etc. As such, these
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Table 1. Resources subscribed and accessible to member universities
S. No.

Electronic resources

URL
Full-text Resources

No. of
Jls.

No. of
Univ.

Phase

1.

ACS

http://www.pubs.acs.org/

37

100

I & II

2.

AIP

http:// www.scitation.org/

18

100

I & II

3.

APS

http:// www.scitation.org/

10

100

I & II

4.

Annual Reviews

http://arjournals.annualreviews.org/

33

100

I & II

5.

Blackwell

http://www3.i nterscience.wiley.com/

497

60

I & II

6.

CUP-STM

http://journals.cambridge.org/

224

100

I & II

7.

Cell Press (Elsevier)

http://www.sciencedirect.com/

34

50

I

8.

Emerald – Lib. Sci.

http://iris.emeraldinsight.com/

29

60

I & II

9.

Institute of Physics

http://www.io p.org/EJ/

46

100

I & II

10.

Jstor

http://www.jstor.org/

1401

64

I & II

11.

Nature

http://www.nature.com/

1

50

I & II

12.

OUP

http://www.o xford journals.org/

206

75

I & II

13.

Portland Press

http://www.portlandpress.com/

8

50

I

14.

Project Euclid

http://projecteuclid.org/

36

50

I

15.

Project Muse

http://muse.jhu.edu/journals

411

100

I & II

16.

RSC

http://www.rsc.org/

29

100

I & II

17.

SIAM Journals

http://epubs.siam.org/

14

50

I

18.

Springer Link

http://www.springerlink.com/

1389

125

I – III

19.

Taylor & Francis

http://journalsonline.tandf.co.uk/

1365

80

I & II

Bibliographic Databases
20.

JCCC

http://jccc-infonet.informindia.co.in/

150

I – III

21.

MathSciNet

http://www.ams.org/mathscinet/

50

I

22.

SciFinderScholar

http://www.cas.org/SCIFINDER/
SCHOLAR/index.html

20

I

23.

RCS Abstracts and
News Bulletin

http://www.rsc.org/Publishing/

100

I & II

universities do not have much use for e-resources that are
being offered through the Consortium.

5.2 Associate Membership Programme
The Consortium launched its “Associate Membership
Programme” in 2009 with an aim to enroll private
universities and other institutions as members and to
extend benefits of access to e-resources at the same
rates of subscription that are being offered to the core
member universities. The Associate Members are
required to pay an annual fee of Rs 5,000 in addition to
subscription fee for e-resource that they wish to
subscribe. Associate members are free to choose any
resource they wish to subscribe. Forty private universities
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

and other institutions have already joined the Consortium
in the first year itself. Several universities and other
institutions are willing to join the Consortium in the near
future.

6. GOVERNING STRUCTURE: COMMITTEES,
PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS AND THEIR
ROLES
The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium is
being operated by the INFLIBNET Centre under the overall
guidance of a National Steering Committee constituted by
the UGC that guides and steers the activities of the
Consortium. The National Steering Committee (NSC) is
responsible for taking policy decisions as well as for
17

Table 2. Subject coverage of the journals

Subjects

Number of
journals

Computer Science, Information & General
Works

446

Philosophy and Psychology

438

Religion

102

Social Sciences
Language

2045
1875

Technology

1252
392
273
947

execution of the scheme. The Committee takes decision
on e-resources to be subscribed from various publishers
and their accessibility to beneficiary universities. The
NSC comprises members from participating universities
(one each from Central, State, and Deemed universities),
nominee of Governing Board of INFLIBNET Centre,
nominee of university from North Eastern Region,
nominee of Inter-university centres, IITs/IISc/Institutions of
higher learning and Coordinators of CSIR E-Journals
Consortium, and INDEST-AICTE Consortium. Director,
INFLIBNET Centre is Ex-officio Convener of the NSC and
Chief Coordinator of the Consortium.
Besides NSC, a Negotiation Committee (NC) has also
been constituted for negotiating rates of subscription to eresources with publishers. The NC has two members,
each nominated by the Chairman, NSC and Chairman,
Governing Board of the INFLIBNET Centre. Coordinators
of the CSIR E-Journals Consortium and INDEST-AICTE
Consortium are Ex-officio members of the NC. The NC
also has representatives from the INFLIBNET’s Finance
and Store Units. Director, INFLIBNET Centre is Ex-officio
Chairman of the NC.
The INFLIBNET Centre acts as a nodal agency for
implementation, monitoring, and execution of the entire
programme through the committees mentioned above. It
coordinates all activities concerned with negotiation,
renewal of subscription to e-resources, and attending to
subsequent troubleshooting on behalf of the Consortium.
The NSC also promotes cooperation amongst member
universities and facilitates better terms of references for
use and preservation of subscribed electronic resources.

7. LICENSE AGREEMENT AND FAIR USE
Terms and conditions of subscription and access to
electronic resources available through the Consortium are
governed by license agreements that are signed between
the Consortium and publishers by the INFLIBNET Centre

18

±

Simultaneous Users: There is no limit on number of
simultaneous users on any of the resources
subscribed by the Consortium. Any number of users
can access e-resources including e-journals and
bibliographic databases at any given time.

±

Walk-in Users: Walk-in users who are physically
present at the subscribing university should also be
allowed to use the resources.

±

Print-independent Subscription: Subscription to eresources is print-independent. As such, beneficiary
universities are free to drop subscription to print copy
of journals accessible to them through the
Consortium.

±

Inter-library Loan (ILL): Licensee is allowed to fulfill
ILL requests from non-authorised users using print
copy of article downloaded from the licensor’s
website.

±

Usage Statistics: Publisher is required to submit
‘COUNTER’ compliant usage / statistics on number of
downloads (both full-text and abstracts) in a given
month, previous month and cumulative for one year.

±

Inclusion of Additional Titles: The publisher would
provide access to new journal titles that are added
during the contract period at no additional cost.

±

Electronic Link: Publisher may provide electronic
links to the licensed materials from Licensee’s
webpage at journal level or at article level and
publisher should provide help in doing so.

±

Print Copy of Journal: Publisher should provide a
print copy of each journal (if agreed in license
agreement) to the INFLIBNET Centre.

±

Protection on Increase of Price: The Publisher
would provide protection on increase in price of
subscribed resources. The increase should not be
more than 5 per cent.

±

Perpetual Access and Archival Rights: In case of
termination of the Agreement or on the expiry of the
agreement, publisher would extend perpetual access
to e-resources for the paid period of subscription
along with their backfiles offered during the
subscription period. Alternatively, the publisher would
provide full-text of e-resources with back volumes (e-

205

Science
Arts and Recreation
Literature
History and Geography

on behalf of its member universities. The UGC-INFONET
Digital Library Consortium has laid down a number of
terms and conditions that the publisher should agree.
While the Consortium signs the license agreement
prepared by the publisher, care is taken to incorporate
terms and conditions mentioned below for as many
publishers as possible3.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

journals/e-databases) for each year on prevalent
formats, i.e., CD-ROM/DVD-ROM with the retrieval
software for access on the network. In case of change
in archival technology, the state-of-the-art archival
technology shall be made available by the Licensor to
subscribers at no extra cost for archival of full-text
data of e-journals to higher version of technology.
±

±

±

Awareness and Training: The publisher or its
representative would conduct “Users Awareness
Programme” on campuses of member universities at
no-charge to the universities. The publisher would
provide publicity material, brochures, posters and
user-support materials in both print as well as on CD
forms.
E-print Archive: Member universities would be
allowed to download bibliographic records, abstracts
and full-text articles published by their faculty,
researchers, students and staff from publisher’s site
and import them in to their local database and
Institutional Repositories.
Arbitration: All disputes arising under the Agreement
shall be settled under the rules of the International
Arbitration Court by one or more arbitrators in
accordance with the said rules. The place of the
arbitration shall be in New Delhi (India) and carried out
in the English language.

implementation of Consortium, collects comparative
statistics of usage of e-resources by the member
universities on regular intervals from publisher’s site and
makes it accessible to them through INFLIBNET website.
A custom-made web interface called e-RAMS (Electronic
Resource Access Management System) has especially
been designed to provide and deliver statistics of usage to
member universities. The publishers also provide User ID
and Password to the member universities for accessing
the statistics of usage of their resources directly from
publisher’s website4.
The comparative usage of various resources through
2005 to 2008 is given below in Fig. 1. The figure reflects
consistent increase in usage from 2005 to 2008 for all eresources. The average increase in usage from 2004 to
2008 is 55.74 per cent.

9. ECONOMICS OF UGC-INFONET DIGITAL
LIBRARY CONSORTIUM
The factors that determine economic viability and
cost-effectiveness of consortia-based subscription to eresources are: its membership, intensity of usage,
successful migration from print to electronic version (with
discontinuation of print) and cost avoidance. These
factors are discussed below in detail5.

9.1 Number of Members
8. ANALYSIS OF USAGE
Most publishers maintain detailed usage statistics
compliant to an international standard called “COUNTER”
for resources offered by them to the Consortium. The
INFLIBNET Centre, as the agency responsible for

A consortium is more meaningful and effective if it has
larger number of member institutions. The collective
strength of member institutions of the consortium
provides it the power to bargain with the publishers for
better rates of subscription and terms of licenses. The

Figure 1. Year-wise increase in downloads of full-text articles by all member universities.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

19

number of member institutions in a consortium is
inversely proportionate to the rate of electronic resources.
The member universities to the UGC-INFONET Digital
Library Consortium were added in a phased manner.
While subscription was paid for only the first 50
universities in Phase I in 2004, additional 100 universities
were added in a span of next two years, i.e. 50
universities in 2005 (Phase II) and 50 universities in 2006
(Phase III).
The Consortium currently benefits more than 160
universities. Membership of the Consortium has potential
to grow up to 500 including 185 core universities, covered
under the 12 B Act of the UGC, and 315 private or deemed
universities and other institutions which can join as
Associate Members. The Consortium has attracted the
best possible price and terms of agreement from the
publishers for universities in three different phases (Phase
I to Phase III). The rates of subscription to e-resources for
most publishers are comparatively higher for first 50
universities covered in Phase I. However, rates of
subscription are lower for universities in Phase II and
lowest for universities in Phase III.

9.2 Cost Avoidance
The Consortium, with its collective strength of
participating universities, has attracted highly discounted
rates of subscription coupled with most favourable terms
of agreement. In effect, the members of the Consortium
avoid the cost commitments on the following:

9.2.1 Lower Rates of Subscription
Publisher offered 50 per cent to 95 per cent lower
rates of subscription to the Consortium for member
universities. The rates were further lowered as additional
number of universities were added to the Consortium. The
lower rates of subscription are offered to the Consortium
from the vendors not only because of combined strength
of its members, but also due to the eagerness of
publishers to enter the Indian market.

9.2.2 Annual Increase in Rates of Subscription
In general, there is an annual increase of 10 per cent
to 15 per cent of subscription rate of resources. However,
Consortium has negotiated the rates of increase in price
of the e-resources and fixed the price cap within 4-5 per
cent annually. Some of the publishers have offered rates
of subscription without annual increase in subscription
rates up to 2012.

Rs 42.00 crore for 2009. Average cost of single journal
computes to Rs. 712.75 after considering the fact that all
universities do not get access to all journals.

9.3 Intensity of Usage
Intensity of usage of e-resources can essentially be
judged in terms of number of articles downloaded by
users of member universities. It can essentially be
described in terms of average cost of articles and cost
recovered as elaborated below. “Cost Recovery” and
“Average Cost of article per download” can be used
effectively to judge cost effectiveness of e-resources.
These factors reflect the intensity and frequency of usage
of e-resources by member institutions in a Consortium.

9.3.1 Average Cost of an Article/Bibliographic
Record
The average cost of an article reflects frequency of its
usage. It is calculated by dividing subscription cost of a
resource by the number of articles downloaded. Figure 2
provides average cost of an article. The average cost per
article is lowest for JSTOR (Rs 6.16) and highest for
Cambridge University Press (Rs 292.66), whereas the
Consortium average is Rs 75.95.

9.3.2 Cost Recovery
The cost recovery factor calculated by multiplying
number of articles downloaded with the cost of a single
article, if it is purchased directly from the publishers in the
pay-per-view model or bought from a document delivery
service. According to ALPSP survey, 78 per cent of
publishers surveyed offer pay-per-view or individual article
purchase options. In the pay-per-view model the cost of
articles varies from publisher to publisher; average cost is
$ 30 per article. Assuming that if the electronic resources
were not available through the Consortium, articles
downloaded from these resources by the member
institutions would have been sourced on ILL/document
delivery service at a cost of US $15 per article (average
cost of article taken from a study conducted by the
American Research Libraries).
The cost recovery factor for each resource is shown in
Fig. 3, which reflects that the cost recovery factor for
JSTOR is highest followed by Springer. The total cost
that has been recovered amounts to Rs 308.9 crores as
against the total expenditure of Rs 40.5 crores in the year
2008 with Rs 268.4 crores as the cost of articles
downloaded in excess.

9.4 Cost Savings
9.2.3 Average Cost of Journals Subscribed in the
Consortium
The Consortium provides differential access to 5,790
journals to 160 member universities at a total cost of
20

The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium, as a
policy, has subscribed to print-independent e-resources,
which essentially means that member universities are
free to drop subscription to journals that are made
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Average Cost of an Article (in Rs.) for Consortium During the Year 2008
300.00

200.00

100.00

JSTOR

JCCC

ACS

MathSciNet

AIP/APS

SciFinder

OUP

T&F

Nature

Elsevier

IoP

RSC

Springer

AR

Blackwell

Emerald

Portland

Muse

CUP

Consortium

0.00

Figure 2. Average cost of an article (in Rs) for consortium during 2008.

3500
308.9
3000
Rs in Crores

268.4
2500
2000
1500

1000
500

40.5

0
Amount Spent

Cost Recovered

Difference

Figure 3. Cost recovery factor for 2008.

accessible to them through the Consortium arrangement.
Moreover, beneficiary universities are free to drop print
subscription to e-resources for which electronic access is
available through the Consortium. The Centre enquired
from all the 100 member universities about the droping of
the print subscription. Sixty member libraries responded
to the request where 31 member libraries have filled the
specific question about the discontinuation of the
subscription. Accordingly, the figure reaches to around
Rs 3.7 crore on account of drop-in print subscription by
the universities. It is presumed that the total savings
made on this account would be equivalent to the
expenditure incurred on subscription to e-resources
through the Consortium.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

10. EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES ADOPTED BY THE CONSORTIUM
Given the fact that funds required for subscription to
electronic resources for all the universties are met by the
Government, it is imperative to take steps to ensure
optimal utilisation of e-resources in all member
universities. Some of the important steps taken in this
regard are as follows:

10.1 Internet Connectivity through UGCINFONET
The decision to provide access to electronic
resources to universities was taken by the UGC in the
21

year 2003. However, it was realised that the Internet
connectivity, a pre-requisite for extending access to eresources, is not available in most of the universities. To
implement the programme, INFLIBNET took the initiative
by providing connectivity to universities under the project
called UGC-INFONET. So far 160 universities have been
provided Internet bandwidth ranging from 512 kbps to
2 Mbps. Fourteen more universities covered under 12B
Act of UGC has recently been identified for inclusion
under the scheme. ERNET India is the Internet Service
Provider for the members of UGC-INFONET. The Centre is
currently contemplating to provide greater Internet
bandwidth to member universities under the UGCINFONET Programme.

optimum use of subscribed electronic resources. Training
programmes act as a bridge to facilitate better
communication amongst members of consortium and find
answers to common problems. Such programmes are
essential both for the users as well as for the library staff
would make users competent to conduct their own
searches more effectively. The Consortium provides
financial assistance to member universities for
conducting one or two-day user awareness programme
with an aim to increase usage of various e-resources.
These programmes help faculty members, research
scholars and students to get acquainted with resources,
their features, functionalities, and advanced options.

10.3.3 Specialised Publications
10.2 Comparative Usage Analysis by Member
Universities
The INFLIBNET Centre compiles detailed statistics of
usage of e-resources by member universities. Each
university is ranked based on their usage of e-resources.
The rank assigned to universities based on usage of eresources is often used as a measure of their scholarly
performance. Comparative usage statistics of universities
covered under scheme is made accessible to the
universities. Universities with lower usage are urged to
increase their usage.

The INFLIBNET Centre, as nodal agency to execute
the Consortium, prepare, design, print and distribute
posters, brochures, and user’s manual amongst member
universities. Moreover, soft copies of these tutorials are
also made available through the Consortium website. The
website also provides links to web-based tutorials
available for these resources on publisher’s website. The
Centre has also published a Compendium for member
universities that provides detailed guidelines on effective
and efficient use of electronic resources. This
Compendium contains tutorials on each resource
subscribed by the Consortium7.

10.3 Promoting Use of e-Resources
The Consortium needs to take steps to promote usage of
subscribed resources amongst the member universities.
The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium has taken
the following steps to promote use of e-resources6.

10.3.1 Consortium Website
The INFLIBNET Centre maintains a separate,
dedicated website (http://www.inflibnetnet.ac.in/econ/) for
the Consortium. The website provides detailed information
about the Consortium including (i) search and browse
interface for more than 5,000 journals covered under the
Consortium; (ii) classified index to journals covered under
the Consortium; (iii) search interface for member
institutions (universities) and e-resources accessible to
each one of them; (iv) E-resources Access Management
System (E-RAMS) designed to provide access to usage
statistics to member universities and for monitoring their
complaints; (v) detailed tutorials on each e-resource; (vi)
licensing and fair use of e-resources; (vii) associate
membership programmes and information on how to join
the Consortium; and (viii) guidelines for the UGC-Infonet
Digital Library Consortium.

10.3.4 Annual Meets: CALIBER and PLANNER
Besides, training programmes, the INFLIBNET Centre
organises two major annual conventions every year,
namely CALIBER and PLANNER. Both the conferences
are used as a platform to discuss and deliberate on
various issues related to effective use of e-resources.

10.3.5 Usage Monitoring and Web-based Support
for Troubleshooting
The INFLIBNET Centre, as an agency for
implementation of the Consortium, has developed ERAMS (Electronic Access Management System) that (i)
helps users to lodge their complaints and offer their
comments regarding usage of e-resources; (ii) facilitates
publishers to record action taken on the complaint; (iii)
view or track status of complaint made by member
universities; (iv) facilitate systematic hosting and delivery
of statistics of usage of e-resources to member
universities; and (v) facilitate users to view IP ranges
communicated to the publishers for accessing eresources.

10.3.6 Copyright and IPR Issues
10.3.2 Users Awareness Training Programmes
Users Awareness Training Programme is a crucial
requirement a consortium has to fulfill to facilitate
22

Several publishers block access to their e-resources
in case of excessive and systematic download of articles
causing interruption in access to their e-resources. It is,
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

therefore, imperative that the users as well as librarians
are sensitised on issues of licenses and agreements that
consortium signs with the publishers. Users need to be
told what, as an authorized user, they are allowed and
what they are not. While most of the publishers allow ILL,
electronic delivery of articles are not allowed. Similarly,
while there is no limit on number of articles that can be
downloaded from a resource, systematic downloading of
articles is not allowed. Issues of copyright and license
agreements are addressed in detail on the Consortium
website. The issue of copyright and licensing issues are
also addressed during the users awareness programme
to ensure un-interrupted access to e-resources.

10.3.7 Web 2.0 Technologies for Promotion and
Support
RSS Feeds (http://www.inflibnet.ac.in/feed/)
The INFLIBNET Centre has developed and installed
RSS Feed Aggregation Service on its website. The
Service facilitates RSS links to open on the website of the
Centre for all electronic journals that are covered in the
Consortium and have option for RSS feeds. Resultantly,
the users, instead of copying RSS feeds into their RSS
Feed Readers, can visit the INFLIBNET website and read
the current contents of desired journals subscribed under
the Consortium. These RSS feeds are arranged according
to subject categories as well as alphabetically. Moreover,
journals covered under the RSS Feed Aggregation
Services can also be searched according to the subject
category and by words in journal titles.
Library Tool Bars
The INFLIBNET has developed toolbar that facilitates
easy access to e-resources and other important links on
their website. After getting positive response from users,
INFLIBNET has recently launched a new version of
Toolbar.

10.4 Facilitating Communication among
Member Universities
Continuous communication amongst members of a
consortium is considered its life-line. Effective
communication motivates members to cooperate, commit
to the cause of consortium and align members toward a
shared vision. Continuous communication is necessary
to link each member with the practices of the consortium
and to involve them at policy and operational level as a
team. The Consortium promotes communication at the
following levels:

10.4.1 Mailing List
The Consortium is required to keep a close liaison
with its members. It requires feedback and information
from its members regularly and at times urgently. A
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

mailing list with archival facility was made operational at
the INFLIBNET Centre to facilitate communication
amongst members of the UGC-INFONET Digital Library
Consortium. All technical and administrative contacts of
each member institutions are members of the E-mailing
list (e-consortium@inflibnet.ac.in). The mailing list can be
subscribed by any person in a universtiy which is the
member of the Consortium. The Consortium maintains a
comprehensive website (http://www.inflibnet.ac.in/econ/)
that is kept updated regularly.

10.4.2 INFLIBNET Chat
The INFLIBNET Centre has recently developed its own
chat-room services using PHP for extending proactive
support to the users. The users can log on to
www.inflibnet.ac.in/chat or click on “Online chat’ at the
home page of INFLIBNET’s website and enter into a chat
session with dedicated and qualified team of
professionals for resolving their problems in a real-time
mode.
Besides, the INFLIBNET Centre through its annual
events, CALIBER and PLANNER, establish contacts with
members of the Consortium. Moreover, J-gate Custom
Contents for Consortium (JCCC), designed especially for
the Consortium, facilitates resource sharing amongst
member institution and serves as a media to increase
communication amongst members8.

11. FUTURE ENDEAVOURS
One of the immediate future endevours of the UGCINFONET Digital Library Consortium, is to launch college
model of the Consortium under a joint project entitled
“National Library and Information Services Infrastructure
for Scholarly Content (N-LIST)” sanctioned to the
INFLIBNET Centre and IIT Delhi by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (MHRD) under its National
Mission on Education through ICT. The project provides
for cross-subscription to e-resources, i.e., subscription to
INDEST-AICTE resources for universities and UGCInfonet resources for technical institutions as well as for
subscription to UGC-INFONET e-resources for colleges.
The project has been sanctioned and the Ministry has
released the requisite funds for the joint project. Under the
project, individuals (including students, researchers and
faculty) from colleges and other beneficiary institutions
would have direct access to e-resources through server(s)
installed at the INFLIBNET Centre. The authorised users
from colleges would be able to access e-resources and
download articles required by them directly from the
publisher’s website once they are duly authenticated as
authorised users using technologies being deployed for
this purpose.
The INFLIBNET Centre, Ahmedabad is responsible for
developing and deploying appropriate software tools for
23

authenticating authorised users. Though most publishers
of online digital content supports IP filtering and
password-based authentication to provide access to their
electronic resources, there are several other technologies
and protocols that are in vogue for authenticating users to
access and operate upon digital materials irrespective of
their log-in location. Such technologies include Web
proxies, Shibboleth, Referring URL, Kerberos, etc. All
such access management technologies are being
examined with an aim to adopt authentication
technologies that facilitate seamless access to eresources to colleges that do not have static IP
addresses. The Centre would also monitor usage of eresources with an aim to check misuse or trouble
shooting faced by beneficiary colleges.
The INFLIBNET Centre, Ahmedabad is currently
evaluating the availability of ICT infrastructure in Govt/
Govt-aided colleges. Eligible colleges are being asked to
submit list of authorised users including faculty,
researchers, and students. Trial access to selected eresources has already began (for further information on
this initiative, visit the project website at http://
www.inflibnet.ac.in/n-list/). Colleges eligible for the
scheme (12 B/2 F) are invited to register online by filling
the Registration Form.
Besides, the Consortium proposes to add more
resources, especially in social sciences, education, law,
management, etc. Based on the demands from user
community in universities, it is proposed to subscribe to
additional resources from publishers like Wiley
InterScience, Science Direct, Emerald Management Xtra,
and Sage Publications. The Consortium plans to
strengthen and expand its “Associate Membership
Programme” with inclusion of additional e-resources at
lower rates of subscription so as to encourage private
universities and other institutions to join the Consortium
and subscribe to e-resources of their choice on payment
basis.

immensely. Providing access to e-resources to the
faculty and researchers is not a purpose in itself. It is only
a mean to trigger a stronger research and academic
culture in the universities and colleges recipient of this
benefit. The Consortium efforts should, therefore, lead to
increase in productivity of scientific research output both
in quality and quantity. It is presumed that access to eresources would invariably make qualitative difference on
research, learning, scholarly and R&D activities of faculty
and researchers. Quality of teaching, research and
publications of scientists and scholars are impacted with
accessibility and availability of print and e-resources. It is
presumed that research productivity of scientists and
researchers in beneficiary universities would increase
with increase in availability and accessibility of qualitative
information resources. Similarly high degree of correlation
is presumed between ranks of universities arranged in
accordance with number of articles downloaded by them
and number of articles produced by them. Lastly, Return
on Investment (RoI) is also likely to be positive and high.
Ensuring optimal use of electronic resources is one of
the biggest concerns for the consortium that receives
central funding from the Government. Libraries and
information professionals are required to play a proactive
role in promoting usage of resources amongst faculty and
researchers.

REFERENCES
1.

Government of India: Ministry of Human Resource
Development. Department of Higher Education (2009),
Outcome Budget, 2009-2010, Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Government of India, New
Delhi.http://education.nic.in/planbudget/Outcome
Bgt-2009-10-HE-E.pdf

2.

Sathyanarayana, N.V.; Krishnan, S. & Arora,
Jagdish. Indian library and consortia development for
resource sharing: A white paper prepared for WHO,
under contract from Rajiv Gandhi University of Health
Sciences, Bangalore, 2004. 54 p.

3.

Arora, Jagdish & Agarwal, Pawan. Indian National
Digital Library in Engineering Sciences and
Technology (INDEST) Consortium: consortia-based
subscription to electronic resources for technical
education system in India. In Proceedings of
CALIBER 2003, edited by S.M. Salgar, et al.
Ahmedabad, INFLIBNET, 2003. pp. 271-90.

4.

Premchand & Arora, Jagdish. Access to scholarly
communication in higher education in India: Trends in
usage statistics via INFLIBNET. Program, 42(4),
2008, 382-90.

5.

Trivedi, Kruti; Chauhan, Suresh & Arora, Jagdish.
Economics of UGC-INFONET digital library
consortium. In Library and Information Science in

12. CONCLUSION
The UGC, through the INFLIBNET Centre, has
successfully infused a new culture of electronic access to
scholarly information amongst academic community in
universities through two major initiatives namely, “UGCINFONET Connectivity Programme” that provides for
networking of university campuses with state-of-the-art
campus wide networks and Internet bandwidth, and the
“UGC-Infonet Digital Library Consortium”, which provides
access to selected scholarly electronic journals and
databases in different disciplines.
With launching of N-LIST programme, e-resources
accessible to universities only, are now being made
accessible to colleges also. These programmes would
certainly benefit the higher education system in India
24

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Digital Age: Essays in honour of Prof M.P. Satija.
2009, Vol.1, 356-69.
6.

Arora, Jagdish. Managing electronic resources
through consortia: An overview. In Proceedings of the
National Convention on Library and Information
Networking held at PES Institute of Technology,
Bangalore, edited by H.K. Kaul and Gayathri Sen.
DELNET, New Delhi. 2005. pp.144-71.

7.

Arora, Jagdish; Prem Chand & Trivedi, Kruti. UGCINFONET Digital Library Consortium: A Compendium
for Member Institutions. Ahmedabad, INFLIBNET,
2008. 216 p.

8. Trivedi, K.J.; Rai, A.K. & Arora, Jagdish. Applications
of Web 2.0 and Library 2.0 technologies at the
INFLIBNET Centre. In Prof. Veena Chandel
Festschrift Volume (in press).

About the Authors

Dr Jagdish Arora is the Director of Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Centre, Ahmedabad. Prior to
this, Dr Arora worked as the Librarian, IIT Delhi, and was also the Web Master of IIT Delhi and the National
Coordinator of the INDEST-AICTE Consortium, one of the most successful Consortia initiatives in India. He has also
worked as the Librarian IIT Mumbai (June 2002-August 2003); Documentation Officer, National Institute of
Immunology, Delhi (1983-1991); and Assistant Documentation Officer, ICRISAT, Pantancheru, AP (1980-1983). Dr
Arora is the recipient of Fullbright Professional Fellowship in Library and Information Science (1997-1998); SIS
Fellow (1999); Librarian of the Year Award (IASLIC 1999); Young Librarian of the Year Award (SATKAL 2001);
and ILA-Kuala Best Librarian Award (ILA 2004). He was also Principal Investigator for several projects sponsored
by agencies like All India Council of Technical Education, Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Information
Technology, Ministry of Human Resource Development, the National Highway Authority of India, and University
Grant Commission. Besides, he was a member of the Delegations that visited selected libraries and the library
science schools in Germany (2002), and Delegation to Jakarta, Indonesia deputed by the Ministry of External
Affairs to discuss development of INDO-ASEAN S&T Digital Library in November 2003. Dr Arora was also
nominated as a member of the International Library Advisory Boards of IEEE and IEE. He has more than 60 research
articles published in learned research journals and as Chapters in books and conference proceedings. His current
interests include consortia-based subscription to e-resources, digital libraries, digitization of old and fragile
documents and their storage, database-driven Web interfaces and Web-based library services, Web-based
learning and education, scientometric analysis, etc.

Ms Kruti Trivedi obtained her Masters in Library and Information Science from Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar,
and is working as Project Officer in the Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Centre since March 2009.
Prior to her present assignment, she worked as Project Assistant in the INFLIBNET Centre from October 2007 to
February 2009.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

25

