DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 4, July 2010, pp. 53-57
© 2010, DESIDOC

Development of Online Directory of Aerospace Engineering
Teaching Institutions and Teachers in India
K.P. Singh* and Nandi Negi**
*Department of LIS, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007
**Junior Research Fellow, AR&DB, DRDO, Delhi-110 105

ABSTRACT
Directory is the vital reference tool for finding information related to organisations, institutions, companies,
persons, etc. These sources are becoming more beaming and significant for the users when they are available
in e-form and accessible online. The present study is an outcome of a major research project awarded and
funded by the Aeronautics Research and Development Board (AR&DB), DRDO, to the Department of Library
and Information Science, University of Delhi. Data for the directory was collected through a specially designed
‘Data Capturing Form’ from all the teachers and teaching institutions of Aerospace Engineering in India. The
collected data was scrupulously analysed, organised, validated and then used for the development of online
directory. The directory is developed on a specially designed Content Management Software (CMS)-based
system for managing the content in dynamic environment.
Keywords: online directory, aerospace engineering institutions, India, DRDO, AR&DB

1. INTRODUCTION
Directories are basically the list of institutions,
companies, firms, etc., of the government, corporate, and
private organisations. Directories are used to find the
information on various aspects of organisations such as
name and address, programmes and activities, courses,
faculty, lab and library facilities, etc. These sources play
a vital role in providing the various sorts of information on
institutions and teachers to the students and
researchers, scientists and technocrats, administrators,
policy makers, and even to a general information seeker,
both within and outside the country. The Internet and web
technologies have changed the way people communicate,
interact, acquire, share knowledge, search, investigate
and participate in the creation and re-use of the
information. It is also an undisputed fact that information
and communication technologies have brought new
dimensions and opportunities in the process of
information access and acquisition, consolidation and
communication, storeation and retrieval, downloading and
distribution throughout the world. Using the web
technologies, one can easily design and develop such
online information tools to provide reliable, up-to-date,
authentic and comprehensive information on the various
Received on 4 December 2010

aspects of aerospace/aeronautical teaching institutions
and teachers in India.
The journey of the aerospace engineering education
in India started from the premier educational institutions
such as Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangaluru,
Indian Institute of Technology Kharaghpur (IIT-Kgh), Indian
Institute of Technology Kanpur (IIT-K), Indian Institute of
Technology Bombay (IIT-B), Indian Institute of Technology
Madras (IIT-M), Madras Institute of Technology (MIT),
Chennai, and Punjab Engineering College (PEC),
Chandigarh (now known as PEC University of
Technology). During the last couple of years, there is an
exponential growth of the Aerospace Engineering
teaching institutions in the country. This study, revealed
that more than 62 teaching departments/institutions are
imparting quality education in Aeronautical Engineering
at various levels such as BTech, MTech, MS (dual
degree) and PhD in India. The majority of the courses in
Aeronautical Engineering are run by the colleges which
are affiliated to the state/private universities. The
surprising fact, find from the study, is that cities like
Chennai and Coimbatore of the Tamil Nadu state are the
hub/focal destination of the aeronautical teaching in the
Country followed by Bangaluru and Hyderabad.
53

2. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
The basic objective of the study was to design and
develop an ‘Online Directory of Aerospace Engineering
Teaching Institutions and Teachers in India’ based on a
Content Management Software (CMS). In addition, the
study has the following specific objectives:


To design and develop a reliable, authentic, up-todate, authoritative and comprehensive online
directory of Aeronautical Engineering education
institutions and academicians in India.



To provide an online interface to the users’ to access,
search (general to advanced) and download the valueadded information on educational programmmes and
teachers of all the aeronautical teaching institutions
in India.



To provide a future roadmap for other academic,
research institutions/LIS professionals in the
country for undertaking such innovative initiatives in
the age of ICT environment to contribute in national
information innovation initiatives.



To record all information on Aeronautical
Engineering teaching departments/institutions and
teachers in trio form of the directory, i.e., print, CD,
and online.

3. SCOPE OF THE STUDY
The study covers all the teaching departments/
institutions in the Aeronautical Engineering in India
including their faculties. It contains 62 academic
departments/institutions across the country responsible
for imparting the education from graduate to doctoral
level such as IIT’s; universities affiliated engineering
colleges, management institutions/colleges. The study
also covers the institutions which are recognised and
affiliated by the Ae.S.I. (Aeronautical Society of India).
In context of the content of directory, it provide the
detailed information on the various aspects of the
department/institutions such as Contact Information,
Name of the Head of Department and institution,
numbers of faculties and facilities at a glance, courses
offered, and eligibility criteria for the admission.
Further, the directory also links the departments/
colleges to their URL for more additional information
related to departments/institutions and others. With
regard to the Aerospace Engineering faculties, 280
teachers have occupied the space that is associated/
affiliated to these teaching institutions. The biographical
segment of the directory is an attempt to provide brief
account of information of an aero teacher ranging from its
contact information to educational qualifications, area of
specialisation/interests,
research
guidance
and
54

publications, awards and recognitions, membership of
professional associations, etc.

4. METHODOLOGY ADOPTED
The organised resources such as directory printed
or online, of the educational institutions/organisations/
staff in any field of knowledge require a systematic
collection of the data from the respondents which are
geographically scattered of regions. The present study is
based on following methodologies:
Collection of Data: The data was collected through the
personal visits/e-mails/by post/telephonic talk/SMS and
specially designed ‘Data Capturing Form’ from institute
like IITs IISc, IIST and MIT. In some cases, information
about institute and faculty was downloaded from the
respective website and the personal website of faculty.
However, in majority, the data was collected personally
by the authors/Principal Investigator (PI) through visits.
Method of Processing and Analysis: The colleted data
was meticulously reviewed, analysed and processed for
the online directory with the help of content development
tools, website, and web technologies.
Design of the Architecture of Directory: The online
directory was designed and developed using the
technology of CMS and independent client server
architecture technology. The reason to adopt/choose
these technologies was because these provide the
dynamic features to the content manager for online
updations, modifications, deletions, search and
download. In addition to these basic technologies, the
Dreamweaver, Photoshop, Flash, HTML/XML, etc., were
also used as content development tools.

5. THE INITIATIVE
The quality databases of educational institutions and
faculties, are not only demanded by the own
organisation/institution for their internal evaluation/
assessment but also by the outside organisations for
engaging them in various academic and research
assignments. Such endeavour also gives an account to
the users an idea of the available infrastructural facilities
in this highly specialised and demanding field of
Aerospace Engineering teaching and teachers in the
country for critical assessment.
n addition, it is also an effort by the funding agency,
Aeronautics Research and Development Board (AR&DB),
DRDO, to have R&D collaboration with the University of
Delhi to design and develop a national resource facility of
Aerospace Engineering educational institutions and
academicians in India for the benefits of Aerospace
Engineering communities and other interested groups.
The project, started in August 2008, had priori knowledge
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

that only a handful institutions such as IISc, IITs, MIT,
PEC are imparting the education in the field of Aerospace/
Aeronautical Engineering. In all nearly 62 department/
institutions are actively involved in the teaching of
Aerospace Engineering in the India. As the project was
purely based on a survey, hence the data was collected
from the identified institutions through distributing ‘Data
Capturing Form’ (specially designed for this purpose
having all fields necessary for developing online directory)
by posts/e-mails/telephones or even fax. To collect the
data for any study/project is always a challenging job for
an investigator/researcher because of passive/indifferent
participation of the respondents. The present directory is
an outcome of more than 1000 mails, more than double of
reminders, and nearly 20 visits by the PI and Research
Associate throughout the country.

6.1 Use and Utility
The Directory has the following functions:


To serve as a vital statistical information on the
various educational programmes of Aerospace
Engineering in India such as contact information,
programmes available, mode and procedure of
admission, brief account of faculties, and facilities,
etc.



To act as an effective tool to assess/evaluate the
performance of a teacher individually and
collectively required for various purposes on the
basis of their academic and research productivity.



To make, a standard and up-to-date Aerospace
Engineering teachers/experts database required not
only by their own organisation but also by the other
national academic and research bodies such UGC,
AICTE, DST, DRDO, CSIR, ISRO, ADA, etc., to
involve them (academicians) in academic and
research activities.



To act as an online interface to researchers to find/
select their research guide according to his/her areas
of interest.



To act as an information reservoir to further develop
an ‘Intellectual Think Tank’ of the eminent
academicians/scientists for the academic and
research assignments of national importance.

6. THE DIRECTORY
The directory is accessible through Internet at http://
aerodirindia.com or from DRDO’s home page (http//
www.drdo.org/ardb/dir.html). The information on the
Aerospace Engineering educational department/
institutions has been arranged by the names in an
alphabetical order under the respective states they belong
to. In case of the teachers/academicians, information can
also be retrieved in the same way as in the case of
institutions. Users can also search the directory
information though institute, courses, faculty, and even
through advanced searches.

Figure 1.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

Screenshot of the directory.
55



To serve as a ready-reckoner for finding filtered
information on aerospace engineering teaching
institutions and teachers in India.

the Aerospace Teaching communities. The directory
portal also has feedback option for further research and
refinement.

6.2 Contents of the Directory

7. CONCLUSION

The directory provides vital information at one stop on
the teaching programmes and teachers of aerospace
engineering in the India for all the users who are
interested to access, search, and download tailor made/
filtered information.

To work on any project, based on survey research
and when the targeted populations/respondents are
situated on multi-locations, is always a challenging job for
a researchers/Principal Investigator. The situation
becomes more challenging when a researcher or PI has
more responsibility in their parental organisation and the
funding agency has more expectations from a
researcher. During the course of this project we have
some very healthy and excited experiences, while
visiting/interacting with few faculties of aerospace
engineering departments/colleges of Mumbai, Nagpur,
Chennai, Bangalore, Coimbatore, Noida, and
Chandigarh, who not only welcome such innovative
initiatives but also made their useful contributions,
suggestions, and compliments that the directory will be
helpful as a single source, information provider to the
professionals and students engaged in aeronautical
studies.

It also literates the information seeker on the various
information segments such as courses and duration of
the programmmes, contact information of a particular
institute, mode/criteria and eligibility of admission,
facilities, and faculty, etc. The link of the website, viz.,
Teachers, is an interesting hot spot to know the
academic, research and professional commitments/
assignments of an Aerospace Engineering teacher. The
link comprises address and contact information, areas of
specialisation/interests, research guidance, publications,
participations in professional events, works experiences
and associations with learned bodies, project handled,
etc.
The website also links the rich/content-based useful
links of the Aerospace Engineering resources available on
the public domain that can be very useful and valuable to

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Firstly, our greatest thanks are due to the funding
agency Aeronautic Research and Development Board

Figure 2. Screenshot of the contnet page of the directory.
56

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

(AR&DB), DRDO, MoD, Govt. of India, New Delhi, for
providing the fund for this major research project. Our
immense thanks to Dr AL Moorthy, the Coordinator,
Aerospace Resource Panel, AR&DB, and Director,
Defence Scientific and Information Documentation
Centre (DESIDOC), DRDO, New Delhi, for his personal
interest in this project and providing us all rounds of
professional and personal inputs. Dr Moorthy’s
contribution has been invaluable to us and without his
active cooperation this project could not have completed.
Secondly, any research project, which is based on
survey research, can not be completed without the
positive responses of the respondents. We express our
sincere thanks to all the department/institutions and

faculties who enthusiastically participated in this project.
For us they are truly the real heroes of this venture/project
and it is also true that the future of this project will depend
on them for making this directory/output more vibrant,
informative, effective, and up-to-date as a national
aerospace info tool.
We will be failing in our duty if we do not record our
deep gratitude to Prof. Deepak Pental, Vice Chancellor,
University of Delhi, for his motivation and encouragement.
Last but not the least, we record our special thanks to Dr
R.K. Bhatt, Head, Department of Library and Information
Science, University of Delhi, and all colleagues/staff for
providing us every possible support and assistance during
the course of this project.

About the Authors

Dr K.P. Singh obtained his MSc in Agricultural Sciences from Meerut University, and MLIS, MPhil and PhD. in
Library & Information Science, from University of Delhi and Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (Punjab),
respectively. Dr Singh is working in Department of Library and Information Science in DU, Delhi as Senior Assistant
Professor in LIS. Principal Investigator of a major research project awarded by Aeronautics Research and
development Board (AR&DB), DRDO, Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India.

Ms Nandi Negi obtained her BLIS and MLIS from University of Delhi. Currently she is working as Junior Research
Fellow on a research project entitled “Designing & Development of Web Enabled Directory of the Teachers and
Teaching Institutions of Aerospace Engineering in India” awarded by the Aeronautics Research and Development
Board (AR&DB), Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence, Government of
India.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

57

