DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 4, July 2010, pp. 58-64
© 2010, DESIDOC

WEBSITE

REVIEW

Websites of Antiquarian Books
Rajendra Kumbhar
Department of Library and Information Science, University of Pune, Pune-411 016
E-mail: rajendra_kumbhar@unipune.ernet.in

ABSTRACT
The article is based on a survey of websites of antiquarian books. Contents of 14 websites of antiquarian
books were analysed. The aspects analysed and interpreted were search facilities, singed editions, reviews,
dust jackets, antiquarian books for sale, maintaining ‘wants lists’, etc. The article concludes that the websites
of antiquarian books are helping a long way in bibliographic control of antiquarian books by providing needed
information easily.
Keywords: Antiquarian books, websites of antiquarian books

1. INTRODUCTION
Books are probably the only antiquarian sources of
knowledge still used by the humankind in their original
forms. Antiquarian books (also referred to by various
terms such as rare books, used books, collectible titles,
out-of-print, etc.) are in demand for centuries for their two
basic features: (i) the value of thought contained in them
and (ii) the physical elegance, cover design, font styles,
and illustrations, (at least for few of the titles). Antiquarian
books are mostly collected by bibliophiles, i.e., persons
who love to read and admire books. Economic stability is
an important feature to sustain interest in antiquarian
books. The market, particularly, the demand of
antiquarian books keeps fluctuating as per the economic
trends, which themselves keeps changing as per space
and time.
The supply of antiquarian books is not very steady.
Wars, recessions, business trends, and technological
developments have their own impact on the supply of
antiquarian books. There was a time when it was very
difficult for a bibliophile to trace and acquire antiquarian
books. Thanks to the Internet and other related
developments that helped the antiquarian book market to
flourish. There are various websites of antiquarian books
using which the bibliophiles can now acquire antiquarian
books easily saving their time and even money. This
article presents a survey-based analysis of selected
websites of antiquarian books.
Received on 11 December 2009

2. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the study are:


To know the access points provided by websites of
antiquarian books under simple and advanced search
facilities.



To trace the various attractions offered for buying
antiquarian books.



To find educative and other value-added features
made available by the websites

3. SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY
There are many booksellers who are selling
antiquarian books through websites. The sample
websites were selected by adopting simple random
method. For selecting websites search was carried out by
using the term ‘antiquarian books’ in Google search
engine. The first link in the retrieved list was to the website
named ‘Vialibri’ (http://www.vialibri.net/). Vialibri, provided
a list of 18 online vendors of antiquarian books. These 18
websites formed the total population for this study. Out of
these 18, Booklooker, (http://www.booklooker.de/), Liverrare-book (http://www.livre-rare-book.com/indexFR.htm),
and Uniliber (http://www.uniliber.com/) are also available
in other than English language. So they are excluded from
the scope of this study. Amazon.com (http://
www.amazon.com/) was also excluded as it offered many

other items in addition to books. Thus the study presents
analysis based on survey of remaining 14 websites
(Table 1).

modus operandi of the web-based antiquarian
booksellers, i.e., they operate from home and save on
payrolls, rent and other overheads.6

4. RELATED LITERATURE

4.3 Bibliographic Control

Literature related with the present topic was searched
in online version of LISA and LISTA. Following is a brief
review of selected literature:

Reese also stated that Internet has made it possible
to acquit millions of people with the existence of
antiquarian books. A detailed account of tools that are
available on the Internet for hunting antiquarian books has
provided by Tony Durham who believed that the web has
taken the chaos out of buying antiquarian books.1
Harper5 and Ahearn7 discussed about the Internet’s role
in spreading information about antiquarian books and
their help in searching.

4.1 Impact of Internet
Tony Durham found that antiquarian book’s market
has become international due to Internet.1 Raugust found
that Internet has revolutionised all aspects of used and
antiquarian book selling.2 Holzenberg presented a detail
account of changes which have taken place in the
second-hand and antiquarian book selling and collecting
business through the ability of buy and sell such items via
Internet.3 Zubal, specialist in scholarly and antiquarian
books, presented an account of his recent experiences,
particularly in the area of the revolutionary changes taking
place in the bookselling and book collecting business,
notably in the field of book websites.4

4.4 Value Addition
Websites of antiquarian books, through links to
special articles, help to know more about rare and
antiquarian books. Their glossaries help even in judging
first editions of antiquarian books.8 Hogan describes web
resources that offer tips on how libraries can price old
books to be sold.9

4.2 Cost Factor

5. ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION

Antiquarian books websites provide opportunity to
search books across the globe along with their prices.5
One can even bargain for the price. Antiquarian books
market on the web has, therefore, become affordable.5
According to Reese the reason for cost cutting is due to

Search facility is the most magical features of the
Internet. Invariably almost all websites help search
contents through search option and or through links.
Websites of antiquarian books like most search engines
provide simple as well as advanced search facility.

Table 1. List of surveyed websites

Name of the website

Web address

Antiquarian bookseller’s Association of America (ABAA)

http://www.abaa.org/

ABE books

http://clickserve.cc-dt.com/

Antikvariat

http://www.antikvariat.net/

Antiqbok

http://www.antiqbook.com/

Albris

http://www.alibris.com/

Biblio

http://www.anrdoezrs.net/

Bibliophile Bookbase

http://www.bibliophile.net

Bibliopoly

http://www.bibliopoly.com/

ChooseBooks (ZVAB)

http://www.choosebooks.com/

The International Legue Antiquarian booksellers (ILAB)

http://www.ilab-lila.com/

The Independent Online Booksellers Association (IOBA)

http://www.iobabooks.com/

MereMagnum

http://www.maremagnum.com

Booksatabfa

http://www.booksatpbfa.com/

Prolibri

http://www.prolibri.com/

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

59

5.1 Simple Search Facility
Simple search facility on the specific website of
antiquarian books allows searching with minimum access
points. Under simple search facility the surveyed
websites provided the following access points (Table 2).
Out of total 14, the two websites did not provide author
and title access points under simple search facility.
However, they provided the ‘keyword’ option. This option
can be used to search antiquarian books by author and
title. Table 1 reveals that ‘keyword’ search facility is
provided by almost all (92.85 per cent) websites of
antiquarian books. This means that ‘keyword’ as an
access point is not just preferred for searching modern
documents but even antiquarian books. Many websites of
antiquarian books (78.57 per cent) provided the facility to
search books by author and titles. Therefore, keyword,
Table 2. Simple search facility

Access point provided

No. of websites

Percentagae

Keyword

13

92.85

Author

11

78.57

Title

11

78.57

ISBN

04

28.57

Binding

03

21.42

author, and title formed the core of simple search
facility.Almost one third (28.42 per cent) websites of
antiquarian books under this study enabled search by
ISBN. Three websites (21.42 per cent) enabled to specify
the search by types of binding, i.e., hard or soft bound
books.

5.2 Advanced Search Facility
Advanced search facility is a common feature of most
search engines. The advanced search facility enables to
search by many more access points than simple search
facility. Also, it enables to delimit the search by as many
features as possible. The numbers of access points
provided by the advanced search facility in this study are
listed in Table 3.
Total 33 search/specifying elements have been
provided by websites of antiquarian books. Nineteen
search elements were provided by two or more websites
and 14 search elements were unique, i.e., they were
available on single but different-different website.
Author and title were the two access points available
on 92.85 per cent websites. Search by keyword and price
has been enabled by 85.71 per cent websites. Price as a
search element was highlighted by 85 per cent websites.

Table 3. Access points provided under advanced search facility

Access points provided
Author
Title
Keyword
Price
Date/year of publication
Publisher
First edition
Singed
With dust jacket
No. of entries to be displayed
Sort results by
Binding
Show titles added
Booksellers country
Search whole/individual dealer’s database
Display currency
Search document (types of document)
Language
Condition of book
Ship to
With bookseller supplied photos
Booksellers within … zip code
Time span

60

No. of websites
13
13
12
12
10
10
10
09
09
09
09
08
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
02
02
02
02

Percentage
92.85
92.85
86.71
86.71
71.42
71.42
71.42
64.28
64.28
64.28
64.28
57.14
57.14
50.00
42.85
35.71
28.57
21.42
14.28
14.28
14.28
14.28
14.28

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

5.3 Combined Simple and Advanced Search
When considered together the simple and advanced
search facility, all the 14 websites provide facility to
search antiquarian books by author title and keywords. It
was also found that some of the access points provided
by a particular website under simple search facility are
also provided under advanced search facility.

5.4 Date of Publication and Publisher
The search option ‘date of publication’ was provided
by 71.42 per cent websites. This option on some
websites enables to search antiquarian books published
before and after a certain year. Whereas some websites
enable search of antiquarian books published between
certain years.

dust jacket’ for the artistic value. Nine (64.28 per cent)
websites enable search of antiquarian books ‘with dust
jacket’.

5.8 Number of Entries Displayed on Each Page
This feature on the websites specifies how many
entries of the retrieved antiquarian books should be
displayed on a single screen. Number of entries can be
selected as per the choice on the display screen. Under
this option antiquarian books websites provide pull down
menus to choose to the number of entries to be
displayed. The option ranges from 5-15 entries per
screen. A fairly large number of websites (64.28 per cent)
provided this option.

5.9 Binding

Search of antiquarian books by ‘publisher’ has been
enabled by 10 (71.42 per cent) websites. This option
which ranks third in terms of frequency of options
indicates its importance. The publisher’s option is
important for two reasons: (i) some books are published
by more than one publishers, and (ii) the cost of the same
antiquarian book may vary from publisher to publisher
(due to the change in the publisher’s country and thereby
the currency).

‘Binding’ as a search factor helps to choose from hard
and soft binding options. Types of binding affects price of
the antiquarian books. This option has been provided by
eight (57.14 per cent) websites of antiquarian books under
the advanced search facility. The binding option is also
provided under simple search facility by three (21.42 per
cent) websites. So taken together, simple and advanced
search this facility is being provided by 11 (78.57 per cent)
websites.

5.5 First Edition

5.10 Sort Results

Some people have interest in ‘first’, i.e., to be first
customer of a new edition of a car, telephone number in a
series, to watch first day first show of a movie and so on.
Similarly there are bibliophiles who feel proud in having
first edition of an antiquarian book. To fulfill this
requirement 71.42 per cent websites have made provision
to specify the search of a ‘first edition’ of desired
antiquarian books.

The sort results helps in searching by various access
points (Table 4). Also, the search could be delimited by
features like year of publication, binding, etc. Search
results are arranged in some logical order so as to enable
the searcher to locate an entry in the retrieved list. Nine
(64.28 per cent) websites of antiquarian books provide
search results by various ways. The options provided
under the facility ‘sort result’ included: Oldest on the site,
images, bookseller’s names, etc.

5.6 Signed Books
Authors put their autographs (signatures) on selected
books. They also give autographs on their books in
response to the request from a visitor. It gives a special
feeling to have an author signed copy of book. Bibliophiles
like to collect books which have autograph of its author.
Nine (64.28 per cent) websites have the option ‘signed’
(editions) of antiquarian books.

5.7 With Dust Jacket
Dust jacket of a book is an essential deterrent for
wear and tear of a book. In addition, for the publishing
industry it is a very good publicity tool. So, some books
particularly, books of artistic value, novels, have
beautifully designed dust jackets. Most of the time the
picture on the dust jacket very intelligently represents the
contents of the book, i.e., they are thematic dust jackets.
Bibliophiles persuade hard to have antiquarian books ‘with
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

5.11 Show Titles Added
This search specification is provided by eight (57.14
per cent) websites of antiquarian books. By using this
option search can be restricted to retrieve titles added to
the website’s database recently, i.e., in last one or two
weeks or up to a specific date from the date of upload to
the database. This option serves as current awareness
service.

5.12 Bookseller’s Country
Online book market is an international market, which
helps the searcher in getting the antiquarian book from a
specific country. The reason for favouring a specific
country may be that the bibliophile wants to get the
antiquarian book from his mother or favoured country.
Price can be the another reason for knowing bookseller’s
country, as the price may change from country to country
61

on account of changes in currency rates. Seven websites
(50 per cent) of antiquarian books provided the option
‘bookseller’s country’. ‘From bookseller in … country’,
‘search in … country’, ‘geographical market’ are the other
names given to this option. This is a pull down embedded
option.

intensity of the need, and the attitude a bibliophile
decides what physical condition of the desired book he/
she prefers. Only two out of 14 websites have provided
option such as ‘any condition’, ‘better condition’, ‘fine
condition’ to choose from.

5.18 Ship To
5.13 Whole or Individual Dealer’s Database
To enhance the scope of the antiquarian books market
the websites of antiquarian books are working on a
‘border-less market principle’. Accordingly, 42.85 per cent
websites of antiquarian books under this study provided
the option search in either ‘whole database or individual
dealer’s database’. This means these websites maintain
links to two separate sets of databases, i.e., a cumulative
database covering the antiquarian books available with all
vendors in the group and separate database of antiquarian
books available with each individual dealer. The second
set of database is useful to the searcher who has specific
dealer in mind.

5.14 Display Currency
Antiquarian books may be available with dealers in
different country, resulting in variance of prices of the
book. A bibliophile may be interested in getting an
antiquarian book offered in a specific currency. To fulfill
this requirement 35.71 per cent websites of antiquarian
books have provided the option ‘display currency’. This
option is also a pull-down embedded option.

5.15 Searches by Document Types
Most online booksellers of antiquarian books hold
stock of various types of documents. This includes
books, autographs, maps, movies, audio material, etc.
However, only four out of 14 websites provided the facility
to further limit the search by types of document. This
search limiting factor is useful for a searcher who is
looking for a specific type of antiquarian book.

5.16 Language of the Book
This search option is offered by just three (21.42 per
cent) websites. By using this option a searcher can
specify his language interest as far as an antiquarian
book is concerned. One of the reasons why many
websites of antiquarian books did not provide this option
may be that, in most cases, the author and title
automatically delimits the language of the book, unless
off course, if the book is published in more than one
language.

A bibliophile may be searching for a book seller who
can ship/sent the antiquarian book to particular country.
Only two websites have provided an option to choose the
country where they want the antiquarian book to be sent
to. This option might not have been provided by the more
websites as some booksellers may not able to supply
books to a specific country due to political reasons. The
‘Ship To’ option has a pull down sub-options such as ‘any
country’, UK, US, Canada, etc.

5.19 Bookseller’s Geographical Distance
A bibliophile may be interested to buy an antiquarian
book only if it is available within a specific geographical
distance. This requirement is fulfilled by two websites by
providing the option ‘booksellers within 5, 10, 15, 20, 25,
50 miles’ of the (specified) zip code. This is a great help
for those who intend to buy an antiquarian book from a
nearby area.

5.20 Time Span
This search option is different from the year of
publication. This option covers the time for the antiquarian
books where date of publication is not known and or not
bothered by the bibliophile. Two of the 14 websites has
provided this option with a further pull-down to choose a
specific century.

5.21 Discounts and Other Attractions
Discounts are direct monetary attractions offered to
attract bibliophiles. Three versions of discounts are
noticed on the websites of antiquarian books studied in
this survey. They are: discounts (2), free shipping (2), and
best buy (1), Return policy (5), 100 per cent secure
shopping (2), money- back guarantee (1), gift certificates
(1), etc., are some other attractions for the bibliophile on
the websites of antiquarian books. Shopping rate, your
account, view basket/shopping cart, are the captions
under which the customer can get required information for
buying antiquarian books. Through these links the
bibliophile can also update his purchases. Information
under these links makes online book purchasing easier.

5.17 Condition of the Book

5.22 Educative and Other Value-added
Features

Being old and or used, the antiquarian books may not
be in a good physical condition. Depending on the

The world of antiquarian books is a specialised one
and has its own jargon. Proper knowledge of technical

62

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

terms related with antiquarian books helps in their
selection and acquisition. Seven (50 per cent) websites
have provided educative information about antiquarian
books under heading such as ‘glossary (3), learn more
about rare books (2), articles (1) and resources (1).

5.23 Reviews and Interviews
Reviews of antiquarian books, and interviews of
authors of such books has been made available by one
website each. Information given under these links enable
the bibliophile in choosing proper antiquarian book.

5.24 Publicity
Websites of antiquarian books are meant to sell
books. They intend to enhance the business by staying in
contact with the customer. Facilities under the various
links have been used to reach the bibliophiles.
Newsletter and press release have been used to
provide information about events in the recent past. The
‘events’ link has been used for communicating
forthcoming events. ‘Book fairs’ link provides information
about venue, menu (i.e. participating dealers, their
specialization, etc.) and dates of forthcoming fairs of
antiquarian books. Blog has been used by these websites
for two way communication with the bibliophiles.

5.25 Caring for Libraries
There may be some libraries looking for a specific
antiquarian book. Three out of 14 websites of antiquarian
books have a link named ‘libraries’. This link enables
libraries to select and acquire antiquarian books like
individual bibliophiles. Through this link these websites
give special treatment to libraries as customers.
Table 4. Types of links for publicity

Types of link

No. of websites

Newsletter

3

Book fairs

2

Blogs

2

Events

1

Press release

1

5.26 Wants List
There are six websites (42.85 per cent) that enable
the bibliophile to register their demand for getting an
antiquarian book, which he wants to have but is not
available in the present database. An antiquarian
bookseller keeps track of the requests registered in the
wants list. As and when the bookseller finds the
requested antiquarian book he informs the requester
accordingly.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

5.27 The Reverse Flow: Selling Antiquarian
Books
Websites of antiquarian books not only help the
bibliophile to get rare and antiquarian books of their
interest, but also help the holder of antiquarian books in
selling such books. The reasons for selling antiquarian
books by individuals to antiquarian booksellers can be
either monetary need or lost of interest in the antiquarian
book.10

5.28 Usual Links
Last, but of equal importance, are the links usually
available on any website are also available on the
websites of antiquarian books surveyed during the
present study. These include: home, about us, contact
us, FAQ, and help.

6. CONCLUSION
The online facility has revolutionised the antiquarian
books market. It offers something for every concerned
party which includes the bibliophile, libraries, individual
who wants to sell antiquarian books and of course the
booksellers of antiquarian books. All in all, the websites of
antiquarian books are contributing in a great way in the
rapid and universal movement of antiquarian books by
providing adequate access points. These also provide a
very good buying and educating information for the
bibliophiles.

REFERENCES
1. Durham, Tony. Treasure hunters discover net. Times
Higher Education Supplement, 1999, 1372, 8.
2. Raugust, Keren. Old books in new packages: How
antiquarian book fairs keeping current with marketing
and Internet help. Publishers Weekly, 2002, 24-25.
3. Holzenberg, Eric. Second-hand and antiquarian
books on the Internet. J. Rare Books, Manuscripts
and Cultural Heritage, 2001, 2(1), 35-44.
4. Zubal, J.T. Selling used and antiquarian books: Old
vagaries and new certainties or old certainties and
new vagaries. Against the Grain, 2000, 11(6), 26-28.
5. Harper, Philipp. In the book world, the rarest of the
rare. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6124643/
6. Reese, William S. The Rare book market today. The
Yale University Library Gazette, 2000, 74(3-4).
7. Aherrn, Allen. The current outlook: The book
collectors’ golden age. World Literature Today. 2008,
35-36.

63

8. Bland, Celia. New ways to find old books. Forbes,
2000, 165(12).

10. Milliot, Jim. A good time to be selling used books
(foreword). Publishers Weekly, April 2009, 1.

9. Hogan, Cecilia. Library book sales: Cleaning house or
cleaning up? Searcher, 2008, 16(3), 36-46.

About the Author

Dr Rajendra Kumbhar has been teaching LIS courses of various levels for more than 20 years. He is
actively engaged in design and implementation of LIS coursesfor distance mode learning. His areas of
interest include LIS education, research methodology, and knowledge organisation.

64

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4)

