DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 2, March 2010, pp. 26-39
© 2010, DESIDOC

Visualisation of Relationships Among Library Users
Based on Library Circulation Data
Sumit Goswami, Anandarup Mukherjee, Mansi Kharbanda, Abhinav Gupta* and Pulkit Soni*
DESIDOC, Defence R&D Organisation, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054
E-mail: sumit_goswami@desidoc.drdo.in
IMPS College of Engineering & Technology, Malda, West Bengal
E-mail: soab87@yahoo.com
Indira Gandhi Institute of Technology,Kashmere Gate, Delhi-110 006
E-mail: mansi126750@gmail.com
*Northern India Engineering College, Shastri Park, New Delhi-110 053
E-mail: abhinavniec@gmail.com; pulkit_indian@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
A library has a large number of databases from which information can be extracted. But data
retrieved is superficial and indicates only about the transactions of library. To predict and anticipate the
future issue patterns such as what kind of books might be in demand more or what is the taste of majority
of users, can only be found by mining the information from the data of library. The library circulation data
does not indicate much about the relationship between the users based on the books got issued by them.
The aim of this paper is to develop communities based on the issue patterns and find how many similar
users are there and which type of books a particular group of users prefer to read. So, the idea is to
form a community-based on relationships among the library users and books and visualise the generated
relationship through a graph to present the extracted information from the database more effectively. This
is possible by finding the hidden relationships in data through community mining process, which has been
done by identifying the relationship of users from library circulation data.
Keywords: Data visualisation, circulation data, community identification, data mining

1. INTRODUCTION
In today’s world, with the availability of large volumes
of data, it is impossible for human beings to interpret it
and find useful information. Data mining enables to find
answers and discover patterns in data. Data mining
relates to the discovery of unknown facts. It is the
knowledge discovery process that relates to the finding of
hidden information, patterns and relationships from large
set of databases. Data mining is, “the efficient discovery
of valuable, non-obvious information from a large
collection of data”1. It aims towards knowledge and
pattern discovery. It also tries to discover that side of the
knowledge which was never visualised to exist2. Another
important utilisation of data mining is prediction of
forthcoming data in an event where one tries to look for an
association between the event and its operating
Received on 09 October 2009; Revised on 27 November 2009

condition. Data present at any academic or research
library is vast and versatile. To find the knowledge lying
behind the data which is not implicit, the concepts of data
mining are used3. For example, in a library user database,
to predict which of the members would move up in their
issue patterns, the data is mined and then based on
archived data and knowledge present the future course of
events is predicted. This helps in building strategies and
anticipation of adversities as well as necessities, which
an organisation may face in future4,5. Thus data mining
helps fulfill two different needs, which are knowledge
discovery and prediction6,7.

1.1 Motivation
Many things on this earth can be given a name
according to the community it belongs to. Therefore,

researchers started to take these to the complex
network, to visualise these according to their needs8,9. The
need of making communities was to understand the
complexity behind the concept, as earlier it was not
coming out in any of the picture form but forming
communities made it easier. The following systems can
be expressed by a network in which nodes represent the
objects and arcs signify the relationships between them.
±

Social networks such as scientific collaboration
network, food network, transport network, etc.

±

Technological network such as web network, software
dependency network, IP address networks, etc.

±

Biological network such as protein interaction
networks, metabolic networks, gene regulatory
networks, etc.

In this study, authors propose a method to discover
library user communities. The basic concept of the study
is to provide an interactive visualisation of communities of
users and their books10. While data mining, the authors
ought to find the latent part of information, which cannot
be resolved using SQL/ACCESS queries. Such kind of
information may include identifying the communities of
books read by the users or communities of users with
respect to the specific books.
The way helped in finding: which books are more
interrelated or which of the readers are more related to
each other; how the books and readers are interrelated; if
a book is read by the user then how large is the probability
that the next book in the community would be read by
him/her on studying the communities formed. Several
possible ways are present to form communities. In the
present study, authors used two factors on which the
community will be formed. These are the users, and the
books issued to each user. The first factor is a measure of
total number of users, which will give the total number of
cliques. The second factor gives the number of books with
each user that tells us the size of the clique of each user.
Both these factors decide the final view of the

communities. The communities are identified based on
the edges between the common books with each user.
These edges give the relationship between various users
and it forms a community, which can be easily identified.11

2. MINING OF CIRCULATION DATA
The database of books, users, and their associated
transactions is important for managing a library. A library
database has all the information about its users, the
books issued to them, all kind of transactions between
the library officials and the publishers, and the different
subjects of books in the library. It still does not help in
establishing any useful relationship in the data which is
not possible through SQL queries. For analytical
purposes, one has to find hidden relationships in the data,
which can be done using various mining techniques to
uncover the hidden patterns (Fig.1).

2.1 Structure of the Data
The study reported in this paper was conducted on a
standard library database. “ISSUES” table in the
database contains the record of the issue and return of a
book by a library user. This table is the sole source of
circulation data on which authors accomplished their
study for finding communities. The issue table contains
an attribute “CODE” which has the unique library
membership code of a library user and the “TITLE” which
has the title of the issued book. Authors used only two
attributes for members and books, respectively for the
analysis. The data has to be put in a proper format before
it becomes suitable for visual analysis. The errors should
be removed from it to the maximum possible extent. Preprocessing the data before visualising includes scanning
the entire data and bringing it into a form which can be
enabled to be visualised through a visualisation tool. It has
heuristics for dividing member records because the
member records in ISSUES table sometimes contain
redundant member names, or redundant entries. Besides,
these may have empty abstract entries, which might not
be of any use. Visualisation process creates a graphical

Figure 1. Schematic representation of mining of circulation data.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

27

screen for visualising communities easily12. To find a
community, the user must be able to browse the data
interactively. For this authors used a suitable graph tool
that helps in visualising communities through
diagrammatic representations via graphs. After
establishing a particular relationship amongst the users,
the nature can be easily predicted the behavior of the
users as well as their for the books. However, mining of
the circulation data is an ongoing process, as new
patterns are discovered new questions can be raised,
which may lead to further mining.

Field Name
Type
Data Source
Code
Title
Author
Remarks
A900
Issue Date
Return Status
Return Date
Issue Officer
Return officer

Data Type
Text
Number
Number
Text
Text
Text
Text
Date/Time
Text
Date/Time
Text
Text

Figure 2. Schema of document issue table in Circul.mdb.

2.2 Data Staging
After extracting the suitable data from the entire
database, the next step is to prepare data storage for
mining. The extracted data has to be changed, converted,
and made ready in a format that is suitable for query and
analysis. Three major functions performed during the data
staging part are: data extraction, data transformation and
data loading (ETL). Data staging provides an area and a
place where data can be changed, cleaned, combined,
and prepared for actually storing in warehouse for
analysis2.

2.2.1 Data Extraction
Extraction forms the primary stage of data staging
component of data mining. Data staging helps in
extracting the raw data from the source which is modified
to act as input for transformation stage. In this study, the
data from ‘Circul.mdb’, an MS Access file, of case study
library database for finding hidden relations as well as
existing patterns amongst users of the library (schema
shown in Fig. 2). The database contained the following
fields:
(i)

Type

(ii) Data source
(iii) Code
(iv) Title
(v) Author
(vi) Remarks
(vii) A900
(viii) Isuue date
(ix) Return status
(x) Return date
(xi) Issue officer
(xii) Return officer
This final table was created by making an SQL query
for the distinct code and the title from the database. This
28

query was made to give the title a unique serial number to
make the implementation part easier to visualise. Next
step in data extraction is to identify the attributes that can
be used for data mining. CODE and TITLE were choosen
to make communities of users based on similarity of
books issued to them.

2.2.2 Data Transformation
Transformation is an intermediate process in data
staging component of data mining. This is the refining
stage in which the data is filtered according to the
requirements of the study and then used for knowledge
discovery. Each book is represented by a vertex and the
books which are issued to a common user are connected
by the arcs forming a mesh. So the entire data received
after extraction is converted into arcs and vertices.
Vertices are represented by the instances of TITLE. Arcs
represent the relation between them. For example, if
CEE0001 user is issued books or TITLE, “Let us C”,
“Computer Networks”, “Organisational Behaviour”, then
the arcs and vertices would be as shown in Fig. 3. The
different books are numbered and a relationship is formed
between them by their pair-wise representation under the
Edges head.

2.2.3 Data Loading
This is the final stage of the ETL process of data
staging component. In this stage transformed data is
input into the graph visualisation tool, which processes it

CEE0001
*Vertices 3
1 Let us c
2 Computer networks
3 Organisational behavior
*Edges
11
12
13
23
Figure 3. Representation of books issued by a user in
terms of vertex and arcs.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

to draw graph for the given data. Entire data is
represented into a form shown in Fig. 3 and saved in a
suitable format which can be read by the graph
visualisation tool. For example, the graph visualisation
tool used in this study is ‘Pajek’ which takes the input file
in .net format. The graph visualisation tool thereafter
represents the data in the form of a suitable graph which
can be used for finding the unobvious piece of information.

different communities of users who borrow similar books.
Communities can be made between any fields of the
database to see the graphical relationship between the
respective fields. Earlier it was difficult to make any
relationship between the fields, but graphs have sorted
this out and the latent concept is understood. The
advantages of defining any system in terms of graph are:
±

The system comes to the level that is easy to get
through the algorithm used if any in the
representation.

±

The representation can also be changed if required.

3. COMMUNITY IDENTIFICATION
Community is the group of people that share some
common features. The word usually refers to a segment of
people identified around common features. Community
makes us to identify similar things easily. In community
identification using library database, communities of
people reading similar books and how these are related
with respect to similar books read by them are identified.
This concept was implemented using circulation data,
which envisaged using a graph (Fig. 4). Different colors
represent the distinct books read by each user. These
books are related to each other and are shown in form of
mesh. The common book between the different users is
connected to form a community of users.

3.1 Graph Representation
Graph is always an easy mode to understand a
complex network, problem etc. It is extensively used in
almost every field of computer science. It elaborates a
complex system in an easy way, and to visualise it better.
Graphs are not only used in computer science but also in
other fields to deal with the complex problems. Graphs
represent a network in terms of vertices, edges, etc.
Vertices are drawn as node, and edges are as a line
connecting vertices. The purpose of making graph was to
make communities of books borrowed by users. This
graph helps in understanding the relation between

3.2 Graph Visualisation
Graph visualisation tool, Pajek13 was used for the
study. Pajek is a software for visualisation of large
networks. This software is free open source and can be
downloaded from Internet. It gives the graphical
representation of the data. This software helps in
understanding that how individual community can be
identified. The in-built algorithms used represents the
graph in a different way. It accepts the file in .net, .mat and
few other similar formats. Some other formats like .txt are
also acceptable but they all had been generated through
Perl language coding which has been used in the study.
The basic reason of using the Perl language is that there
was a requirement to display the edges in the form so that
community can be easily identified. The .net file is
obtained form a converter available on the Pajek website.
This converter converts the excel file into the .net file.

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND
DISCUSSION
The pre-processing steps involved in the study have
been explained with the help of a flowchart represented in
Fig. 5. Perl was used during pre-processing to prepare the

Figure 4. A graph representing the books issued by a user and the common books.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

29

START

Open file circul.mdb

Refine data

Establish ODBC
connection with PERL

Store distinct user and its
distinct copy of books
in text file

Store data in following format:
S.no, User_id, Book_no

Create relationships among all books
read by an individual user

Print the s.no of books
followed by relation

Connect different cliques
together with respect to their
common books

END

Input the final output text
file to PAJEK

Figure 5. Flow chart representing pre-processing of data before visualisation.
30

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

data to make it acceptable in .net format, which can be
used as an input to Pajek. A sample Perl code used in the
study is represented in Fig. 6. This portion of the code
written in Perl demonstrates the use of ODBC
connection, named ‘test1’, created between the database
provided and the program, to fetch data from the database
according to the users’ IDs one-by-one and also fetching
their respective books and storing them in a file. Figure 7
gives an overview of the graph of cliques obtained from

different users. Red color vertices represent distinct
books of each user. Users with different books represent
the individual clique in the graph. A clique in a graph is a
set of pair-wise adjacent vertices. In the final graph
cliques were obtained in a similar way. The common
books between the different users display a community of
users. Each issued book is represented by an edge, the
data for which is an input to the Pajek from a .net file
(Fig. 8). All the books issued to a user are connected to

use strict;
use DBI;
my $dbh = DBI-> connect('dbi:ODBC:test1');
my @data;
my @data1;
my $i=0;
my $a=1;
open(MYFILE,">compound.txt");
open(TEST,">codes.txt");
my $sth = $dbh->prepare('SELECT DISTINCT code FROM final ') ;
$sth->execute();
while((@data=$sth->fetchrow_array())&& ($i<=20) )
{
my $firstname=$data[0];
print"\n\n\n$firstname\n";
print TEST "\n$firstname\n";
my $sql="SELECT DISTINCT sno FROM final WHERE code='$firstname'";
my $sth1 = $dbh->prepare($sql);
$sth1->execute() ;
Figure 6. A sample perl code used in the study to extract data from the database.

Figure 7. Cliques obtained for different users.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

31

Figure 8. Representation of books identified by acession
No. under ‘Vertices’ as input to Pajek.

form a mesh. The information of arcs for the mesh is
available in the input .net file (Fig. 9). Figures 10-14
represent the graph based on the issue pattern of the
books of 5, 10, 20, 30, and 50 library users. Looking at
these graphs, the books that had been read by more than
one user and the number of books issued to a particular
user can easily be visualised. Graph also help us to
correlate the taste of each user as closeness of their links
represent closeness in their subject choice. This clusters
the users with a similar choice nearer to each other.
Figure 15 depicts the connectivity among 100 library
users who were connected based on the usage of the
books on similar subjects. The arc formed on the top of
Fig. 15 depicts the users who were not connected to the
selected 100 users. Figures 16 and 17 depict the
relationship among the library users from a particular lab
only, i.e. ISSA and DESIDOC, respectively. The
relationship is based on the connectivity of the users who
had books from a common subject area. Accession

Figure 9. Representation of arcs between books issued
by each individual user.
32

Figure 10. Graph for five users’ books.

number does not fulfill the purpose for community
identification in this case as there may be multiple copies
of the same book, which may hamper clustering all the
users of a particular book. Furthermore, there were
various books on the same micro subject published by
different authors. So clustering based on Class number
was more effective. Figures 18 and 19 show the graph of
all the users with books on Philosophy and Psychology,
and Religion and Theology respectively based on these
two macro subject usage pattern. Figure 20 is an
alternate separated out view of Fig. 19 to give a better
visualisation.

5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
After making community of users through books as
the node, it can be said that the members who use books
form a mesh are related to mesh of another user if and
only if they have any books in common with them. Also, if
a particular group of users have some common books
among them then these members may have some
generalised subject of books. Uncommon books of each
member can be suggested for other member of the group.
For example, if A and B are the books read by a member
and A and C are read by another member, then these two
members are related to each other through a common
node A. If these two can be generalised based on the
subject area then book B can be suggested to the
member who has not read that book. Other member can
be suggested book C. Thus, in spite of such a large
database of library user can be suggested his choice of
books based on his needs. This can be also be used to
trace all the researchers working in a common field of
research subject as they would have interlinked mesh.
Thus, library circulation data can be of strategic
importance in huge research organisation’s or defence
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Figure 11. Graph for 10 users’ books with labelled nodes.

Figure 12. Graph for 20 users’ books.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

33

Figure 13. Graph for 30 users’ books.

Figure 14. Graph for 50 users’ books.

34

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Figure 15.

Graph depicting relationship between 100 users connected based
on class number.

Figure 16. Users from one particular lab connected on circulation pattern.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

35

Figure 17. Subject-based community formed among all DESIDOC library users.

Figure 18. Relationship of users based on the usage of books on Philosophy and Psychology.
36

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Figure 19. Relationship among users based on issue of books on Religion and Theology.

Figure 20. A separated out view of Figure 19.
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

37

establishments as it can be used to trace the researchers
in a common field.
Authors intend to further visualise the entire users
data and extract the patterns from the issue list. A similar
study is also being done by forming a graph representing
each library user by a node and connecting all those
users which have a common book issued among them.
This may also lead to a similar clustering of library users
on the choice of their subject area or research
imitativeness.

REFERENCES

7.

Singh, S.; Vajirkar, P. & Lee, Y. Context-based data
mining using ontologies. In International Conference
on Conceptual Modeling, Chicago, 2003, 2813. pp.
405-18.

8.

Magnusson, C. & Vanharanta, H. Visualising
sequences of texts using collocational networks. In
Proceedings of Third International Conference of
Machine Learning and Data Mining in Pattern
Recognition, MLDM 2003, 5-7 July 2003, Leipsig,
Germany. pp. 276-83.

9.

Shibata, N.; Kajikawa, Y.; Takeda, Y. & Matsushima,
K. Detecting emerging research fronts based on
topological measures in citation networks of scientific
publications, Technovation, 2008, 28(11), 758-75.

1.

Bigus, J.P. Data mining with neural networks,
McGraw-Hill Inc, 1996.

2.

Ponniah, P. Data warehousing fundamentals: A
comprehensive guide for IT professionals. John Wiley
and Sons, 2001. pp. 399-426.

3.

Papamichail, G.P. & Papamichail, D.P. Real-time
concept creation in distributed e-learning systems. In
IASTED Int. Conf. On Web Education, Innsbruck,
Austria, 2004. pp. 631-36.

4.

Levenson, A.R. Leveraging adversity for strategic
advantage. Organisational Dynamics, 2002, 31(2),
165-76.

5.

Genestre, A.; Herbig, P. & Shao, A.T. What does
marketing really mean to the Japanese? Market.
Intelli. & Plann. 1995, 13(9), 16-27.

12. Ichise, R.; Takeda H. & Ueyama, K. Exploration of
researchers’ social network for discovering
communities. In Proceedings of JSAI workshops,
Kitakyushu city, Japan, 2005. pp. 458-69.

6.

Ellatif, A. & Mohamed, M. Association rules
technique to evaluate software users satisfaction.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1078506, (accessed on 07
September 2009).

13. Pajek—Program for large network analysis. http://
vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/ (accessed on
07 September 2009).

10. Ichise, R.; Takeda, H. & Ueyama, K. Community
mining tool using bibliography data. In Proceedings of
Ninth International Conference on Information
Visualisation, IV’05, London, 2005. pp. 953-58.
11. Khambatti, M.; Ryu, K. & Dasgupta, P. Structuring
peer-to-peer
networks
using
interest-based
communities. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop On Databases, Information Systems and
Peer-to-Peer Computing, P2PIR’06, Berlin, Germany,
2003. pp. 1-16.

About the Authors
Mr Sumit Goswami holds an MTech degree in Computer Science and Engineering from IIT Kharagpur, a Post
Graduate Diploma in Journalism and Mass Communication, a Bachelors degree in Library and Information
Science, and BTech in Computer Science and Engineering. He has been working as a Scientist with Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Delhi, India since 2000. His areas of interest include
network centric operations, mobile ad hoc and sensor networks, web-hosting security, text mining and
machine learning. He has published 41 papers/chapters in various journals, books, conferences and
seminars. Sumit also chaired a session on the theme Computer Architecture in National Conference on
Emerging Principle and Practice of Computer Science held at GND Engineering College, Ludhiana, India in
August 2006.
Mr Anandarup Mukherjee is a final year student of BTech in Electronics and Communications Engineering
from IMPS College of Engineering and Technology (under West Bengal University of Technology), Malda,
West-Bengal. He has also done diploma courses in C, C++, Java, Visual Basic from Centre for Development
of Advanced Computing(C-DAC), a certificate course in microcontrollers from Eastern Regional Testing Labs
(East), Kolkata, and Digital Image Processing from IIT Kharagpur. His areas of interest include microcontrollers
and microprocessors. He also takes keen interest in programming with knowledge of multiple languages. He
is also constantly creating microcontroller-based projects and developing various projects in MATLAB and
Visual Basic.
38

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Ms Mansi Kharbanda is a final year student of BTech in Computer Science and Engineering from
Indraprastha University, Delhi. Her areas of interest include software engineering, mobile communication and
computer networking. She has attended workshops on Open Solaris Introduction and Java Beans organised
by SUN CLUB, IGIT. Manshi is an active participant in IEEE and CSI society as a student member. She takes
keen interest in programming and algorithm implementation.
Mr Abhinav Gupta is a final year student of BTech in Computer Science from NIEC, GGSIPU, Delhi. He has a
good hand in handling programs related to C, C++, and Perl programming languages. Abhinav was ranked
among top 0.1 per cent students who participated in class Xth CBSE Board Examination (2004) securing 100
per cent in Mathematics. He was also awarded a Merit-cum-Scholarship by AISSE under National Scholarship
Scheme. Recently, his works related to Weka-Data Mining Tool got space as an article in leading IT magazine
PC-Quest. He is keen on learning new things related to the field of data mining and knowledge extraction.
Mr Pulkit Soni is pursuing BTech in Information Technology from Northern India Engineering College,
(affiliated to Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University), Delhi. His areas of interest include Data Mining,
Computer Networking, Mobile Communication, and ERP. Pulkit has coordinated Technical Events (FNORD’09) in
his college and has also attended seminars like Interactions’08 and Technophilia organised by Northern India
Engineering College.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

39

