DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 3-8
© 2010, DESIDOC

Library and Information Science Education in India:
A Historical Perspective
Krishan Kumar and Jaideep Sharma*
Former Professor and Head, DLIS, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007
E-mail: krishan14@hotmail.com
*Associate Professor, SOSS, IGNOU, Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110 068
E-mail: jaydeepsharma@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The paper presents a historical perspective of Library and Information Science (LIS) education in India,
and traces the growth and development of the subject. LIS education began under the patronage of the
erstwhile Maharaja of Baroda when he invited an American librarian to set up public libraries in the state. After
independence, Library Associations in the country continued with the efforts of developing LIS education in
India. The discipline got recognition with the introduction of various courses at the university level. It has seen
periods of growth and maturation. The recommendations of National Knowledge Commission provide an
opportunity for reforms and changes in the educational system that needs to be grabbed.
Keywords: LIS education-India, LIS education-History-India

1. INTRODUCTION
Library and Information Science (LIS) education in
India will be completing 100 years in 2011. It is time for
introspection and a need to know the present status of
LIS and areas that need improvement. History provides a
picture of the growth and development, which lends a
perspective to such a study. This article presents an
insight of these historical developments in LIS education
in India since its inception.
The beginning of the 20th century marked the
beginning of LIS education in India. There is a vast
literature crediting Sayyaji Rao Gaekwad, the then
Maharaja of the erstwhile princely State of Baroda, for
initiating the LIS education movement in the country.
American librarians, William Alanson Borden and Asa
Don Dickinson were the first LIS teachers in India.
John MacFarlane, an Englishman, who happened to be
the first librarian of the Imperial Library (now National
Library, Kolkota) also shares the credit for training
librarians in our country. In fact, MacFarlane’s training
programme is the first case of LIS education in India
reported in literature. It took place between 1901 and
1906 in the Imperial Library when training programmes
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

were organised for its staff. Later it was extended to
librarians working in Calcutta as well as in other states.
It is believed that there was an existence of some
training in library routines for the staff of university
libraries prior to that also1.

2. THE BARODA SCHOOL
The first formal training course in library routines, to
be started anywhere in the country, began in 1911 when
classes were held to impart professional training to
librarians in the erstwhile Baroda1. W.A. Borden was
invited by the State to develop its library system; library
education became part of it. The training programme
supported the library development and in turn was
supported by the library development. The trainees
applied the knowledge and skills acquired during the
training programme in library work. On the other hand,
the library provided them the infrastructure as a
laboratory to practice and learn from it. The class
comprised 10 best workers of the library. They
underwent one year theory and subsequent practical
training for another year. Borden also started a shortterm summer training programme (5 months) for town
and village librarians, both from within and outside the
3

State. Book selection, ordering, accessioning,
classifying, lending, preparing quarterly and annual
reports, billing, children’s libraries, travelling libraries,
and the knowledge about the new outlook of
librarianship were the topics taught in this summer
course2.

3. PUNJAB UNIVERSITY
Another landmark year in the history of LIS
education in India is 1915 when it was started for the
first time at the university level in Punjab University,
Lahore (earlier part of undivided India). Asa Don
Dickinson, the university librarian started the course.
The subjects taught comprised were basic like decimal
classification, cataloguing rules, list of subject headings,
dictionary catalogue, and open shelves. The duration of
the course was 3 months. Dickinson also wrote the first
book, Punjab Library Primer, in library science, for a
better understanding of the course. Incidentally, this
was the second such school in LIS education in the
world and the first in Asia; LIS education was first
started in the U.S.
Dickinson’s disciple, Labhu Ram, later revised the
course contents. These included: (i) foreign languages;
(ii) linguistic survey of India; (iii) basic selection;
(iv) law of copyright in England and India; (v) a survey
from Tennyson to Bernard Shaw; (vi) sources of
provincial histories of India; (vii) oriental bibliography;
(viii) milestones of English literature (ix) library
buildings, their designs and equipment; (x) Anglo-Indian
literatures; and (xi) open access and technical
libraries3. The course continued till 1947 with
modifications and revisions from time to time. The
duration of the course was 6 months and graduation as
the minimum eligibility for admission. This was a
development towards the maturation of LIS as a
discipline4.

undergraduate summer programme (certificate) of 3
months duration. The students were taken to Madras
University Library for practical work and observing
library routines. This was the first certificate course of
library science to be started by any state library
association in India. Prof. Ranganathan was
instrumental in instituting library school under the
auspices of the Association and also taught the
students. He also acted as the Honorary Director of the
school6.
The course consisted of two parts. Part I covered
theory (laws of library science including library
organisation, classification, cataloguing, and library
routine). Part II (practical) covered classification
according to colon scheme and cataloguing according
to cataloguing rules of the Madras University Library7.
In 1931, the school was taken over by the University of
Madras. The certificate course continued up to 1937. In
1938, the 3 months training course was suspended and
was replaced in July 1938 by a one-year full-time
postgraduate course, leading to a diploma course in
librarianship. Throughout, the period of his service in
the University (1931-1944), Ranganathan continued to
be the head of the school. Two members of his staff
were co-teachers8. It may be noted that Ranganathan,
taught library science courses at the University right
from 1931 to 1946. University of Madras was the first
university in India to offer one-year postgraduate
diploma in library science. Only persons employed in
libraries were admitted to the course. Thus, India
became one of the first countries to introduce full-time
postgraduate courses in universities, the credit for
which goes only to Ranganathan.
In 1935, Bengal Library Association started a
training camp for librarians, a precursor to the summer
course provided by the Association in 1937. The
summer course was later upgraded to a certificate
course.

4. LIS EDUCATION BY LIBRARY
ASSOCIATIONS

5. LIS EDUCATION BY THE UNIVERSITIES

The LIS education, which took off from the northern
and western parts of the country moved towards the
south subsequently. LIS professionals realising the need
for education acted through Library Associations. The
first such attempt was a school set up by Andhra Desa
Library Association in 1920. Lectures were organised
on various topics related to the history, literature, and
culture of Andhra Pradesh besides the library
movement. The course was modified later to include
more topics of library science5.

Introduction of LIS courses at the university level
dates back to 1915 when Punjab University started a
certificate course. The LIS courses got a boost in 1935
when due to the efforts of Dr M.O. Thomas, Andhra
University started a diploma course in library science.
The course was later upgraded as a postgraduate
diploma in 1961. In 1938, a postgraduate diploma
course in librarianship was started by Madras University
by taking over the course earlier offered by MALA. The
course was open only for working librarians, and owes
its credit to Ranganathan.

In 1929, Madras Library Association (MALA)
started a School of Library Science for training college
and school librarians in the state of Madras. It was an

Banaras Hindu University (BHU) was the second
university after University of Madras to start a

4

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

postgraduate diploma course in 1941. The minimum
qualifications for admission to the course was
intermediate or matriculation with four years of working
experience in a library (Andhra University, Department
of Library and Information Science, 1987, p.7) In 1965,
BHU, was the second university to start MLIS courses;
courses were later discontinued during 1968-69 9. This
was closely followed by the part-time evening course
leading to Diploma in Librarianship started in 1943 by
Bombay University. The credit for starting the course
goes to Dr P.M. Joshi, the then librarian of Bombay
University. It was a postgraduate diploma course of two
terms. The course was also open for matriculates who
had to devote four terms instead of two terms.
In 1945, University of Calcutta started a one-year
diploma course, due to the efforts of Kumara Munindra
Deb Rai. It continued till 1968 and was upgraded to
BLIS in 1969. Prof. S.R. Ranganathan was a pioneer in
the LIS education in India as evident from his initial
efforts at Madras University and BHU. In 1947, he moved
to University of Delhi and started the first postgraduate
diploma course. The first batch was awarded diploma in
1948 and continued their studies and were awarded
BLIS in 1949. In the same year, a two-year programme
for MLIS was introduced replacing the BLIS programme.
Simultaneously, the PhD programme was launched by
the university in 1949. University of Delhi was the first
university to start a doctoral programme in library
science in the entire British Commonwealth. In 1956
Nagpur University and M.S. University, Baroda also
started library science courses. The next year saw the
beginning of library science courses in Vikram
University, Ujjain. The first PhD was also awarded in
1957 to D.B. Krishna Rao from the University of Delhi.
His guide was Prof. S.R. Ranganathan. Library science
courses were also started in five more universities—
Hyderabad, Osmania, Panjab, Poona and Rajasthan by
the end of 1960.
It is reported that there were about 12 library
schools in 1960s, imparting library science education in
the country at all levels except the MPhil degree. The
period of growth of library science started in early
sixties10. The main reason was the allocation of funds for
libraries in the third five-year plan of Government of India.
Another major factor was the support extended by UGC
to libraries and library education. Many new library
schools were started in sixties.
Early 1990s can be described as the period of
Modernisation of library science when modernisation of
libraries started taking place10. Government of India gave
a thrust to application of information technology, through
various incentives. UGC also chipped in with liberal
funding for establishing computer laboratories. Library
schools started revising their curriculum, introducing
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

courses on computer application in libraries, information
science, and established computer laboratories for
giving hands on experience to their students. This was
also a period of consolidation.

6. PERIOD OF GROWTH IN LIS EDUCATION
The decade of 1960s saw some very important
events taking place affecting LIS education in the
country. Ranganthan conceptualised the premier
education and research institute, Documentation
Research and Training Centre (DRTC), Bangalore
under the auspices of Indian Statistical Institute in 1962
for imparting a specialised training programme in
documentation. Another parallel institution, Indian
National Scientific Documentation Centre (INSDOC),
now named as National Institute of Science
Communication and Information Resources (NISCAIR),
was established under the aegis of Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR), Delhi, in 1957. It
started a course in Associateship in Documentation in
1964. Prior to this, it organised short-term training
programmes for librarians which it continues to do as its
objective of providing continuing education for LIS
professionals. These are two premier institutions in the
country providing specialised training in documentation
and information and have been providing national input
and support to the development of the profession in the
country. They have updated their curriculum regularly
keeping in tune with the changing time.
Another important event that has a role in the
growth and development of LIS education in the country
is the setting up of the Review Committee for LIS
education in the country in 1961 under the
chairmanship of Ranganathan. In 1965, the Committee
gave recommendations that had far reaching impact on
LIS education. Some of these included: Have separate
faculty for teaching, do away with librarians acting as
part-time faculty; delineated separate objectives for
BLIS and MLIS courses; anyone seeking admission in
LIS courses should have done a six months
apprenticeship in recognised library, and a student
teacher ratio of 1:10 for BLIS and 1:5 for MLIS. It also
recommended a course that was almost the same being
practised at the University of Delhi. The formation of
Indian Association of Teachers of Library and
Information Science (IATLIS) in 1969 was another
important happening towards the end of the decade.
IATLIS further helped in the growth and development of
the discipline. It organised its first seminar in 1970 on
teaching methods in library science.
The decade, 1970-80, saw a gradual development
in the LIS educational scenario in the country. Some
more courses were added. University of Calcutta
introduced two-years MLIS in 1974. There was a need
5

felt to update the syllabi in view of the increasing
importance of information. Karnataka University,
Dharwad, organised a seminar to discuss the changes
required in BLIS syllabi to accommodate components of
documentation and information to enable the students to
handle information related jobs. A landmark in the
development of curriculum took place when the
University of Delhi organised a national seminar on
curriculum reforms in 1978. New courses were
proposed for MLIS. These included System Analysis
and Statistical Methods, and Information Storage and
Retrieval. Some courses were revised to include
components of international information systems, data
banks, etc. University of Delhi added another milestone
to its credit when it introduced MPhil programme for the
first time in the entire commonwealth region. This
decade also saw the second PhD being awarded to Dr
Pandey S.K.Sharma after a gap of almost twenty years
after the first PhD was awarded to Dr D.B. Krishna Rao.

custom designed and later proprietary software came
into the market. LIS schools started incorporating LIS
software in their curriculum. Initially, hands-on sessions
were organised in the computer centre of the
universities.

Microcomputers appeared on the scene in library
activities and services during the 1980s. Accordingly,
library schools began incorporating computers in the
syllabi. University of Delhi was one of the first to
introduce an optional paper on computer application
that included Pascal programming language also.
Another development during this period was the
introduction of two-years integrated MLIS in the North
Eastern Hill University (NEHU) in 1986 and Madras
University in 1988. It was felt that two-year MLIS would
put it on the same pedestal as the other Master’s
degrees and also the curriculum would be better spread
if integrated over a two years period.

LIS entered the new century with the CDC report12 in
2001, emphasised to face the onslaught of ICT. The
report stressed on the need to have integrated two-year
MLIS, gave new topics to be included in the curricula
along with many optionals to allow the professionals to
choose from alternative careers. University of Madras
changed the name of their degree to Master of Science
in Information Science dropping the term ‘Library’
altogether.

In late 1980s, in addition to formal teaching
courses, some universities introduced correspondence
courses at various levels. M.L. Sukhadia University and
Kashmir University introduced correspondence course
at certificate level. Punjabi University started a diploma
course. University of Madras initiated postgraduate
courses. Andhra Pradesh Open University started a
degree course in 1984. Indira Gandhi National Open
University, New Delhi, introduced BLIS in 1989. It has
played a pioneering role in LIS education, and conducts
BLIS, MLIS, PhD and PGDLAN (one-year postgraduate
diploma). Its printed course material is considered of
high quality10.

7. PERIOD OF MODERNISATION IN LIS
EDUCATION
Initiation of automation activities and development
of software packages in libraries started in 1990s. The
fillip came from none other than UNESCO, when it gave
the free software CDS/ISIS to libraries. Not only that, it
provided expertise for training. International experts
trained resource persons in the country. Simultaneously,
6

Later departments started developing their own
computer centres. Curriculum reforms also took place in
1992 with the directive coming from the Curriculum
Development Committee Report11 headed by Prof. P.N.
Kaula, the doyen of LIS teachers. It recommended
course contents for BLIS, MLIS as well as integrated
two-year MLIS degree. In fact, it directed the universities
to switch over to the integrated mode of education. The
decade also gave birth to library and information
networks (INFLIBNET, DELNET, CALIBNET, etc.) in
India to overcome the increasing resource crunch.
Alongside, the developments in telecommunication
technology were also slowly incorporated in the curriculum.

A step further, International School of Information
Management (ISIM) was esatablished to offer MTech
and PhD degrees in information systems and
management. It is a truly international venture with
faculty from India and other countries. DRTC also
revamped its curriculum, even changing the name of
their degree to Master of Science (MS) in Information
Science. The latest development is the introduction of eeducation in which the IGNOU took the lead by
introducing MLIS in the e-mode in 2008.
National Knowledge Commission (NKC)13, set up by
the Government of India, has recommended certain
measures for the overall development of LIS education in
the country. These are:
(i)

National Mission on Libraries should be set up
immediately, for a period of three years. The
Mission should subsequently be converted into a
Permanent Commission.

(ii) Revamp LIS education, training and research
facilities. The proposed: Mission/Commission on
Libraries must assess as soon as possible the
manpower requirements of the country in the area
of LIS management, and take necessary steps to
meet the country’s requirement through LIS
education and training.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

(iii) To keep the LIS sector abreast of latest
developments, necessary encouragement should
be given to research after evaluating the research
status in this field.
(iv) Establishing a well-equipped institute for advanced
training and research in library and information
science and services would provide the necessary
impetus to this task.
(v) A system should be set up to foster close cooperation between the teaching/research faculty
and practicing librarians at all academic and
research institutions.
(vi) The minimum staffing pattern for the BLIS course
and the MLIS has been recommended.
(vii) There should be a 1:10 teacher-student ratio.
(viii) It was felt that the Department should have not
more than 50 students in one class for BLIS course,
20 students for MLIS course, and PhD students
according to the University norms.
(ix) All departments of LIS should set up computer
centres and well-equipped departmental libraries
with appropriate teaching tools.
(x) Appropriate physical facilities such as classrooms,
must be made available to each LIS Department.
(xi) E-learning materials for upgrading the skills of the
existing staff should be provided.
(xii) Teachers who will teach in areas such as ICT
applications in libraries and other modern methods,
should have a specialisation in these areas. A
system must be set up to allow stringent review of
the performance of teachers. A suitable system of
rewards, including promotions, should be instituted.
This is a golden opportunity for LIS education to
improve. It has been realised at the highest level that
libraries and library science education need revamping.
Librarians should come together and act to take the
profession on a high pedestal.

8. DISCUSSION
LIS education has moved a long way with training
programmes in library routines and procedures for
library staff and outsiders. The next development was
acknowledging the participants with certificates. The
duration of the programmes was extended to 3 months
and later to 6 months. The real pedestal for growth took
place when universities started offering certificate
programmes in library training. University training
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

provides a stamp of class in higher education. The
programmes were later upgraded to diploma and further
to postgraduate diploma. Admission was made stringent
when only graduates could get admission to it. Thus,
library science education was accorded a status of
postgraduate education setting the roots for library
science as a discipline.
The next step in the evolution of LIS education
came when the postgraduate diploma was re-named
and upgraded to a BLIS and later to MLIS. This
development was an important factor giving the
academic recognition to the discipline. It all required the
hard work and vision of committed and dedicated
professionals, like S.R. Ranganathan, S. Dasgupta,
Asadullah Khan, and M.O. Thomas to name a few.
Introduction of PhD programme and the award of the
first PhD was another landmark in LIS education in
India.
Contribution to seminal literature at international
level by Ranganathan kept the Indian flag afloat at the
international level. The contents were added to syllabi at
various levels. There was Indianness in library literature.
Parallel developments in the library scene acted as a
reservoir to the graduates passing from LIS schools.
But the situation did not continue for long due to two
reasons: (a) Mushrooming growth of library schools
without taking into consideration the demand and supply
position in the country, and (b) Opening of library
schools without the minimum basic physical and
intellectual infrastructure. This continued for long,
resulting into a quantitative growth with little qualitative
growth. The syndrome affected all levels, from
bachelor’s degree to the PhD level.
There are still some individual cases in the form of
institutions and individuals who have recognition in LIS
education. Lessons need to learn from these taking as
case studies. Collaborative and coordinated efforts are
required on the part of teachers, librarians and active
associations. Issues are more or less recognised, there
is a need for strong will to work for overall improvement.

9. CONCLUSION
Libraries hold a special position in the development
of a society is evident from the fact that rulers took keen
interest and are responsible for the origin of LIS
education in the country. Experts from abroad were
invited to provide a strong base and an international
touch to it. LIS education in India is fortunate to have its
torch bearer none other than the father of library
science, the great Prof. S.R. Ranganathan. Of all his
qualities, his being a teacher was a boon to library
science in India. He contributed everywhere, whether
initiating departments, courses, outlining contents or
7

planning a research base for the discipline. Department
of library science in the University of Madras, Banaras
Hindu University, University of Delhi, DRTC are all his
babies and still have a name amongst others. We need
to take stock of the situation: what have we achieved,
where we are, where we could not reach, and how to
improve. History is a great teacher. We learn from our
tradition; what led to a name for the country in LIS
education throughout the globe. One obvious reason is
Ranganathan. But library professionals need to ponder
over what he taught us and continue on those lines.
Canons of context and currency are some of his
important teachings. Library science need to change
according to the needs of the time. It is high time,
librarians and teachers should come together to
overcome all shortcomings and take LIS education to
greater heights.

10. Krishan Kumar & Sharma, Jaideep. In Research
libraries in developing countries. Vikas, Delhi, 1973.
pp. 33-34.
11. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee on Library and Information
Science. University Grants Commission, India, 1992.
12. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee on UGC model curriculum
for library and information science. University Grants
Commission, India, 2001.
13. National Knowledge Commission (India). Report to
the nation 2006. Nantional Knowledge Commission,
India, 2007.

REFERENCES
1. Neelameghan, A. India, education for librarians and
documentalists. In Encyclopedia of library and
information science, Vol. 11, New York, Marcel
Dekker, 1974. 323 p.
2. Krishan Kumar & Sharma, Jaideep. Library and
information science education in India. Har-Anand,
New Delhi, 2009. p. 72.
3. Anis Khurshid. Intellectual foundation of library
education. Int. Lib. Sci., 1976, 8, 3-21.
4. Agarwal, S.P.; Mythili, T. & Soni, Rajni. Directory of
LIS education in India. Reliance, New Delhi, 1996.
BAI-2.
5. Patel, Jashu & Krishan Kumar. Libraries and
librarianship in India. In Greenwood press Westport,
Connecticut, 2001. p. 209.
6. Krishan Kumar & Sharma, Jaideep. Libraries and
librarianship in India. In Greenwood Press Westport,
Connecticut, 2001. p. 40.
7. Mohanrajan, P.A. Library science: Dr S.R.
Ranganathan’s contribution (1924-1944): An
analysis. Mohanavalli Publications, Madras, 1992.
pp. 85-86.
8. Mohanrajan, P.A. Library science: Dr S.R.
Ranganathan’s contribution (1924-1944): An
analysis. Mohanavalli Publications, Madras, 1992.
p. 124.
9. Krishan Kumar. In Research libraries in developing
countries. Vikas, Delhi, 1973. p. 75.

8

About the Authors
Prof. Krishan Kumar received library
education at University of Delhi and
University of Chicago. He retired as
Head, Department of Library and
Information Science, University of Delhi in
Dec 1998. He is Past-President, Indian
Library Association, 1988-90; President,
Indian Association of Teachers of Library and Information
Science, 1985-89; Past-Vice-President, Delhi Library
Association; former, Director of its School of Library
Science; Editor, Library Herald, 1981-2002; ExChairman, Editorial Board, Journal of Library and
Information Science; Ex-Consulting Editor, Knowledge
Organisation (organ of International Society for
Knowledge Organisation); Ex-chairman, Editorial Board,
ILA Bulletin. He was member, Scientific Advisory Board,
International Society for Knowledge Organisation and
also Chairman of its Indian Chapter; Convener, UGC
Panel on Library Science, 1985-87; Secretary,
International Conference on Ranganathan’s Philosophy
held in 1985 in New Delhi; Convener, Second Regional
Conference of FID/CR held at New Delhi in 1985;
Member, Indian Organising Committee for IFLA General
Conference, 1992, and also Chairman, Paper
Distribution Sub-Committee. He is settled in Toronto
(Canada).
Dr Jaideep Sharma is Associate
Professor in the School of Social
Sciences, IGNOU. He has also taught at
Kurukshetra University. LIS education is
an area of interest to him on which he
has written books and articles.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

