DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 48-55
© 2010, DESIDOC

Library and Information Science Education in
Maharashtra: A Perspective
Pratibha Gokhale
Department of Library and Information Science, University of Mumbai
Vidyanagari, Kalina, Santacruz (East), Mumbai-400 098
E-mail : pagokhale@mu.ac.in; pratibha_gokhale@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Library and Information Science education in India is undergoing a fundamental change in its basic
framework and is being re-oriented to meet the current needs of the information society. This paper highlights
the programme of study, the current state of affairs and the different components of the LIS syllabi taught in the
universities in Maharashtra. The discussion is limited to teaching, research, and course content through
regular learning. Distance learning and vernacular media courses are not covered.
Keywords: Library and information science education, knowledge society, Maharashtra, curriculum development

kolkata) started the first in-service
programme for the staff in 1901.

1. INTRODUCTION
The vital role of libraries and information centres, in
an upcoming knowledge society, in improving the socioeconomic status is now a recognised phenomenon. The
discipline of LIS is a composite one and has
appropriately integrated in itself the best of principles
from other disciplines like management, computer
science, philosophy, statistics, and also handling of
technology. India is fortunate to have visionaries like Dr
S.R. Ranganathan and his distinguished scholar
disciples who were instrumental in establishing formal
library science schools in the country. The library
science course, being a professional one, is somewhat
analogous to other professions like law, medicine or
engineering as far as learning or teaching is concerned
because both theoretical knowledge and its applicability
are synchronous in practice.



W.A. Borden initiated training for librarians at the
invitation of Maharaja Sayajirao Gaikwad II of
Baroda in 1911.



Asa Don Dickinson started a systematic training
programme at the Punjab University in Lahore in
1915. This was first university course in the
undivided India. He also prepared a manual namely,
“The Punjab Library Primer.”



Andhra Desa Library Association, founded in 1914,
started conducting training classes for library
personnel in 1920 at Vijaywada. This is known as
the “Peoples’ Movement.”



M. Vishveshwaraiah, the then Diwan of Mysore
state in 1920, started training course for librarians
at Bangalore as, “Programme of Library
Development.”



University of Madras in collaboration with the
Madras Library Association started offering a
certificate course in librarianship form 1929, which
was taken over by the University in 1931. In 1937, it
converted the certificate course in librarianship to
Postgraduate diploma course of one year duration.

2. SOME LANDMARKS IN LIS EDUCATION IN
INDIA
Formal library education in India has a history of
100 years behind it. Chronological developments as
reported in the literature reveal the following as important
milestones in the history of LIS education in India:


48

John Macfarlane, the first Librarian of the Imperial
Library (now the National Library) Calcutta (now

training

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)



Andhra University, the Imperial Library, and the
Bengal Library Association imparted training through
Certificate/Diploma courses for shorter duration of
varying period.



Banaras Hindu University in 1941, University of
Bombay in 1944, Calcutta University in 1946, and
Delhi University in 1947 too started diploma
courses.

Aligarh Muslim University is the first university to
start the degree course as Bachelor of Library Science.
At present, there are about 100 universities in India
which are imparting different levels of courses in LIS
ranging from certificate course to PhD. DRTC and
INSDOC (now NISCAIR) offer two-years Associateship
programme. DRTC has recently converted this
programme as MS in LIS.

are 35 districts in the state with best colleges and
higher education institutions. As per the 2001 census,
the literacy rate in the state was 77.27 per cent (male
86.27 per cent and female 67.51 per cent). There are
more than 3000 colleges in the state imparting higher
education (non agriculture), with a student strength of
nearly 32 lakh, University of Mumbai established in 1857
is one among the oldest universities in the country.

3.1 LIS Education in Maharashtra
The subject of LIS is relatively a younger one
compared to those like Chemistry, Physics, Literature,
and Philosophy. In Maharashtra it is taught as shortterm certificate level to postgraduate research degree
level. The universities offering LIS in Maharashtra are:


University of Mumbai.

2.1 Research in LIS in India



SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai.

Delhi University instituted the doctoral programme
leading to PhD in Library Science in 1951. Dr D.B.
Krishna Rao was the first recipient of PhD in Library
Science in India in 1958 from University of Delhi, under
the guidance of Prof. S.R. Ranganathan. His topic was
“Facet Analysis and Depth Classification”.



Pune University, Pune.



Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University
(BAMU), Aurangabad.



Rashtrasant Tukdoji Maharaj Nagpur University.



Shivaji University, Kolhapur.



Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University.



Swami Ram, Teerth
(SRTMU), Nanded.



North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon.



Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Pune.



Bharati Vidyapith Deemed University, Pune.



Yashvantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University
(YCMOU), Nashik.



IGNOU Regional Centres.

However, the second PhD degree in Library Science
was awarded to Dr Pandey S.K. Sharma by Punjab
University in 1977 only after 19 years. He received the
degree under the guidance of Dr J.S. Sharma. His topic
was, “Expansion and Modification of DDC (18) for
Classifying Indological Books with Special Reference to
Indian Philosophy and Indian Religion.” With this modest
beginning of PhD research, as of now, there are
approximately 800+ PhD degree holders in LIS in India.
It is an accepted fact that at any given point, the major
objectives of the academic work in a university are
teaching, research, and publications; research being the
core function. Apart from PhD, the components of
research at elementary level are also covered through
the following ways:


MPhil course.



MLIS projects/dissertations.



Individual or team research projects sponsored by
UGC, ICSSR, DST, MHRD.



Self-supported research.

3. EDUCATION IN MAHARASHTRA
Maharashtra is the third largest state in India known
for its outstanding educational quality and facilities at all
levels in almost all the major disciplines of study. There
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

Marathwada

University

IGNOU, YCMOU are distance learning open
universities. Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Pune,
conducts courses in vernacular medium. Bharti
Vidyapeeth is a deemed university, not covered by
Maharashtra University Act. Therefore, LIS courses
conducted by these institutions have not been covered
in this study. Addresses of universities covered under
the study are given in Appendix 1.

4. METHODOLOGY AND SCOPE
The purpose of this paper is to examine critically
the state of affairs of LIS education in Maharashtra; the
49

programmes, structure of the courses, teaching
methods, research, admissions, and variations in
imparting the education. The information for the study
was collected from the respective university websites
(Appendix 1), their syllabi, requests to teachers and
librarians, telephonic conversation, and personal
contacts.
The scope is limited to postgraduate level LIS
courses conducted by the universities which are
governed by Maharashtra Universities Act 1994. The
study has not covered certificate courses, privately-run
PG Diploma Courses in Library Networking, vernacular
medium courses, and open university/deemed university
courses. The study is a general overview of the LIS
courses and not the detailed analysis of the syllabus of
each university. Preliminary enquiry was made to find
out:


Year of establishment of the university.



The year of establishment of the Department of LIS.



Courses conducted.



Annual/semester pattern of examination.



Whether integrated/non-integrated.



Intake capacity.



Whether credit based.



Recent revision.



PhDs awarded.

5. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
Table 1 shows the year of the establishment of the
universities and respective department of LIS. University

of Mumbai is the oldest university and also has the
oldest department of LIS. The LIS course offered earlier
by the university was PG Diploma in Library Science,
which was converted to a full-time degree course leading
to Bachelor’s degree in library science. Similarly a
change from library science to library and information
science came into effect in most of the universities
around 1995-96.

5.1 Conduct of the Courses
Table 2 shows the types of LIS courses conducted
by the universities under study. University of Mumbai,
SNDT University, Shivaji University, and Amravati
Universities conduct BLIS and MLIS courses separately
of one year duration each. University of Pune, RTM,
Nagpur and Marathwada University, Aurangabad have
integrated, combined course of two years duration
leading to master’s degree in LIS. However, colleges,
affiliated to the universities to conduct the courses are
following annual pattern and granting two, BLIS and
MLIS degrees SRTMU, Nanded is conducting only MLIS
course. Pune and Aurangabad are running MPhil course
and one year duration, respectively.
University of Mumbai and Nagpur have the approval
but not yet started the course. It has been observed that
students’ first preference is to complete NET/SET than
take up MPhil course. Except North Maharashtra
University, all universities have PhD programme.
Admission to these courses is strictly on merit basis
depending upon the performance at the graduation level
followed by personal interview. Shivaji University
conducts a written test also for admission to BLIS
course.
Intake capacity and the structure of the LIS courses
offered by the universities are given in Appendices 2
and 3.

Table 1. Year of establishment of the university and department of LIS
Name of the university

50

Year of establishment

Year of establishment of
the departm ent of LIS

University of Mumbai

1857

1944

SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai

1916

1961

University of Pune, Pune

1948

1958

BA MU, A urangabad

1958

1968

RTM Nagpur University

1923

1956

Shivaji University, Kolhapur

1962

1965

Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University

1983

1990

SRTMU, Nanded

1994

1999

North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon

1989

2000

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

Table 2. Types of LIS courses onducted

Nam e of the University
University of Mumbai
SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai

BLIS
1-year

MLIS
1-year







Integrated
BLIS & MLIS





University of Pune, Pune
BA MU, Aurangabad
RTM Nagpur University




Shivaji University, Kolhapur
Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University

MPhil










SRTMU, Nanded
North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon

5.2 PhD Research
Table 3 shows the numbers of PhD degress
awarded and ongoing at the various universities.
University of Pune has awarded highest number of PhDs
in Maharashtra, followed by Nagpur and Aurangabad. A
list of completed PhD and on-going research is available
on the respective websites of the universities. Although
the Department of LIS, Mumbai University is one of the
oldest in the country, its PhD turnout is low in number.
Nagpur University has 75 candidates enrolled for PhD
with as many as 11 supervisors as guides for research.
Varied topics have been undertaken by the candidates
for pursuing PhD including classical base such as
development of public libraries, legislation, role of UGC,
evaluation of library services, measuring library
effectiveness, information needs and so on.
The decade of 90s was dominated by topics
covering resource sharing, bibliometric studies,
abstracting services, technology transfer, information
retrieval, vocabulary control, whereas impact of ICT is

PhD










clearly visible in the topics undertaken by the
candidates in the current decade. Emerging trends and
innovative areas such as web designing, consortia,
electronic resources, grey literature, web content
management, and ontology are undertaken for advanced
research by candidates, which is a welcome scenario.

6. COURSE CONTENTS
The basic framework of all the LIS courses
conducted by universities in Maharashtra, is almost up
to 95 per cent in conformity with the model curriculum
suggested by the committee constituted by UGC under
the chairmanship of Prof. Karisiddappa. The committee
recommended modular approach to curriculum as a
flexible structure to be adopted by the departments with
ratio of 80:20, (80 per cent from the modules and 20 Per
cent emphasising local needs). It further suggested to
offer electives pertaining to different subject fields like
commerce, business, industry, health science, archives
management, and so on. A close study of data gathered
on course components revealed that the subject and

Table 3. PhD research

Name of the University

No. of PhDs awarded

On-going

University of Mumbai

5

5

SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai

9

5

University of Pune, Pune

48

No. not available

BAMU, Aurangabad

11

No. not available

RTM Nagpur University

34

75

Shivaji University, Kolhapur

6

No. not available

Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University

11

11

SRTMU, Nanded

4

5

North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon

---

No. not available

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

51

topics covered during the first year of the two-years
integrated MLIS course are nearly the same or
equivalent to one-year BLIS course and those covered in
the second year of integrated course have a near match
with the one-year MLIS course. The difference is in the
nomenclature of title of the papers and in offering
electives. The first year covers the following (with some
variation) subjects:

practice of one or more library software such as
WINISIS or SOUL. All the universities have project or
dissertation with viva-voce as mandatory exercise. An
extensive syllabus revision was done by all universities
during the years 2007 to 2010, incorporating the latest
trends and needs of the profession.

(i)

The Maharashtra Act No. XXXV of 1994 is an act to
unify, consolidate and amend the law relating to the
non-agricultural and non-technological universities in the
state of Maharashtra. Clause No. 19 (1) (a) and (b) of
Chapter IV P. 335 of the Act, read the following:

Foundations of Library and Information Science.

(ii) Library Management.
(iii) Knowledge Organisation, Information Processing
and Retrieval (covers classification and cataloguing).
(iv) Information Sources, Products, and Services.
(v)

Information Technology (basics and applications).

(vi) Research Methods and Techniques.
(vii) Electives or Reference Sources and Services
The one-year BLIS course of the universities has
two separate papers, Library Classification and
Cataloguing, with a variant title as subject access to
documents and two different papers covering Reference
Sources, Services and Information Services, and
Systems. The core component of all other papers is
nearly the same. The paper on Research Methods is
covered at the MLIS course of one-year, wherein
following subjects are covered (with some variation):
(i)

Information and Communication.

(ii) Management and Libraries and Information Centres.
(iii) Organisation of Information.
(iv) Information and Communication Technology in
Libraries.
(v)

Research Methodology.

Thus, it may be stated that whether one-year or
integrated pattern, universities have uniformly maintained
the core objectives and learning outcomes of the LIS
curricula though the methodology differs. A balanced
focus on technology-related topics like library
automation, networking, communication technology,
data communication systems, digital libraries is
observed in syllabi of all the universities. Electives are
offered by Pune, Nagpur, and Marathwada Universities
as per the UGC recommendations. The practicals
component covers book/documents classification,
cataloguing–AACR II, reference sources, abstracting,
indexing, thesaurus construction, search methods,
Internet and CD Rom searches, search strategy, and
52

7. MAHARASHTRA UNIVERSITIES ACT 1994

19. (1) (a) where in a University, there is a department of
Library Science, the head of that department, not below
the rank of a reader, shall ex-officio, function as the
librarian.
(b) where in a University, there is no department of
Library Science, or where the head of the department is
below the rank of a reader, the Librarian shall be the
principal officer of the university library. He shall be fulltime salaried officer of the university. He shall work
directly under the control of the Vice Chancellor.
The above clause of the Act is left to wide
interpretation by the universities in Maharashtra. In
Mumbai, Pune, and SNDT universities, the department
and the library is headed by a single authority. He/She,
since holding the dual post as Head of the Department
and Librarian, is automatically designated as Professor.
Whereas, RTMU, Nagpur; BAMU, Aurangabad; Shivaji
University, Kolhapur; SRTMU, Nanded; and SGBU,
Amravati have independent posts of Librarian and Head
of the LIS department. University of Mumbai is perhaps
the only university in the country having combined
teaching posts as Lecturer/Assistant Librarian, Reader/
Deputy Librarian, with no clear distinction or guidelines
for number of teaching hours or workload, either in the
department or in the library. This has affected the
appointment of full-time teachers in the department. It is
also the reason for low turnout of PhD researchers,
compared to the fact that it is one of the oldest
departments in the country.
The situation in other universities is also not much
different, with number of full-time teachers (engaged only
in teaching) ranging from 1 to 3. Pune University has 5
full-time teachers, in addition to a common Head of the
Department who is also the Librarian. Departments are
largely depending on contributory teachers. However, all
the Departments are well equipped with independent
computer labs, multimedia gadgets, printers, and
scanners to impart training. University Libraries are well
stocked with good number of latest books in LIS,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

collection of reference sources, encyclopedias, ejournals (under UGC INFONET), audio-visual material,
educational CDs, DVDs, etc. and so on. Students are
given exposure to the use of variety of information
sources, secondary periodicals, and electronic
resources. Visits, study tours, tutorials, assignments,
seminars by students are permanent features of all
university
departments.
Continuing
Education
Programmes are regularly arranged on theme-based
seminars, national level conferences, workshops, SET/
NET guidance lectures, refresher courses, and
additional lectures on latest developments by visiting
professionals.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

8. CONCLUSION

4. University Grant Commission. Report of the Model
Curriculum Development Committee on Library and
Information Science. University Grant Commission,
New Delhi, 2001.

The transition of libraries from information centres to
resources centres in a knowledge-based society is a
noteworthy phenomenon of the 21st century. The
advances in ICT has intensified the expectations from
librarians. The performance of future librarians will be
dictated by how efficiently the library services will be
designed and disseminated. Attitude towards service,
social sensitivity, time management, communication
ability, curiosity and desire to perform well, will be the
personal characteristics that will be detrimental in
measuring effectiveness of a librarian. Library schools
may also have to seriously prepare themselves for eLearning mode and Virtual Learning Environment (VLE).
The regular courses will have to be continuously
supplemented by periodic training and acquiring new
skills.
Web-based seminars (called as Webinars) may
have to be thought of as regular part of the training, as
they could be cost-effective too. Library Science schools
have to take a cognisance of such emerging trends and
needs of the knowledge-based society and prepare an
action plan on collaborative basis. The present syllabi
would possibly need frequent restructuring with
computer-supported training, online/web-based learning
to suit the environment. The LIS departments affiliated to
universities in Maharashtra have taken a positive note of
the changing scenario, which is an encouraging scene.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

1. Corbin, John. Competencies for electronic
information services. Public Access Comp. Sys.
Rev., 1993, 4(6), 5-22.
2. Patkar, V.N. Perspectives on role of the library in the
emerging wisdom society. In NACLIN 2010, BITS
Pilani, Zuarinagar, Goa, 15-18 June 2010.
3. University Grant Commission: Report of the
Curriculum Development Committee on Library and
Information Science. University Grant Commission,
New Delhi, 1992.

About the Author
Dr (Smt) Pratibha Gokhale is currently
a teacher in the Department of LIS in the
University of Mumbai. She has more
than 30 years of experience in the field
of library management and teaching.
Initially she worked at TIFR and then
moved to a multinational chemical
company where she worked as a corporate librarian for
15 years. She possesses an ideal combination of having
an experience in library management and full-time
teaching in library science. She is the first recipient of
PhD in Library Science from University of Mumbai. Her
research topic on Grey Literature was a unique area of
study in the field. She has contributed several articles in
professional journals, national and international
conference volumes, has edited books, and presented
papers at various platforms. She received the C.D.
Sharma Award for best presented and written article at
the ILA National Conference in 2003. She attended and
presented a paper at the 3rd International Conference on
Grey Literature at Luxembourg in 1997. Her areas of
specialisation are library management, organisation of
knowledge, IT applications to library work, and grey
literature.

53

Appendix 1

Addresses of universities in Maharashtra conducting LIS course
Name of the University

Address

Phone No.

Website

University of Mumbai

Department of LIS Jawaharlal Nehru Library,
Vidyanagari, Kalina, Santacruz (E)
Mumbai-400 098.

022-26528201
26543000

www.mu.ac.in

SNDT Women’s University

S.H.P.T. School of LIS, 1, Nathibai Thackersey
Road, Mumbai-400 020.

022-22031879
22085439

www.sndt.digital
university.ac

University of Pune

Department of LIS Jaykar Library Ganeshkhind
Road, Pune-411 007.

020-5696061,
5696065

www.unipune.er
net.in

Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar
Marath wada University

Department of LIS, Aurangabad-431 004.

0240-2400431,
2400437

www.bamunivers
ity.ac.in;
www.bamu.net

Rashtrasant Tukadoji
Maharaj Nagpur Univesity

Department of LIS, Ravindranath Tagore Marg,
Nagpur–440 001,

0712-2523045,
2548577

www.nagpuruniv
ersity.org

Shivaji University
(Kolhapur)

Department of LIS, Balasaheb Khardekar Library.
Vidyanagar, Kolhapur–416 004.

0231-655571,
693140, 2690571

www.unishivaji.a
c.in

Sant Gadge Baba Amravti
University

Post Graduate Department of LIS, Tapovan Road,
Camp Amravati-444 602.

www.amtuni.com
www.sgbau.ac.in

Swami Ramanand Teerth
Marath wada University
North Maharashtra
University
Yashwantrao Chavan
Maharashtra Open
University
Tilak Maharashtra
Vidyapeeth
Bharati Vidyapeeth
Deemed University

Department of LIS, Dnyanteerth, Vishnupuri,
P.B.No. 87 Nanded-431 606.
Umavinagar, P.Box No. 80, Jalgaon-425 002.

0721-2662358
2662206,
2662208
02462-229242
229560
0257-2258428
2258438
0253-2231714
2231715

Department of LIS, Dnyangangotri, Near
Gangapur Dam, Nashik-422 222.
Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Vidyapeeth
Bhavan, Gultekdi, Pune-411 037
Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Lal
Bahadur Shastri Marg, Pune-411 030.

020-24261856
24264699
020-24335701
24335709,
24335710

www.srtmun.ac.in
www.nmu.ac.in
www.ycmou.com
www.tmv.edu.in
www.bharatividy
apeeth.edu

Appendix 2
Intake capacity
Name of the University

BLIS

MLIS

Integrated

MPhil

University of Mumbai

40

20

SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai

40

12

University of Pune, Pune

30

10

BAMU, Aurangabad

22

15

40+40

10

RTM Nagpur University

54

Shivaji University, Kolhapur

40

15

Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University

30

20

SRTMU, Nanded

20

North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon

20

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

Appendix 3
Structure of the course
Name of the university
University of Mumbai
SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai

Annual examination

Semisterised

For MLIS

For BLIS from 2010-11

Semesterised and
credit-based





University of Pune, Pune



BAMU, Aurangabad



RTM Nagpur University



Shivaji University, Kol hapur



Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University



SRTMU, Nanded



North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon



DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

55

