DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 61-66
© 2010, DESIDOC

What Ails Doctoral Research in Library and
Information Science in India?
M.P. Satija
Guru Nank Dev University, Amritsar-143 005
E-mail:satija_mp@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The paper discusses research in library and information science in India. It delves into the history of library
and information science research crediting the institutionalisation of research to Ranganathan. While
presenting the growth of the research, the article discusses the factors responsible for poor standards. It also
provides an international comparison by citing examples at places.
Keywords: Research, research in LIS, India

1. IMPORTANCE OF RESEARCH
Research of all sorts and at any level or in any
sector of society is an objective and methodical problem
solving approach. Research is an investigation to
provide answers to some unanswered questions. It fills
gaps in our knowledge and is an authentic and reliable
process of knowledge discovery. Research increases
our knowledge base. It helps to replace myths and
superstitions with facts and figures. It provides evidence
and documentation for what is obvious or common
knowledge. Research throws more light on more facts,
and discovers hidden relations between entities. By
discovering new facts or by modifying the earlier ones,
it helps in formulation of new theories. Research
provides fodder for the textbooks and renews their
contents. It constantly adds to the fund of theoretical
and practical knowledge. Both, basic and applied
researches are important. In fact, at the end of the day
there seems no difference between the two: applied
becomes basic and basic becomes applied.
Paradoxically a theory is the most applied knowledge. It
increases the breadth and depth of a discipline. Above
all it brings prestige to the individual researcher and the
profession at large. To individuals it provides access to
many privileges and power. Every discipline feeds on
constant research, which is its lifeline. New information
and knowledge obtained by research helps in problem
solving, which in turn leads to many innovations for
better quality products and services. Apart from
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

inventions, research leads to many innovations in
governance, politics, communication, education,
administration, defence, healthcare, business and
commerce, production, and lifestyle. It leads to new
thinking, and ultimately to changed social values and
hopefully better standard of living.

2. THE BEGINNING OF RESEARCH IN LIS
The roots of research in library science are not very
deep. Research in library science started only in the
20th century ushered in by the Library School of the
University of Chicago in mid 1920s. The visionary efforts
of the pioneers of Chicago School bore abundant fruit,
and provided leadership to the world in library science
research1. Today the pace of library research is picking
up everywhere due to social pressure as well as
inspiration. In justifying the PhD programmes in library
science, it has been urged that “if librarianship aspires
to become a profession, it should depend upon research
to develop its knowledge base and its theoretical
framework”2.

2.1 The Indian Context
In India, following the British tradition and American
precedent as established by Asa Don Dickinson,
Librarian, Punjab University, Lahore (1915–1916), library
schools for advanced professional education have
remained attached to universities. The constant growth
61

of universities in independent India ensured their regular
growth, too. In a university, apart from teaching, a
teacher is expected to do and guide research. The third
function of a university, namely service and consultation,
has always remained weak in India despite many newly
established university-industry linkage programmes3.
Most of the research in Indian universities has remained
confined to dissertation writing not targeted at any
pending problem solving.

2.2 Ranganathan’s Work
The credit for the formal institution of the doctoral
degree programme in library science in India goes
undeniably to Prof. S.R. Ranganathan (1892–1972). In
1951, he started one such programme at the University
of Delhi surmounting many difficulties and facing
personal ridicule. The University of Delhi awarded the
first de jure degree in library science in 1957 to D.B.
Krishan Rao who worked on a faceted classification for
agriculture. Doctoral research remained in the
wilderness when Ranganathan shook the Delhi soil off
his feet in 1955. The Documentation Research and
Training Centre (DRTC) in Bangalore, founded by
Ranganathan in 1962, is technically not empowered to
award the PhD Therefore, for the rest of his life, from
1962 to 1972, Ranganathan only advocated solo and
team research with stress on quality, relevance, and
basics. No big research projects were taken up at
DRTC though individual teachers and students
maintained both the quality and the tempo of research.
Since the death of Ranganathan almost the entire DRTC
faculty has earned PhDs from other Indian universities
on topics of research relevant to DRTC4.

2.3 Growth of Doctoral Research In India
Elsewhere in India other individual librarians and
library science teachers, eager to earn doctorates,
were hampered by the non-existence of programmes
more so due to non-availability of approved and
competent guides. In the 1960s and 1970s some
doctorates on library-related topics were earned by
library professionals from some other faculties such as
sociology, history, law, economics, management, and
the like. The mantle of reviving and furthering doctoral
research facilities was assumed by Dr J.S. Sharma
(1924–1993), the then university librarian and head of
the library science department of the Panjab University,
Chandigarh, who had earned his own PhD from USA.
Under his guidance the second de jure PhD in library
science was awarded to S.K. Sharma in 1977 after a
gap of two decades. Thereafter, there was no looking
back. Many universities followed suit with some
individual’s efforts and enthusiasm. Doctoral research
got a fillip in the 1980s. India maintained its Third World
62

leadership in library research as well as in library
education and literature. PhD programmes since then
have rather mushroomed even despite the lack of
facilities or adherence to standards.

2.4 Facilities for Research
A conscientious university teacher is always in a
dilemma over how to divide the time between teaching
and research. Teaching is a primary compulsive and
urgent duty to be performed. Students expect their
teachers to give them time and personal attention. There
may be appreciation in good teaching but the rewards
lie in research. The university expects its teachers to do
research as its prestige and fame lie therein. Research
output is also important for a university to get better
grading from the national accreditation and funding
agencies. But when it comes to supporting of research
many universities in India are neither generous nor
unambivalent. Ordinarily piecemeal research, especially
in social sciences, is not supported financially. Internal
support for research trickles through a tedious and offputting bureaucracy and political manoeuvering.
Colleagues are unsupportive. They are unappreciative,
intolerant, and jealous. Library facilities are poor. Thus
most of the teachers are driven to the passivity of
guiding doctoral research instead of doing postdoctoral
work. Some conscientious people turn away from
research. To quote an official report: In India 45 per
cent of the PhDs (against 5 per cent in USA and 7 per
cent in UK) are engaged in activities not related with
R&D. It is difficult to say whether this is because of the
absence of a challenging research and development
environment or because of the orientation of training, or
due to the policy with regard to import of technology, but
the fact remains that very few people have contributed
to original research which could be considered
commensurate with the potential Indian genius5.
Programmes for PhD research have been
introduced and expanded mindlessly. As a result, there
has been a bit of doctoral boom–a spectacular rise in
PhD awarding universities and awardees–though many
institutions lack utterly the resources of people or
material or both. A 1987 bibliography listed 41 PhD
theses written from 1957 to 19856. In another
bibliography of doctoral dissertations in India from 1950
to March 1997 about 340 titles have been listed7. In
another study listing a year-wise production of PhDs
from 1957-2008, a total of 802 thesis have been
counted during the previous half a century8. Its subject
analysis unveils an interesting picture: the topic of
bibliometric studies with 85 topics topes the list, and the
LIS education with 17 dissertation comes at the end.
Some of the recent topics are: Human resources
development; digital libraries/institutional depositories;
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

electronic documents acquisition; use of Internet by
different sections of the society. Information searching
and seeking behaviour still maintains its popularity.

2.5 Relevance of Research
In a developing country like India, there could not
be a dearth of research problems to be investigated. But
there seems a lack of perception to visualise, identify,
and formulate valid problems for research. A cursory
glance on the topics for PhDs will at once reveal that the
topics chosen do not have a problem or hypothesis but
merely survey the state-of-the-art or the existing
conditions. Hypotheses if given are bookish, too
obvious, and even meaningless.
The popular areas for research have been, in order
of popularity: university libraries, bibliometrics, library
use and user studies, information seeking behaviour,
information systems, classification and indexing, special
libraries, library history, reference service and sources,
and library science education. Document selection and
procurement, cataloguing, and experimental designs in
library management are the least popular topics– though
these seem practical and relevant to present day needs.
That basic research is the most neglected area is also
endorsed by other surveys of doctoral research9, 10.
Library automation, library software, networking and
information technology are dominating. There is need to
revive research in knowledge organisations especially in
context of OPACs, information networks and the
electronic information environment in general.
The Curriculum Development Committee (CDC) on
Library and Information Science (1992)11 of the
University Grants Commission rehashed the importance
of research, though it did not dwell at length on this
aspect in its report. The blue document listed the
following areas for research, which are no less broad
than the courses being taught at the Master’s level at
that time.


Structure and development of knowledge.



Classification, cataloguing, and indexing.



Infometric studies.



Computer applications.



Historical studies.



Social and economic aspects of librarianship.



Library and Information management and systems
analysis.



Applications of techniques of library and information
science to evaluate other disciplines.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

The list could have been more specific. Though not
much revered, the report rightly laid emphasis on
standards in research. It uncompromisingly asked for a
clear statutory declaration from PhD candidates that
the “work is based on the discovery of new facts by the
candidate or the new relations of facts ... and how the
work tends to the general advancement of knowledge”12.
While it is normally expected of every completed piece
of research, yet it rarely happens. The Working Group
on Libraries of the National Knowledge Commission13 in
its recommendation inter alia says... “Necessary
encouragement should be given to research....” It has
further recommended the establishment of “Indian
Institute of Library and Information Science” under the
aegis of Ministry of Culture. To the proposed institute
the following enumerated tasks have been assigned by
the WGL:
“To identify, sponsor and conduct R&D
programmes in the field of library and information
science, including newly emerging research areas.
Among the areas needing immediate R&D the following
were identified by the Working Group:


Cross-language information retrieval, with
emphasis on information in Indian languages.

an



Standardisation of Indian names.



Vocabulary control over Indian subjects developed
in terms of multi-lingual thesauri and subjectheading lists.



Development of open source software.



Development of Digital Libraries, both in English
and Indian languages.



Technical standards for Indian scripts, Optical
Character Recognition (OCR) for Indian scripts,
and search engines which can implement stemming
algorithms for Indian languages.



User needs and reading habits for different groups.



Organisation of community information
development of appropriate standards.

and

“The Institute’s scientists will carry out research in
major areas contributing to libraries and information
science. In addition, they can undertake externally
funded projects and provide consultancy to other
organisations.
The Institute will also undertake activities to
disseminate research findings, through printed and
online publications, seminars and conferences, or web
portals”.
63

2.6 The Deterioration of Standards
The University Grants Commission (UGC)
preconditions for faculty employment and promotions
have prompted many library professionals to acquire
PhD degrees, though many may not have the aptitude
and the intrinsic ability to do research. Standards have
not only been diluted but have been kept at abeyance.
Supervisors and the examiners have become obligingly
compromising. The first cut-off date of December 1992
(then advanced to December 1993) for obtaining the
PhD degree to get an exemption from the (difficult)
national level test for teaching jobs in universities/
colleges has done incalculable damage to research
standards. An eminent academician has corroborated
the ill effects of this policy: “They were required to
submit their theses before the deadline (31 December
1993) regardless of the date of registration. Some of the
candidates on whom PhD’s were conferred were not
fully acquainted with the contents of their dissertations.
In some cases even the supervisors were not aware of
what the theses were about. The incitement came from
the UGC”14. The very kind and generous Chaddha
Committee for the revised salary scales of university and
college teachers (applicable since 2006) has again
accepted PhD degree as substitute for the NET to
become eligible for lectureship in universities and
colleges. Nevertheless as per its recommendations
admission to PhD has been streamlined, made bit
formally rigorous and partially a credit-based course
work. Yet loopholes remain to evade standards and
quality. Though controlling admission to PhD is
commendable, but to equate it with NET for lectureship
is a retrograde step. It seems nothing has been learnt
from
the experience of 1992-1993. It is
incomprehensible how an aspirant having failed many
times to clear the NET becomes competent and worthy
to do research which requires innovative and imaginative
minds. It is possible only in exceptional cases showing
a clear evidence of aptitude for research and innovation.
The policy of PhD-NET equivalence not only encourages
mediocre of the mediocres to join academic but also
plays havoc with the institution of research. Most of
such candidates are manipulators and a lifelong liability
on the profession and the institutions.

2.7 Research Milieu
The evaluation process, however formal, is easily
manipulated with impunity and without qualms.
Examiners are obliging on a reciprocal basis. In a small
profession like ours this interplay of mutual usability
comes in easily. It is often said jocularly (but understood
seriously) that the degree is recommended more for the
supervisor than for the candidate. And above all, we
must admit that the library profession has failed to lure
the best brains and even more to retain them. Mediocrity
64

thrives; hypocrisy reigns. But this is not to overlook
some genuine oasis in the Indian desert of academic
research. Despite being too theoretical, theses have
contributed little towards pushing the frontiers of
knowledge; few are models of research methodology.
Indian library research seems to have no moorings in the
prevailing realities. Topics are skin-deep, superficial and
bookish. Even experienced librarians keen on earning
the PhD degree rarely come with any perceptible
problem for research. The supervisor usually suggests
the topics and shies from controversial areas. Even a
mild and healthy criticism is not tolerated in India.
Feudal norms still lie deep in the Indian social ethos. In
addition, there is a dire paucity of data archives and
reference works. Collecting data and information is
considered a satisfactory end to the job – the goal of the
research exercise. It is very difficult to collect data by
questionnaire in a vast country like India. There is hardly
any all India survey. To lessen the load a topic is studied
in context of region and repeated over different regions.
For example, Public Library Services in north-east. Then
another topic will be Public Library Services in Punjab
and Haryana. Each researcher has a bag full of woeful
tales to tell. Library associations at all levels seem to
have washed their hands of the research responsibility.
They have not even collected and compiled statistics of
the professional activities and conditions pertaining to
their areas. Their libraries are poor. They have no
research budget.
From quite a time, professionals have been talking,
writing, and conferencing about library education and
research in India. Every year the Indian Association of
Teachers of Library and Information Science (IATLIS)
holds a seminar on topics of library education and
research. That it is the most popular topic with the
teachers and librarians can be gauged from the fact that
the FID/ET seminar was the largest of all the 49th FID
(1998) pre-conference seminars held in India. The
literature on library education and research is enormous,
though repetitive, and inflated. We have given lip service
to the change of curricula and the raising of standards of
research. But the needed change has not come through.
The blame is wholly put on the lack of infrastructure and
unavailability of funds. That is not the entire reason. The
new maladies that have recently inflicted the LIS
research are:


Ghost writing.



Outsourcing of data processing.



Data cooking.



Rampant plagiarism.

Not only the candidates lack skills of research and
more so of writing, they do not try as well. There is no
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

understanding that PhD work is a training in doing and
writing research in future. The lack of effective and
collective efforts to safeguard the standards seems no
less a major cause.

2.8 The Contributions Made by Research
Contrary to expectations, dissertations are not
fountainheads of the rest of the literature to grow and
mature. These primary sources of information are
distanced from relevance. The National Social Science
Documentation Centre (NASSDOC) New Delhi,
systematically procures one copy of each research
dissertations in social sciences to preserve and makes
it available to researchers for consultation within the
premises of its library. The INFLIBNET now also
procures and provides online access to Indian theses
under its ETD programme. Retrospective bibliographies
of LIS dissertations in India are available15. The latest
information on theses awarded, PhD degrees, and PhD
research in progress is available in the featured column
of the weekly University News (1962+) of the
Association of Indian Universities, New Delhi. It is a
major source to keep track of the dissertations awarded
PhD degrees by Indian universities in all disciplines.

2.9 Utility
As a custom lot of suggestions are given at the end
of a research thesis. But the findings and suggestions
are never conveyed to the libraries on which studies
were done. Nor the librarians ask the researcher or the
university for a copy of the research report to know
what the researcher has to say about these. In heart of
heart they know that trite suggestions are no more than
a paper exercise. For example, a doctoral candidate
designs a “Model of Information Literacy Training in
ABC Academic Library” where he himself is the Chief
Librarian. Degree is obtained but the proposed model
gathers dust instead of its implementation wholly or even
partially. It is simplistic to ask why any national agency
such as the National Library Kolkata, The Raja
Rammohan Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF),
INFLIBNET, DELNET, etc., have never invited any LIS
school to do research on the problems being faced by
them. Either they have no professional problems groping
for researched solutions or have no faith in the power of
research to help them! For example, sometime back,
the RRRLF, Kolkata assigned AC Nielson ORG-MARG
Pvt Ltd, the task of undertaking a comprehensive
evaluation of the impact of the Foundation on public
libraries in India. Their formal report was well accepted
and is quite often quoted by the Foundation. No public
or private industry has ever been a source of research
funds for library schools.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

In spite of availability, other researchers do not
adequately use these dissertations; nor are these works
cited or quoted by teachers or textbook writers. Working
librarians rarely use research results to solve their
professional problems. There is no precedent of a library
inviting a library school to do research on a problem
confronting it (conversely there seems inborn animosity
and mistrust between them). At the risk of calling
attention to a red herring, it is worthwhile to have this
idea corroborated from a veteran library leader late
Professor P.N. Kaula (1924-2009)16 who candidly
observed: “The LIS departments have little or no
understanding and cooperation with the central library ...
The problem is more psychological than academic ...
Much harm has been done to the teaching of library
science by the disharmony”.
Librarians go in for local, ad hoc and protem
solutions for their practical problems. Researchers
consult a teacher or a fellow researcher for a topic of
research rather than a practitioner. It is not only true in
India but elsewhere too17. Thus research has become
divorced from reality—a theoretical exercise to earn a
degree at best. To measure the worth of a research work
it will be pertinent to know the following:
(i)

How many papers based on the research have been
published in refereed and international journals?

(ii) How many dissertations have been published as
independent and readable books?
(iii) How many times such a research work has been
quoted or cited in textbooks or other derivative
works or collateral research?
(iv) It would be too much to ask if any patent has been
granted on the research work.
This seems a universal phenomenon in our
profession. Carl Keren18 doubting the value of research in
information science daringly suggested, It would be
worthwhile to find out how much of it has really
contributed to our body of knowledge and to the
methods used by practitioners.” He himself understands
that, “We will probably be rather disappointed”.
American teacher Margaret Steig19 endorses this notion:
Research done by library and information science
educators seems to receive little respect from
professionals, and if they do not find it of value one has
to wonder who will. She further quotes20 the famous
Conant report to prove her point: Library educators
seldom produce well-researched literary products ...
This is where the library schools most fail the
profession. This is a time to pause and think, why? If we
fail the practitioners and the scholars alike, whom do we
serve then?

65

REFERENCES
1. Shera, J.H. Introduction to library science. Libraries
Unlimited, Littleton, CO, 1976.

Science, 1992. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee on Library and Information
Science, UGC, New Delhi, 1992. p. 20.

2. Wilkinson, John. The legitimisation of librarianship.
Libri, 1983, 33(1), 39.

13. National Knowledge Commission (India). Working
Group on Libraries. Libraries gateway to knowledge.
The NKC, New Delhi, 2007. pp 11-12.

3. Mitra, C.R. University-industry interaction with
reference to RECs. University News, 1997, 35(25),
1–4.

14. Kaul, R.K. A requiem for Rajasthan university. Indian
Book Chronicle, 1998, 23(5), 7.

4. Satija M.P. Forty years of doctoral research in
classification and indexing in India, 1957–1997.
Library Herald, 1998, 36(2), 80–87.
5. Ministry of Education (India). Challenge of
education: A policy perspective. The Ministry of
Education, New Delhi. 1985. 116p.
6. Kumar, P.S.G. Research in library and information
science in India, indexed by A. Tejomurty and H.R.
Chopra. Concept, New Delhi, 1987.
7. Sharma, Dev Raj. Doctoral research in library and
information science in Indian universities. The
Author, Palampur, 1997.
8. Chandrashekara, M. & Ramesh, C.P. Library and
information science research in India. http://aliep.kc.tsukuba.ac.jp/proceedings/papers/a65.pdf
(accessed on 25 May 2010).
9. Lahiri, Ramansu. Research in library science in
India (1950–95): An account of PhD programmes.
Ann. Lib. Sci. Doc., 1996, 43(2), 59–68.
10. Varalakshmi, R.S.R. Library and information
science research in India: Subject perspective. Lib.
Sci. Slant Doc., 1994, 31(2), 91–110.
11. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee on Library and Information
Science, 1992. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee on Library and Information
Science, UGC, New Delhi, 1992. p.107.
12. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee on Library and Information

66

15. Satija, M.P. Sources of Indian library and information
science dissertations. Libri, 1989, 39(1), 71–78.
16. Kaula, P.N. Hundred years of library and information
science education. In Library and information
science in India, edited by P.S.G. Kumar & C.P.
Vashishth. Sterling Publishers, New Delhi, 1992.
17. Prytherch, Ray. Problems of research. Inf. Manage.
Rep., 1997, 18.
18. Keren, Carl. On information science. J. Amer. Soc.
Inf. Sci., 1984, 35(2), 137.
19. Steig, Margaret F. Change and challenge in library
and information science education. Chicago,
American Library Association, 1992. p. 96.
20. Steig, Margaret F. Change and challenge in library
and information science education. Chicago,
American Library Association, 1992. p. 198.

About the Author
Dr M.P. Satija is professor in the
Department of Library and Information
Science, Guru Nank Dev University
Amritsar. During his four decades of
professional career he has written about
25 books and 150 papers. Knowledge
organisation being his area of interest.
He has collabortated with Editors of UDC, DDC, and
Sears List for resarch in these areas. He has been
awardee of ILA Lifetime Achievement Award–2007 and
also Best Teacher Award–2009. He is also a Visiting
Professor in the University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

