DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 56-60
© 2010, DESIDOC

Short-term Library and Information Science Training Courses in India
G. Mahesh, Narendra Kumar, and Dinesh K Gupta*
National Institute of Science Communication and Information Resources
14, Satsang Vihar Marg, New Delhi-110 067
E-mail: gmahesh7@gmail.com; narendrakumar@niscair.res.in.

*Department of Library and Information Science
Vardhaman Mahaveer Open University, Kota, Rajasthan-324 010
E-mail: dineshkg.in@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Short-term courses have been the pre-cursor to the LIS education programmes. However, after the
educational programmes came into being, the short-term LIS programmes stopped and not many of these were
conducted during the 1960s and 1970s. With the advent of information technologies in Indian libraries in the late
1980s, the short-term courses have made a slow but steady comeback. The recent years have seen the
strong resurgence of short-term LIS training courses in India with new players joining the LIS training
bandwagon. However, these courses in India have not been a subject of exclusive study. The study traces the
history, growth, and current status of short-term LIS courses in India.
Keywords: Short-term training, LIS education, India

1. INTRODUCTION
Libraries have been in existence since time
immemorial. One of the earliest libraries, the Royal
Library of Alexandria, dates back to third century BC.
According to Butler1, although libraries existed long
back, librarianship as a profession evolved very slowly
and in three phases. The first was in 1850s when the
librarians
became
aware
of
their
scholarly
responsibilities. The second was in 1870s when the
librarians began to realise that a book stock becomes a
library only when it is systematically arranged,
conveniently stored, and completely inventoried. And the
third was in 1920s when librarians extended the new
concepts to their own vocational activities.
Library education in the world began in the mid1800s2. However, the foundation of LIS education in India
dates back to 1911 when W.A. Borden (1853-1931), an
American disciple of Melvil Dewey, for the first time
started a short-term training programme in library
science at Baroda under the patronage of Maharaja
Sayajirao Gaekwad II of Baroda (1862-1939)3. After that,
a number of LIS schools were set up in universities,
colleges, and other institutions of higher learning and
56

research. It is reported that programmes for professional
library education developed in the Madras in the 1930s,
and Bombay, Calcutta, and Delhi in the 1940s and in
other places during the 1960s4.
Today, 87 universities are offering Bachelor’s and
Master’s programmes in LIS, 11 MPhil, and 32 doctoral
degrees in India. Besides, Documentation Research and
Training Centre (DRTC), Bengaluru, and National
Institute of Science Communication and Information
Resources (NISCAIR), New Delhi, also offer specialised
programmes in documentation and information science5.
There are also a number of institutions that conduct
diploma and certificate programmes in library science.
Before library and information science emerged as a
separate discipline, grooming for librarianship involved
imparting skills through trainings of short durations,
apprenticeship or vocational programmes. It is reported
that historically, the library profession depended solely
on apprenticeship in its early years6. The development of
LIS discipline can thus be traced to short-term trainings
that later evolved into systematic education programmes
leading to Certificate, Diploma, Bachelor’s, Master’s,
and other higher degrees.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

A search in the Library, Information Science and
Technology Abstracts (LISTA) database (http://
www.libraryresearch.com) did not yield any study that
deals exclusively with short-term courses. Most studies
include short-term courses as a part of continuing or
lifelong education programmes. However, in context of
this study, short-term courses have been considered as
those courses that are held for a period of three days to
three months and do not culminate to the award of a
diploma or degree.
Short-term courses in any discipline have an
important role to play as they are not only a means of
continuing education but also supplement and
complement to the education programmes. The paper
attempts to trace the growth and the current status of
short-term training courses in the field of library and
information science in India.

2. SHORT-TERM TRAINING PROGRAMMES
IN LIS: A BRIEF HISTORY
Although the history of short-term courses in LIS in
India is not systematically documented, the role of
national and international information systems and
programmes cannot be overlooked in promoting training
courses in library and information science. The
important role played by UNESCO in promoting and
strengthening LIS activities, not only India but across
the world, is well known. UNESCO, in its General
Information Programme (GIP), included short courses,
visiting lectures, guidelines for faculty development, and
evaluation of library and information science continuous
education programmes7.
One of the earliest reports of short-term training in
India pertains to erstwhile Indian National Scientific
Documentation Centre (INSDOC) [presently, National
Institute of Science Communication and Information
Resources (NISCAIR)]. On behalf of UNESCO, INSDOC
organised three regional training programmes in
documentation in 1955, 1963, and 1979 in which
representatives of documentation centres of a number of
Asian countries took part8. INSDOC’s contribution to LIS
in India in general, and LIS education and training in
particular, is also noteworthy. Apart from conducting
short-term training programmes in association with
UNESCO, INSDOC, in 1964, started the two-year
“Associateship in Documentation and Reprography” that
included an IT-based paper, namely “Information storage
and retrieval”9. The course was renamed as
“Associateship in Information Science” in 1974 and
continues to be a respected library and information
science programme in India.
LISTA reveals that during 1960s to early 1980s, the
short-term training programmes were not a regular
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

feature on the Indian LIS scene. Some courses held
during the period focus on indexing, abstracting,
information consolidation, and repackaging, etc. The
reason for the sluggishness in the conduct of short-term
courses could have been due to less demand and also
perhaps for the reason that the Indian academic system
was focused on establishing LIS schools and
consolidating various LIS academic programmes in
institutions of higher learning.
Short-term courses in LIS got the requisite impetus
and began to flourish since 1986 with erstwhile
NISSAT’s (National Information System for Science and
Technology) policy to eradicate computer illiteracy
among Indian LIS professionals. It is reported that during
the period 1986 to 2000, NISSAT had organised 205
short-term computer courses that included many
courses on CDS/ISIS and WINISIS9. NISSAT provided
financial assistance to various institutions to conduct
short-term courses. Nevertheless, since the nineties,
with or without the funding of NISAAT, institutions such
as INSDOC, NASSDOC (National Social Science
Documentation Centre), and library associations such
as Indian Library Association (ILA), Indian Association of
Special Libraries and Information Centres (IASLIC), and
Medical Library Association of India (MLAI) stepped up
short-term training courses in LIS in India. The chief
reason for this was the inroads made by computers in
library and information activities in India.

3. IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The arrival of computers in India during the 1980s
was the all important factor for the appearance of shortterm courses in LIS. It is well known as to how
computers have impacted libraries and later how
information and computer technology (ICT) and Internet
changed the very face of the libraries and are continuing
to do so. It also impacted the education and training and
triggered the growth of short-term trainings for different
reasons as discussed below:

3.1 Non IT-based LIS Workforce
The LIS personnel working in libraries were no doubt
knowledgeable about library and its various facets, but
were not skilled to work in the new IT-enabled
environment, because there were no avenues available
to them to revisit the conventional educational
institutions for learning the requisite IT skills. This
created a need for short-term courses in the area of IT.

3.2 Lack of Infrastructure in Institutions
Although many library schools came into existence,
some of these made a name for themselves, the rapid
emergence of IT could not be coped by the library
57

schools in many ways. One of the reasons was the lack
of basic computer infrastructure required for teaching ITrelated courses. In many instances, even if IT-based
courses were available, library schools emphasised on
more theory than practicals10. Consequently, students of
these institutions began to seek short-term courses for
obtaining hands-on trainings.

3.3 Non-revision of Course Curriculum

In the late 1980s and the 1990s, many institutes
started conducting courses on IT applications to library
and information activities. The courses included general
application of IT in libraries but some focused on
courses pertaining to specific software applications,
particularly CDS/ISIS. A few libraries began conducting
short-term courses in areas other than IT applications
such as marketing, total quality management,
intellectual property management, etc.

Given the fact that IT is a rapidly changing subject,
it is essential to update the relevant LIS course
curriculum regularly. However, curriculum revision does
not happen as frequently as was required and as a
result the curriculum of many universities continue to be
outdated at least as far as the IT applications part of the
syllabi were concerned. Short-term courses thus bridged
the gap that existed in the LIS curriculum.

The turn of the century witnessed widespread
Internet-based applications and increased use of the
client server technologies. One of the major influences
has been the open source software and the concept of
open access both of which have enormous implications
in libraries. The development of open source software in
particular has impacted not only libraries but has also
created new centres of training on these software.

3.4 Non-availability of Appropriate Faculty
Library schools did not have the suitable faculty to
teach IT-related topics; situation continues to be so in
many library schools in the country. The University
Grants Commission (UGC) has in place mechanisms
such as the refresher courses and programmes, to tide
over the situation. The short-term courses complement
the programmes of UGC.

3.5 Development of the Open and Distance
Learning System
The period also saw the growth of open and
distance learning (ODL) system. Many universities
started BLIS and MLIS programmes in the ODL mode. It
has been reported that about 20 universities are offering
LIS courses through the distance education mode that
will double the number of professionals being produced
by the traditional programmes in the entire country put
together11. But, many of the education programmes in
the ODL system do not have adequately supported IT
infrastructure to provide training in ICT.

3.6 Short-term LIS Courses: The Present
Scenario
The above reasons necessitated the need for
training courses in niche areas, particularly in ICT
applications in libraries for students, working LIS
professionals, and the faculty. Further, lack of
apprenticeship programmes or in-service training in most
LIS schools in India, creates problems when the
students join as professionals in different libraries and
information centres12. Elsewhere, the need for short-term
training courses to meet the rising demand for IT training
personnel through retraining of existing professionals
have also been indicated13.
58

3.7 Emergence of Niche Training Institutions
It has been discussed in the beginning that shortterm training in LIS in India was concentrated at national
level organisations such as INSDOC (now NISCAIR),
which had the mandate and expertise for conducting
training courses. Additionally, onsite trainings for
handling proprietary library management software was
provided by software companies that developed the
software and sold it to a library. The scenario changed
completely with the advent of the open source software.
Open source software, primarily because of economic
reasons, is being looked upon as an alternative to the
proprietary software by many libraries in India.
However, one of the problems with many open source
software is that it has a longer learning curve and a
majority of the library and information professionals are
not technically adept in installing and handling these on
their own. Meanwhile, the more technically savvy LIS
professionals began to experiment and implement open
source software in their own libraries. Such libraries
began to impart trainings and workshops on the open
source software. Examples include Indian Institute of
Management, Kozhikode for Green Stone Digital Library
(GSDL), and Developing Library Network (DELNET) for
Koha. Institutions mandated to carry out training
activities such as NISCAIR and DRTC also started
conducting training on many open source software such
as DSpace, GSDL, NewGenLib, and so on.

3.8 Private Players
With the growing number of open source software
and libraries’ keenness to implement these training
requirements could not be fulfilled by traditional
institutions alone. Private players conducting training
programmes for LIS professionals in India were unheard
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

of in the past. However, the use of open source software
in libraries created opportunities for private players to
foray in the area of LIS trainings. Private organisations
such as Nucsoft, Delhi and Anant Corporation, Mumbai
provide training and support on open source software
such as Koha and DSpace.

3.9 Pre-conference Tutorials
The proliferation of library networks and
associations has resulted in a number of annual events
such as conferences, workshops, seminars, etc. While
these events are a platform for professional exchanges
and learning, it is seen that in recent years preconference tutorials on ICT tools are also held regularly.
Such pre-conference tutorials are usually not mandatory
for all the registrants of the conference and are open to
those who are interested to learn about a software at an
additional fee.

3.10 Consortia/Publishers
The increasing preference of electronic resources
has seen the formation of many e-resources consortia.
These consortia, at their own level or through the
publishers or database vendors, are also providing many
training programmes particularly on handling eresources.

4. CONCLUSION
Education is a lifelong process. Formal education
takes place in the academic setting at different levels.
Informal education continues throughout the life through
a wide variety of channels. Short-term courses are a
necessary component in the education system that
fulfills the continuing education needs of the society.
They also aim to train people to handle technology,
tools, and learn routines specific to some institutions.
Short-term training courses are important in the
development of the curricula of a discipline. Since these
courses mostly focus on the recent developments in the
discipline, they give a direction to the curricula in the
traditional formal courses. Also, these are need based,
which when implemented strengthens the curricula of
formal traditional courses. They also contribute to the
development and refinement in the teaching-learning
techniques. Short-term programmes also provide an
opportunity to practicing professionals to teach further
their job-related skills to others. Another advantage of
these courses is that it provides a platform to the
teachers in the traditional teaching and the practicing
world to share the platform and devise better learning
opportunities.
The importance of short-term courses to bridge the
skills and knowledge gaps among library and information
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

professionals and as activators of lifelong learning has
never been as important now as at any time in the past.
If the widespread use of computers in libraries in the late
1980s caused a spurt in short-term courses, the
increasing use of open source software in library
activities presently are triggering the resurgence of
short-term training courses in the last three to four
years. It is appropriate that the present training courses
in India are focusing on ICT applications, pre-dominantly
on open source software.
This augurs well with the global trends, which
include the creation of digital libraries and institutional
repositories. Short-term training courses complement
the education programmes to impart the requisite skills
and knowledge on new softwares. The involvement of
new institutions including private players for providing
short-term training courses is a positive trend.

REFERENCES
1. Butler, P. Librarianship as a profession. The Lib.
Quart., 1951, 21(4) 235-47.
2. Lynch, B.P. Library education: its past, its present
and its future. Library Trends, 2008, 56(1), 931-53.
3. Singh, S.P. Library and information science
education in India: Issues and trends. Malaysian J.
Lib. Inf. Sci., 2003, 8(2), 1-17.
4. Davis (Jr), D.G. & Taher, M. Library history in India:
Historiographical assessment and current trends.
World Libraries, 1993, 3(2). http://www.worlib.org/vo
l03no2/davis_v03n2.shtml (accessed 25 May 2010).
5. Satyanarayana, R. A fresh look at the provision of
education and training for library and information
professionals in India in the 21st century. In Library
and information systems: From Alexandrian heritage
to social networking, edited by K.S. Raghavan &
K.N. Prasad, Ess Ess Publication, New Delhi, 2009.
pp. 232-92.
6. Ranganathan, S.R. Training in library science. Ann.
Lib. Sci., 1954, 1(2), 109-11.
7. Dasgupta, A. & Satpathi, J.N. Continuing education
programmes of library and information science (LIS)
professionals in the universities of West Bengal
(India) with special reference to the University of
Calcutta. In Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific
Conference on Library & Information Education &
Practice, Singapore, 2006. pp. 239-46.
8. Chaddha, O.N. & Gupta, B.M. Indian National
Scientific Documentation Centre. In Handbook of
libraries, archives and information centres in India,
59

Vol. 7, edited by B.M. Gupta & S.S. Nathan. Aditya
Prakashan, New Delhi, 1990. pp. 76-77.
9. Sen, B.K. Competency development re-orientation of
LIS education. In Library and information profession
at the crossroads. In XIX National Seminar of
IASLIC, Bhopal, India, 2000. pp. 283-90.
10. Karisiddappa, C.R. Library and information science
curriculum for the developing countries. In
Proceedings of the World Library and Information
Congress: 70th IFLA General Conference and
Council, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2004. http://
archive.ifla.org/IV/ifla70/papers/062e-Karisiddappa
.pdf (accessed on 26 May 2010).
11. Satyanarayana, N.R. & Jaiswal, B. The changing
role of library professionals and need for reorientation of library and information science
education. In XIX National Seminar of IASLIC,
Bhopal, India, 2000. pp. 291-96.
12. Dasgupta, A. Preparing future librarians in India: A
vision for LIS schools of Indian universities in the
21st century. In World Library and Information
Congress: 75th IFLA General Conference and
Council, Milan, Italy, 2009. http://www.ifla.org/files/
hq/papers/ifla75/126-dasgupta-en.pdf (accessed 23
May 2010).
13. Chatterjee, A. LIS education in India at the
crossroads. In XIX National Seminar of IASLIC in
Bhopal, India, 2000. 297-302.

60

About the Authors
Shri G. Mahesh is Scientist EII with
the Education and Training Division,
National
Institute
of
Science
Communication
and
Information
Resources (NISCAIR), New Delhi.

Dr Narendra Kumar is Scientist ‘F’
and In-Charge, Short Term Training
Courses at NISCAIR, New Delhi. He is
also the Co-ordinator of SAARC
Documentation Centre, New Delhi. He
holds a PhD in library and information
science from the University of Delhi.
Dr Dinesh K Gupta is Associate
Professor and Head of the Department
of Library and Information Science at
Vardhman Mahaveer Open University,
Kota. He holds a PhD in LIS from
University of Rajasthan, Jaipur. Dr
Gupta is a member of the Standing
Committee of IFLA’s management and
marketing section for a second term (2007-2011). He is
also the Chair of the Jury for the IFLA International
Marketing Award. He has edited three books, including
the IFLA book, Marketing Library and Information
Services: International Perspectives, published by K.G.
Saur in Munich, Germany.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

