DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 67-73
© 2010, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Library and Information Science Education in India:
Some Government Initiatives
Manoj K Joshi
Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra-136 119
E-mail: manojkj01@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Library and information sceience education in India is completing a century of its existence. A lot of
progress has been made during this period. Many government initiatives taken by different agencies have been
instrumental in this development. The larger initiatives like Radhakrishnan Commission; Kothari Commission;
National Policy on Education-1968, 1986, 1992; National Knowledge Commissiion and functioning of institutions
such as UGC, NAAC, DEC have influenced the entire higher education sector. The Government of India has also
taken keen interest in library matters through Advisory Committee for Libraries; Working Group of Planning
Commission; National Policy on Library and Information System, etc. UGC has shown keen interest in LIS
education through its various committees and subject panels. The Library Committee; Review Committee and
the two CDCs constituted in 1990 and 2000 have been largely responsible for the present state of LIS
education in India. This paper reviews the various initiatives taken by Government of India in respect of LIS
education in India.
Keywords: University Grants Commission, library and information science education, distance education,
National Policy, Curriculum Development Committee

1.

INTRODUCTION

Historically, government has been the single most
influential player in higher education scenario. Despite
erosion in government role in capitalist world, it has
retained its prominent place particularly due to social
relevance of education. Although, Indian higher
education system got a boost in 1857 with the
establishment of three universities, library education had
to wait till the 20th century. The seeds of LIS education
in India were sown when Maharaja Sayaji Rao Gaikwad
II of Baroda invited an American librarian W.A. Borden in
1911 to establish a network of libraries in his state.
Borden started the first training programme for librarians
in India. Since this small beginning, the library education
has grown in breadth and width to supply the ever
growing demand of the Indian democracy.
The philanthropic nature of Indian princes was more
an exception than a norm. So, efforts like Baroda were
not replicated frequently and it was only after the
charismatic appearance of Dr Ranganathan in the Indian
library scene, that LIS education could got a real boost.
Madras Library Association started a Certificate Course,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

which was later taken over by Madras University making
it a Diploma in Library Science (DLiSc). This heralded
the era of university education in LIS in true sense. This
was the time, when the imperial government had little
interest in libraries and library education.

2.

HIGHER EDUCATION IN INDIA

The independence brought a responsive government
of our own people, who could feel for their country and
its precious heritage. Immediately after independence,
on the suggestion of Radhakrishnan Commission,
University Grants Commission (UGC) was established in
December 1953 (in November 1956 as a statutory body)
to not only fund higher education but to maintain quality
and regulate its all round growth. But UGC is not the
sole agency in this context, many a time the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (erstwhile Ministry of
Education) appoints committees or commissions on
issues pertaining to larger social context of education.
Planning Commission is another agency that ponders on
the issue of education. The University Education
Commission (1948-49) and the Education Commission
(1964-66) were appointed by the Government of India to
67

suggest future course of action on higher education and
education in general, respectively. The report of the
Education Commission was widely discussed among
different sections of Indian society and the consensus
that emerged on future direction of education in India
was reflected in the National Policy on Education in
19681. This policy led to expansion of educational
facilities, common structure of education at
undergraduate level and setting up of Centres of
Advanced Study for postgraduate education and
research.
In May 1986, a new National Policy on Education
(NPE) was adopted by the Parliament of India. It was
revised in 1992 following the suggestions of Acharya
Ramamurti Committee (1990) and N. Janardhana
Reddy Committee (1992)2. The NPE was instrumental in
the setting up of Academic Staff Colleges in universities,
establishment of autonomous colleges, and expansion of
distance education institutions and courses. Although,
these developments took place in higher education
sector in general, LIS as a part of this sector has also
been affected.
One important development during 1980s was the
emergence of distance mode of education in a big way.
In fact, establishment of Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU) in 1985 proved a catalyst for open
and distance learning. The Distance Education Council
(DEC) as a part of IGNOU Act was entrusted with the
task of maintaining quality of courses offered via
distance mode. The 1990s saw a boom in distance
education directorates or institutions fully devoted to
open and distance learning. The National Knowledge
Commission (NKC) made 10 specific recommendations3
regarding streamlining and strengthening of Open and
Distance Education (ODE) system particularly in view of
the fact that more than every fifth student enrolled in any
higher education course belongs to ODE system. NKC’s
recommen-dations have formed the basis of the recently
prepared draft ‘New Policy on Distance Learning in
Higher Education4 of the Government of India to promote
and strengthen distance learning system in India.
The policy statement says that pending formation of
the National Commission for Higher Education and
Research as suggested by Prof. Yash Pal Committee
and NKC, only programmes with less practical content
shall be permissible through distance mode. Besides a
lot of other conditions, it states that universities shall
offer only those courses through distance mode that
they offer through regular mode. And open universities
shall offer courses only after having proper faculty in the
concerned departments. Choice based credit system
shall be promoted and it would be mandatory for all
institutions to use Information and Communication
68

Technology (ICT) for course delivery and management of
student affairs. Under National Mission for Education, a
National Information and Communication Technology
infrastructure for networking of ODE institutions shall be
created, and reputed foreign education providers shall be
allowed. These provisions have far reaching implications
for LIS education as almost every Open University and
Directorate of Distance Education of regular university
now offer LIS courses. Besides these developments,
certain steps taken by the Government of India and
other agencies directly relate to LIS education and
research.

3.

THE INTER-UNIVERSITY BOARD OF INDIA

The Inter University Board of India was formed on 23
March 1925 with a view to promote inter-university
cooperation and interaction. In 1943, the Inter- University
Board of India resolved that, “in order to maintain
uniformity of standards at various centres for training for
librarianship, it is necessary that only graduates be
admitted to the diploma course”5. It became necessary
as the Board dealt with the issue of equivalence of
degrees awarded by foreign and Indian universities. The
Board adopted a new name, Association of Indian
Universities, in 1973 and is still very active.

4.

THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR
LIBRARIES

The Ministry of Education, Government of India set
up a nine member committee under the Chairmanship of
Shri K.P. Sinha to recommend the future library
structure and its development in India. The Committee
submitted its report in 1958. Although the Committee
was mainly concerned with development of public
libraries, it made recommendations for training for
librarianship. The Committee recommended to the
Government of India to set up an expert committee to
suggest complete reorganisation of the syllabus,
teaching methods and conduct of examination of the
then prevailing library diploma course6. It recommended
that UGC should provide financial assistance to
universities offering diploma courses for establishment of
full teaching departments. It also recommended that the
terms and conditions of work of library science teachers
should be same as those of other departments.

5.

THE INSTITUTE OF LIBRARY SCIENCE

In 1959, the union Ministry of Education provided
grants to establish an Institute of Library Science at the
University of Delhi to impart instructions mainly to
‘public librarians and to prepare teaching aids and
materials7. But the Institute was finally closed down in
1964 and the staff was merged with the Department.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

6.

THE WORKING GROUP OF PLANNING
COMMISSION

The Working Group8 of the Planning Commission on
Modernisation of Library Services and Informatics for the
Seventh Five Year Plan (1985-90), looked into the state
of libraries in India in detail. It also made some
recommendations for the library education for the Plan
period. The recommendations included setting up of a
National Centre for Education and Research in LIS
along the lines of NCERT, NIEPA, etc.
In view of large number of LIS schools, the Group
suggested, for the next five years, term consolidation
instead of expansion. Moreover, LIS schools should
offer specialisations on different areas and organise
continuing education programmes (CEP) for teachers
and practicing librarians. The Group suggested for
provision of grants to LIS schools for research
fellowship, travel grants, etc., to attract quality students
particularly with S&T background. One appreciable
recommendation of the Working Group was to include
LIS in the bilateral exchange programmes.

7.

THE NATIONAL POLICY ON LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION SYSTEM

accreditation agency for LIS courses was suggested to
check falling standards due to proliferation of schools. It
was also suggested to establish a National Centre for
Higher Education and Research in LIS.

8.

NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE COMMISSION

The National Knowledge Commission (NKC) was
constituted on 13th June 2005 to advise the Prime
Minister of India mainly on creation, management, use
and application of knowledge institutions and services. It
recommended, in its first report, setting up of a National
Commission on Libraries and National Mission on
Libraries12 to conduct a survey of manpower
requirements and evaluate the status of research. It also
recommended establishment of a well-equipped institute
for advanced training and research in LIS and services
to revamp LIS education in India.

9.

UGC AND LIS EDUCATION

UGC has played a vital role in LIS education in
independent India through its various committees and
subject panels. Besides its responsibility towards higher
education in general wherein it formulates various
norms and guidelines applicable to all the disciplines
(including LIS) being taught in the universities and
colleges in India, UGC has also given special attention
to libraries and library education.

In the year 1985 the Indian Library Association (ILA)
and the Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation
(RRRLF), both prepared separate drafts of National
Policy on Library and Information System. In fact, due
to continuing debate on National Policy on Education
that finally took shape in 1986, both these efforts were
made. The ILA draft devoted one full section on
manpower development9. It proposed the establishment
of a National Centre for Education and Research in
Library and Information Science. The RRRLF draft
called for uniform pattern and standards for LIS
education for the entire nation10. It also stated that
research and specialised courses may be offered by
universities as well as leading research and library
promotional organisations such as National Library,
DRTC, INSDOC, RRRLF, etc.

To look into the various aspects of functioning and
management of university and college libraries, the
UGC appointed a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr Ranganathan in 1957. Its report published in 1965,
covered all aspects of academic libraries including the
education and training of professional librarians13. The
Committee
recommended
that
the
university
departments should offer only professional courses
such as BLIS, MLIS and PhD. The practice of offering
certificate course by universities should be stopped and
the diploma should be converted to BLIS.

In October 1985, the Government of India set up a
Committee on National Policy on Library and
Information
System
(CONPOLIS)
under
the
Chairmanship of Prof. D.P. Chattopadhyaya. Its report
entitled National Policy on Library and Information
System—A Presentation was submitted in 1986, and
was subsequently assessed by an Empowered
Committee chaired again by Prof. Chattopadhyaya to
draw up an action plan11. The Empowered Committee in
its report submitted in March 1988, recommended that
IT should be used as a tool for maintenance of
standards in LIS education. Professional development
activities be strengthened in a systematic way. An

The Committee also made recommendations for
faculty. A department offering only BLIS course should
have a minimum of one reader, one lecturer and one
demonstrator; while those offering MLIScourse should
have at least one professor, one reader, two lecturers,
and two demonstrators. Moreover, a full-time teacherstudent ratio should not exceed 1:10 in BLIS and 1:5 in
MLibSc. The Committee also suggested to appoint a
committee to look into the question of quality and
standard of library education. Since, it was the first
scientifically prepared comprehensive document on
college and university libraries, the UGC accepted its
recommendations as norms14.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

10. THE LIBRARY COMMITTEE

69

11. REVIEW COMMITTEE ON LIBRARY
SCIENCE IN INDIAN UNIVERSITIES

12. UGC PANEL ON LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION SCIENCE

Realising the need for a committee to investigate
the state of library education, UGC appointed a Review
Committee in 1961 under the chairmanship of Dr
Ranganathan, to look into the standards of teaching and
research in library science in Indian universities. The
report of the Committee published in 1965, contained a
detailed review of library science education15. The
Committee made wide ranging recommendations on all
aspects of library education. The syllabus it designed
for BLIS and MLIScourses was adopted with minor
changes by almost all library schools in India. At that
time, some library schools were having non-professional
subjects like general knowledge, language, cultural
history, etc., this practice was discouraged by the
Committee. It also suggested for redesignation of
diploma in library science to BLIS and urged
universities to offer only professional courses like BLIS,
MLISand PhD. The Committee also urged library
science departments to have a provision of six-month
apprenticeship before BLIS.

In the 1970s the Department of Library and
Information Science of Delhi University organised two
national level seminars (in 1973 and 1977) with the
financial support of UGC. These were held on methods
of teaching and evaluation in library science and LIS
education. After a detailed discussion on the
recommendations of these programmes and LIS
courses and curriculum the Panel made some
significant recommendations16.

Regarding faculty, the Committee suggested a
minimum of two lecturers and one reader for a
department offering only BLIS course, and one
professor, two readers and four lecturers for a
department having MLIS also. This was a slight
improvement over what the Library Committee had
suggested; however, on teacher-student ratio its
suggestion was same as that of the Committee.
The Review Committee also delved on the issue of
teaching strategies and evaluation and suggested at
least 400 working hours during a session for BLIS. The
Committee emphatically called for independent teaching
departments of library science, similar in all respects to
other departments in the university. However, a close
cooperation between the department and university
library was deemed essential.
Although, the Review Committee devoted one full
chapter on research, the condition of research was not
very encouraging. After a decade of independence, only
D. B. Krishna Rao got a PhD degree and he was lone in
the list for nearly two decades that followed. The
Committee called upon UGC to organise a survey of the
new entrants coming out of universities and employers
to assess the need for library professionals and the
quality of university products.
This was the first exhaustive document on library
education in India. Many of its recommendations like
the model syllabus of BLIS and MLibSc, change in the
nomenclature of the course, etc., were readily
implemented by most of the departments.
70

Universities having adequate facilities may start a
two-year integrated programme leading to MLIS. Like
the Review Committee, the Panel also suggested that
LIS departments in the universities should have the
same independent status as other teaching
departments. One significant change occured in Indian
library education during 1970s was inclusion of the
components of information science like information
storage and retrieval, computer application, etc. in the
LIS curriculum. In view of this, the Panel suggested that
the nomenclature of the departments may be changed
to reflect the changed curriculum. It also urged the
departments with adequate infrastructure to offer
research programmes of MPhil and PhD. Interestingly,
after D.B. Krishna Rao (1958) the second PhD in
library science in India had just been awarded to
Pandey SK Sharma in 1977. But since then research
has got a boost.

13. THE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEES
After the Review Committee Report, library
education was drastically changed. In fact, the Review
Committee not only touched upon all aspects of LIS
education, it set the direction and pace for the future.
LIS education followed the path suggested by the
Review Committee for more than two decades. Since
then, two curriculum development committees have gone
into the LIS curriculum in detail.

13.1 The Kaula Committee
The first Curriculum Development Committee
(CDC) in LIS was appointed by the UGC under the
Chairmanship of Prof. P.N. Kaula in 1990. After wide
ranging deliberations, the Committee submitted its
report in 1992. It contains, besides a well- designed
detailed syllabus, well thought out suggestions to LIS
schools and recommendations to UGC17. The
Committee suggested LIS schools to clearly specify the
objectives of each course offered by them. Admission for
the courses be on the basis of academic achievement,
admission test, and an interview. In the university
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

courses the medium of instruction should be English.
The CDC also made recommendations regarding
teaching methods, aids and other infrastructural
resources required for the courses. Endorsing the UGC
Panel’s recommendations the CDC suggested an
increase over the Review Committee suggestions, in the
minimum faculty strength of LIS departments. It
suggested for the departments having only BLISc
course one professor, one reader and three lecturers,
and for departments also offering MLISc course one
professor, two readers and five lecturers. The CDC
made some specific recommendations to UGC
regarding independent status of LIS departments similar
to those in other disciplines. The same issue was earlier
taken up by the Review Committee and the UGC Panel
also. The CDC also recommended for the creation of
one post of professor at least in the LIS departments
offering MLISc course. It also urged the UGC to issue
guidelines to all universities for treating LIS departments
as science departments for allocation of equipment
grants. The scheme of papers and detailed syllabus
designed by the CDC remained a model for subsequent
curriculum revision exercises done by the departments.

13.2 The Karisiddappa Committee
The UGC constituted the second CDC in LIS under
the chairmanship of Dr C.R. Karisiddappa in 2000. The
Committee submitted its report in 200118. It is an
excellent document on curriculum containing not only
syllabi and infrastructural requirements needed to be
met, but also areas like allotment of marks, teaching
hours and their break-up, etc. It emphasised strongly for
two-year integrated master degree course. And of
course, due to the strong words used by Dr Hari
Gautam, then UGC Chairman in the foreword of the
Report, regarding implementation of the same, a number
of departments also went for the two-year integrated
master degree course. The Committee also emphasised
practical component and made specific provision for
practice in certain papers.

14. NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND
ACCREDITATION COUNCIL
The National Assessment and Accreditation Council
(NAAC) was established in 1994 by the UGC. As an
outcome of the Government’s National Policy on
Education, 1986, NAAC was established to assess and
accredit institutions of higher education in India. NAAC
assesses only those higher education institutions which
volunteer for this purpose, although UGC is endeavoring
to bring all institutions under its purview. Interestingly,
assessment of specific academic programmes19 has
also been stated in its mission, but it has primarily
concerned itself with assessment of institutions only.
The establishment of NAAC is a welcome step to bring
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

in qualitative changes in higher education. It has begun
with the accreditation of institutions; let us hope to see
it accrediting courses too, to bring further quality in
higher education including LIS education.

15. CONCLUSION
Library education has completed a century in India.
During this period, it has covered a long distance from
a small beginning of short-term training to a countrywide network of universities, colleges, polytechnics,
research organisations, professional associations, etc.,
offering certificate, diploma, PG diploma, bachelor’s
degree, master’s degree, MPhil, PhD and even DLit
through regular and distance modes. This brighter side
is not so bright in reality.
The frequently highlighted need for consolidation
has not been given proper thought. Still, the emphasis is
on expansion. In fact, anyone enjoying support of
authority soon develops ambition of starting a LIS
course. The concluding remarks made in the Status
Report, given along with CDC report (2001), only
indicate a dangerous trend. “In conclusion it can be
expressed with serious concern that there is a
undesirable growth of LIS courses at all levels in the
country, in contrast to the state of the happenings in
other countries like USA, UK, Australia and so on,
where the LIS schools are either abandoned or merged
with the departments offering high profile courses, to
enhance
their
marketable
potentiality”20.
This
mushrooming of LIS courses has created a large army
of half-baked unemployed youth.
This problem is compounded by overlooking the
cautious recommendations of the Advisory Committee
for Libraries (1958), Review Committee (1961), UGC
Panel (1979) and CDC (1992) to have independent
departments of LIS in universities. Frequently, LIS
courses are being started from library without
establishing a proper department and recruiting full-time
teachers. In fact, the notion that a good librarian can
teach LIS content in an excellent way to produce
potentially highly employable professional is debatable.
No doubt, a technician or semi-professional can be
produced through this technique, but not a professional.
It is essential to have a department of LIS along the
same line as other teaching departments in the
university.
The proliferation of LIS courses has another reason.
The distance education that got boost through the NPE,
1986, has changed the entire scenario of LIS education
in India. Today, we have many times more students in
distance stream than in regular stream. The idea of
taking education to the doorsteps of the student, who is
unable to go for regular courses due to non-educational
constraints, is very appreciable. But making it a shortcut
71

to get a degree or diploma by avoiding the rigorous
educational requirements of regular stream has become
the practice in distance stream. IGNOU does not need
to offer its courses for resource generation, but for other
universities Directorate of Distance Education is the
main source of income. The Distance Education Council
may keep record of infrastructural aspects but at the
level of implementation the deterioration has no limits.
Universities without having a single LIS teacher offered
all courses from bachelor degree to Master of
Philosophy. Of course, now MPhil is offered through
regular stream only.
LIS education is marred by another burning
problem of insufficient faculty strength. Although, all the
committees have recommended minimum faculty
strength, but it is widely violated. To add to the woos of
the departments, even the existing faculty positions are
not filled timely. Talwar21 has claimed that 78 LIS
departments having 291 sanctioned positions of
teachers were running with a shortage of 75 teachers.
In certain states governments impose blanket ban on
appointments, which adversely affects the recruitment
of teachers also. The suggestion of the Working Group
of the Planning Commission for Seventh Five Year Plan,
for a National Centre for Education and Research in
L&IS along the lines of NCERT, etc. and reiterated by
the NKC besides making recommendations for setting
up of National Commission on Libraries and National
Mission on Libraries, have not been able to attract the
attention of our policy planners.

REFERENCES
1. Ministry of Education (India). National Policy on
Education, 1986 (as modified in 1992) with National
Policy on Education, 1968. Department of
Education,
Ministry
of
Human
Resource
Development, New Delhi, 1998. pp. 38-45.
2. Ministry of Education (India). National Policy on
Education 1986 (as modified in 1992) with National
Policy on Education, 1968. Department of
Education,
Ministry
of
Human
Resource
Development, New Delhi, 1998. pp.1-37.
3. National
Knowledge
Commission
(India).
Recommendations on open and distance education.
http://www.knowledgecommission.gov.in/rec
ommendations/open&distance.asp (accessed on 6
July 2010).
4. Ministry of Human Resource Development (India).
New policy on distance learning in higher education.
http://www.dec.ac.in/index.htm (accessed on 6 July
2010).

72

5. Krishan Kumar & Sharma, Jaideep. Library and
information science education in India. Har-Anand,
New Delhi, 2009. p. 72.
6. Ministry of Education (India). Advisory Committee for
Libraries. Report of Advisory Committee for Libraries,
Rev. Ed. Ministry of Education, New Delhi, 1960.
pp. 101-02.
7. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum
Development
Committee.
University
Grants
Commission, India, 1992. p. 3.
8. Planning Commission (India). Working Group on
Modernisation of Library Services and Informatics.
Report of the Working Group of the Planning
Commission on Modernisation of Library Services
and Informatics for the Seventh Five Year Plan
1985-90. Planning Commission, India, 1984.
pp. 59-60.
9. Girija Kumar. Library development in India. Vikas,
New Delhi, 1986. pp. 147-53.
10. Girija Kumar. Library development in India. Vikas,
New Delhi, 1986. pp. 154-61.
11. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. National policy on library
and information system–A presentation. Report of
the Curriculum Development Committee, UGC,
1986. pp. 13-14.
12. National Knowledge Commission (India). Report to
the nation 2006. NKC, 2007. pp. 28-29.
13. University Grants Commission (India). University
and College Libraries: Containing the Report of the
Library Committee of the University Grants
Commission and the Proceedings of the Seminar on
From Publisher to Reader held on 4-7 March 1959.
University Grants Commission, India, 1965. pp.1-150.
14. Mangla, P.B. National policy on libraries, information
systems and services: An overview. In 50 years of
library and information services in India, edited by
M. K. Jain. Shipra, Delhi, 1998. pp. 10.
15. University Grants Commission (India). Review
Committee. Library science in Indian universities:
Report of the University Grants Commission, Review
Committee. University Grants Commission, India,
1965. pp. 34-41.
16. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

Development Committee on Library and Information
Science. University Grants Commission, India,
1992. pp. 11-12.
17. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee, UGC, 1992. pp. 23-31.
18. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee on UGC model curriculum
for library and information science. University Grants
Commission, India, 2001. pp. 13-14.
19. National Assessment and Accreditation Council
(India). http://naacindia.org/aboutus.asp (accessed
on 28 June 2010).
20. University Grants Commission (India). Curriculum
Development Committee. Report of the Curriculum
Development Committee on UGC model curriculum
for library and information science. University Grants
Commission, India, 2001. pp. 120.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

21. Talwar, V.G. Library and information science
education in India: Some issues. In Quality
education in library and information science, edited
by N. Laxman Rao and S. Sudarshan Rao. Keynote
address delivered at the XXII IATLIS National
Conference, Department of Library & Information
Science, Bishop Heber College, Tiruchirapalli, 24-26
November 2005. IATLIS, Hyderabad, 2006. p. 4.

About the Author
Dr Manoj K Joshi is currently Associate
Professor in Library and Information
Science,
Kurukshetra
University,
Kurukshetra. Having studied LIS in the
University of Delhi, he has been
associated with Kurukshetra University
for about 15 years. He has authored one
book, 2 chapters in books, 12 papers in
journals, 7 conference papers, besides a number of
seminar reports, book reviews, etc.

73

