DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 83-90
© 2010, DESIDOC

e-Learning Library and Information Science: A Pragmatic View for India
Manorama Tripathi and V.K.J. Jeevan*
Central Library, JNU, New Delhi-110 067
E-mail: manoramatripathi2@yahoo.com
*Library & Documentation Division, IGNOU, New Delhi-110 068
E-mail: vkjj@rediffmail.com

ABSTRACT
E-learning is basically the computer and network-enabled transfer of skills and knowledge. It includes the
electronic applications and processes applied to teaching and learning. E-learning applications may include
web-based learning, computer-based learning, virtual classrooms, and digital collaboration. The paper
highlights the various steps required to be undertaken by an institution to venture into e-learning, especially in
the context of a professional discipline like library and information science which has gained immense
popularity in recent times. By taking reference service, it further illustrates how to design, develop, and
execute a functional e-learning course. Various issues related to e-learning, which need serious attention
have been discussed from the different perspectives of teacher, learner, and institution.
Keywords: e-learning, information science, reference services, e-learning, online education

1.

INTRODUCTION

E-learning is learning attempted through electronic
means for achieving the computer and network-enabled
transfer of skills and knowledge. It refers to courses that
are offered fully online, courses that mix face to face
and online access to instruction and course materials
and courses where teachers post notes and materials
for students and provide access to online discussion
forums on course topics. E-learning, blended learning,
online learning distance learning have been used
interchangeably and the lines of demarcation among
them are blurred. The origins of e-learning, web-based
education can be traced back to distance learning
where participating learners would receive materials to
pursue an educational or training course1.

2.

PARADIGM CHANGE IN THE TEACHINGLEARNING PROCESS

The landscape of higher education is constantly
evolving due to rapid strides being made in the field of
Information and Communication Technology (ICT).
Traditionally, the teaching and learning process has
predominantly involved face to face interaction. But the
evolution of ICT has ushered the way for e-learning. It is
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

gaining lot of popularity due to various factors such as
increasing demands for higher education, rising costs,
dwindling budgets, need for learner-centric distance
education, training and skills, emergence of knowledge
intensive global economy and the deep desire of the
professionals to learn while they earn. These factors are
causing e-learning to spread across the higher
education sector. Concerted efforts are being made to
make e-learning part and parcel of higher education.
Further, the popularity of e-learning is also attributed to
the vast potential of World Wide Web and its costeffective technologies which are widely available for
learning applications. It has also been observed that elearning is gaining more user acceptance owing to
change in the models of teaching and learning (from
passive to participative or user centric) and
internationalisation of education where delivery of crossborder education is common2.

3.

A MODEL FOR DEVELOPING E-LEARNING
PROGRAMME FOR LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION SCIENCE

Collis and Moonen3 have identified important
components of institution, implementation, pedagogy,
and technology which need serious consideration
83

before any online course is designed and implemented.
Jolliffe, Ritter and Stevens4 have described an 18-step
process for implementing and developing an online
learning environment. Mishra5 has specified different
steps, which must be followed for implementing and
developing any online course, as: need analysis,
demand for online programme, course credit and
equivalence, learner profile, hardware and software
requirements, internet access/and bandwidth aspects,
costs,
organisational
profile,
expertise,
and
infrastructure and faculty development. Bixler and
Spotts6 have identified the following parameters which
should be considered for implementing e-learning
programmes: institutional support, course development,
teaching and learning, course structure, student
support, faculty support, evaluation, and assessment.
The requirement for institutional support is imperative for
e-learning deployment and success. The new, changed
role of teachers and instructors should be duly
recognised and acknowledged. Support plans for the
evolution and transformation processes must be well laid
out. The student support must be robust. The concept of
student support is entirely different from that of
traditional methods. In online environment the students
learn from the programmed instructional systems that
have been automated7.
The following steps may be followed in designing
and implementing an e-learning programme in LIS:

3.1 Need and Demand Analysis for Online
Programme
A rigorous research needs to be undertaken to find
out if online programme is needed in LIS. The research
report should clearly indicate the need, problems to be
encountered, and surmounted in implementing the elearning programme. With highly successful distance
learning programmes in many open-and campus-based
universities and regular programmes in many of the
latter, it is easy to estimate that there is a strong need of
e-learning programmes in this discipline.

curriculum for each course has to be decided. How will
the certification be done for the programme? The rigid
course design and execution strategies followed by our
universities give very little scope for total overhaul. One
has to stick to the courses and credits of regular and
distance courses but the course delivery may be more
challenging due to the wide opportunities of simulation
studies possible through e-learning.

3.3

Intended Audience

It is very important to know and ascertain whether
the programme is meant for freshers or for mid-level
professionals. Will there be takers for such an online
programme? Will the programme be completely online,
blended to support face to face learning and so on so
forth? The course may be structured and delivered to
the intended audience in a more flexible and modular
fashion through e-learning.

3.4 Hardware and Software Requirements
The programme will require any specific hardware
and software requirements. The users will need to install
specific software on their terminals for accessing the
course or CDs of the course content will be given to the
students. The functionality of the technological
infrastructure should be ensured before the programme
is launched. Emphasis must be paid to always select
cost-effective and open access solutions considering
the nature of large number of students and
professionals
from
the
economically
weaker
backgrounds to benefit from the exercise.

3.5 Internet Access

3.2 Courses and Credits of the Programme

It must be ensured that the students have Internet
access with adequate bandwidth. The lessons may have
animations, graphics, simulations, online tests, which
may require lot of bandwidth to download. E-learning
programmes in order to run smoothly require adequate
bandwidth, technology-equipped classrooms and
sufficient computing facilities for the learners. The
advancement in technology should be accompanied by
enhanced support system as well. The technology
providers should provide e-learning solutions following
common standards which facilitate interoperability8. The
regular evolution in hardware, software, and rising
expectations of the learners should be taken in to
consideration by the technology providers to offer
innovative products at reasonable rates. With cyber
cafes, broadband Internet facility in homes, offices,
colleges and universities, Internet access with good
bandwidth is at the reach of many learners.

It should be further decided about the number of
papers or courses and their credits; the content/

But there are still many left without such
advantages and for them, e-choupals, Internet facility at

Apart from the regular courses, the potential of elearning for providing continuing education to working
professionals is very vital considering the onslaught of
many new technologies in the library workplace. The
present channels of providing continuing education are
very little like orientation programmes or workshops, and
tutorials and e-learning may offer more fruitful and
effective on-the-job training to more number of
professionals in less time.

84

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

public libraries and local community
activated. Since mobile technology
accessible than internet, the learners
may use this for sms, alerts, and for
short queries with instructor.

centres may be
is getting more
and trainers also
quick contact for

3.6 Cost
E-learning offers many advantages of scalability,
wider geographic reach and faster delivery speed9,10. It
has been always observed that the work of producing
multimedia training modules is expensive. The system
can be cost-effective when training and education has
to be imparted to thousand learners located in various
distributed locations, but the initial cost is always high.
The initial cost of developing content, acquiring,
arranging infrastructure, bandwidth, and system
integration is always high. The cost of Internet access,
course fee, etc., should be reasonable for the students
to bear and sustain. The universities may set up
learning resource centres where computer and Internet
facilities may be provided. With recent passage of Right
to Education (RTE) and better allocation for education,
functional and cost- effective e-learning programmes
may be evolved.

3.7 Institutional Mindset
The leaders, administrators, instructors should be
prepared to undertake e-learning projects. The teachers
must be prepared to embrace the use of technologies
for starting an online programme and need to be trained
in the use of tools and technologies for teaching in an
online environment.
They should be crystal clear with the different ways
of interacting with the students. They should know how
to use e-mails, mailing list, group chat, online diary,
discussion boards, etc. The human resources—
teachers, administrators, designers, and developers—
should be committed to the programme; only those
professionals should be involved who have an interest in
technology and ability to adopt and adapt technology.

3.8 Assessment and Awarding Marks or
Grading
Assessment enhances and reinforces the learning
approach which a student follows and is a pivotal part of
teaching and learning process. Assessment of learners
should be based on higher order thinking skills; this will
ultimately ensure a deep holistic approach to e-learning
by the students11.
The online courses offer different assessment
methods like the students may be assessed according
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

to their performance in objective type multi-choice
questions, and essay-type long answers. They may be
further evaluated on their projects, which they submit
online or on their participation in the discussions forums
and so on so forth.

3.9 Selection of Learning Management Software
or Virtual Learning Environment
For
developing
and
launching
e-learning
programme, it has to be decided whether open source
software or commercially available software will be
used. The content, course pages should have
multimedia—text, graphics, animation; the pages should
have adequate links and should be easy to navigate.
There should be provision for support tools—facility to
upload files, submit assignments, availing online tests,
monitoring learning progress, research reports,
bookmarking facilities to mark where one stops in a
particular session.
The instructors should be enabled to upload course
plans, content, lessons and questions, and exercises.
The system should facilitate the teachers to monitor the
learners’ progress and provide individual feedback to
them.
There should be FAQs or help guides for the
learners to troubleshoot the problems during the course
of the programme. The course designer, instructor
should have the administrator rights for over all
management—assigning user ID, passwords; user
rights to the authentic learners. The system should
permit online registration and fee payment.

3.10 Orientation and User Awareness
Programmes
This is a transition phase in which the mode of
delivery of education is evolving; e-learning is yet to
develop in its fullest form. So the users need to be made
aware, familiarised with different modules and tools
which they will come across in the online environment.

3.11 Staff Training and Development
For e-learning programmes to become successful
the importance of staff training and development must
be duly recognised12. This will ensure that technology
can be integrated into teaching and learning process
effectively with least problems.
The teachers need to keep abreast with the latest
tools and technologies in order to teach in online
environment. This means the teachers will have
additional workload which some of them detest. The
success of online courses depends on the instructors’
85

familiarity with the latest technologies, which they can
adopt easily.

3.12 Evaluation
Evaluation is an important activity, which needs to
be undertaken to find out if a particular activity is
helping the intended audience. An e-learning
programme should be evaluated to find out the following:


Number of enrolment over the years.



Success rate of the students.



Cost-efficiency of the online course as compared to
the traditional programme.

3.13 Maintenance of the System
Success of online programmes require constant
monitoring and updation. The staff should be available
for 24x7 monitoring and maintenance. There are many
problems like server errors, occasional breakdowns,
busy signals, lack of access, which can hamper optimal
utilisation of various tools, cause frustration among the
learners, and adversely affect the learning process.
These problems cannot be completely eliminated; but
efforts should be taken to ensure the functionality of the
technological infrastructure.

4.

ILLUSTRATION OF E-LEARNING COURSE
FOR REFERENCE SERVICE

For designing an online reference service course the
following steps need to be undertaken:
Curriculum: The content or syllabus of the course or
paper needs to be identified and should include concept
of reference service, history of reference service, need
and relevance of reference service, components of
reference service, different reference sources, free online
reference sources, use of Web 2.0 tools for providing
reference service, and evaluation of reference sources.
Creator: It has to be decided whether the content will be
designed and developed in-house or outside experts are
to be involved or content from public domain will be
taken. Since e-learning involves no trainer in campus,
there is no need that all the instructors should be on roll
of the institute, collaboration at regional, national and
international levels with experts in the field may be
worked out for creating lessons and also as course
faculty.
Format: The e-lessons should be created on the
identified topics. E-lectures of teachers can be recorded
and archived for the students. Since e-content can
include text, PowerPoint presentations, pictures,
86

animations, graphics, audio and video, a balance of
these formats should figure in the e-learning materials to
make the lessons livelier. Which format should suit a
particular learning may be decided based on the
availability of the desired materials or through pilot
testing in the initial e-learning sessions. Since learning
can be better achieved by doing, scope for enough
practical sessions requiring learner involvements in the
topics dealt should be included. The e-lessons should
be interspersed with short, focused video clips of
reference desk, reference interview, which takes place in
an academic library. The video clips will motivate and
engage learners and sustain their interest for long.
Question Bank: The question papers on reference
service of different universities can be digitised and
archived; to help the students some model answers may
be provided. E-quizzes comprising reference questions
which the library staff may expect from users, may be
provided. Online tests, short answer, fill in the blanks,
objective-type and essay-type questions with model
answers and key may be provided on the course site.
Creating e-base for the Course: Apart from locally
created course materials and course packs, there
should be reading lists at the end of each chapter. The
resources should be clickable and accessible. The
institution may create course web portal based on
information available free on the Internet and purchased/
subscribed e-books, e-journals, e-databases relevant to
the course. All resources of interest to a learner, to
successfully complete the course and fruitfully meet the
knowledge requirements may be accessed from the
portal.
Course Delivery: The main source for the learner to take
the course is through the course website/portal. The
various resources provided on the site plus its hyperlinks
of e-base helps the learner to achieve the various
learning objectives of the course. Asynchronous
discussion forums allow for comments to be posted and
viewed at a time of convenience to the students and the
instructors; there is no need to be connected at the
same time. Asynchronous discussion forums may be
used by the teachers to provide information or
instructions to the students on the course content,
administrative matters or comments which are for all
students. The students may answer to the postings. The
instructors are supposed to actively respond to the
postings by the students. An instructor can post a topic
for the students to debate upon; for example the
importance of reference service in the Internet age. The
students may be asked to write a short essay of 800
words or so. They can be assessed and awarded marks
for participation which should be made obligatory for the
students; it should not be optional.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

Podcasts: Podcasts are digital media files which play
audio and/or audio and video and which can be opened
or downloaded. Educational podcasts are digital audio
files which have meaningful content for learning.
Educational podcasts may be prepared for a particular
type of student group. Popova and Kirschner13 have
proposed a frame work which may help teachers to
decide upon the most appropriate type of podcast to
support learning. More effective teaching and learning
takes place when learners can interact, share
knowledge, experience and understanding of others.
This helps in supporting and enhancing collaborative and
conversational learning among the students. Interview of
a reference librarian of a university can be taken and
podcast. The learners will get to hear practical
experience of a reference librarian—what problems are
encountered in day-to-day routine reference work.
Webcasting: It is dissemination of recorded or live
content over the Internet; generally webcasts are live
presentations, which may enable the learners to ask
questions and receive answers, even though they may
be away from the expert. Guest lectures are important
tool to give students an enhanced learning experience
by offering theory as well as practical experience. The
lectures of reference librarians, keynote addresses of
experts can be webcast and the learners can raise
queries too.
Blog: A blog is a personal website that contains content
organised like a journal or a diary. Entries are dated and

Learning,
accessing,
using

displayed on the webpage in a chronological manner. An
instructor may use blog to post class information—
reading lists and deadlines for assignments to be
submitted. Instructors may create their own blog;
provide links to resources related to the topics of the
curriculum. The blog serves as a source for providing
supplemental information to the students. For example,
if a conference or seminar is being organised on Web
2.0 tools for reference service, a link to the conference
website may be provided. The students can be
encouraged to blog on specific topics related to the
curriculum.
Evaluation: At the end, after the minimum time, students
should have the facility to take on-demand online
examination for certification. Apart from continuous
evaluation and end of course evaluation, the instructors
should encourage the use of resources listed at the end
of each chapter and some additional marks may be
awarded to the students for using the resources. The
course module should provide practical tips on how to
use Web 2.0 tools for providing reference services. For
example, the course content should have provision for
enabling students to create an account and start a blog
using free blogging service. There should be some
provision for the students to have interaction among
them and get feedback; individually from the teachers.
Baggley14 has classified levels of interactivity under 12
categories like browsing-mail; question/answers: no
feedback; real time polling; text forums; text chats, A/V
conferencing; question/answers: feedback, collaborative

e-knowledge base,
course materials,
web links, eresources, question
banks etc.

Creating,
identifying and
linking

Learner
Learner- instructor
multi mode
i i
Learning
feedbacks
Evaluation and
certification

Instructor

Figure 1. A schematic of a pragmatic e-learning framework.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

87

activities; real-time and CRM: no feedback; and realtime CRM: feedback.

5.

PROBLEMS OF E-LEARNING

The problems relating to e-learning which need
immediate attention are:

5.1 Issues Related to Teachers
In online environment, a teacher has to be an
administrator as well as instructor. Basically, a teacher
has to have four main skills of an administrator,
facilitator, technical supporter, and evaluator. They
should have administrative skills to ensure that the
programme runs smoothly. General feeling among
teachers is that for implementing e-learning programmes
they have to work in addition to the routine work of
traditional teaching; they have to write course materials,
check assignments, attend to users’ queries, and
provide feedback through e-mails. Studies have revealed
that teachers need nearly twice as much time to teach
an online course compared to a traditional course. So
they need to be supported and facilitated in terms of
resources to ensure that e-learning courses are
developed appropriately and needs of the students are
optimally met. They should get help and support through
the transition period before e-learning courses become
commonplace. It takes more time on the part of faculty
members to develop content and provide online versions
of content15 therefore, teachers should be given
incentives and appreciations from accredition agency for
engaging in e-learning applications.
Professional development of teachers is a
prerequisite for any e-learning programme to be
sustained over a period of time. The teachers should be
offered training at regular intervals so that they are well
versed with latest technologies and protocols and are
ever prepared to embrace and implement e-learning in
their teaching work unhesitatingly. The administrators
and faculty members have an indifferent attitude towards
introducing innovations in education. They feel they will
not be rewarded for the additional work and efforts which
they take. The university authorities and accreditation
bodies should give some recognition or incentive to
those who initiate ICT-enabled teaching and learning
procedures.

5.2 Issues Related to Institutions
Institutions often have to cope with shrinking
budgets and weak infrastructure to engage in any sort
of innovations with regard to teaching and learning.
Complain about quality assurance has acquired lot of
importance in higher education sector. The national
bodies like NAAC and NBA (of AICTE), which provide
88

guidelines for development and maintenance of quality
assurance and procedure should also develop and set
benchmarks
for
e-learning
programmes.
The
accreditation bodies should clearly cover areas such as
course structure, development, student support service,
teaching and learning, and assessment and evaluation.
Presently, the online degrees do not have the credibility
and recognition in the society and the market. The lack
of interaction between the teachers and the learners
and the low admission standards for online courses are
the causes of concern among the employers and the
public. More concerted efforts should be taken for wider
recognition from accreditation bodies of the country,
which in turn would help to gain more learner interest in
e-learning programmes.

5.3 Issues Related to Students
It should be widely communicated among the
student community and potential employers that elearning programmes are at par with the traditional
ones. This will certainly encourage the students to go
for online courses. For instance, the LIVE programme
of IGNOU has less than 10 students whereas the
equivalent distance learning course of the same
university has students in hundreds.
Generally the institutions, universities complain of
paucity of funds and dwindling of budget, which prevent
them from implementing e-learning programmes. To
overcome this problem, some policy needs to be laid
down and a certain percentage of university budget
should be earmarked for piloting and implementing elearning programmes. The students are also found not to
be techno savvy so they avoid taking e-learning courses.
Those students who are comfortable with e-technologies
and spent hours in chatting and surfing also have a
negative mindset in applying the same for the purpose of
education and training. The students need to have skills
of critical thinking, research and evaluation as there is
abundance of information in electronic environment16.
Students are highly independent and need to be
immensely motivated to learn17. The e-learners perform
as well as the learners in the conventional system; but
there is higher incidence of drop outs18.
The learning outcomes are affected by e-learning
system quality, e-learning readiness, and e-learners’
competencies. Efforts should be taken to improve upon
e-learners’ online learning skills of self direction, meta
cognition, and collaboration19. The e-learners should also
get adequate learner support system to succeed. They
may not know how to participate in discussion forums,
bulletin boards, make use of blogs, wikis, podcasts and
vodcasts and so on so forth; they doubt if they will get
teachers’ support. For this, training sessions, user
awareness and orientation programmes should be
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

organised before e-learning courses are launched.
Students may take time to get accustomed to the new
e-learning environment. They should be told how to
access and use courseware and other electronic
resources; pop-up boxes in the courseware can be
incorporated in order to provide advice and guidance to
the learners.

6.

CONCLUSION

Laurillard20 has remarked that a university is known
and recognised by its academic excellence and not by
the advance technology which it uses and implements.
Laurillard wanted to stress that whatever technology is
followed, research, learning and teaching should be the
pivotal focus of the whole thing.
Oblinger and Hawkins21 have also emphasised that
e-learning will be an important part of higher education
and after some time would eventually be dropped as
technology is just a tool or enabler to accomplish the
goal of teaching and learning. Developing and
implementing an online course requires a thorough
understanding and planning of various steps and
procedures. It requires coordination and concerted
efforts of all the stakeholders—students, administrators,
teachers, course designers, and developers.
The potentials of e-learning are too many for a
country like India not only for formal degree programmes
but also for effective continuing education strategies for
placing its multitude of professionals well- equipped for
the challenges of the knowledge economy. Beyond
technology and resources, the mindset is one big
hindrance to usher in the benefits of this functional and
flexible mode of teaching learning.

REFERENCES
1. Bahreinejad, A. E-learning and associated issues in
Iran. Int. J. Dist. Edu. Technol., 2006, 4(4),1-4
2. Srikanth, G & Inglis, Alistair. Guest Editorial. Qual.
Assur. Edu., 2009, 17(3).

6. Bixler, B. & Spotts, J. Screen design and levels of
interactivity in web-based training. http://www.clat.
psu.edu/homes/jds/john/research/ivla1998/ivla98.
htm (accessed on 7 July 2010).
7. Uhomoibhi, James O. Implementing e-learning in
northern Ireland: Prospects and challenges. Campus
Wide Inf., Sys., 2006, 23(1), 4-14.
8. Friesen, N. Interoperability and learning objects: An
overview of e-learning standardisation. Interdiscip. J.
Knowl. Learn. Obj., 2005,1, 23-31.
9. Appana, S. A review of benefits and limitations of
online learning in the context of the student, the
Instructor and the tenured faculty. Int. J. e-learn.,
2008, 7(1), 5-22.
10. Perreault, H.; Waldman, L.; Alexander, & Zhao.
Overcoming barriers to successful delivery of
distance education courses. J. Edu. Busi., 2002,
77(6), 313-19.
11. Copeland, R. The usual rules apply online. Times
High. Educ. Suppl., 18 May 2001.
12. Popova, A. & Kirschner, P. A. Innovative pedagogical
and psychological perspectives of podcasts. In
Proceedings of World Conference on Educational
Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunica
tions:AACE, Chesapeake, VA, 2008.
13. Baggley, Jon. Level of media interactivity. In
Handbook of e-learning. 2009. http://www. ignou.
ac.in/institute/STRIDE_Hb8_webCD/Chapter%204.pdf
(accessed on 12 July 2010).
14. Doughty, P.L.; Spector, M. & Yonai, B.A. Time,
efficacy and cost considerations of e-collaboration in
online university courses. Brazilian Rev. Open Dist.
Learn., 2003. Vol 2. http://www.abed.org.br/
revistacientifica/Revista_PDF_DOC/2003_Time_
Efficacy_Cost_Considerations_Part_2_Philip_
Doughty_Michael_Spector_Barabara_Yonai.pdf
(accessed on 12 July 2010).

3. Collis, B. & Moonen, J. An on-going journey:
Technology as a learning workbench. University of
Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2005. http://
www.bettycollisjefmoonen.nl/Book-LearningWorkbench-V2.pdf (accessed on 12 July 2010).

15. New Media Consortium. Horizon report. http://www.
nmc.org/pdf/2007_Horizon_Report.pdf (accessed on
7 July 2010).

4. Jolliffe, Alan; Ritter, Jonathan & Stevens, David. The
online learning handbook: Developing and using
web-based learning. Routeldge, London, 2001.

16. Huynh, M.Q., Umesh, U.N. & Valachich, J. Elearning as an emerging entrepreneurial enterprise in
universities and firms. Comm. of AIS, 2003, 12, 48-68.

5. Mishra, Sanjaya. Designing online learning. In
Handbook of e-learning, 2009. http://www.ignou.ac.
in/institute/STRIDE_Hb8_webCD/Chapter%203.pdf
(accessed on 12 July 2010).

17. Zhang, D.; Zhou, R.; Briggs, O. & Nunamaker, J.F.
Instructional video in e-learning: Assessing the
impact of interactive video on learning effectiveness.
Information and Management. 2006, 43, 15-27.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

89

18. Ho, Li-An; Kuo, Tsung-Hsien & Lin, Binshan.
Influence of online learning skills in cyberspace.
Internet Research, 2010, 20(1), 55-71.
19. Laurillard, D. Rethinking university teaching: A
conversational framework for the effective use of
learning technology, Ed 2. Routeldge, London, 2002.
20. Oblinger, D. & Hawkins. The myth about e-learning:
We don’t need to worry about e- learning any more.
Educause Review, 2005, 40(4), 14-15.

Dr V.K.J. Jeevan is Deputy Librarian in
IGNOU, New Delhi. He has also worked as
Assistant Librarian (IIT, Kharagpur); Library
Assistant (Nuclear Science Centre, New
Delhi); and Information Trainee (NCSI, IISc,
Bengaluru). Dr Jeevan is the recipient of
the Young Information Scientist Award from SIS, New
Delhi, and the Best Paper Award from IASLIC, RRRLF,
and ILA.

About the Authors
Dr Manorama Tripathi is Deputy
Librarian in Central Library, Jawahar Lal
Nehru University, New Delhi. She has also
worked as Documentation Officer in
IGNOU, New Delhi. She is recipient of the
Best Paper Award of RRRLF.

90

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

