DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 91-96
© 2010, DESIDOC

Library and Information Science Education in
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh
Prabhjeet Kaur and Paramjeet Kaur Walia
Department of LIS, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007

ABSTRACT
The paper aims at providing a glimpse of the situation of LIS education being provided in India with a
special focus on the regions of central India. The states covered in the central India are Chhattisgarh and
Madhya Pradesh. From the central region, six universities imparting LIS education were selected for the
present study. It was seen that these universities still have to provide an integrated two-year postgraduate
course in LIS, which is being widely accepted all over the country because of its recognition by the UGC in its
model curriculum.
Keywords: LIS education, India, Chattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh

1. INTRODUCTION
Library and Information Science (LIS) education
incorporates a field of professional education that
provides the training to the future librarians to manage
the libraries and information centres efficiently. The
vision of LIS education includes teaching and research
in the field of librarianship with a multidisciplinary focus
on the issues of information access and equality. It is
fundamentally a content centered discipline with
information as its subject. The basic objectives of LIS
education include:


To familiarise the students with the history and
philosophy of the profession of librarianship.



To make them understand the concept of
information and its transmission in various
environments.



To make them aware of the importance of
information flow to the society.



To provide them information about theories of library
administration and organisation.



To provide skills needed for evaluation of library and
information systems and services.



To make them understand the importance of
resource sharing.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

The basic goal of LIS education hence is to provide
knowledge and skills needed for the LIS profession in
the present age of information overload and the everdecreasing budgets of libraries. Keeping in view the
changes taking place in the society, libraries have to
sustain themselves with modern technologies of
information transmission and communication. For
providing effective services, the information professionals need to have knowledge and training in
information technology applications and information
handling procedures. As a result, the changes in the
curriculum in LIS need to be carried out to keep pace
with the advances in technology and communication
phenomena. The field now encompasses information and
knowledge creation, communication, identification,
selection, acquisition, organisation and description,
storage
and
retrieval,
preservation,
analysis,
interpretation, evaluation, synthesis, dissemination, and
management. The library education is such that the
library professionals must withstand the continuing and
ever changing information requirements and demands of
the users and come up as successful professionals. The
student population will learn the LIS, one way or the
other, at one stage or the other, as a means of learning
their chosen specialised subjects. This will
automatically have its impact in the LIS education.
Therefore, the library education in India has to be
planned to keep pace with the changing needs of the
Indian society.
91

2. LIS EDUCATION IN INDIA
LIS education in India has undergone substantial
changes since W.A. Borden initiated training in 1911 at
Baroda followed by Asa Don Dickenson who started
such training programmes at Punjab University, Lahore
in 1915. There after Prof. Ranganathan contributed for
the upliftment of the profession in India. By the time
India got independence, only six departments offered
Diploma courses in library science. Presently, there are
more than 100 universities (regular as well as distance
education) that conduct various courses including BLIS,
MLIS, MPhil, and PhD. More and more institutions are
offering library science courses without even having the
required infrastructure including the trained teachers.
Although by 1956, the number of schools of library
science rose to 10, there was no written document
regarding the policy of library science education.
Hence, UGC Review Committee on Library Science was
appointed in 1961 under the chairmanship of Dr
Ranganathan to lay down a detailed pattern for LIS
education. Besides the departments of LIS at various
universities, Documentation Training and Research
Centre (DRTC), Bengaluru, National Institute of Science
Communicaton and Information Resources (NISCAIR),
New Delhi, etc., also provide some specialised courses
in Information Science.
To update the LIS curriculum, UGC appointed the
Curriculum Development Committee (CDC) 2001 to
restructure the courses in LIS, which prompted the LIS
schools to include various aspect of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) in their curricula. So
far, most of the departments of LIS in India have
broadly adopted the scheme as given by the CDC.

3. LIS EDUCATION IN CENTRAL INDIA
The States included in the central region of India
are: Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. Chhattisgarh
and Madhya Pradesh have comparable population
density of 154 and 196 and rank 26th and 23rd in the
population density in India, respectively. However, both
Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh have an average
literacy rate of 64.66 and 63.74, respectively in
comparison of the overall literacy rate of India, i.e.
64.841.
The universities offering post-graduate (PG level)
courses in LIS in Chhattisgarh are: Guru Ghasidas
Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur (GGV); and Pt. Ravishanker
Shukla University, Raipur (PRSU); and those in Madhya
Pradesh are: Awadesh Pratap Singh University, Rewa
(APSU); Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore (DAV);
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar
(DHGV); Jiwaji University, Gwalior (JU); Madhya
Pradesh Bhoj Open University, Bhoj (MPBOU);
92

Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramodaya Vishwavidyalaya, Chitrakoot (MGCGV); Makhanlal Chaturvedi
Rastriya Patrakarita Vishwavidyalaya, Bhopal (MCRPV);
and Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya, Jabalpur (RDV).
Vikram University (Ujjain), which is also offering LIS
courses could not be included in the present study due
to lack of access to the university website. Thus, its
data could not be gathered at the time of the study.

4. LIS EDUCATION IN CHHATTISGARH
4.1 Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya
Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, a Central
University is located in Bilaspur. It was established
under Central Universities Act 2009, No. 25 of 2009.
Formerly called Guru Ghasidas University (GGU), it was
established by an Act of the State Legislative Assembly
and was inaugurated on 16 June 19832.
The Department of LIS of GGV was established in
1985 under Faculty of Arts to impart quality education
and modern skills in the field to the students. It is
engaged in research and career guidance too. As a
part of curriculum, project work is assigned to each
student. Tutorials are also conducted regularly. The
Department organises academic tours, besides
activities like seminars and workshops. The majority of
pass outs have occupied good positions throughout the
country3.

4.2 Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University
Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University, Chhattisgarh’s
largest and oldest institution of higher education, was
founded in 1964 at Raipur. There are 29 teaching
departments in PRSU and 180 educational institutions
affiliated to it4.
The University established the Department of LIS in
1971 under Arts faculty. In the beginning only BLIS was
started. Later on in 1988, it started MLIS. In 1991,
Information Technology and Information System
Analysis and Data Processing were introduced in MLIS
syllabi. From 2003-04, PRSU started MPhil in LIS. The
University now also offers PhD degree in LIS. UGC
Model Curriculum for MLIS is being followed by it5.

5. LIS EDUCATION IN MADHYA PRADESH
5.1 Awadhesh Pratap Singh University
The University was established on 20 July 1968 and
got UGC recognition in February 1972. APSU is a
teaching-cum-affiliating university with its jurisdiction
over 65 colleges, 21 Sanskrit Colleges and 85 Sanskrit
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

Schools spread all over Madhya Pradesh. It offers BLIS
and MLIS as both regular as well as correspondence
courses6.

5.2 Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya
Devi Ahilya Vishwavidalaya was established in the
year 1964 by an act of legislative assembly of Madhya
Pradesh7. The university Central Library was also
established along with the establishment of the
university. It started BLIS from 1993-94 as a part-time
course. BLIS and MLIS as regular courses were
introduced during 2006. MPhil in LISc has been started
from the academic year 2009-10. It also plans to
introduce PhD in LIS and PG Diploma in LAN (Library
Automation and Networking). The School of Library and
Information Science is under the Faculty of Engineering
Sciences. It conducts one-year (two semesters) fulltime courses leading to the degree in BLIS, MLIS, and
MPhil8.

5.3 Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, formerly
University of Saugar, was established on 18 July 1946
by Dr Harisingh Gour. It is one of the oldest and the
biggest university of Madhya Pradesh. This university
was declared a Central University on 15 Jan 2009. The
State Legislature changed the University of Saugar
name to Doctor Hari Singh Gour Vishwavidyalaya in
February 19839. Department of Library and Information
Science of DHGV, founded in 1970, offers BLIS and
MLIS courses. It has a departmental library along with
ICT facilities including two PCs, laptop, printers,
scanners etc10.

5.4 Jiwaji University
Jiwaji University was established as a teaching and
affiliating university on 23 May 1964, under the
provision of MP Govt Ordinance No. 15 of 196311. The
Jiwaji University started post-graduate teaching and
research from 1966-67. In 1984, the School of Studies
in Library and Information Science was established to
impart quality education and modern skills in the field to
the students leading to BLIS and MLIS, as well as PhD.
The department is also engaged in research and career
guidance too. The School has ICT for teaching and
training at degree, PG and research level12.

5.5 Madhya Pradesh Bhoj Open University
The National Policy of Education (NPE) 1986
emphasised that distance education is an important
medium for the development and promotion of higher
education. In this context, for the expansion and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

promotion of distance education the Central Advisory
Board of Education (CABE), Government of India, took
an important decision that in the VIIIth year plan every
state should establish a state open university following
the distance education pattern. On this basis, Madhya
Pradesh Bhoj (Open) University (MPBOU) was
established under an Act of State Assembly in 1991.
The university emphasises in use of different modes of
educational inputs such as lessons in print, text books,
contact teaching, practical classes, TV/Radio/Video/
Audio programmes, using satellite communication, etc13.
Two LIS courses are being offered by MPBOU, i.e., BLIS
and MLIS. Both these courses are of one-year duration.
These courses come under the category of need-based
programmes14.

5.6 Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramodaya
Vishwavidyalaya
The Vishwavidyalaya was established on 12
February 1991 on the banks of the holy river Mandakini
through a separate MP Govt Act (9, 1991) at Chitrakoot.
The main objectives of the MGCGV are to provide
education and dissemination of appropriate technology.
The MGCGV has jurisdiction in the entire state of
MP and plays a great role in the field of rural
development through higher education and in preparing
innovative models of rural development15. It has
established a number of Distance Education Centers in
the entire state for imparting higher education for those
who can not able to attend regular classes due to
economic or other reasons16.
The academic programmes of teacher education,
mass communication, and LIS have been clubbed and a
department of “People’s education and Mass
Communication” has been established under the faculty
of Education, Fine Arts, Humanities and Social
Science17.

5.7 Makhanlal Chaturvedi Rashtriya
Patrakarita Vishwavidyalaya
Act No. 15 of 1990 of the Legislative Assembly of
Madhya Pradesh set up Makhanlal Chaturvedi Rashtriya
Patrakarita Vishwavidyalaya at Bhopal. There is a wide
network of over 500 study centers associated to MCRPV
in different parts of the country, where various courses
are conducted18.
Its NOIDA campus, offers BLIS course with duration
of one-year (2 semesters). The objective of the course is
to provide knowledge of technical working of libraries and
to develop skills for information management, i.e.,
classification and cataloguing. It also offers PhD in
Library & Information Science19.
93

5.8 Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya
The Vishwavidyalaya was established at Jabalpur in
1959. In addition to the teaching departments, RDV
comprises 151 colleges. There are 13 fully functional
faculties in the RDV20. The discipline of LIS was
introduced in one of the affiliated colleges, known as KP
Guru Bhasha Bharti, way back in 1970s. However, the
teaching, due to one reason or the other, could not be
introduced at the UTD level. The RD University, Jabalpur,
instituted MLIS course at UTD level from 1998. The
department of LIS, which is integrated part of the
University Library, has been successfully imparting
instructions to MLIS students for the last four years.
From 2002, the university decided to introduce BLIS
along with the existing MLIS course making it an
integrated two-years course leading to BLIS and MLIS.
In all, there are 30 seats for BLIS and 20 seats for MLIS
being run under Self-Financing Scheme. The admission
is subject to entrance test as well as merit21.

6. ELIGIBILITY AND ADMISSION CRITERIA
Table 1 gives details of the minimum eligibility of
different courses offered in central India along the
admission criteria for these courses. Table 1 shows that
all the universities accept graduates for BLIS. BLIS
qualified are eligible for admission to MLIS course and
MLIS qualified candidates for admission to MPhil
degree. But, the lowest cut-off marks for admission
differs from university to university.
While all universities offering MPhil course accept
candidates with a minimum of 55 per cent marks,
minimum marks for admission to BLIS and MLIS may
vary from passed to 50 per cent marks. Only the 5-year

integrated course, offered by GGV, provides admission
to undergraduate candidates, who have passed 10+2
with 50 per cent or more aggregate marks.
As far as admission criteria is concerned, only
APSU and RDV take students on the basis of merit as
well as entrance tests, where as other universities give
admission on the basis of merit of marks of the
qualifying degree only. Only DAV takes interviews of the
applicants for its courses.

7. SEATS OFFERED
Jiwaji University offers the maximum number of
seats, i.e., 40 each for both the LIS courses. This is
followed by PRSU and RDV with 35 and 30 seats,
respectively for BLIS course and 2 seats each for the
MLIS course. PRSU also offers 10 seats for its MPhil
course. On the other hand, the lowest number of seats
is offered by MGCGV with 15 seats each for both
courses, by MCRPV for BLIS course. GGV in its 5years course offers 30 seats, and 20 seats in one-year
MLIS.

8. SYLLABUS
The syllabus for PRSU for regular as well as the
part-time MLIS course is almost identical with 10 theory
and two practice papers spread out in two semesters.
For MPhil, it offers 3 theoretical papers along with a
dissertation submission. PRSU offers ICT-based courses
on all levels of its LIS education.
Awadhesh Pratap Singh University offers a single
paper on ICT and that too as an optional paper. However,
it does provide its students with the opportunity of

Table 1. Eligibility and admission criteria of LIS courses offered by the universities of central India
State

Chhattisgarh

University

BLIS

MLIS

GGV

-

BLIS(50)

PRSU

G

BLIS

APSU

G(45)

DAV

G(50)

DHGV

G

Integrated MLIS

Admission
criteria

-

10+2 (50)

Merit

MLIS(55)

-

Merit

BLIS(50)

-

-

ET + Merit

BLIS(50)

MLIS(55)

-

ET + Interview

BLIS

-

-

ET + Merit

BLIS(50)

-

-

Merit

Madhya

JU

Pradesh

MPBOU

G

BLIS

-

-

Merit

MGCGV

G

BLIS

MLIS(55)

-

Merit

MCRPV

G

-

MLIS(55)

-

Merit

G(50)

BLIS(50)

-

-

ET + Merit

RDV

G(50)

MPhil

Note:G=Graduate, ET=Entrance Test, Figures in brackets are marks required for eligibility
94

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

undergoing research by submitting a dissertation. Also,
it offers practice in both classification and cataloguing
papers. MPBOU offers 8 papers in each of its one-year
BLIS and MLIS courses. It offers exclusive paper titled
‘Telecommunication Technology and Information
Networking’ in its BLIS course and at MLIS level it has
papers including content on Media Technology’,
‘Database Management Systems’ and an optional paper
titled ‘IPR and Cyber Laws’. The courses have been
revised in 2009.
Devi Ahilya Vishwavdyalaya offers 4 and 3 papers in
its two semesters, respectively for its BLIS course.
Also, it includes an Internship at the end of the second
semester and the students are required to submit a
project report and face a viva based on it, on which they
are marked. The MLIS has a similar pattern of papers
except for the internship report. MPhil comprises three
semesters with papers in the first two semesters, with
the option of an elective paper in the first, while the third
semester comprises marking based on dissertation,
seminar, and assignments. It was also noted that DAV
follows credit system in marking their papers.

There is need to enhance the number of faculty
members in almost all the LIS schools in central India.
In the case of RDV, a separate full-fledged department
should be set up with full-time faculty members. The
library profession is facing various challenges wherein,
library and information science professionals have to
navigate electronic networks, deal with multimedia
products, and understand and master database
searching, preservation and management of digital
collection etc. The growth and development of library
and information professionals depends on their capacity
to change traditional approach, adapt the new
technology, and add new library and information
services. They have to play multiple roles as a global
information provider and facilitator in the informationseeking process, educator, and specialist in information
literacy and ICT. It is necessary that growth and proper
human resource planning is required for systematic
development of libraries and information instead of
haphazard growth. In the changed context, it is
necessary to reassess the human resource
requirements for different types of libraries and
departments of LIS.

9. SUGGESTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

REFERENCES

UGC has given a model curriculum for an integrated
two-year MLIS course, so there should be more and
more of the universities adapting to such programs in
the future. Initiatives may be taken to infuse research,
may be on a smaller scale, into the MLIS curriculum.
As far as the information and communication technology
(ICT) aspect of the education is concerned, no one
should be left behind. So, it has become extremely vital
for the universities to incorporate ICT into their
curriculum at all levels, both in theory as well as in
practice, Also, their has to be provision for computer
laboratories for the students to hone upon their skills in
ICT. In some LIS schools, provision for optional papers
in specialised areas should be included in the syllabi.
Provision for Internet connectivity and subscribed
content along with library automation and digitization
software for practice are a must. An internship program
provides LIS students with the opportunity to gain
valuable job experience during the academic year in
various library operations. It helps students to acquire
essential practical experience required to work in a
library. The well-planned internship prepares the intern
for future job responsibilities and a chance to put his
knowledge to work and prepare for future job
responsibilities. Students must undergo internship of 3-4
months in a library supervised by a mentor. They should
also be paid stipend during the training period22.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

1. India 2010: A reference mannual. Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting. Publication Division,
New Delhi, 2010.
2 . Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya. Home Page. http://
www.ggu.ac.in/ (accessed on 13 July 2010).
3. Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya. Department of
Library & Information Science. http://www.ggu.ac.
in/fact_sci_lib.html (accessed on 13 July 2010).
4. Pt. Ravishanker Shukla University. http://www.pr
su.ac.in/about.htm (accessed on 8 July 2010).
5. Pt. Ravishanker Shukla University. School of
Studies in Library & Information Science. http://
www.prsu.ac.in/libraryscience.htm (accessed on 8
July 2010).
6. Awadesh Pratap Singh University. About Us. http://
www.apsurewa.nic.in/ (accessed on 8 July 2010).
7. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya. About University. http://
www.dauniv.ac.in/AboutUniversity.pdf (accessed on
18 July 2010).
8. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya. Central Library. http://
www.clib.dauniv.ac.in/ (accessed on 18 July 2010).
9. Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya. University
Profile. http://www.sagaruniversity.nic.in/univ.htm
95

10. Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya. Department
of Library and Information Science. http://www.
sagaruniversity.nic.in/dept/lib_home.htm (accessed
on 18 July 2010).
11. Jiwaji University. About us. http://www.jiwaji.edu/
about-us.asp (accessed on 8 July 2010).
12. Jiwaji University. School of Studies in Library and
Information Science. http://www.jiwaji.edu/pdf/schoo
l-studies/library.pdf (accessed on 8 July 2010).
13. Madhya Pradesh Bhoj Open University. About
university. http://www.bhojvirtualuniversity.com/univ/
about.html (accessed on 18 July 2010).
14. Madhya Pradesh Bhoj Open University. Course
catalogue. http://www.bhojvirtualuniversity.com/ada/
cataloge.html (accessed on 18 July 2010)..
15. Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramodaya Vishwa
vidyalaya. Introduction. http://www.ruraluniversitychitrakoot.org/mgcgv_files/niintro.htm (accessed on
8 July 2010).
16. Mahatma
Gandhi
Chitrakoot
Gramodaya
Vishwavidyalaya. Distance education. http://www.
ruraluniversity-chitrakoot.org/mgcgv_files/
Distance.htm (accessed on 8 July 2010).
17. Mahatma
Gandhi
Chitrakoot
Gramodaya
Vishwavidyalaya. Department of peoples education
and mass communication. http://www.ruraluniversity
-chitrakoot.org/mgcgv_files/Page2488.htm
(accessed on 8 July 2010).
18. Makhanlal
Chaturvedi
Rastriya
Patrakarita
Vishwavidyalaya. About us. http://www.mcu.ac.in/
about_university.aspx (accessed on 8 July 2010).
19. Makhanlal
Chaturvedi
Rastriya
Patrakarita
Vishwavidyalaya. Prospectus. http://www.mcu.ac.in/
Prospectus201012.pdf (accessed on 8 July 2010).

96

20. Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya. Information
brochure.
http://www.rdunijbpin.org/brochure.doc
(accessed on 8 July 2010).
21. Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya. Department of
Library and Information Science. http://www.rdunijbpi
n.org/Libsc.htm (accessed on 8 July 2010).
22. Walia, P.K. & Kalra, Neha. Teaching methods in
library and information science education. In
Changing face of LIS education: Learning styles
and teaching methodologies, edited by R.
Karysiddappa and B.D. Kumbar. (Paper presented
at the Twenty Fifth IATLIS National Conference, 2729 November 2008, Panjab University, Chandigarh.
pp.169-79.)

About the Authors
Ms Prabhjeet Kaur is a Research Scholar
(UGC-JRF) in the Department of Library
and Information Science, University of
Delhi and doing PhD. She served as an
intern in the American Library, Delhi and
worked on an automation project in Ratan
Tata Library, Delhi School of Economics, and University
of Delhi. She has also undergone training in TERI Library
and Information Centre, India Habitat Centre, Delhi.
Dr (Mrs) Paramjeet K. Walia is an
Associate Professor in the Department of
Library and Information Science, University
of Delhi. Prior to this, she taught for 14
years in the Department of Library and
Information Science, Panjab University,
Chandigarh. She had also served in different capacities
in academic and special libraries. She had contributed
many research papers in journals and conference
proceedings.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

