DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 2010, pp. 74-82
© 2010, DESIDOC

Employability of Library and Information Science Graduates:
Competencies Expected versus Taught—A Case Study
Bharat Kumar
Management Development Institute, Gurgaon-122 007
E-mail: Bharat.Kumar@hotmail.com; Bharatkumr@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The article discusses employability of LIS students and competencies expected versus taught. Author had
analysed 56 advertisements published in March-April 2010 from two national newspapers, The Times of India
and The Hindustan Times, two job websites Sarkari Post and Current Government Jobs, and curriculum of four
universities of north India namely, BHU, Varanasi; DU, Delhi; IGNOU, Delhi; PU, Chandigarh. Finding shows that
there is a gap in professional competencies expected versus taught.
Keywords: Employability, LIS graduates, LIS curriculum, competencies

1.

INTRODUCTION

The focus of library and information science (LIS)
education is to equip LIS graduates with competencies
and skills to meet ever changing needs of the users in
multi-faceted, inter-disciplinary environment. The
changing needs of users’ and rapid development on
technological fronts demands new competencies of LIS
graduates to enhance employability. Future graduates
need to develop an understanding of competencies and
skills required to pursue a career in librarianship. LIS
academics should respond to the changing
competencies by revising curriculum that equips
graduates according to the changing environment.
Ameen observed that changes in the curriculum,
schools names, and the job market have been a
constant phenomenon at global level1.

2.

LIBRARIES AND LIBRARY
PROFESSIONALS IN INDIA

Libraries all over the world are now responding to
the changes especially with regard to IT applications.
Anderson opined that, “Immediacy, availability, and
affordability are key attributes of libraries in the new
millennium”2. It is from the beginning of the 21st century
that LIS professionals working in India are facing
various paradigm shift3 that include:
(i)
74

The transition from print format to electronic format

(ii) Increasing demand for accountability along with
focus
on
users
services,
performance
measurement, benchmarking, and continuous
improvement
(iii) Introduction of new forms of work organisation such
as work teams, job sharing, outsourcing, reengineering, etc.
To deal with the present situation LIS professionals
of India have to play a more ‘proactive’ rather than
‘passive’ role. They have to learn, develop, and nurture
various types of competencies required in the field of
library. Who can make them ‘proactive’? What they
have to learn? What types of competencies they
actually need? How can they nurture various types of
competencies? Answers to all these questions can be
properly handled and dealt with by the faculty members
of different LIS schools located in the various
universities in the country.

3.

ROLE OF UNIVERSITIES IN DEVELOPMENT
OF LIS PROFESSIONALS

In 1923 when C.C. Williamson published his Report
on Library Education, he recommended that the library
schools be placed under the universities4. Since
universities are dedicated to formal education, they are
placed better to equip librarians with necessary
competencies. Stieg stated that “The largest numbers of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

accredited schools of LIS studies in the United States
are located in research universities”5. Most educators
feel that professional schools can upgrade their quality
only when practical teaching and applied research are
in combination with basic enquiries and instructions.
This kind of situation can exist only within a university
set-up. According to Steig location of LIS education in
the university has “proven to be a very mixed blessings,
bringing many benefits, but at the same time creating
problems”5. The significant disadvantage of this system
is that universities have their own rules, values and ways
of operating, which have not always matched with those
of the profession. This incompatibility is true of all
professional education and LIS education is not an
exception to that.
In 2001, the Curriculum Development Committee
(CDC), formed by UGC under the chairmanship of
Prof. C.R. Karisiddappa framed a modular curriculum
keeping in view the present development in the job
market in India and suggested a 60:40 approach for
practical and theoretical papers, respectively. The
practical sessions include hands-on-experience,
assignments, seminar presentations, and demonstrations
by LIS students during the course of study6.

4.

BACKGROUND

Professional competencies7 are combination of
knowledge, skills, and attitudes required to discharge
specific duties and responsibilities. Knowledge
comprises the understanding of LIS and of other
disciplines that underlie its professional practice. Skills
refer to the abilities to use one’s knowledge effectively.
Attitude refers to the moral values essential to undertake
professional practice. Professional competencies vary
with environmental conditions, time, and state of
development of libraries in a geographical area.
Libraries in India exist in different extremes parallel to
the societal development in the country. There are
libraries where the emphasis on service is minimal and
where one professional is engaged in the circulation of
books in a closed access library. On the other hand,
there are state-of-the-art libraries with a large number of
professionals providing all the library services expected.

5.

LIS GRADUATES AND EMPLOYABILITY

Tenopir said that employer expectations are more
demanding8 and the ability to move seamlessly from
graduation to employment greatly concerns employers9.
Developments in ICT, interdisciplinary research, and
users’ expectations have raised debate amongst LIS
educators10. Employers are expecting that the academic
curricula should keep pace with changing competencies.
Employability skills are those basic necessary skills for
getting, keeping, and doing well on a job. Employability
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

skills, while categorised in many different ways, are
generally divided into three skill sets: (a) academic
skills, (b) higher-order thinking skills, and (c) personal
qualities.
Employability can also be defined as “a set of
achievements–skills, understandings and personal
attributes–that makes graduates more likely to gain
employment and to be successful in their jobs”.
Hillage and Pollard refer employability as person’s
capability of gaining initial employment, maintaining
employment, and obtaining new employment if
required11.
In simple terms, employability is about being
capable of getting and keeping fulfilling work. More
comprehensively, employability is the capability to move
self-sufficiently within the market to realise potential
through sustainable employment. For individuals,
employability depends on the knowledge, skills and
abilities (KSAs) they possess, the way they use these
assets and present these to employers, and the context
(e.g. personal circumstances and market environment)
within which they seek work.
LIS profession should be aware of competencies
and skills required for getting a job. The changes in
library and librarianship are very fast due to
interdisciplinary research, fast developments of
technological fronts, etc.

6.

REVIEW OF RELEVANT LITERATURE

Some studies have focused on the extent of the
employability, usually investigating the employment
opportunities for LIS graduates. Other studies have
focused on the competencies expected by employers.
Kennan, Willard, and Wilson12 studied 135
advertisements for LIS graduates appearing in the
Sydney Morning Herald for four weeks in 2004, 1994,
1984, and 1974. They found changes in demand
developments in IT as well as changes in workplace
conditions, and client expectations. The study collected
data on the demands of employers as expressed
through job advertisements including data on work
status
(full-time,
part-time,
contract,
casual),
qualifications and the experience required. The data
indicated a movement from simple advertisements in
1974 inviting applications for reference or technical
services librarians, to complex and specialised positions
advertised in 2004 where the most called for attributes
were interpersonal skills, and behavioural characteristics.
The Library and Information Management
Employability Skills (LIMES) Project in 2005 surveyed
representatives from four UK employment agencies
75

specialising in recruitment of LIS professionals with an
aim to identify ‘employability’ competencies and skills
as employers want graduates with skills that make them
more useful when they start work13. Traditional, or
professional skills such as classification and cataloguing
are still important but requirement is more for soft skills
such as negotiation skills, not taught in Library Schools.
Generic abilities, particularly persuasion, influencing,
and communication skills were also sought, and
apparently not always evident in recent graduates13, 14.
Like the ISNTO foresight projects, the LIMES research
supports the idea that library and information
professionals require a variety of skills, although its
findings suggested that though generic abilities are
important, a greater weight is placed on professional
skills, and particularly their practical applications.
Library directors in Singapore were asked by e-mail
for their opinion regarding important competencies
needed by librarians in the next five to ten years15. Five
library directors responded, and their responses are
summarized under nine categories: (i) traditional LIS
skills; (ii) information management; (iii) IT skills; (iv)
transferable/generic skills; (v) teaching, training and
coaching; (vi) management and leadership; (vii)
entrepreneurship; (viii) attitudes and professional
values; and (ix) other skills/knowledge. It is clear from
the literature and from responses from library directors
in Singapore that employers are increasingly
emphasising transferable and soft skills, especially
communication, management, leadership, training and
teamwork.
LIS professionals have to be effective in oral,
written, and electronic communication with users,
colleagues, and supervisors. They have to be effective
in promoting and marketing their services, as well as
promoting the value of their service to the parent
organisation. They also need good interpersonal and
networking skills to interact with their users and
effectively with their colleagues.

elements in a LIS curriculum16 should include: (i) the
information environment, information policy and ethics,
the history of the field; (ii) information generation,
communication and use; (iii) assessing information
needs and designing responsive services; (iv) the
information transfer process; (v) organisation, retrieval,
preservation and conservation of information; (vi)
research, analysis and interpretation of information; (vii)
applications of information and communication
technologies to library and information products and
services; (viii) information resource management and
knowledge management; (ix) management of
information agencies; and (x) quantitative and qualitative
evaluation of outcomes of information and library use.
The American Library Association’s (ALA)
Standards for Accreditation of Master’s Programmes in
Library and Information Studies describe the curriculum
as encompassing information and knowledge creation,
communication, identification, selection, acquisition,
organisation and description, storage and retrieval,
preservation, analysis, interpretation, evaluation,
synthesis, dissemination, and management17. In a
congress on professional education, the ALA resolved
that the core of librarianship includes: information
access skills; the ability to deal with information
technology; communication skills; management skills;
and the ability to deal with change18.
The Association of College and Research Libraries
recommended that library schools should train
graduates in the theory, principles, and history of
librarianship; in-depth knowledge of the higher
education environment; preparation for scholarly work;
understanding
technological
issues;
conducting
information literacy programmes; planning and
management;
assessing
library
effectiveness;
knowledge of legal and policy issues; consideration of
ethical issues; and understanding and appreciation of
diversity19. The Library and Information Technology
Association recommended that LIS graduates should
possess various skills regarding effective use of
information technologies in libraries and communication
with users20.

A literature search was carried out in the Library
and Information Science Abstracts (LISA) database for
articles published during 2000 to 2004 discussing
competencies needed by information professionals15.
The competencies mentioned in 64 of the abstracts
retrieved were analysed. It is interesting that the
competencies mentioned by the library directors of
Singapore were largely similar to those highlighted in the
literature. The library profession in this part of the world
appears to be facing the same challenges as the
profession in Europe and North America.

The New Hampshire Library Association classified
its list of core competencies into philosophies and
ethics; personal attributes; administration; collection
management; public services; technical services; and
technology21. Yale University Library has set core
competencies for future job performance of its staff,
covering five areas: resources, interpersonal skills,
information, systems, and technology22.

The guidelines from the International Federation of
Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) LIS
educational programmes recommend that the core

The Association of Southeastern Research Libraries
prepared a list of competencies required for research
librarians23. The major issues covered are: developing

76

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

and managing effective services to meet user needs and
support the research library’s mission; supporting
cooperation and collaboration to enhance service;
understanding the library within the context of higher
education and the needs of students, faculty, and
researchers; knowing the structure, organisation,
creation, management, dissemination, use, and
preservation of information resources, new and existing,
in all formats; and demonstrating commitment to the
values and principles of librarianship.
The Special Library Association recommended
competencies for future special librarians that are
equally useful for academic librarians working in
professional institutions24. These include: (i) professional
competencies related to the special librarian’s
knowledge in the areas of information resources,
information access, technology, management and
research, and the ability to use these areas of
knowledge as a basis for providing library and
information services; and (ii) personal competencies
representing a set of skills, attitudes and values that
enable librarians to work efficiently; be good
communicators; focus on continuing learning throughout
their careers; demonstrate the value-added nature of
their contributions; and survive in the new world of work.
Corbin25 classified competencies required for providing
electronic information services into personal characteristics, basic skills, general knowledge, and specialised
knowledge.
Koenig26 noted that the information industry was
seeking candidates who not only have the requisite
technical and operational skills, but also possess the
language skills, interpersonal and communication skills,
and the breadth of background and knowledge that allow
them to operate effectively in the new international
marketplace. Library and information education
programmes must consciously prepare themselves to
educate students to work in the marketplace.
Morgan27 grouped competencies future academic
librarians should possess, in addition to core library
skills, into four areas: credibility with academic staff;
teaching and training; IT-related skills; and management
skills. Buttlar and Du Mont28 asked 736 alumni of library
schools: What competencies were most valuable in their
professional lives. The five competencies most highly
rated by academic librarians in the sample were:
knowledge of sources in all formats; conducting an
appropriate reference interview; applying critical thinking
to library problems; communicating effectively in writing;
and utilising oral presentation skills to make presentations.
Giesecke and McNeil29 provided a list of core
competencies for university librarians. This includes:
analytical skills/problem solving/decision making;
communication skills; creativity/innovation; expertise
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

and
technical
knowledge;
flexibility/adaptability;
interpersonal/group skills; leadership; organisational
understanding and global thinking; ownership/accountability/
dependability; planning and organisational skills;
resource management; and service attitude/user satisfaction.
Bonnice30 recommended a mandatory internship
(practicum) for MLIS students. In a survey of the course
contents of 44 MLIS programmes accredited by ALA,
Beheshti31 found that the main knowledge and skillbased competencies taught were: technology
management; organisation of information; searching and
database
development;
collection
development;
mathematical methods and research; sociocultural
aspects; non-print media; rare materials and
conservation; sources of information; reference
materials; archives; children’s literature and services;
and professional issues.
Rehman, Majid, and Baker32 interviewed 60 top and
middle level managers of academic libraries in Malaysia
to validate a list of competencies (knowledge and skills)
required of entry level academic librarians. They divided
the list into six operational areas: foundation,
cataloguing, circulation, information services, collection
development, and serials. According to Rehman, Baker,
and Majid33, middle and top managers of the large
libraries of Malaysia perceived that inadequacy in IT
skills was the most deficient area in Malaysian
librarians34. Rehman, Chaudhry, and Karim34 carried out
a survey to see if there were significant differences
between competencies accepted at undergraduate and
postgraduate levels. Senior library managers in the
Arabian Gulf region identified 48 higher level
competencies
(performance
evaluation,
policy
development, designing databases, planning for
automation) out of a total of 70. The remainder not
being significantly different for either level, except for
‘acquiring materials’ that was favoured at the
undergraduate level. The competencies were classified
into six functional areas: management; information
technology; resource development; information service;
technical service; and general competencies.
Keeping in view the needs of the Asia-Pacific region,
Moore35 prepared a detailed curriculum for information
education. The curriculum covered three elements–
knowledge, skills, and tools–for the creation, collection,
communication, and consolidation of information. A
recent survey of library graduates in Australia,
conducted by Middleton36, identified 189 skills grouped
into nine categories: collection building and
management; communication; facilities and equipment;
information
organisation;
information
services;
information systems; management; marketing; and
research. The findings show that seven of the top 10
ranked skills were in the information service category.
77

Sharma7 discussed professional competencies
expected and possessed in college libraries in India.
Professional competencies were ascertained in terms of
knowledge, skills, and attitudes. Findings show that
professionals were less aware of the most important
professional competencies expected. Communication,
time management, and marketing skills were also found
lacking. Faculty and senior professionals have an
important role in helping new professionals improve their
competencies. Sharma felt that appropriate teaching
techniques are required to inculcate the competencies
expected of professionals.

7.

OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY

(i)

To know essential and desirable competencies, and
other skills that employers advertise in jobs for the
positions of professionals

(ii) To ascertain gaps between competencies expected
for different professional positions and those being
taught in LIS schools

formulates policies, rules and regulations, design
services, and get these implemented. Generally librarian
is reporting to Vice Chancellor/Director of the institute.
Expected professional competencies required from a
librarian are given in Table 1.
Table 1. Expected professionals competencies
for the position of librarian

Qualifications

Percentage

Evidence of innovative Library services

40

Published work

40

Good communication skills

15

Leadership skills

5

Professional commitment

5

For the post of librarian, 40 per cent institutes/
universities demand for evidence of innovative services
and published work. Good communication skills are also
required by 15 per cent of the institutes/universities.

(iii) Suitability of course contents with current needs.

9.1.2 Deputy Librarian

8.

Deputy Librarian assists librarian in organisation
and management of library, oversees routine
administration, day-to-day problems and provides
guidance and support to Assistant Librarian for smooth
functioning. S/he is reporting to the Librarian. Essential
qualifications required for a Deputy Librarian are given in
Table 2.

METHODOLOGY

The study is based on an analysis of job
advertisements during the period March-April 2010. Fifty
six advertisements were collected from two national
newspapers, The Times of India and The Hindustan
Times, and from two job websites, Sarkari Post (http://
www.sarkaripost.com/) and Current Government Jobs
http://currentvacancy.blogspot.com/). Course curriculum
of four universities of North India, viz., Banaras Hindu
University (BHU), Varanasi; University of Delhi (DU),
Delhi; Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
Delhi; Punjab University (PU), Chandigarh was also
downloaded from their respective websites to study
expected competencies and the subjects taught. PU
and BHU have two-years integrated MLIS course while
DU and IGNOU have two separate courses (BLIS and
MLIS) of one year duration.

9.

DATA ANALYSIS

9.1 Expected Professional Competencies
Required of LIS Professionals
9.1.1 Librarian
Librarian is the seniormost person in a library and
overall in-charge of technical, administrative, and
financial matters of the library. S/he is responsible for
management and organisation of library and its services
to achieve the objectives of its parent organisation.
Librarian should be equipped with technical skills of
librarianship and management of people. S/he
78

Table 2. Essential qualifications for the positon
of deputy librarian

Qualifications

Percentage

Evidence of innovative library services

60

Published work

60

Computerization of library

60

Professional commitment

60

For the position of deputy librarian, 60 per cent
institutes/universities require evidence of innovative
library services, published work, computerisation, and
professional commitment as essential qualifications.

9.1.3 Assistant Librarian
Assistant Librarian is responsible for the day-to-day
operations of the library and help users in consultation of
library. S/he is in-charge of a section/division, and is
responsible to deputy librarian. For the position of
Assistant Librarian, which is an entry level position at
professional level, good communication skills are the
basic requirements as they have to interact with users
and external agencies like publishers, suppliers, etc.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

9.2 Status of LIS Professionals

9.4 Development of Competencies

UGC as well as All India Council of Technical
Education (AICTE) consider LIS professionals as nonvocational teachers. While if the advertisements are
analysed, a good number of universities/institutes
consider them as staff.

The term ‘Competency’ is defined in various ways. A
decade ago, competency was considered in terms of
personal characteristics and was judged in terms of
character, virtue, innate abilities. In the present day,
competence is considered more in terms of skilloriented behaviour and observable actions. Competency
is defined by Council of Europe as “the set of knowledge
and skills that enable an employee to orient easily in a
working field and to solve problems that are linked with
their professional role”37.

9.3 Comparison of LIS Curriculum
A curriculum is a fundamental part of any education
programme. It provides a list of courses or modules
offered in a programme and gives information on
content, purpose, method, time/duration, etc. all of
which are essential in a successful dispensation of
manpower training and education.
Banaras Hindu University and PU are conducting
two-years integrated MLIS programme while IGNOU and
DU are conducting one-year BLIS, and one-year MLIS
programme. All the four universities are following
semester system. Curricula of the four universities
represent a mix of traditional library subjects and
modern concepts. Table 3 shows the traditional and
modern concepts that are covered by the curricula.
Table 3. Traditional and modern library concepts in
the curricula

Traditional concepts

Modern concepts

History and development of
libraries

Library automation
software

Cataloguing (Theory & Practice)

Library housekeeping
operations

Classification (Theory &
Practice)

Operating systems

Library systems and services

Digital libraries and
software

User needs and user surveys

MS Office

Library orientation

Search engines

While majority of contents are similar in the four
universities, all the universities teach MS Office except
IGNOU. CDS/SIS is a software which is being taught in
all the universities except PU, which is teaching its
students WINISIS. DU is imparting skills on both the
software. IGNOU is the only university teaching
publishing and printing technology to its students in a
module. Library digitisation is being taught in all the
universities while none of these is providing hands-on
practice. Technical writing, and preservation and
conservation of library material are the optional courses
which are offered by IGNOU only. Research
methodology is a course which IGNOU is offering as an
optional course while remaining three universities are
offering it as a compulsory course. Dissertation is
compulsory in DU and IGNOU, while remaining two
universities do not have it.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

The traditional skills such as classification,
cataloguing, indexing, user education are relevant and
important even today, but the LIS professionals should
acquire skills to deal with information in the new
electronic and technological environment. In addition to
the technical skills, librarians should also possess good
interpersonal communication and management skills to
become more effective managers. To fulfill the key
information role, the new era librarians require
professional as well as personal competencies.
Professional competencies relate to librarian’s
knowledge of various information sources, technology,
management and research and the ability to use these
areas of knowledge for providing library and information
services. Personal competencies represent a set of
skills, attitudes and values that enable librarians to work
efficiently; be good communicators, demonstrate the
value-added nature and survive in the new world of work.
The LIS educators have a greater responsibility to
incorporate these various competencies into the LIS
curriculum.

10. DISCUSSION
The results of the study indicate the competencies
required by the library professionals. Some of these are:

10.1 Writing and Publication Skills
Job advertisements reveal that publications are
important for the position of Deputy Librarian and
Librarian. DU and IGNOU are the universities which offer
dissertation as a course while remaining two universities
do not. It equips students with writing and publishing
skills.

10.2 Communication Skills
These days, good communication skills are
essential for library professionals of all levels. One has
to interact and send written communication to faculty
members, students, publishers/suppliers, external
agencies, etc. S/he should also have etiquettes for
communication. A course on technical writing would
79

prove helpful. IGNOU is offering as an elective course.
Communication skills have been stressed to be
important in numerous studies38.

(iii) The LIS graduates should have hands-on practice
on library automation software being used in
libraries.

10.3 Library Automation

(iv) LIS students should have practical knowledge of
digital library software as many universities/
institutions are digitising their publications.

Most of the universities libraries are automated
these days. The curriculum of the universities under
study includes application of library automation,
automation
software,
housekeeping
operations,
retrospective conversion, etc. which is a good sign. All
the four universities are teaching and providing handson practice also. It is high time for the libraries who
have not automated to do so.

10.4 Digitisation of Library Resources
All the universities are teaching theoretical aspects
of library digitation and its software. But none of the
university is imparting practical training on digital library
software. It should be included as part of the
curriculum.

10.5 Electronic Resource
None of the university curriculum includes electronic
resources while these days a good number of libraries
are subscribing electronic journals and electronic books.
It should be part of different courses teaching different
aspects like acquisition, processing, management,
service, etc.

10.6 Personnel Management
Some topics of human resource management are
there in curriculum of all the universities. But none of
the university teaches in details nor includes time
management and attitude. Maurice, Marchant and
Smith39, in their study of competencies for academic
libraries, conclude that human resource management
skills are highly desirable for many positions. Ojiambo
also comments on the importance and lack of such
skills in professionals in developing countries40.

11. RECOMMENDATIONS
The following measures are suggested to reduce
gap between expected versus taught competencies in
LIS schools:
(i)

Dissertation should be a compulsory course in all
the universities as it equips students with writing
and publishing skills.

(ii) Communication skills, written as well as oral, are
very important for today’s librarian so there is a
need to introduce it as a compulsory course.
80

(v) Librarians should be considered as non-vocational
teacher in all academic institutions as per
notification of the UGC to bring uniformity.

12. CONCLUSION
In today’s competitive world, the theoretical
knowledge of academic subject is not enough for LIS
graduate to survive. The graduates will have to develop
competencies to meet the challenging as well as
changing needs of employers/users. They will have to
improve their communication skills, problem solving
attitude, good knowledge of IT, presentation skills, and
will have to provide services to customers with
motivation and commitment. These features will enhance
their employability skills.

REFERENCES
1. Ameen, K. Issues of quality assurance in LIS
higher education in Pakistan. In World Library and
Information Congress: 73rd IFLA General
Conference and Council, 19-23 August 2007,
Durban, South Africa. http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla73/
papers/114-Ameen-en.pdf (accessed on 13 April 2010).
2. Anderson, C. The long tail. In Singapore vision of the
21st century library service. Keynote address by N.
Varaprasad, Singapore, National Library Board, 2004.
3. Das Gupta, Arjun. Preparing future librarians in
India: A vision for LIS Schools of Indian universities
in the 21st Century. http://www.ifla.org/files/hq/
papers/ifla75/126-dasgupta-en.pdf (accessed on 19
May 2010).
4. Williamson, C.C. Report on library education: A
report prepared for the Carnegie Corporation of
New York, New York, 1923.
5. Stieg, M.F. Change and challenge in library and
information science education. ALA, Chicago, 1992.
6. University Grants Commission (india). Report of
UGC Model Curriculum Committee on Library and
information science. UGC, New Delhi, 2001.
7. Sharma, Jaideep. Expectations versus reality: A
study of professional competencies in college

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

libraries in India. Edu. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2004, 45(4),
352-63.
8. Tenopir, C. I never learned that at library school:
Curriculum changes in LIS. Online, 2000, 24(2), 4246.
9. Partridge, H. & Hallam, G. The double helix: A
personal account of the discovery of the structure
of (the information professional’s) DNA. 2004. http://
conferences.alia.org.au/alia2004/pdfs/partridge.h.paper.
pdf (accessed on 19 May 2010).
10. Goulding, A. Never the twain shall meet Changing
syllabi of LIS schools, or from cat (cataloguing) and
class (classification) to intranet construction and
does it matter?” Impact J. Career Develop. Group,
4(4), 65-66.

19. Reichel, M. Issues in higher education and library
and information studies education. Background
paper prepared for the ALA Congress on
Professional Education, 30 April–01 May 1999.
http://www.ala.org/congress/acrl.html (04 April 2010).
20. Jacobson, S. Library and Information Technology
Association Statement for Congress on Professional
Education,
1999.
http://www.ala.org/congress/
lita.html (accessed on 04 April 2010).
21. New Hampshire Library Association. Preparing New
Hampshire’s librarians and trustees for the 21st
century: A report of the New Hampshire Task Force
on Trustee and Librarian Education, 1999. http://
www.state.nh.us/nhla/tasked1.htm (accessed on 02
April 2010).

11. Hillage, J. & Pollard, E. Employability: Developing a
framework for policy analysis. Research report
RR85. Institute for Employment Studies, DfEE,
Brighton, 1998.

22. Yale University Library. The Secretary’s Commission
for Achieving the Necessary Skills (SCANS) for the
Workplace. 2000. http://www.lib rary.yale.edu/
training/stod/competencies.htm (accessed on 04
April 2010).

12. Kennan, M.A.; Willard, P. & Wilson, C.S. What do
they want? A study of changing employer
expectations of information professionals. AARL,
2006, 37(1), 18-37. http://www.alia.org.au/publishing/
aarl/37.1/kennan.willard.pdf (accessed on 15 April
2010).

23. Association of Southeastern Research Libraries,
Education Committee. Competencies for research
librarians, 2000. http://www.aserl.org/statements/
competencies/competencies.htm (accessed on 15
June 2010).

13. Hamblin, Y. Library and information management
employability skills: LIMES. SCONUL Focus, 2005, 35.

24. Special Library Association. Competencies for
special librarians of the 21st century. 1996. http://
www.sla.org/content/SLA/professional/meaning/
competency.cfm (accessed on 25 June 2010).

14. Varalakshami, R.S.R. Educating 21st century LIS
professionals—needs and expectations: A survey of
Indian LIS professionals and alumni. J. Edu. Lib. Inf.
Sci., 2006, 47(3), 181-99.
15. Soo-Guan Khoo, Christopher. Competencies for new
era librarians and information professionals. http://
www.lib.usm.my/elmuquip/conference/Documents/
ICOL20200520Paper20220Christopher20Khoo.pdf
(accessed on 25 April 2010).
16. International Federation of Library Associations and
Organisations, Guidelines for Professional Library/
information educational programs. 2000. http://www.
ifla.org/VII/s23/bulletin/guidelines.htm (15 May 2010).
17. Mediavilla, C. Professional competencies for the
21st century: The CLA’s vision. CSLA J., 1999, 22,
25-27.
18. New Jersey Library Association. NJLA technical
competencies for librarians. 2001. http://www.njla.
org/statements/techcompetencies.html (accessed
on 18 April 2009).
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

25. Corbin, J. Competencies for electronic information
services. The Public-Access Comp. Sys. Rev.,
1993, 4, 5-22. http://www.info.lib.uh.edu/pr/search/
corbin.4n6 (accessed on 12 March 2010).
26. Koenig, M.E.D. Education requirements for a libraryoriented career in information management. Library
Trends, 1993, 42(Fall), 227-89.
27. Morgan, S. Developing academic library skills for the
future. Library Review, 1996, 45(5), 41-53.
28. Buttlar, L. & Du Mont, R. Library and information
science competencies revisited. J. Edu. Lib. Inf.
Sci., 1996, 37, 44-62.
39. Giesecke, J. & McNeil. Core competencies and the
learning organization. Lib. Admin. & Mgt., 1999,
13,158-66.
30. Bonnice, L.J. Theory and practice: A white paper.
Background paper prepared for the ALA Congress on
Professional Education, 30 April–1 May 1999. http://
81

www.ala.org/congress/theoryandpractice.html
(accessed on 12 March 2010).

Library and Information Studies, Dublin, Ireland, 2123 March 2001.

31. Beheshti, J. Library and information studies
curriculum. 1999. http://www.gslis.mcgill.ca/beheshti/
alacais4.htm

37. Webber, Sheila. Competencies for information
professionals. Bull. Amer. Soc. Inf. Sci., 1999,
26(1). http://www.asis.org/Bulletin/Oct-99/webber.ht
ml (accessed on 15 June 2010).

32. Rehman, S.U.; Majid, S. & Baker, A.B.A.
Competences for future library professionals of
academic libraries in Malaysia. Library Review,
1997, 46, 381-93.
33. Rehman, S.U.; Baker, A.B.A. & Majid, S. Needed
capabilities and development strategies for future
information professionals: A Malaysian perspective.
Int. Inf. Lib. Rev., 1998, 30, 123-41.
34. Rehman, S.U.; Chaudhry, A.S. & Karim, N.S.A.
Differentiated competencies for graduate and
undergraduate levels: Needed transformation of the
information study programs. Education for
Information, 1998, 16, 9-28.
35. Moore, N. A curriculum for an information society:
Educating and training information professionals in
the Asia-Pacific region. Bangkok, UNESCO
Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific,
1998.
36. Middleton, M. Skills expectations of library
graduates. In 4th British-Nordic Conference on

82

38. Angela, Abell. New roles? New skills? New people?
Lib. Assoc. Record, 1997, 99(10), 538-39.
39. Maurice, P.; Marchant & Nathan, M. Smith. The
research library director’s view of library education.
Coll. Res. Lib. 1982, 43(6), 437-44.
40. Ojiambo. Developing Human Resource Capacity.
162-63.
About the Author
Shri Bharat Kumar is Assistant
Librarian at Management Development
Institute, Gurgaon, Haryana. He is MPhil
(LIS) and PGDCA. He has number of
publications
in
journals,
national/
international conferences. He has
attended several training programmes in
the field of LIS and management and participated in
national/international conferences. His areas of interest
are ICT and management aspects in libraries.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(5)

