DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 6, November 2010, pp. 12-23
© 2010, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Quality Assessment of Libraries
N.K. Dash* and P. Padhi
*Silicon Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar, Orissa-751 024
E-mail: nsing.dash@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The concept of quality is not a new phenomenon for library and information science professionals as it is
entrenched in library philosophy and practice. Service quality is viewed as a comparison of what the customer
expected prior to the use of services and the perceived level of services received. Quality of service and user
satisfaction are two significant facets of effective service management. Although the concept of quality is not
new, measuring service quality as a management technique has gained importance over the last few decades
in service industries and libraries are no exception. The perception of library quality differs in the stakeholder
groups and users who evaluate library quality according to their experience with the services they use. The
present study discussess quality assessment process in library and information systems in modern age. A
number of approaches have been made to quantify the library service quality.
Keywords: Service quality, SERVQUAL, LIBQUAL+, ISO 11620, ISO 2789, performance indicator, benchmarking,
balanced scorecard, RODSKI

1. INTRODUCTION

2. THE EVOLUTION OF QUALITY CONCEPT

A dramatic change is occurring in the scope and
pace of technological advances that are contributing
substantially to a fundamental shift in library and
information products and services, thereby, affecting the
roles and responsibilities of professionals. The
information context in which libraries and information
professionals may have to operate will be far more
different that ever in the past.

Quality is an attribute, a characteristic or a trait or
an excellence, the possession of which invests a thing,
a person or an idea with a sense of superiority1. Prior to
assessment of service quality, it would be quite
appropriate to know about the inherent characteristics of
the quality as described below:

As the shift from an industrial to an informationbased economy takes place, there will be far more
aggressive participants in the production, processing,
dissemination, and distribution of information than even
before. The issues before library and information
professionals are how to cope with the increasing
demand for information from a variety of users and use of
information technology (IT) to redefine services, roles,
and responsibilities.
It is against this background, the quality of library
should be assessed to keep going in the highly
competing situation. The present study depicts the
quality assessment process in library and information
systems in modern age.

Received on: 16 February 2010

Intangible: Quality like value is imperceptible only when
it manifests itself in a person, a matter, a method, or an
idea that it is describable. But though intangible, its
presence is evident and its loss eloquent.
Relative/Associative: There is nothing like “absolute”
quality. Quality is associated with time, place,
environment and the people. A quality product or a
quality service in one milieu or environment may not
necessarily be a quality product or a quality service in
another. Similarly, one cannot impose one’s own notion
of quality on others.
Tendency to Deteriorate: Quality has a natural tendency
to deteriorate with the passage of time, shift in
environment, and change of values. It is highly
perceptible to the facet of obsolescence. Standards are

therefore evolved not only to maintain the quality, but
also to revise it from time-to-time to further improve it.



Serviceability: The ease to which a product can be
repaired.

Dialectical Relationship between Quality and Quantity:
Much is made of the fact that quality tends to go down
as the quantity goes up. There is an element of truth in
it. But one should not allow oneself to be overwhelmed
by this notion and let the quality suffer under the
onslaught of quantity. The managerial quality lies in
keeping quality abreast of quantity, certainly not behind
it and eventually creating conditions in which quantity
can troublesome itself into quality. The relationship
between the two is of dialectical nature and not of
perpetual antipathy.



Aesthetics: The sensory characteristics of a
product such as how it looks or how it sounds.



Perceived quality: This is based upon customer
perceptions and opinions.

Quality is a Seamless Whole: Quality is indivisible. It
cannot partly ‘be’ and partly ‘not be’. Either it is or it is
not. Also, it should not be judged in parts.
Gravin2 discussed five approaches to define quality:
(i)

Transcendent-based quality: It is synonymous with
innate excellence. Customers usually presume
expensive products means high quality or high
grade.

(ii) Product-based quality: The product-based approach
views quality as a precise and measurable variable.
(iii) Manufacturing-based quality: In this approach the
focus is on the supply side and is concerned
primarily with engineering and manufacturing
facilities.
(iv) Value-based quality: It defines products in terms of
cost and prices.
(v)

User-based quality: According to this approach the
goods that best satisfy customer preferences are
believed to be of high quality. This approach equates
quality with maximum satisfaction.

Gravin2 provides the following eight
dimensions that he feels make up quality:

quality



Performance:This refers to how efficient a product
is in achieving its intended purpose.



Features:These are elements that supplement a
product’s basic performance such as cruise control
on a car.



Reliability: This refers to how a product performs
consistently over its life-cycle.



Conformance: This means that a product must
meet or conform with the specifications for its use.



Durability: The degree to which a products stands
stress without failure.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

As few products can claim to rank high on all eight
dimensions at all times, it is clear that some
dimensions can be achieved only at the expense of the
other dimensions. Gravin’s approaches to quality are
largely based on goods. In contrast, Calvert and Hernon3
focused their studies on service quality and proposed
four perspectives of service quality as excellence, value,
conformance to specifications, and meeting and/or
exceeding expectations. Their research emphasised
“meeting and/or exceeding expectations” and led them
to develop a framework for service quality in academic
libraries.
To achieve high quality in their products and
services is essential not only for commercial firms, but
also for all non-commercial institutions. Quality will have
a different aspect in every institution, but there is a
broad consensus in management literature. A short
definition that has achieved acceptance is quality is
customer satisfaction. “Fitness for use” is an alternate
short definition. Unfolding the definition starts with
defining the word “customer”. A customer is anyone who
is impacted by the product or process. A “product” is the
output of any process4.
In the ISO 9000 standard quality is described as the
consistent conformance of a product or service to a
given set of standards or expectations5. In most
definitions quality is defined in relation to the customer
or user: “… the key issue is that quality becomes a
meaningful concept only when it is indissolubly linked to
the aim of total customer satisfaction”6. Quality of a
product or service defined in relation to the customer
must not necessarily mean the highest grade possible.
A product of a simpler grade may have high quality
because it meets the needs and expectations of its
target customer group. Quality for one customer or
customer group does not always mean quality for
another customer or group7.

2.1 Parameters of Quality in Library and
Information Science
Each subject or object of study has its own set of
parameters and the same should be assessed or
evaluated in terms of those parameters only. Library and
information service too has its own parameters for
assessment/evaluation as illustrated in Table 1.
13

Table

1.

Library quality component and parameter

Component
Library

Parameter


Reading materials



Best documents for the largest number at
the lea st cost
Right document for the rig ht user at the
right time
Every document its user

Library techniques







Logical but practical
Easy to practice
Simple to follow
Purposive to the specific library
Uniform application

Library users





Document are for use
Every user his/her document
Save the time of the user

Library bui lding, furniture and equipments





Functional
Aesthetic
Comfortable

Library environment



Conducive reading atmosphere

Library staff






Academi cally qualified
Professionally trained
Update with information
Motivated

Library management



Having capacity to planning, organising,
staffi ng, directing, coordinating, reporting,
budgeting

Education and training in library an d information science





Current
Relevant
Having th e potential to develop the skills

Research an d development in library and informati on science





Relevant
Productive
Promote self-reliance

Library web-page








Content
Language
Structure
Design
Navigation
Accessibility

Library association



That protects and promotes the instances
of professionals representative



3. CHANGING CONCEPT OF QUALITY IN
A LIBRARY
The concept of quality is not a new phenomenon for
library and information science professionals as it is
rooted in library principles, practices, and activities.
Ranganathan’s five laws of library science, particularly
the fourth law (save the time of reader) implies the
importance of quality in library services. The law
emphasises that library administration be simple and
efficient to save user’s time. Knowledgeable staff
provides seamless access to information regardless of
format, whether the user is in the library or at a remote
location8. Historically, the quality of library has been
measured in terms of its collection (size, number of
titles and breadth of subject coverage) and various
14

counts of its use, budget and manpower, and services.
In recent past, this concept has been changed towards
the nature of service rendered by the librarians and not
merely on the library collection and size.
However, in the present-day context, satisfying the
needs of the users is very important and the reliance on
the traditional methods might not be sufficient to assess
the quality and effectiveness of the library from
customers’ perspective. Today’s academic libraries face
competition from alternative, cost-effective information
providers. Quality is the basic philosophy and
requirement of library service, and all libraries strive to
deliver the highest quality of service. If a library provides
appropriate information to the user at the right time and
in the required form, then it could be argued to be
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

maintaining quality9. In the light of this reality, it is
imperative for libraries to seek means to ensure that
their services meet, and preferably exceed user
expectations. In service marketing literature, service
quality is viewed as the comparison of what the
customer expected prior to the use of services and the
perceived level of services received8. Service quality and
satisfaction are two significant facets of effective service
management. Library and information science (LIS)
researchers have followed the principles of marketing
philosophy to focus attention on expectations and an
alternative view of quality.

No doubt many of the determinants for quality of
products can be applied to the service, but the human
side of service is missing to a considerable extent in
case of services. A. Parasuraman et al., a group of
researchers in marketing have proposed quality
dimensions10. Originally their study consisted of 10
dimensions. Table 3 depicts the dimensions, features,
and sample questions to be asked in context of a
library. Later on these 10 dimensions were pooled into 5
dimensions as given in Table 4. The five dimensions of
services considered the following issues in library
scenario (Table 5).

Although the concept of quality is not new,
measuring service quality as a management technique
has gained importance over the last few decades in
service industries. Quality in library and information
services can have many aspects. Peter Brophy, starting
from the general management literature, has adapted a
set of quality attributes to libraries. Table 2 relies for the
most part of Brophy’s set and shows the quality criteria
with typical examples of their appliance to LIS7.

5. SCOPE OF QUALITY ASSESSMENT
STUDY IN LIBRARIES

4. DETERMINANTS OF QUALITY OF
SERVICES IN A LIBRARY
In services, it is the customer who defines quality.
Therefore, human side of service is key to deliver quality.

Library quality can have many aspects, and these
aspects can change if seen from the point of view of the
various stakeholders (are all groups that have an interest
in functioning of an institution): for a library the different
stakeholders are7:


The users (actual and potential).



Funding institutions (a university, a community).



Policy makers.



Library staff.

Table 2. Criteria of library quality
Criteria of library quality

Examples

Performance

A service meets its most basic purpose

Making key information resources
available on demand

Features

Secondary characteristics, which add to
the servic e but are beyond the essential
core

Altering services

Reliability

Consistency of the service’s performance
in use

No broken web links

Conformance

The service meets the agreed standard

Dublin core

Durability

Sustai nability of the service over a period
of time

Document del ivery within 2 days

Currency

Up-to-datedness of information

Online catal ogue

Serviceabil ity

Level of help available to users

Complaint service

Aesthetics

Visual attractiveness

Physical library, website

Usability/Accessibility

Ease of access and use

Opening hours, web site structu re

Assurance/competence/Credibility

Good experience with sta ff’
knowledgabil ity

Correct refe rence answers

Courtesy/Responsiveness/Empathy

Accessibility, flexibility, and friendliness of
staff

Reference service

Communication

Clear explanation of servi ces and options
in a l anguage free of jargon

Website, Sig nposting in the library

Speed

Quick delivery of services

Interlibrary lending

Variety of services offered

May clash with quality, if the resources are
not sufficient for maintaining quality in all
services

Comprehensive collection, reference
service in walk-in, mail and chat form

Perceived quality

The users’ view of the service

User satisfaction

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

15

Table 3. Quality dimensions in library
Quality dimension

Core features

Tangibles

Appearance of physical
faciliti es, equipment,
personnel, printed and
visual materials

• Are facilities attractive?
• Are staffs dressed appropriately?
• Does technology adopted look modern?

Reliability

Ability to perform promised
service dependably and
accurately

•
•
•
•

If a response is promised in a certain time, does it happen?

•
•
•
•

When there is a problem, does Library respond to it quickly?

•
•
•
•

Can library staff provide servi ce without fumbling around?

Responsiveness

Competence

Courtesy

Credibilit y

Willingne ss to help
customers to provide prompt
service

Possession of required skil l
and knowledg e to perform
service

Samples of questions to be asked in context of library services

Are exact specifications of user followed?
Are statements or reports free of error?
Is service performed right th e first time?

Are Library staffs willing to answe r users’ questions?
Are specific times for service accomplishments given to users?
Are public situations treated with care and seriousness?

Are materials provided appropria te and up-to- date?
Can library staff use the technology quickly and skillfully?
Does staff appear to know what they are doing?

Polite ness, respect,
consideration and
friendline ss of contact
personnel

• Does staff member have a pleasant demean or?
• Does staff refrain from acti ng busy or being rude when clients ask

Trustworthi ness,
believability, honesty of the
service provider

• Does library have a good reputation?
• Do library staff members refrain from pressuring the client?
• Are responses given accura te and consisten t with other reliabl e

questi ons?

• Does staff observe conside ration of the property a nd values of use r?

sources?

• Does the library guarantee its services?
Security

Freedom from danger, risk,
or doubt

• Is it safe to enter the premises and to use the equipment?
• Are documents and other i nformation provided for the user hel d
securel y?

• Are use records of users safe from unauthorized use?
• Can user be confident that service provided was done correctly?
Acces s

Approachability and ease of
contact

• How easy is it to talk to knowle dgeable library sta ff member when user
has a problem?

• Is it easy to reach the appropriate staff person
o in person?
o by tele phone?
o by emai l?
• Are service access points conveniently located?
Communication

Listening to customers and
acknowledg ing their
comments and Keeping
them informed in a language
they can understand

• When user contacts service point, will staff p erson listen to their
problem and demonstrate understanding and concern?

• Can library staff explain clearly the various option s available to a
particul ar query?

• Does library staff avoid usi ng technical jargon when speaking with
clients?

Understanding
the custom er

Making the effort to know
customers and their needs

• Does someone on staff recognise each regular user and address them
by name?

• Does staff try to determin e what users’ specific objectives are?
• Is level of service and cost of service consistent with what user
requires and can afford?

• Are service providers flexible e nough to accommodate to users’
16

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

Table 4. Redefined quality dimensions
Ten dimens ions
(original m odel)

Table 6. Library quality perceptions of the stakeholders
Users

Five dimensions
(later model)

Tangibles

Tangibles

Reliability

Reliability

Responsiveness

Responsiveness

Competence

Assurance

Financing
authorities

Courtesy
Credibility
Security
Access

Empathy

Staff

Communication
Understanding the customer

Table 5. Redefined quality dimensions in a library
scenario
Dimensions

Definition

Tangibles

Th e physical app earance of the
library: library staff, facilities and
communications materials

Reliability

Th e ability of library staff to
perform the promised service
dependably and accurately.

Responsiveness

Th e willingness of l ibrary staff to
help users and provide prompt
service

Assurance

Th e knowledge and courtesy of
library staff and their ability to
convey trust and confidence

Empath y

Th e caring, indivi dualized attention
that library staff provide to users



Library managers.



General public.

The perception of library quality (Table 6) will differ in
the stakeholder groups. Users see library quality
according to their experience with the services they use.
They will not care for the efficiency of background
processes, but for the effective delivery of services.

-

Access to information worldwide
Delivery of information to the desktop
Speed an d accuracy of delivery
Good in-li brary working conditions
Responsiveness of staff
Reliability of services
Cost-effectiveness
Clear planning, effective o rg anisation
Positive outcome on users
Benefits for the institution’s g oals
Effective cooperation with other
institutions
High reputation of the library
Good working conditions
Clear planning, straight processes
Systematic staff developmen t
High reputation of library

does not preclude the use of others; rather, each offers
different insights and opportunities to engage in planning
and improved decision-making11. There are various
options for assessing the quality of library:
(a) Performance
indicators:
it
measures
the
effectiveness and cost-efficiency of library services.
They produce quantified data and are therefore
sometimes called “objective”.
(b) User surveys: measure the perceived quality, users’
estimate of library services. They produce qualitative
data and have a subjective bias.
(c) Outcome assessment: tries to prove the value and
benefit of libraries for individual users and society.
The standards established by Tann12 are valid for the
general assessment of library quality:


Knowing the customers’ needs.



Faultless delivery of service.



Good facilities.

The funding or parent institution will be interested in
the library’s benefit to the institution and in the library’s
cost-effectiveness. Staff, on the other hand, will rate the
library’s quality by their working conditions, by adequate
offers for further education, and by an efficient
organisation. Not all of the issues named here are
indeed criteria of library quality. A good reputation for
instance is rather an effective of quality services, but it is
important for maintaining quality.



Reliable equipment.



Efficient administration.



Efficient back-up service.



Feedback loops to build in improvement procedures.

It is possible to assess library collections, services,
and facilities from various vantage points. Adopting an
organisational perspective, for instance, librarians might
examine issues of extensiveness, efficiency, or
effectiveness, perhaps even within a cost framework.
Taking a customer perspective, they might examine
service quality or satisfaction. One way of evaluation



Assess what its users (or non-users) expect from
the services they use (or do not use because of bad
experience).



As the funding institution’s opinion about what the
library should do and how it should perform to
support the institution’s goals.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

The best way for any library to measure quality is
to7:

17



Try to find measures that assess quality in the
sense of stakeholder groups.

6. QUALITY ASSESSMENT IN LIBRARIES:
APPROACHES
6.1 SERVQUAL
SERVQUAL (for SERVice QUALity), which is
grounded in the Gap Theory of Service Quality developed
by the marketing research team of A. Parasuraman,
V.A. Zeithaml and L.L. Berry. Introduced in 1988, the
SERVQUAL is a diagnostic tool to measure service
quality, defined as the difference between customer’s
perception and expectation of service13. The SERVQUAL
approach has been “successfully” applied to a variety of
service settings including library14. The developers
applied numerous qualitative studies to this and finally
evolved a set of five dimensions (mentioned earlier in this
article), which have been consistently ranked by
customers to be most important for service quality,
regardless of service industry. Based on the five
SERVQUAL dimensions, the researchers also
developed a survey instrument (better known as 22-item
SERVQUAL instrument) to measure the gap between
customers’ expectation for excellence and their
perception of actual service delivered. SERVQUAL’s
customer-based approach for conceptualising and
measuring service quality offers an alternative for
defining the quality of library services. It emphasises the
service nature of libraries, in which the traditional
collection-based criteria of quality may be part of, but
not the entire component, of excellence. Service quality
contributes to value experienced by customers. Value
becomes an outcome of excellent service. The
SERVQUAL instrument, modified for use in library
service settings, provides an outcome measure for
managers to gauge their service activities.
SERVQUAL has also been subjected to a number
of theoretical and operational criticisms. Despite all

these criticisms, studies have convincingly shown that
subject to certain modification/adjustment, SERVQUAL
can be applicable and useful for evaluating library
services15.

6.2 Gap Theory of Service Quality
This model was developed by A. Parasuraman, V.A.
Zeithaml, and L.L. Berry. The model claims that the
consumer evaluates service quality experience as the
outcome of the gap between expected and perceived
quality. It emphasises on the key requirements for a
service provider delivering the expected service quality.
The model identified 5 (Table 7) gaps that can cause
unsuccessful service delivery. By learning the flow of this
model, it is possible to exercise greater management
control over the consumer relationships. The study of
this model should lead to an improved realisation of the
key issues at which the service providers can influence
the satisfaction of consumers16.

6.3 LibQual+
It is an emerging standardised measure of library
service quality across institutional library contexts. It is
adapted from SERVQUAL. This tool allows a web-based
method of administration and analysis and eases the
burden of administration locally, creating a scaleable,
and replicable protocol. It also makes readily available
large normative data on user perceptions, and
expectations of library service quality. LibQUAL+ was
initially developed as a self-financed pilot project by
interested members of the Association of Research
Libraries (ARL) in collaboration with the Texas A&M
University Libraries (TAMU) and subsequently received
substantial funding from the U.S. Department of
Education’s Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary
Education (FIPSE). The goals of three-year research
and development project include:
(a) Establishing a library service quality assessment

Table 7. Gap theory of service quality
Gaps

18

What is it?

What causes it?

Gap 1

Lack of understanding

It is the Ga p between consum er
expectation and management perception

Mana gement’s fa ilure to correctly identi fy
client expectations

Gap 2

Lack of developm ent

It is the gap between managem ent
perception and service quality
spec ific ations

Limited resources, lack of operational tools to
bring the client’s vo ice to service
specifications; m anagement’s indifference and
rapid change in m arket conditions

Gap 3

Poor delivery

It is the gap between service quality
spec ific ation and service delivery

Lack of knowledge about specifications, lack
of ability to ca rry out the specified or la ck of
com mitment by collaborators

Gap 4

Unrealistic expectation

It is the gap between service delivery and
external communication

Lack of com mun ic ation and the client does not
know what to expect or m ore is p romoted than
actually delivered

Gap 5

Service gap

It is the gap perceived service and
delivered service

A gap or a series of gaps from 1 to 4

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

program at ARL
(b) Developing web-based tools for assessing library
service quality
(c) Developing mechanisms
evaluating libraries

and

protocols

for

to characterise the performance of a library”.
Performance indicator includes both simple counts and
ratios between counts7. The criteria for performance
indicators are established in the ISO 11620.
Performance indictors should be:


(d) Identifying best practices in providing library service.
The dimensions of LibQual+ that make up a users
perception of service quality include17:

Informative: helpful for identifying problems and
possible actions to be taken.



Reliable: producing the same results when used
the same circumstances.

Service affect: responsiveness, assurance, empathy,
and reliability—the human dimensions of library service.



Valid: measuring what they are intended to
measure.

Library as place: campus centre of intellectual life, but
may not be a concern if the physical facilities are
adequate.



Appropriate: compatible with the
procedures and working environment.



Practical: easy to use and understand, applicable
wit a reasonable amount of effort in terms of staff
time, staff qualifications, operational costs and
users’ time and patience.



Comparable: allowing comparison of results
between libraries of similar mission, structure and
clientele.

Personal control: ability to navigate both the information
universe in general and the web in particular.
Information access: ubiquity of access meaning
information delivered in the format, location, and time of
choice and comprehensive collections.

6.4 Performance Indicators
Measuring performance means collecting statistical
and other data that describe the performance of the
library and analysing these data to evaluate the
performance of the library. Or, in other words: comparing
what a library is doing (performance) with what it is
meant to do (mission) and what it wants to achieve
(goals). Performance or quality indicators (also called
performance measures) have been developed and
applied by libraries since several decades and have
been published in handbooks and standards.
The international standard ISO 11620 defines a
performance indicator as “numerical, symbolic or verbal
expression, derived from library statistics and data used

library’s

Performance indicators measure on one side, the
effectiveness in delivering services to user and on the
other side the cost-effectiveness, the efficient use of
existing resources. Quality would then mean what a
service is “good” as well as “cheap”.

6.5 Benchmarking
Benchmarking is a process of identification of best
practices in another organisational unit, followed by their
analysis and adoption. It is the systematic search for
best practices, innovative ideas, and highly effective
operating procedures. Benchmarking considers the
experience of others and uses it. From library point of
view, benchmarking is a total quality tool used to

What is your performance level?
How do we do it?

What are others performance level?
How did they get there?

Creative
Adaptation

Breakthrough Performance

Figure 1.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

Benchmarking concept.
19

measure and compare your library’s work with those in
other libraries. The goal of benchmarking is to increase
library’s performance by adopting the best practices of
library’s benchmarking partners. Since best library
practices are always evolving, every library should apply
benchmarking18. Benchmarking is a well proven tool for
quality study. In library scenario, it brings the following
benefits:


Improves library’s performance.



Gains/improves upper management support.



Builds professional relationships.



Meets strategic goals.



Proves ibrary’s value.



Has room for improvement.
Benchmarking process pros:



Benchmarks libraries in different environments.



Tells how to improve.



Explains why you need libraries.



Uses business approach.

6.6 Balanced Scorecard

6.5.1 What to Benchmark in a Library?
Library resources and processes can be
benchmarked. Throughout time, library has been
associated with the resources they hold. Library
processes means any service or function in the library
that takes certain inputs, acts upon these and
procedures an output. For example, reference service,
online searching service, inter-library loan, journal
routing service, circulation procedure, shelving/reshelving procedures, and collection development.
Benchmark a library process that:


Is important to library staff, customer and higher
management.



Emphasises librarian’s skills.



Faces competition from outside sources.



Is not transitional.

The concept for the balanced scorecard was
introduced in an article in the Harvard Business Review
by Kaplan and Norton19. It is a conceptual framework for
translating an organisation’s strategic objectives into a
set of performance indicators distributed among four
perspectives: Financial, customer, internal business
processes, and learning and growth20. Some indicators
are maintained to measure an organisation’s progress
toward achieving its vision; other indicators are
maintained to measure the long term drivers of success.
Through the balanced scorecard, an organisation
monitors both its current performance (finance,
customer satisfaction, and business process results)
and its efforts to improve processes, motivate and
educate employees, and enhance information
systems—its ability to learn and improve. In a library
scenario the balanced scorecard allows a library to
concentrate on a small number of measures.
Taken together, these measures provide a quick but
comprehensive picture of the health of the organisation.
Balanced scorecard provides a framework that the
library believes can be easily explained and understood
by staff and others. It has been given increased
relevance within the library environment through the

Finance Perspective
How are the library’s finances
managed to use resources in a
cost effective way?
Customer Perspective
How are the library
services to meet the
needs of users’ effective
way?

Library Vision
&
Stra tegy

Internal Process
Prospective
How are the library’s
internal processes
organized to get efficient
and quality services?

Innovation & Lea rning
Perspective
How is the library fitn ess to ensure
that goals are met in a future?

Figure 2. Balanced scorecard structure adapted to a library.
20

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

Table 8.

Rodski customer satisfaction survey variables

Areas

Variables

Communication

Library staff describe clearly th e services on offer
Library staff provide clear and accurate answers/responses to my queries
Library catalogue provides clear and useful information
Library information guides a re clear and useful
Library web pages provide clear and useful information
Adequate signage exists within the library

Servic e quality

Library staff provide quality service
Books an d journals are re-shel ved quickly
Prompt corrective action is taken regarding missing books and journals
Services for clients with disabil it ies are adequate
Library staff are proactive in their dealings with me

Servic e delivery

Opening hours meet my needs
Service staff respond in a timely manner
Inter-library loan requests are filled promptly
Requests for inter-campus loan s are filled promptl y
The library collection is adeq uate for my needs
Library staff are readily available to assist me

Facilities and equipment

Photocopying and printing facilities are adequate
Individual seating is adequate
Group study facilities are adequate
Access to computers to support study/research is adequate
Quiet study facilities are adequate
Facilities for using personal laptops are adequate
Wireless facilities are adequate

Library staff

Library staff treat me fairly and without discrimination
Library staff display professionalism
Library staff are friendly and helpful

Virtual library

The library website is easy to use
The library catalogue is easy to use
Course-specific resources are easy to find and access
Access to el ectronic resources is adequate
Off-campus access to electronic information resources and services is adequate
Online hel p services are ade quate

addition of a fifth perspective, information resources
(satisfying demand for information from Library and other
resources), to the existing categories specified by the
library as Clients (‘providing value to clients to help them
achieve their goals); financial resources (building
financial strength to develop Library services and
assets); internal processes (excelling at processes for
fast, effective delivery of services and resources); and
learning and growth (enabling staff to lead and
innovat’)21.



It communicates the objectives and measures to a
business unit.



It aligns the strategic initiatives in order to attain the
long-term goals.



It aligns everyone within an organization so that all
employees understand how they support the strategy.



It provides
performance.

6.6.1 Advantages of using the Balanced Scorecard

The scorecard provides a feedback to the senior
management if the strategy is working.

This tool is being used by several organisations
throughout the world because of certain advantages this
scorecard has been able to deliver which are cited
below28:


It translates vision and strategy into action.



It defines the strategic linkages to integrate
performance across organisations.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

a

basis

for

compensation

for

6.7 Rodski Survey
The Rodski Customer Satisfaction Survey has been
used as a performance and benchmarking tool by
Australian university libraries since 1998. Since its
inception almost every university library in Australia and
New Zealand has used the tool to measure and
benchmark their performance (Table 8). The Rodski
21

survey methodology gives library management the
opportunity to measure and assess any gaps between
client expectations and service delivery. This data can
be used to improve levels of service delivery by
redistributing resources and efforts to services clients’
rate as very important but performing to a lower
standard. Thirty-three Variables are grouped into the
following areas22:

7.2 ISO 11620



Communication .

The first version of this standard was published in
1998. A new one was completed in 2008. The main
sources of the library performance indicators are:
(a) resources, infrastructure—what services does the
library offer; (b) use—how are the services accepted;
(c) efficiency—are the services offered cost-effectively;
(d) potentials and development—are there sufficient
potentials for future development.



Facilities and equipment.

8. CONCLUSIONS



Service quality.



Library staff.



Service delivery.



Virtual library.

Libraries must execute evaluation programmes as
management tools oriented to identify services requiring
improvements, as new ones to be implemented. The
credibility and respect that the information service has
among the community can only be certified through the
systems’ auditor: the user. The ability to learn and to
develop library activities from a customer’s point of view
as well as involvement of the library staff can help to
improve the quality of library. To deal with the customer
the development of the role of the librarian as an inspirer,
a mentor/coach and/or the contact creator is essential.
The ability for library to create quality improvements is
highly dependable of its ability to verify its activities from
a customer’s point of view. The difficulty lies in trying to
find a single model or set of simple indicators that can
be used by different institutions, and that will compare
something across large groups that are by definition
only locally applicable—i.e., how well a library meets
the needs of its institution. Librarians have either
accepted oversimplified national data or have undertaken
customised local evaluations of effectiveness, but that
has not been devised an effective way to link the two.
Quantifiable data obtained from any tool is not an end in
itself. Library staff should discuss user perceptions and
expectations, using their experience to interpret service
quality data and suggest how perceived shortfalls could
be addressed.

The name has been changed from Rodski to Insync
survey23.

7. INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS FOR
LIBRARY QUALITY
ISO has designed standards dealing with library
statistics and indicators (ISO 2789, ISO 11620 and
others projects which are still under development).
These can be used as reference documents and
strategic tools in a performance assessment process in
library.
ISO 2789—assessing quantity (International Library
Statistics), and ISO 11620—assessing quality
(Performance indicators for libraries), which is based on
an international consensus of experts, takes into
account, as much as possible, the recent evolutions in
library structures and services. In addition, they are
related to classical and shared assessment models. So,
although their aim is not to draw up an assessment
framework, they prove themselves useful for basic
operations in such a framework: to define objects and
services, and to classify, count, and build appropriate
indicators24.

7.1

ISO 2789

The first edition of ISO 2789 dates back to 1974. It
was based on work begun at the end of the 1960’s by
experts from IFLA and ISO, at the request of UNESCO,
which needed general guidelines for library statistics
aggregation at an international level. The fourth version
was published in September 2006. It deals with the
assessing quantity in library in terms of collection size,
number and types of users, usage of services, staff,
space, equipment, and training.
22

REFERENCES
1. Sethi, A.R. Quality syndrome of librarianship. In
Quality in libraries, edited by C.P. Vasisth. Seminar
Papers of 32 ILA Conference, 3-6 January 1987. pp.
115-17.
2. Gravin, D.A. What does product quality really
mean? Sloan Manage. Rev., 1984, 26(1), 25-43.
3. Calvert, P. & Hernon, P. Surveying service quality
within university libraries. J. Acad. Librarianship,
1997, 23(4), 408-15.
4. Juran J.M. & Grynam, F.M. Quality planning and
analysis, 3rd Ed. TMH, New Delhi, 1995. p.3.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

5. ISO 9000. Quality management systems,
fundamentals
and
vocabulary.
International
Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva, 2005.

19. The balanced scorecard: Measures that drive
performance. http://harvardbusinessonline.hbsp.harvard.
edu/?referral=7855 (accessed on 6.3.2010).

6. Brophy, P. & Coulling, K. Quality management for
information and library managers. Aslib Gower,
Aldershot, 1996. p.6.

20. Sinha, A. Balanced scorecard: A strategic
management tool. Vidyasagar Univ. J. Commerce,
2006, 11, 71-81.

7. Poll. R. & Boekhorst, P. Measuring quality—
performance measurement in libraries, 2nd Rev. Ed.
IFLA Publications, 2007. pp.13-21.

21. Melo, L.B. & Sampaio, M.I.C. Quality measures for
academic libraries and information services: Two
implementation initiatives—mixed model CAF-BSCAHP and PAQ-SIBi-USP. http://www.arts.fe.up.pt/
use/extra/iatul_v16/.../iatul_v16_fps_5_4.pdf
(accessed on 6.3.2010).

8. Impact of technology on quality of services in
technical and management libraries in Karnataka.
p.6.http://www.dsir.gov.in/reports/tifp/tapmi/tapmi_
report.pdf (accessed on 6.3.2010).
9. Sahu, A.K. Measuring service quality in an
academic library: An Indian case study. Library
Review, 2007, 56(3), 234-43.
10. Parasuraman, A.; Zeithaml, V.A. & Berry, L.L.
SERVQUAL: A multiple-item scale for measuring
consumer perceptions of service quality. J.
Retailing, 1988, 64 (1), 12-40.
11. High quality–high impact? Performance and
outcome measures in libraries. www.tilburguniver
sity.nl/services/lis/ticer/08carte/.../04apoll.pdf
(accessed on 6.3.2010).
12. Tann, J. Dimensions of quality in library settings. In
Quality Management: Towards BS 5750, edited by
M. Ashcroft & D. Barton. Capital Planning
Information, Stamford Lincs, 1993. pp.23–31.
13. Nitecki, D.A. Changing the concept and measure of
service quality in academic libraries. J. Acad.
Librarianship, 1996, 22 (3), 181-90.
14. Ladhari, R. A review of twenty years of SERVQUAL
research. Int.J. Qual. Serv. Sci., 2009, 1(2), 172-98.
15. Shoeb, Z.H.; Zabed, S.M. & Ahmed, Z. Individual
differences in service quality assessment: A study of
a private university library system in Bangladesh.
Perform. Measur. Metrics, 2009, 10(3), 193-211.
16. Rampal, M.K. & Gupta, S.L. Service marketing—
concepts, application and cases. Galgotia
Publications, New Delhi, 2006. pp. 303-306.
17. LIBQUAL+: Creating library service quality. http://
www.libqual.org (accessed on 6.3.2010).
18. Ohio benchmarking basics for librarians. In Military
librarians workshop, 18-20 November 2007, Dayton
Marriott Hotel, Dayton. http://units.sla.org/division/
dmil/mlw97/gohlke/ (accessed on 6.3.2010).
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

22. Rodski client satisfaction survey report, University of
Newcastle, Australia. http://www.newcastle. edu.au/
service/library/survey/results/FinalReport2006.pdf
(accessed on 3.3.2010).
23. The insync surveys. http://www.insyncsurv eys.com
.au (accessed on 5.3.2010).
24. Renard, P. ISO 2789 and ISO 11620: Short
presentation of standards as reference document in
an assessment process. http://liber.library.uu.nl/
Volume 17 Issue 3/4 2007 (accessed on 3.3.2010).

About the Authors
Shri N.K. Dash is working as Librarian
at Silicon Institute of Technology,
Bhubaneswar (Orissa). He has more
than 12 years of professional
experience. His areas of interest
include user study, user education,
service quality assessment, and
resource management.
Prof. P. Padhi is former Professor and
Head,
DLIS,
Utkal
University,
Bhubaneswar. As a founder teacher of
the University’s LIS Department, he
introduced two-year MLIS and PhD
programmes. He acted as the resource
person in academic persuits and also
as the expert member in various selection committees of
the universities and govt organisations. He authored a
text book on reference sources in modern Indian
languages, apart from translating IFLA/UNESCO
Guidelines for public library services in Oriya language.
He also translated Soul Manual developed by
INFLIBNET. He was visiting professor of BHU and also
the visiting fellow of Central University, Mizoram.
23

