DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 30, No. 6, November 2010, pp. 25-30
© 2010, DESIDOC

Design and Development of Prototype Astronomical Digital
Image Library using Greenstone Digital Library Software
Md Nurul Alam and Pragya Pandey
Physical Research Laboratory, Navrangpura, Ahemdabad-380 009
E-mail: alam@prl.res.in; praggyap@prl.res.in

ABSTRACT
This paper provides a mechanism for the development of a digital library—Greenstone Astronomical Digital
Image Library (GADIL)—for astronomical images using open source software Greenstone digital library, and its
use for astronomy community and educational users in India. The system is based on open source software
like GSDL, Apache, PERL, GRE and Imagemagik, and can serve as an ideal access tool of research-ready
scientific images so as to enhance astronomers’ productivity and increase public awareness of astronomy as
a subject.
Keywords: GADIL, Greenstone Digital Library, astronomy, digital images library, digital library

1. INTRODUCTION
Digital libraries have collection of digital objects,
including text, images, videos, and audios along with the
methods for their access and retrieval. Robust and
flexible digital library collection management and
presentation software is essential for creating and
delivering digital collection. But digital library
technologies and contents are not static; continuous
evaluation and investment are required to maintain the
digital library as the needs for managing digital
collections have increased greatly in the recent years.
Some library software vendors such as DiMeMa, Luna
Imaging Inc., Endeavour Information System Inc., etc.
have released commercial digital library management
systems. To avoid expensive license fees, a good option
is to use open source alternatives. Open source
application allows developers and users to modify and
tailor it to their own particular needs. Like commercial
software, open source software will not be a perfect
solution, but gives developers and users the opportunity
to modify functionality and create interfaces for
integration with other software1. Some major open
source software projects, for building and maintaining
digital collections, are Dspace, Fedora, Eprints, and
Greenstone. Greenstone is a suite of software for
building and distributing digital library collections that
provides a way of organising information and publishing
it on Internet or on removable media (e.g., CD ROM/
Received on: 23 February 2010; Revised on: 15 May 2010

DVD). Greenstone aims to empower users, particularly
universities and research libraries, to build their own
digital library collection in the fields of education science
and culture.

2. FUNCTIONS OF A CORE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Digital library systems comprise a family of
automated systems that together provide a
comprehensive capability to manage the digital content
of an enterprise. Capabilities of a digital library system
can be divided into the following areas:


Capture or creation of content.



Indexing and cataloging (metadata).



Storage.



Search and query.



Asset and property rights protection.



Retrieval and distribution.

In addition, a digital library has the following salient
features:


It enables greater access to digital contents, which
can be managed from remote locations and provide
25

a way to enrich the teaching and learning
environment.


It enhances the power and capacity of library
services and also provides workable solutions to
problems of the print-based collections in traditional
libraries.



It provides access to multiple users simultaneously
with continuous availability of documents.



It reduces floor space requirements compared to
conventional library to store the documents. The fifth
law of Ranganathan, i.e., “the library is a growing
organism” has always been putting pressure on
traditional libraries for more and more physical
space to accommodate new arrivals in the library.
This problem is completely solved in a digital
environment2.



To provide an easy access to the scientific-quality
images for the purpose of scientific and educational
use.



To encourage the further use of images that
respects the scientific integrity of the data.



To help astronomers in preparing figures for talks or
papers.



To create an interest in Astronomy among students.



To increase public awareness and understanding of
Astronomy as a subject.

4. SCOPE
GADIL is a prototype astronomical digital image
library confined to a small sample of astronomical
images available freely from the World Wide Web.



It facilitates improved access to information by
providing various sophisticated search and retrieval
facilities.

5. RELATED WORKS



It facilitates information sharing among users
through notification, file sharing and co-operative
document preparation.

(i)



It breaks the barriers of time, space, language, and
culture.



It facilitates improved collaboration among users
which has profound impact on the scholarly
information lifecycle—the process by which the
researchers and scholars create, use and
disseminate information.



It reduces the gap between nation and people in
terms of infrastructure, facilities and resources.
Thus it reduces the digital divide2.

3. OBJECTIVES
Astronomy is a subject with its roots in the study of
images. These images are part of the presentation of
scientific results; therefore, their archival for present and
future use is necessary. There is a vast range of images
of astronomical objects available on Internet. However,
finding images of a specific object can sometimes be
fairly difficult.
The Greenstone Astronomical Digital Image Library
(GADIL) helps in collection of astronomical, researchready images and make these available to the
astronomical community and the general public. The
other objectives of building GADIL were:


26

To increase the astronomers’ productivity through
easy access to data.

Some of the existing digital libraries are:
Bus and Coach Photo.com (http://www.busandc
oach.com/simpleSearch.aspx?mode=all&list=1)
image library is a comprehensive image collection
developed by TATA Group. It is a commercial
website for display of numerous buses and coaches
manufactured by the company.

(ii) Gandhi serve (http://www.gandhiserve.org/cgi-in/if2/
imageFolio.cgi?direct=Art/Drawings), a charitable
foundation has created an online image archive of
art, cartoon, documents, correspondence, etc.
related to Mahatma Gandhi.
(iii) Headlines India.Com (http://www.headlinesindia.co
m/Archive/image_archive.jsp?j=1), an electronic
news media has archived images related to India’s
news headlines.
(iv) National Archive of India (http://nationalarchives.g
ov.in/photo_gallery.html) has created a repository of
images for the use of administrator and scholars.
(v)

Freelance artist have created image libraries of own
work for demonstration and publicity.

6. METHODOLOGY
As astronomy is a vast subject, a detailed analysis
is required to understand the intension and extension
ideas of the subject. This has been done by defining the
subject and identifying the divisions and sub-divisions of
astronomy using thesaurus and subject heading lists.
Sample data was collected through keywords search
from Internet.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

6.1 Software Requirements
The following software were used for installation:
(i)

Apache Web server.

(ii) JRE.
(iii) GSDL.
(iv) Imagemagik.

7. GREENSTONE LIBRARIAN’S INTERFACE

Figure 1. Creating a new collection.

The simplest way of building a new collection is to
use Greenstone Librarian’s Interface. This allows
collecting a set of documents, import or assigning
metadata and building these into a Greenstone
collection. .The librarian’s interface can be run in one or
four modes: Librarian assistant, librarian, librarian
system specialists, and experts. The modes control the
level of details within the interface and can be changed
through preference in the file menu.

8. CREATION OF COLLECTIONS
8.1 Creation of New Collection and Selection
of Metadata

Figure 2. Gathering.

To create a new collection, open the file menu and
choose new (Fig. 1). Software provides various kinds of
metadata, which can be selected on the basis of
requirements. A new metadata set was created, which
interprets the basic image data like object type and
name, description, format (jpg, bmp), height, width, and
resource identifier.

8.2 Gathering
Gathering implies selection of the files required for
the collection. Dragging and dropping the files solve this
purpose (Fig. 2).

8.3 Adding Metadata to the Document
While adding metadata to the document, the enrich
panel comes into play (Fig. 3). The enrich tab brings a
panel of information. On the left is the document tree
representing the collection, while on the right, metadata
can be added to individual documents. To view the
document to which metadata is being assigned, double
clicking on the document in left panel will open the
document using the appropriate program.

8.4 Designing the Collection
Collection can be designed in the following steps:

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

Figure 3. Adding metadata.

8.4.1 Document Plug-in
In Greenstone, documents and metadata
specifications are imported by software modules called
plug-ins (Fig. 4). Plug-ins enables Greenstone to
support different document formats. It explains order of
their appearance, types of plug-ins to be used, and what
parameters to pass to.

8.4.2 Indexing
Indexes (Fig. 5) specify which parts of the collection
are searchable. To manipulate an index command, the
search index is chosen in the design panel. Browsing
classifiers allows the user to browse the documents in a

27

collection; the browsing structures are generated
automatically from the metadata that are associated
with each document in the collection. Browsing
classifiers are set up in the design panel. Classifiers
generate a hierarchical structure that is used to display
a browsing index.

8.4.3 Format Feature
Greenstone library webpages are generated
dynamically when requested. Format commands are
used to change the appearance of these pages—
particularly how documents are shown in browsing and
search result list. To manipulate a format command, the
format feature (Fig. 6) section is chosen in the design
panel, where use of html tags, metadata values, some
customised format string items, and conditional
expressions can be made.

9.

FUNCTIONALITY/WORKABILITY OF GADIL

GADIL is a digital image library restricted
astronomy and its related disciplines. It can be regarded
as the first indigenous prototype digital image library
developed using open source software Greenstone.

28

GADIL can serve as an ideal access tool for
astronomical community in India. It is available via the
web allowing access to astronomical research-ready
images with a user friendly interface at http://127.0.0.1/
cgi-bin/library.exe. It is also available through selfinstallable CD-ROM. Figure 7 shows the home page of
GADIL.

10. SERVICES PROVIDED BY GADIL
GADIL provides the following services to the user:

10.1 Single User Interface
GADIL provides different browsing classifiers (Fig. 8)
for finding information such as search facility, type of
images, subjects, and instruments used, etc.

10.2 Simple and Advanced Searches
GADIL provides both simple and advanced searches
(Fig. 9) interface via the web, which in turn allows more
targeted searching. For advanced searches (Fig. 10),
different search fields like type of images, image
objects, instruments used, and image formats, etc.) can

Figure 4. Document plug-in.

Figure 5. Index.

Figure 6. Format feature.

Figure 7. Home page.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

be combined with each other and linked with logical
operators AND,OR and NOT.

10.3 Browsing Facility
GADIL provides browsing facilities (Figs 11 to 16) by
type of images, instruments used, subjects, and
keywords. A list of images appear in an ascending order.

Figure 8. About page.

Figure 9. Simple search.

Figure 10. Advanced search.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

11. CONCLUSIONS
The preliminary results presented above suggest
that the use of Greenstone as GADIL can be very useful
for the astronomical community. GADIL not only aims to
serve as a reference tool with research ready images but
also as a didactic one with futuristic educational
applications. During the course of development of the

Figure 11. Browsing by type of images in the collection.

Figure 12. Image results with description.

Figure 13. Browsing by instruments.
29

resolution, pixel examination, and color manipulation
have been major challenges while developing the
system.

Figure 14. Image results of browsing by Hubble space.

GADIL, being an indigenous experimental prototype
model, provides a beginning or standing platform for
development of a comprehensive digital image library
and is expected to serve as a top quality resource for
scientists, researchers and students. It is important to
mention that in future, if GADIL is made OAIPMH and
Unicode compliant, the system would also be able to
operate as a harvester thus facilitating interoperability
and would eventually be successful in crossing the
barriers of language, time, and location.

REFERENCES
1. Zhang, A. & Gourley, D.A digital collection
management system based on open source
software. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM/IEEE-CS
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 27-31 May
2003, Texas. The IEEE Computer Society, USA,
2004. pp. 381. http://www.wrlc.org/dcpc/dcmspaper/
(accessed on 05.10.2009).

Figure 15. Browsing by subjects.

2. Bhatt, R.K. & Singh, K.P. Digital libraries:
Emergence, features, challenges and opportunities.
In International Conference on Digital Libraries, 2427 February 2004, New Delhi. The Energy and
Resource Institute, New Delhi, 2004. pp. 49-55.

About the Authors

Figure 16. Image result for Mars.

GADIL, several issues related to the Greenstone
software and otherwise, like metadata selection and
editing as per needs, have been met. The metadata are
the ancillary data needed to properly interpret the basic
image information. Since there is a wide variety of ways
in which a digital library may be customised, selecting
metadata, editing and customisation keeping in view
user’s idiosyncratic requirements and possible
approaches is a fairly tough task. Further, resolving
problems related to the scientific data, i.e., images have
been quite an issue. Format of the images, size and
30

Shri Md Nurul Alam graduated with
Electronic
Science
and
has
a
postgraduate degree in LIS from Jadavpur
University, Kolkata. Professionally, he had
worked with Electronic Media Library and
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
and is presently working at Physical Research
Laboratory under the aegis of Department of Space. He
has keen interest in open source software (OSS)
technologies and is constantly developing various
application-based products using OSS technologies.
Ms Pragya Pandey graduated with
Chemistry and Zoology and has a
postgraduate degree in LIS and a diploma
in Library Automation and Networking.
Presently, she is working at Physical
Research Laboratory.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(6)

