DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 2011, pp. 19-24
© 2011, DESIDOC

Use of Online Information Resources for Knowledge Organisation in
Library and Information Centres: A Case Study of CUSAT
Archana S.N. and P.K. Padmakumar
Central Library, CUSAT, Cochin-682 022, Kerala
E-mail:niharikamanakkil@gmail.com; pappan_tvm@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The paper discusses the use of online information resources for organising knowledge in library and
information centres in Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT). The paper discusses the
status and extent of automation in CUSAT library. The use of different online resources and the purposes
for which these resources are being used, is explained in detail. Structured interview method was applied
for collecting data. It was observed that 67 per cent users consult online resources for assisting
knowledge organisation. Library of Congress catalogue is the widely used (100 per cent) online resource
followed by OPAC of CUSAT and catalogue of British Library. The main purposes for using these
resources are class number building and subject indexing.
Keywords: Knowledge organisation, online catalogues, WEBOPACs, subject indexing, classification, networked
information sources, library automation

1. INTRODUCTION
The changing nature of research, both
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary, has resulted in
the literature output complex in terms of form and
subject content. This has created greater challenges for
library and information professionals in organising
knowledge in library and information centres. This
situation warrants the use of dynamic online information
tools for knowledge organisation (KO), since the static
nature of the conventional tools for KO fall short to
accomplish the task. In this paper, authors have
attempted to find out how the library professionals in
Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT)
use online information resources for organising
knowledge in their libraries and information centres.

2. KNOWLEDGE ORGANISATION IN
LIBRARIES
To the library and information professionals, KO is
a specific purpose-oriented activity. The purpose being,
to organise the documents/information in a collection or
their surrogates in a database, assist users in browsing,
formulating search expressions, presenting information
services and products to users in forms and formats
convenient for them to use. Essentially, KO is an
Received on:
04Inf.
June
2010 2011, 31(1)
DESIDOC
J. Lib.
Technol.,

intellectual process of organising information and/or
information sources to provide access, facilitating
appropriate information retrieval and dissemination1.
By the end of the 19th century, formal systems to
organise knowledge, embodied in documents of library
collections, started emerging. Various schemes of
classification like Library of Congress Classification and
Subject Heading, Melvil Dewey’s Decimal Classification
(DDC), the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC),
Ranganthan’s Colon Classification (CC), etc. came out
in the following decades and took the leading roles of
organising knowledge in library and information centres.
The term “Knowledge Organisation” seems to be
established around 1900 by people like Charles A.
Cutter, W. C. Berwick Sayers and Ernest Cushington
Richardson2.

2.1 Definitions
“Knowledge organisation encompasses every type
and method of indexing, abstracting, cataloguing,
classification, records management, bibliography and
the creation of textual or bibliographic databases for
information retrieval”3. In the context of the present
study, KO is defined as all activities involved in
19

organising the documents in the library, i.e., classifying,
cataloguing and indexing, and creating metadata of
documents.

2.2 Tools for Knowledge Organisation and
Networked Environment
From the definitions above, it is clear that the tools
for KO are the classification schemes, cataloguing
codes, the subject heading lists and thesauri. Different
classification schemes like DDC, UDC and CC are
commonly used for the purpose and most of the present
day libraries follow AACR II for cataloguing. Advances
in Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
enhanced the sharing and access of such tools.

2.3 Online Resources for Knowledge
Organisation
Many of tools discussed above are now available
online as free or on a subscription mode. Besides, the
catalogues of many of the leading (both national and
international) libraries are now online. Library
professionals now-a-days depend on such sources
frequently for assisting their job of KO. Easy access,
currency and authenticity are the main factors that
prompt the librarians to consult such resources. Another
factor is the challenge faced by librarians in processing
books dealing with interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary
concepts. Since the revisions of the existing
classification schemes are not in pace with the rapidly
developing Universe of Knowledge, fixing a location to a
document for a newer subject is really difficult.

3. ABOUT CUSAT
Cochin University of Science and Technology was
established in 1971 by the Government of Kerala with
the specific purpose of “development of higher
education with particular emphasis on postgraduate
studies and research in applied science, technology,
industry and commerce”4. At present there are 26
departments functioning under nine faculties in CUSAT.
All the departments and schools inside the CUSAT
campus are interconnected via the Campus-widenetwork (CWN) with Internet facility of 10 Mbps speed.

3.1 The CUSAT Library System
3.1.1 The Central Library
The Cochin University Library was established in
1975 as the central agency for meeting the information
requirements of the academic community of CUSAT5.
The library LAN has become a part of the CWN,
thereby making it possible for the academics of all the
20

departments to access information from their location
itself. The central library is fully automated using ADLIB
software package. The library also provides facilities for
WEBOPAC, online reservations, fine calculations, and
digital reference service. The library has a collection of
1 Lakh documents. It uses UDC scheme for
classification of documents and follow AACR II for
cataloguing. It has a separate division for technical
processing manned by five professional staff including
an Assistant Librarian, Junior Librarian, and three
Professional Assistants.

3.1.2 The Department Libraries
All the departments of the University are offering
postgraduate, research and post-doctoral programmes.
Twenty department libraries are functioning under the
nine faculties, and catering to the needs of all 26
departments. These department libraries are equipped
with latest ICT facilities and have high-speed Internet
connectivity of 10 Mbps. The collection of these libraries
ranges from 1500 to 34000 books and other documents.
About 99 per cent of the library professionals are
postgraduates or with higher academic qualifications
and are capable of handling the libraries in this changing
environment of ICT revolution. Most of them have got
training in different library automation software packages
and digital library software (both proprietary and Open
Source Software).

3.2 The WEBOPAC of CUSAT Library System
The website of CUSAT library provides global
access to its OPAC. The WEBOPAC is a union
catalogue of all the department libraries and the central
library. Website also has simple and advanced search
facilities. Searches can be made using truncation and
Boolean operators. List of author names and list of
subjects can be accessed for each entry term.
Catalogue has been displayed in AACR II format and
the status of the book and its location can be accessed.
Links to subject headings and personal names have also
been provided in the detailed presentation of the
catalogue.

4. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY


To identify the status and level of automation of
CUSAT library system.



To enumerate the library automation software used
in the CUSAT library system.



To identify whether any online resource is being
used by the CUSAT library community for
supporting their work of KO.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)



If yes, identify the frequently and widely consulted
resources.

library automation. Winisis and Libsoul were the other
software packages used in the library system.



To enumerate the purposes for which these
resources are being consulted.

6.1.2 Extent of Automation of CUSAT Libraries

5. METHODOLOGY
The study was conducted by structured interviews.
The interviews of all the department librarians as well as
the library professionals working in the technical
division of the library were taken. The collected data
was then analysed using Microsoft Excel.

6.

ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION

Among the 21 libraries (university library+20
department libraries), about 80 per cent are automated.
Table 1 shows the status of automation of CUSAT
libraries. Different types of software used for
automation and the extent of automation are discussed
in the following sections.

Figure 2 shows the different classification schemes,
i.e., UDC (Standard Edition), different editions of DDC,
CC (6th Edition) are the schemes of classification used
in CUSAT libraries.
5% CC

Automation of CUSAT libraries

Automated

No. of libraries

Percentage

Yes

17

81

No

4

19

Total

21

100

6.1.1 Library Automation Software Packages Used
in the CUSAT Libraries
CUSAT libraries have used both proprietary software
as well as open source software (OSS) for library
automation (Fig. 1). The University library used ADLIB
software package for all the in-house operations. Recent
developments in OSS has encouraged the professionals
to harness the free availability and user support of OSS
and a greater half of the libraries have used KOHA for
ADLIB 6 %

6.2 Knowledge Organisation Tools used in
CUSAT Libraries
6.2.1 Classification Schemes

6.1 Automation of CUSAT Libraries

Table1.

In CUSAT, the automation of departmental libraries
is mainly confined to the automation of the catalogue. A
complete automation of the in-house operations is
adopted only in the central library. Apart from catalogue,
some of the departmental libraries have automated their
circulation and acquisition works too.

33% DDC
62%, UDC

Figure 2. Classification schemes used in CUSAT.

6.2.2 Cataloguing
Irrespective of the schemes of classification used,
all the libraries in CUSAT use AACR II standard for
cataloguing.

6.3 Use of Online Resources for Supporting
Knowledge Organisation
Table 2 shows that a very good number of
departmental libraries consult the above mentioned
online resources for the purpose of organising
knowledge.

WINISIS 6%

LIBSOUL 6 %

Table 2. Use of online resources for KO in CUSAT

Consult online
resource

KOHA 82 %

Figure 1.

Library automation software used in CUSAT.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

No. of
respondents

Percentage

Yes

14

67

No

7

33

Total

21

100
21

6.4 Different Online Resources Consulted by
the CUSAT Library Professionals

6.5 Purposes for which the Online
Resources are Consulted

The web OPACs of Library of Congress, British
Library, Cochin University Library and OCLC
WORLDCAT are the main online resources consulted
by the professionals (Fig. 3). The advanced search
facility with Boolean operators, downloading of MARC
tags, quick response to search queries, etc. of theses
OPACs are found useful by the librarians. Other online
resources consulted include e-mail user group of web
Dewey, web OPACs of libraries using UDC accessible
through the website of UDC consortium, web OPACs of
different institutions like IITs, IIMs, etc.

The professionals in the CUSAT library consult the
online resources for one or more of the following
purposes (Fig. 4).

6.5.1 Building Class Numbers
Besides different classification schemes for
constructing class numbers, various other online
resources are also being consulted for easing the
number building work. Depending on the classification
schemes the libraries use these resources for (i)
Identifying the basic class: CUSAT libraries that are
using UDC scheme for classification consult the online
resources like LC catalogue, BL catalogue, etc. and (ii)
Finding readymade Class Numbers: Libraries using DDC
22nd edition consult LC catalogue for getting readymade

In addition to these resources Google and
Wikipedia are also being consulted for getting a clear
understanding of the different concepts, which in turn
helps the professionals to identify the basic class and
assign index terms.

110
100
90
80
70

LC

100
93

OPAC of CUSAT
BL

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OCLC

43
29

Others

7

Figure 3. Different Online Resources consulted by
CUSAT library professionals.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20

86,

Building class numbers
Subject indexing

64

36

43
29

Rendering personal
names
Finding place of
publication
Importing metadata

10
0
Figure 4. Different purposes for which online
resources are consulted.
22

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

class numbers. Libraries following other editions of DDC
also use LC catalogue for getting readymade class
numbers in certain cases. Libraries using UDC scheme
consult the CUSAT library OPAC for getting readymade
class numbers.On the whole, for the purpose of building
class numbers 86 per cent of the CUSAT libraries use
the online resources.



Most of the CUSAT libraries are automated and
using Koha.



UDC is the widely used classification scheme in
CUSAT library system, followed by DDC and CC. All
the libraries in CUSAT use AACR II for cataloguing.



Almost all the libraries use one or more online
resources for easing their work of KO.



Catalogues of Library of Congress is the most
widely (100 per cent) consulted online resource.
This is followed by OPAC of the University Library of
CUSAT. British Library catalogue and OCLC
WORLDCAT are the other resources being
consulted.



Construction of class number is the prime purpose
for this consultation, followed by subject indexing.
CUSAT libraries consult these resources also for
the purpose of rendering personal names and finding
the place of publication.



In addition Google and Wikipedia are also being
consulted at CUSAT for the purpose of getting a
clear understanding of the concepts discussed in
the documents.



Professionals in CUSAT do not consult any
particular online thesaurus or subject heading lists
for assisting their work.

6.5.2 Subject Indexing
Subject indexing is also an intellectual work and
need utmost care in each step of assigning keywords for
a document. Standard thesauri and Subject Heading
Lists are consulted for this purpose. The dynamic and
in-built thesaurus of the CUSAT library database is
another source, which provides the list of previously
indexed terms. In certain cases these sources may not
be adequate and the professionals need to depend on
other online resources. For this purpose, 64 per cent of
the libraries consult online resources.

6.5.3 Rendering of Personal Names
In certain cases the personal names provided by the
title page of the book may differ from that on the cover
page. The professionals pose some doubt in rendering
the entry element of certain foreign personal names like
French, Chinese, etc. as well as Muslim personal
names. The CIP data in the verso of title page is much
useful for clarifying this. But all the books may not
provide CIP data and hence the librarians consult online
resources to serve the purpose. For rendering of
personal names 36 per cent of libraries consult online
resources.

6.5.4 Place of Publication
In certain instances online resources are also
consulted for finding out the place of publication of
documents. For this purpose 29 per cent of libraries
consult the online resources.

6.5.5 Importing Metadata
Libraries using KOHA software for automation have
the facility to upload metadata from other sources.
Librarians find this feature very useful since it saves a lot
of time and also avoid mistakes to a great extent. After
uploading the MARC tags, necessary editions (class
numbers, item numbers, etc) are done. Forty-three per
cent of libraries consult online resources for importing
and uploading metadata to their system.

7. FINDINGS
The findings and inferences of the study are
enumerated below:

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

8. CONCLUSION
Knowledge
organisation/technical
information
organisation in libraries has become a challenging job
due to the proliferation of documents dealing with
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary subjects. In many
cases, the conventional tools for KO available in the
libraries do not serve the purpose and librarians need to
depend on other sources for completing their work.
Advances in technology have changed the face and pace
of present-day libraries and its information work.
The ever increasing complexity of documents and
higher user expectations, demand high quality
information work in library and information centers.
Knowledge organisation being an integral part of
information work, the library professionals have to equip
themselves to cope up with the ever changing situation.
As far as CUSAT is concerned, it has a highly qualified,
trained and dynamic group of professionals who are
capable to harness information from every source
available to ease their routine work, especially the
technical work.

23

REFERENCES

About the Authors

1. Seetharama, S. Knowledge organisation systems
over time. In Knowledge Organisation. Information
Systems and Other Essays: Professor A.
Neelameghan Festschrift, edited by K.S. Raghavan
& K.N. Prasad. Ess Ess Publications, New Delhi,
2006. pp. 29-40.

Ms Archana S.N. is currently working as Junior
Librarian in the Central Library, Cochin
University of Science and Technology (CUSAT).
She has 11 years of professional experience in
various libraries including the British Council
Library, Trivandrum and Kannur University. She is pursuing
PhD programme at CUSAT, and published research papers
in peer-reviewed journals and conference volumes. Her
areas of interest are: Electronic and web-based library
services, open source software for library management,
knowledge management, resource sharing, etc.

2. Hjorland,
Birger.
Lifeboat
for
knowledge
organisation, 2007. http://www.db.dk/bh/lifeboat_ko/
CONCEPTS/knowledge_organization.htm (access
ed on 05 April 2010).
3. Anderson, J.D. Organisation of knowledge. In
International encyclopedia of information and library
science, edited by John Feather & Paul Sturges.
Routledge, London, 1996. pp. 336-53.
4. http://www.cusat.ac.in (accessed on 5 April 2010).
5. http://library.cusat.ac.in (accessed on 5 April 2010).

24

Mr Padmakumar P.K. is currently working
as Junior Librarian in the Department of
Hindi, CUSAT. He has 14 years of professional
experience in various libraries including medical
and media libraries. His areas of interest
are: Cognitive aspects of information, social informatics,
human-computer interaction, etc.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

