DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 2011, pp. 31-34
© 2011, DESIDOC

Establishing a Virtual Reference Service
Shalini R Lihitkar
R.T.M., Nagpur University, Nagpur-440 001
E-mail:shanwaghmare@yahoo.com; shalini_lihitkar@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The paper describes the concepts of virtual reference service and instant messaging. It explains how realtime communication works in a library setting, and introduces one free, easy-to-use software, i.e., Meboo for
establishing a virtual reference service in a library.
Keywords: Virtual reference service, instant message, online reference service, Meebo

1. INTRODUCTION
The Internet has revolutionised the way we now
communicate. The ability to publish webpages and send
e-mail communications changed our expectations on the
ease and speed by which information is now being
exchanged. Early on, librarians recognised the potential
of Internet as a way to connect with their users, and email reference quickly became a standard library
service. Advances in technology further brought
systems that enabled chat with users in real time. These
early virtual reference systems varied in price and
features, although most were quite expensive and fairly
complex, and only a few libraries could afford the cost
to implement these. Also, a handful of users were techsavvy enough to care. The potential was there, but the
technology was not ready1.
But now a new web generation has emerged.
Central to the concept of Web 2.0, scores of free,
easy-to-use tools have emerged to facilitate the rapid
exchange of information. A number of tools such as
Blogger, YouTube, Flickr and Del.icio.us where users
post content as well as real-time communication tools,
such as Trillian, Meebo, and Plugoo have changed the
ways the communication is now been made.It is not just
the teenagers who use them, real-time communication
via the Internet is increasingly becoming a preferred
communication
method
for
many
business
professionals, too. Librarians can take advantage of
these real-time communications tools also. No longer
must virtual reference systems be expensive or
Received
07 July
2010; Revised
on: 20 July 2010
DESIDOCon:
J. Lib.
Inf. Technol.,
2011, 31(1)

complex. With today’s real-time communication tools,
librarians can establish a virtual reference service with
relatively little expense or technical expertise2.

2. VIRTUAL REFERNECE SERVICE
Virtual reference service is an online reference
service that enables library patrons to ask reference
questions through a library’s website. The user may be
at home, in office, at school, or in a library. Some virtual
reference services also place answers to frequently
asked questions (FAQs), selected reference tools, and
access to selected databases on the website. The
question answering service using Internet technology is
the essential component, without which the use of the
name “virtual reference” is misleading3.
Virtual reference is reference service initiated
electronically, often in real-time, where patrons employ
computers or other Internet technology to communicate
with reference staff, without being physically present.
Communication channels used frequently in virtual
reference include chat, videoconferencing, Voice over
IP, co-browsing, e-mail, and instant messaging.
While online sources are often used in provision of
virtual reference, use of electronic sources in seeking
answers is not by itself virtual reference. Virtual
reference queries are sometimes followed-up with
telephone, fax, in-person and regular mail interactions,
even though these modes of communication are not
considered virtual4.
31
31

3. INSTANT MESSAGING
Instant Messaging (IM) falls under chat, as it is a
real-time text-based networked communication system.
But it is distinct in that it is based on clients that facilitate
connections between specified known users (often
using “Buddy List”, “Friend List” or “Contact List”),
whereas Chat includes web-based applications that
allow communication between (often anonymous) users
in a multi-user environment. IM is a form of online realtime communication. It allows users to see whether their
contacts are online, and to send them a typed message.
It is similar to e-mail as a communication tool, but,
unlike traditional e-mail, is instantaneous. Messages
sent via IM appear immediately on the recipient’s
computer screen. In this way, IM is a truly synchronous
(that is, real time) form of communication5. Some of the
IM software are:


Proprietary and/or single protocol: AIM, Baidu Hi,
Digsby, Fetion, Gadu-Gadu, iChat, ICQ, IMVU,
Lotus Sametime, NateOn, Qnext , Skype, Tencent
QQ, VZOchat, Yahoo! Messenger, and Xfire.



Open source and/or multi-protocol: Adium, Ayttm,
BitlBee, CenterIM, eBuddy, Empathy, fring, Kopete,
Mail.ru Agent, Meebo, Miranda IM , Nimbuzz,
Palringo, Pidgin, Trillian, and QIP Infium.



XMPP (Jabber): Gabber, Gajim, Gizmo5, Google
Talk, JWChat, and Psi.



.NET Messenger: aMSN, emesene, KMess,
Microsoft Messenger for Mac, Windows Live
Messenger, and Windows Messenger.

3.1

Salient Features of Instant Messaging



Instant messages: Send notes back and forth with a
friend who is online.



Chat: Create a chat room with friends or coworkers.



Web links: Share links to your favorite websites.



Video: Send and view videos, and chat face to face
with friends.



Images: Look at an image stored on your friend’s
computer.



Sounds: Play sounds for your friends.



Files: Share files by sending them directly to your
friends.



Talk: Use the Internet instead of a phone to actually
talk with friends.

32



Streaming content: Real-time or near-real-time
stock quotes and news.



Mobile capabilities: Send instant messages from
your cell phone.

4. INSTANT MESSAGING AND REFERENCE
SERVICE
Instant messaging enables libraries to provide a
responsive, streamlined service that meets users “where
they are”, both technologically and geographically.
Research indicates that IM is the communication tool of
choice for an increasing number of people. By using IM
to deliver reference services, libraries can meet their
users on their own ground. Rather than asking (or
expecting) patrons to come to libraries, libraries will be
able to meet them at their point-of-need, which need not
to be geographically restricted to a computer. While
traditional chat services that employ proprietary, webbased chat reference software can only be accessed
from a computer with an Internet connection, IM clients
can be contacted on hand- held devices like PDAs and
next generation mobile phones5.

5. STEPS OF CREATING VIRTUAL
REFERENCE SERVICE
Although some virtual reference applications have
more bells and whistles than others, they all are based
on the real-time exchange of typed text. Two types,
which librarians can use to establish a basic virtual
reference service with little cost or technical skill, are
instant messaging and embedded chat. With instant
messaging, the patron logs into IM account, chooses
the librarian from her/his contact list, types a quick
message and sends it. In a few seconds, the message
pops up in the librarian’s IM window where he can
immediately reply. It is really not that much different
from e-mail, except that it happens in real-time. Although
IM may be of second nature for some, not all will be
comfortable with it. Fortunately, they don’t have to be.
Using embedded chat, users can still communicate with
a librarian in real-time by using a chat box embedded
on the library’s webpage. User simply has to type
message in the box and send it. The message is then
directed to the librarian’s IM account where he can
reply in real-time. Unlike IM in which both the patron
and librarian must have an IM account, with embedded
chat only the librarian needs to have one. Patrons don’t
even need to know what IM is. Communicating via
embedded chat requires the sender to have no more
technical skill than filling out a simple web form6.
Once a library decides to establish a virtual
reference service, the first step it requires is to register
for an instant messaging account on behalf of the
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

library. Fortunately, most IM systems allow creation of
accounts at no cost. The following factors need to be
considered while establishing an IM account, and have
been explained by using Meebo, and open source IM
software.

5.1 Meebo
Founded in 2005, Meebo enables real-time social
interactions with instant messaging and group chat at
meebo.com, on mobile, and on partner sites across the
web. Meebo users can keep in touch across dozens of
IM platforms, including AIM, Yahoo!, MSN, Google Talk,
MySpace IM, Facebook Chat, and more. Meebo is one
of the web’s fastest growing social media companies7.

5.2 Establish Accounts in Multiple Systems
Since IM systems aren’t interoperable, it is
beneficial to establish accounts in several systems. That
way, no matter what system users are using, they will be
able to reach you. You have to go to www.meebo.com.
The following screen (Fig. 1) will appear.

Figure 2. Screen shot of logging into Meebo.

5.4 Logging and Monitoring IM Accounts from
One Place
Meebo allows to monitor multiple IM accounts from
one application. It requires no installation. To monitor
multiple IM accounts in Meebo, simply go to the Meebo
website and login to all of your library IM accounts. Or,
you can create a Meebo account, which will remember
names of all your users and passwords for all your IM
accounts; in the future, you only need to login to your
Meebo account.

Figure 1. Screen shot of Meebo.

5.3 Naming
When establishing an IM account, you will need to
choose a name, also known as a screen name. This
becomes your IM address which users will add to their
contact list. Therefore, choose a name that is
descriptive of you or your library. To reduce confusion,
consider choosing the same name in each IM system.
Meebo is a web application, which makes it attractive to
many librarians because they don’t have to download
anything. This is ideal for situations in which
downloading applications is discouraged or prohibited.
This too offers several advantages, such as not having to
keep an extra browser window open and risk
accidentally closing the window and the virtual reference
service along with it.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

Figure 3. Screen shot of entering VRS into Meebo.

5.5 Entering Virtual Reference Service into
Meebo
Once the website of library will be opened then
automatically users’ reference queries will pop-up.
Librarian then have to choose the users name list, for
creating a virtual reference service and sent to their
accounts.

6. CONCLUSION
Technology has indeed revolutionised the way we
communicate. More information is being exchanged
faster than ever before. And as information experts,
33

librarians should have a central role in that revolution.
Combined with more traditional methods of reference
such as in person, phone and email, virtual reference
opens up new avenues of communication and enables
us to connect with a new generation of Web 2.0 patrons.
More and more students and business professionals are
communicating in real-time. IM and embedded chat
facilitate quick, effective communication and can help
improve
customer
service.
Today’s
real-time
communication tools such as IM and embedded chat
are freely available and fairly easy to use.
Technological developments have affected not only
the format and sources of the information libraries use to
provide reference service, but also where we provide
reference service. Libraries and their resources have
partially moved to the virtual world of the Internet. As a
result, library patrons can access the resources from
outside the physical library also. In an effort to provide
patrons access to a library via their computers, many
libraries and library consortia are extending their
reference service to include virtual reference.
Technology now allows users to submit their queries
to the library at any time from any place in the world.
Virtual reference is responsive to patrons’ need for
convenient access to reference service. IM is definitely
the way forward for online reference service, the positive
aspects of IM are that it is relatively easy, cheap to set
up, flexible, and so can respond to changes in
technology and the user’s habits.

34

REFERENCES
1. Bonnie, Shucha. IM a librarian: Establishing a virtual
reference service with little cost or technical Skill.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instant_messaging.
(accessed on 29 January 2010).
2. Davis, Kate. Ask now instant messaging: Innovation
in virtual reference. http://www.asknow.gov.au.
(accessed on 29 January.2010).
3

DMOZ Open Directory Project’s Instant Messaging
page. http://www.dmoz.org/Computers/Internet/Chat/
InstantMessaging. (accessed on 26 January 2010).

4. Trillian. http://www.ceruleanstudios.com (accessed
on 27 January 2010).
5. Lancaster, Sean, et al. The selection of instant
messaging or e-mail: College students perspective
for computer communication. Inf. Manage. Compu.
Secur., 2007, 15, 5-22.
6. Tyson, Jeff & Cooper, Alison. How instant
messaging works. http://communication. howstuffwo
rks.com/instant-messaging.htm. (accessed on 28
January 2010).
7. Bedwell, Linda; Rodrigues, Denyse; Duggan,
Lawrence J. & Orlov, Stanislav. IM a librarian:
Extending virtual reference services through instant
messaging and chat widgets. J. Lib. Inf. Pract.
Res., 2008, 3(2).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

