DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 2011, pp. 41-48
© 2011, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Current Trends in Wireless Technologies in Academic Libraries
M. Krishnamurthy and H.M. Rajashekara*
Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical Institute, Bengaluru-560 059
E-Mail: mkrishna_murthy@hotmail.com
*Central Computer Centre
Indian Statistical Institute, Bengaluru-560 059
E-Mail: raja@isibang.ac.in

ABSTRACT
Wireless communication is the transfer of information over a distance without the use of wires. Wireless
communication is generally considered to be a branch of telecommunications. Wireless operations permit
services, such as long-range communications that are impossible or impractical to implement using wires.
Wireless communication brings fundamental changes to data networking and telecommunications, and makes
integrated networks a reality. Wireless networks focus on networking and user aspects. Network architecture
for personal communication systems, wireless LANs, radio, tactical and other wireless networks, and design
and analysis of protocols are addressed on a regular basis. At present, the major application of Wi-Fi
implementation in libraries is limited to information management. This paper elaborates the Wi-Fi in detail about
the components, functions, area of applications, issues, and challenges.
Keywords: Wi-Fi technology, ICT, WiMAX, local area network, standards , access point

1. INTRODUCTION

information activities on such a scale must take into
account the perspective of national and international
cooperation. There has been a growing concern for
improvement of library services in general and scientific
and technological library services in particular for
providing effective and efficient information support for
carrying out research and education activities. In
addition, such information system requires both the use
of modern scientific information theory and advanced
technology2.

Features of the emerging knowledge society of the
digital era include the convergence of information and
communication technologies (ICTs) enabling almost
seamless access, in the expanding digital space, to
vast and varied information and knowledge sources from
anywhere, at any time. The spread of telecom
facilities—wireless technology and cellphone—into rural
areas is enabling rural traders and others to obtain
market information for their products, to contact village
and/or taluq and district officials, not only to get
information but also to obtain certificates and other
documents1. Availability of ICTs in developing countries
is not as widespread as it is in Europe and North
America. However, the spread of wireless technologies,
especially cell phones, has been rapid. New areas and
new groups of users are able to access ICT services
including wireless local area networks, and long-range
wireless links in libraries and information centres.

Wireless technology is an alternative to wired
technology, which is commonly used, for connecting
devices in wireless mode. Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity) is a
generic term that refers to the IEEE 802.11
communications standard for Wireless Local Area
Networks (WLANs).

The idea of increasing the effectiveness of
information exchange by sharing the work nationally and
internationally is fully recognised, but the planning of

Wi-Fi is wireless technology gives connections to
the Internet and Intranet using low power radio waves.
Wi-Fi network connects computers to each other, to the

Received on:
25 Inf.
August
20102011, 31(1)
DESIDOC
J. Lib.
Technol.,

2. WHAT IS WI-FI TECHNOLOGY?

41

41

Internet, and to the wired network. LANs have been
available since the late 1980s, but the market remained
immature due to dearth of standards and predominance
of incompatible proprietary solutions. By definition,
LANs are local in terms of networking technology and
thus involve none of the complexities of routing, Internet
work address resolution, name-to-address translation,
segmentation, reassembly of data packets, etc. Also,
since traditional LANs have been bound by the
limitations of physical media, such as the 500 meter
maximum coaxial cable length for a traditional 10-BASE
5 Ethernet, user mobility has not traditionally been an
important consideration.

connect via satellite. A wireless transmission method is a
logical choice to network a LAN segment that must
frequently change locations. The following situations
justify the use of wireless technology:


To span a distance beyond the capabilities of
typical cabling.



To provide a backup communications link in case of
normal network failure.



To link portable or temporary workstations.



To overcome situations where normal cabling is
difficult or financially impractical, or



To remotely connect mobile users or networks.

3. CLASSIFICATION
There are a lot of entities describing wireless
communication for WLANs. Among the famous
standards that the IEEE certifies are standards 802.11a,
802.11b and 802.11g. WLANs, based on the Wi-Fi
technologies are often implemented as an overlay to the
wired LAN based on the Ethernet technology. There are
two main architectures used in the WLAN environment:
(a) Peer-to-peer autonomous architecture in which the
wireless access point (AP) has autonomy over
access, security, and operation. APs in this
architecture usually do not require a wireless
controller.
(b) Centralised WLAN architecture in which lightweight
APs with limited functionality are used, with most of
the wireless intelligence residing at a central
controlling device, i.e., the WLAN controller.
Any wireless network can be thought of as a
combination of one or more of the following types of
connections:
(i)

Point-to-point: The simplest connection is the pointto-point link. These links can be used to extend a
network over great distances.

(ii) Point-to-multipoint: When more than one computer
communicates with a central point, this is a pointto-multipoint network.
(iii) Multipoint-to-multipoint: When any node of a
network may communicate with any other, this is a
multipoint-to-multipoint network, (also known as an
ad hoc or mesh network) which allows for much
greater bandwidth.
Wireless networking (i.e., the various types of
unlicensed 2.4 GHz, Wi-Fi devices) is used to meet a
variety of needs. The most common use is to connect
laptop users who travel from location to location.
Another common use is for mobile networks that
42

The Wireless communication can be via:


Radio frequency (RF) communication.



Microwave communication, for example long-range
line-of-sight via highly directional antennas, or
short-range communication, or



Infrared (IR) short-range communication, for
example from remote controls or via Infrared Data
Association (IRDA).

Application
may
involve
point-to-point
communication, point-to-multipoint communication,
broadcasting, cellular networks, and other wireless
networks.

4. CHARACTERISTICS
4.1 Wi-Fi Hotspot
The term ‘hotspot’ refers to the referral to the area
or physical location where an access point is made
accessible to users with Wi-Fi enabled devices,
typically found in coffee houses, airports, hotels, malls,
and increasingly in libraries. Wi-Fi hotspots are places
where users can visit anytime for fast and reliable
broadband wireless Internet access. Wi-Fi hotspot
services are available in places such as Internet cafes,
coffee houses/shops, and airports around the world,
although coverage is patchy in comparison with cellular.
Most Wi-Fi location will not have any restrictions to
access, but there will be some locations that may
restrict access in one of the following ways:


Through a login procedure to users with a
registered account.



Some require users to be registered guest of their
facility.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)



Other may require users to be a customer.



There are those that require a purchase to gain a
password required to login.



Some may ask some survey questions as part of a
login process.

The Wi-Fi wireless broadband Internet connection
allows users to do anything that one would do at home
or the office on the Internet. Users can freely surf on
the web, check and send e-mails, connect to your
corporate network, make free voice over IP phone calls,
play online games, update your blog, and IM with your
friends.

4.2 Access Point
Access point consists of a radio transmitter and
receiver as well as an interface to a wide network or
directly to the network server as a base station and acts
as bridge between the wireless network and a larger
Ethernet network or the Internet.

Mbps in practice). The 802.11a standard provides eight
radio channels in the 5 GHz frequency band.
802.11b: The 802.11b standard is currently the most
widely used one. It offers a maximum throughput of 11
Mbps (6 Mbps in practice) and a reach of up to 300 m in
an open environment. It uses the 2.4 GHz frequency
range, with three radio channels available.
802.11c: The 802.11c bridging standard is of no interest
to the general public. It is only an amended version of
the 802.1d standard that lets 802.1d bridge with 802.11compatible devices (on the data link level).
802.11d: The 802.11d standard is a supplement to the
802.11 standard and is meant to allow international use
of local 802.11 networks. It lets different devices trade
information on frequency ranges depending on what is
permitted in the country where the device is from.

4.3 Service Set IDentifier

802.11e: The 802.11e standard is meant to improve the
quality of service at the level of the data link layer. The
standard’s goal is to define the requirements of different
packets in terms of bandwidth and transmission delay
so as to allow better transmission of voice and video.

Service Set IDentifier (SSID) is public name of
WLAN. All wireless devices on a WLAN must employ
the same SSID in order to communicate with each
other. SSID is set on the access point and broadcast to
all wireless devices in range. It is case sensitive,
consists of a sequence of alphanumeric character, and
has a maximum length of 32 characters.

802.11f: The 802.11f is a recommendation for access
point vendors that allow products to be more compatible.
It uses the Inter-Access Point Roaming Protocol, which
lets a roaming user transparently switch from one
access point to another while moving around, no matter
what brands of access points are used on the network
infrastructure. This ability is also simply called roaming.

4.4 Access Point Authentication
Access Point Authentication comprises:




Open Authentication, which does not do any
checks on the identity of the station. The access
point allows any station to join the network and
shared authentication. Based on the challenge
response system.
Stations share a secret key.

5. STANDARDS
The IEEE 802.11 standard is actually only the
earliest standard, allowing 1-2 Mbps of bandwidth.
Amendments have be made to the original standard to
optimise bandwidth (these include the 802.11a, 802.11b
and 802.11g standards, which are called 802.11 physical
standards) or to better specify components to ensure
improved security or compatibility3.
802.11a: The 802.11a standard (called Wi-Fi 5) allows
higher bandwidth (54 Mbps maximum throughput, 30
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

802.11g: The 802.11g standard offers high bandwidth (54
Mbps maximum throughput, 30 Mbps in practice) on the
2.4 GHz frequency range. The 802.11g standard is
backwards-compatible with the 802.11b standard,
meaning that devices that support the 802.11g standard
can also work with 802.11b.
802.11h: The 802.11h standard is intended to bring
together the 802.11 standard and the European standard
(HiperLAN 2, hence the h in 802.11h) while conforming
to European regulations related to frequency use and
energy efficiency.
802.11i: The 802.11i standard is meant to improve the
security of data transfers (by managing and distributing
keys, and implementing encryption and authentication).
This standard is based on the AES (Advanced
Encryption Standard) and can encrypt transmissions
that run on 802.11a, 802.11b and 802.11g technologies.
802.11j: The 802.11j standard is to Japanese regulation
what the 802.11h is to European regulation.
802.11r: The 802.11r standard has been elaborated so
43

that it may use infra-red signals. This standard has
become technologically obsolete.

6. SECURITY MEASURES
To prevent intercepting data by others the designers
implemented many security techniques, like Wi-Fi
Protected Access (based on encryption), Virtual Private
Network (making virtual “tunnels”), Media Access
Control Filtering (rejecting unknown MAC addresses),
RADIUS Authentication and Authorisation (using login
and password) or Kerberos (key distribution). There is
also a possibility to combine some of these security
mechanisms making the transmissions even more
secure.
On the other hand providing such security in public
places (like Internet cafes) may not meet its
expectations. Connecting to the protected wireless
network, security code, encryption key or a password is
asked. If the code/key/password is not provided, it will
not be able to establish a communication link and use
Internet resources. Most of public areas do not use
security modules because of that reason making Wi-Fi
users data unsafe.
The “open air” nature of wireless radio signals poses
challenges for securing wireless computer networks. No
computer network is truly secure, but how does wireless
network security stack up to that of traditional wired
networks?
The following techniques can be implementing to
serve wireless network.


Antivirus software.



Intrusion and detection system.



Vulnerability assessment tools.



Wireless firewall gateway.



Personal firewall.



Content filtering.



Hard drive encryption.

Security is a big concern in wireless networking,
especially
in
m-commerce
and
e-commerce
applications. Mobility of users increases the security
concerns in a wireless network. Current wireless
networks employ authentication and data encryption
techniques on the air interface to provide security to its
users. The IEEE 801.11 standard describes wired
equivalent privacy (WEP) that defines a method to
authenticate users and encrypt data between the PC
44

card and the wireless LAN access point. In large
enterprises, an IP network level security solution could
ensure safety of corporate network and proprietary
data. Virtual private network (VPN) is an option to make
access to fixed access networks reliable. Since hackers
are getting smarter, it is imperative that wireless security
features must be updated constantly4.

7. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
The Wi-Fi LAN has a broad application nowadays.
Because of the comfortable and quick installation,
people often replace old wired LANs with Wi-Fi. Such
connection allows moving machine around the place
without losing the Internet or other network resources.
Some highly attended places like airports, libraries,
schools or even coffee bars offer constant Internet
connection using wireless LAN, so retrieving new files,
cruising the global network or corresponding with others
is not be a problem in those (and many other) places.
The most important shortcoming in Wi-Fi is the
range. There may be difficulties in making a connection
with a receiver which is 50-75 m away (inside the
buildings). The signal should be stronger to provide
larger connectable spaces. Additionally, some of the
wireless adapters work on the frequencies that are
currently used by many other wireless devices. It can
cause a serious interference, so the connection
performance can be quite poor.
However, building Wi-Fi network is often the
cheapest way to achieve the desired connection with
the surroundings. The price of a single wireless adapter
is decreasing almost every day, so making a large
network area by means of Wi-Fi is the most reasonable
way. By the way, most of the Wi-Fi adapters have userfriendly configuration and diagnostic tools which can
help to adjust or change WLAN settings or even can do
everything for users.

7.1 Advantages


Wi-Fi uses unlicensed radio spectrum and does
not require regulatory approval for individual
deployers.



It allows LANs to be set up with cabling. It can
reduce associated costs of network connection and
expansions. Places where cables cannot be run,
such as outdoor areas and historical buildings can
use wireless LANs.



Wi-Fi products are easily available in the market.
There are different brands of access points and
user’s network interfaces are able to inter-operate
at a very basic service level.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)



Prices are considerably lower as competition
amongst vendors has increased.



Wi-Fi networks can support roaming. This allows
mobile users with laptop to be able to move from
one access point to another.



Numerous access points and network interfaces
support various degrees of encryption to protect
traffic from interception.

Inter-operability issues between brands or
deviations can cause limited connection or lower
output speeds.



Free access points can be used by the malicious to
anonymous to initiate an attack that would be
extremely difficult to track beyond the owner of the
access point.





Wi-Fi has a set of global standards. Not like the
cellular carriers, the same Wi-Fi users can work in
different countries around the world at all time.

7.2 Disadvantages
Wi-Fi is still relatively new, there are following
disadvantages too.


The use of Wi-Fi band that is 2.4 GHz does not
require a license in most countries provided that
stays below limit of 100 mW and one accepts
interference from other sources; including
interference which causes the users devices to no
longer function.



The spectrum assignments and operational
limitations are not consistent worldwide.



Power consumption is fairly high compared to
some other standards, making the battery life and
heat a concern to some users.



Wi-Fi uses the unlicensed 2.4 GHz spectrum,
which often crowd with other devices such as
Bluetooth, microwave ovens, cordless phones, or
video sender devices, and many others. This may
cause degradation in performance.



Wi-Fi networks have limited range. A typical Wi-Fi
home router might have a range of 45 m (150 ft)
indoors and 90 m (300 ft) outdoors. Ranges may
also vary as Wi-Fi is no exception to the physics of
radio wave propagation with frequency band.



The most common wireless encryption standard,
wired equivalent privacy or WEP has been shown
to be breakable even when it has been correctly
configured.



Access points could be used to steal personal and
confidential information transmitted from Wi-Fi
consumers.



Intervention of a closed or encrypted access point
with other open access points on the same or a
nearby channel can prevent access to the open
access points by others in the area. It poses a high

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

problem in high-density areas such as large
apartment blocks where many residents are
operating Wi-Fi access points.

8. THE FUTURE
Wireless LAN technologies still have a long way to
go. Both fundamental and practical problems still persist
in this area. Therefore, it may be crucial to develop
innovative and commercially viable solutions to some of
the key issues and challenges discussed in this article
to ensure the success of emerging wireless
applications. The outlook of Wi-Fi broadband wireless
Internet is boundless. The future is set to provide
greater and longer connection ranges with faster
transfer speeds. This allows users to freely surf on the
web, check and send e-mails, connect to their
corporate network, make free voice over IP phone calls,
play online games, update their blogs, and IM with their
friends more efficiently with stabilities. The future is set
with many companies looking into offering users Wi-Fi
not only around Internet cafes, coffee houses/shops,
and airports around the world but also in public libraries,
academic locations such as schools, colleges and
universities, hotels, motels, resorts, apartment blocks,
shopping centres, restaurants and even into homes and
offices. This hopes to eliminate the hassles of dial-up
Internet services and the fuss of costly installations of
broadband cables, and broadband ADSL connections.
With Wi-Fi available, consumers can freely use their
computer around places where it suits them without all
the lines and cables.
In the future, there will be better securities
measures in protecting personal and confidential data’s
being received and sent out. There will also be better
anti-virus and firewall protections whilst using Wi-Fi
around destinated areas. With fierce competition of
different companies, there would be cheaper Internet
connection costs and choices for better services to
consumers.

9. RECENT TRENDS OF WIRELESS
TECHNOLOGY: WIMAX
WiMAX (World interoperability for Microwave
Access) is a wireless technology mainly designed for
bridging the last mile to the end user and providing him
45

with a broadband connection. WiMAX is based on
standards developed by IEEE and ETSI, notably the
IEEE 802.16 range of standards and the HIPERMAN
standards. WiMAX can be used in different frequency
bands in the range 2-66 GHz. It is claimed to be useful
for urban, suburban and rural areas, sometimes with a
non line of sight condition between base station antenna
and subscriber station antenna. Intel has announced
that they will start building WiMAX chipsets into laptop
computers already in 2006.
WiMAX is not to be confused with Wi-Fi. The former
is a metropolitan area networking technology whereas
the latter is designed for local area networking. With
WiMAX, nomadic users can be served, for instance,
while they are stationary or when they have a walk
during a communications session. A WiMAX area served
by one base station is termed “Hot zone” because it is
considerably larger than a Wi-Fi service area called “Hot
spot”.
WiMAX can provide broadband wireless access
(BWA) up to 30 miles (50 km) for fixed stations, and 3 10 miles (5 - 15 km) for mobile stations. In contrast, the
Wi-Fi/802.11 wireless local area network standard is
limited in most cases to only 100-300 feet (30-100m).
With WiMAX, Wi-Fi-like data rates are easily supported,
but the issue of interference is lessened. WiMAX
operates on both licensed and non-licensed frequencies,
providing a regulated environment and viable economic
model for wireless carriers. WiMAX can be used for
wireless networking in much the same way as the more
common Wi-Fi protocol. WiMAX is a second-generation
protocol that allows for more efficient bandwidth use,
interference avoidance, and is intended to allow higher
data rates over longer distances. The IEEE 802.16
family of standards and its associated industry
consortium, WiMax, promise to deliver high data rates
over large areas to a large number of users in the near
future. This exciting addition to current broadband
options such as DSL, cable, and Wi-Fi promises to
rapidly provide broadband access to locations in the
world’s rural and developing areas where broadband is
currently unavailable, as well as competing for urban
market share. WiMax’s competitiveness in the
marketplace largely depends on the actual data rates
and ranges that are achieved, but this has been difficult
to judge due to the large number of possible options and
competing marketing claims5.

9.1 Technical Characteristics
WiMAX is based on well-designed and thoroughly
calculated standards, contrary to e.g. Wi-Fi. In the
physical layer, OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing) is applied in the 2-11 GHz frequency
range, which makes WiMAX signals resistant to
46

multipath effect and selective fading. The standards have
means to provide quality of service (QoS) guarantees,
which is extremely important for real-time services such
as telephony. Security issues are treated by
authentication and encryption mechanisms. WiMAX is
usable in both licensed frequency bands and licence
exempt bands. The most important frequency bands for
WiMAX usage in Europe will be the 3.5 GHz and 5 GHz
bands.
The system design encompass advanced concepts
such as adaptive modulation where the system is able to
apply different modulation methods depending on the
communication link signal to noise ratio. Spatial diversity
techniques and adaptive antenna systems are available
to the WiMAX system designer. This enables signals
from multiple antenna elements to be coherently
combined to concentrate the transmission or reception
to a particular direction or directions. Mesh networking
is an interesting feature where a subscriber station is
able to relay signals to and from other stations that do
not have a direct contact to the base station. With this,
the range can be extended and coverage holes be filled.

9.2 Usage
WiMAX will be used in urban, suburban and rural
areas, particularly where other broadband means are
not available or installations are expensive. Competition
to DSL will not be fierce in areas where it is already
established due to its relatively low costs and high
penetration. Furthermore, a high density of WiMAX
base stations will be needed in urban and suburban
areas to serve customers with self-installable CPE and
reasonable data rates. In fact, the cell sizes under these
conditions are only a few hundred metres. WiMAX is
likely to play an important role in serving rural areas.
There, cell sizes of 5-10 km are possible requiring
outdoor antennas at the customer premises. The speed
can be increased by strengthening the signals. For a
fixed transmitting power and antenna gain, this means
lower range. Thus, ranges are lower if more speed is
desired, e.g., for 26 Mb/s the 1-2 km range for terrain
type B would drop down to 700 m6.

10. WI-FI AT INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE,
BENGALURU CENTRE
The use of Wi-Fi at the Indian Statistical Institute
(ISI) has been active since 2004. In 2004, ISIBC started
implementing the WLAN stage-by-stage. By the end of
2009 the WLAN has covered almost all the blocks of the
building in the Campus including Faculty Blocks,
Administration Blocks, Students Labs, Students
Hostels, Gust Houses, Auditoriums, etc. The network
architecture at ISI is shown in Fig. 1.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

Figure 1. Network architecture (Wi-Fi+wired) at ISI, Bengaluru.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

47

10.1 Applications
The state-of-the-art facility of the WLAN at the
Institute has strengthened the use of the Internet and
Intranet services of the Institute very effectively. Every
user and visitor of the Institute can use the WLAN
facility provided with proper access key. The Library
has been facilitated with the applications such as
Libsys, OPAC and Web OPAC, dspace, etc. Users can
access the information/data available in the Library
through WLAN.

10.2 LAN Topology
Network topology is defined as the physical
interconnection of the various elements (links, nodes,
etc.) of a computer network. Network topologies can be
physical or logical. Physical topology means the
physical design of a network including the devices,
location and cable installation. Logical topology refers to
the fact that how data actually transfers in a network as
opposed to its design.
Topology can be considered as a virtual shape or
structure of a network. This shape actually does not
correspond to the actual physical design of the devices
on the computer network. The computers on the home
network can be arranged in a circle shape but it does
not necessarily mean that it presents a ring topology.
Hybrid networks use a combination of any two or
more topologies in such a way that the resulting network
does not exhibit one of the standard topologies (e.g.,
bus, star, ring, etc.). For example, a tree network
connected to a tree network is still a tree network, but
two star networks connected together exhibit a hybrid
network topology. A hybrid topology is always produced
when two different basic network topologies are
connected.
Two common examples for hybrid network are: Star
Ring Network and Star Bus Network. A Star Ring
Network consists of two or more star topologies
connected using a multi-station access unit (MAU) as a
centralised hub. A Star Bus Network consists of two or
more star topologies connected using a bus trunk (the
bus trunk serves as the network’s backbone)

48

The Star Bus Network topology has been adopted at
Indian Statistical Institute, Bengaluru where the Library
computers have been connected to serve the users
using Wi-Fi or Wired.

11. CONCLUSION
The use of Wi-Fi technology at ISI, Bengaluru
libraries can be rated as relatively good. Users access
the information from the departments, hostels and
computer centres and also from the libraries. Wi-Fi
technology has highlighted the importance of achieving
capability among databases and information products,
hardware and software, input formats, processing, data
exchange, output formats has to be address. Its main
focus is utilising the resource in a productive manner.
We are witnessing today the emergence of global
network infrastructure, wherein WLAN are rapidly
getting interconnected.

REFERENCES
1. Neelameghan, A. & Chester, Greg. Knowledge
management in relation to indigenous and
marginalized communities in the digital era.
Information Studies, 2007, 13(2), 73-06.
2. Nardi, Bonnie. A social ecology of wireless
technology, 2003, 8(8). http://firstmonday.org/htbin/
cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1069
(accessed on 28 April 2010).
3. IEEE 802.11Std, 1999.
4. Chandramouli, R & Subbalakshmi, K.P. Wireless
LAN: Issues and challenges. Ticker, 2001.
5. Ghosh, Arunabha; Wolter, David R; Andrews,
Jeffrey G. & Chen, Runhua. Broadband wireless
access with WiMax/802.16: Current performance
benchmarks and future potential. IEEE Commun.
Mag., 2005, 43(2), 129-36.
6. Saemundur, E & Thorsteinsson, Síminn. The
significance of WiMax. http://www.eurescom.eu/
message/messageMar2005/The_significance_of_
WiMAX_Eurescom_Study_WiBAN.asp. (accessed
on 11 Jan 2010).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

