DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 2011, pp. 65-71
© 2011, DESIDOC

Implication of ICT’s in Libraries of Higher Education Institutes:
A Panacea Catapulting Library Development in Africa
Manir Abdullahi Kamba
Department of Library and Information Science, Bayero University, Kano Nigeria
E-mail: manirung@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The Information Age transformed developed nations in the tale end of the 20th century, and now is poised
to have an equally dramatic effect on developing nations. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has
helped higher education libraries improve the provision of library and information resources and services.
African libraries are also adopting ICT to improve and also give a positive impact to the development of
research and information utilisation. The key success factor of this implementation is mainly of availability and
the good quality of grade of services, adequate resources, and communication infrastructure. The paper has
analysed the efforts made by the higher education libraries in Africa to recognise, restructure and re-oriented
the library facilities and personnel with ICT adoption. In addition, the paper also highlights the various efforts to
establish networking and consortia among the libraries, and the implications that could be derived by applying
ICTs into higher education libraries. The paper also highlights the reasons why ICT application is taking a snail
speed in library development in Nigeria and provides the solutions as a panacea for library development in
Africa.
Keywords: Information and communication technology, Africa

1. INTRODUCTION
Seeking access to library resources and information
services in higher education libraries all over the world is
undergoing tremendous transformation, especially with
the advent of information and communication technology
(ICT) as tool and enabler. This changes and
transformations clearly indicate that there is a dramatic
shift from the traditional approach to information
provision, access, retrieval, and management to modern
methods where computer technology plays a significant
role. The application of ICT into the higher education
libraries has promoted the information seeking and
made it more meaningful, where users can stay in their
homes and classrooms to access and interact with the
librarians and receive information without physically
visiting the libraries.
ICT was in the past very mystified. It was
extraordinary and belonged only to the experts and
specialists. Yet in the past 10 years, ICT has
transformed learning, information organisation, retrieval
and dissemination regardless of the distance, removing
inhibitions, obstacles, and challenges that were thought
Received on:
02 Inf.
February
2010;
Revised
DESIDOC
J. Lib.
Technol.,
2011,
31(1) on: 20 March 2010

insurmountable1. It is therefore not surprising that the
modern curriculum of library and information science
LIS schools, instruction and education policy, library
educators and practitioners and LIS students all over the
world have been swept off-balance by the new
technological transformations taking place around the
world. At the LIS schools, methods of instructions and
delivery of teaching have been transformed with the aid
of ICT and students’ learning outcome and performance
is changing with aid of the technology; thanks to the
Internet as a tool for learning, research and education2.
Library professionals are today finding it easier to
discharge their responsibilities using ICT; they provide
and share information without any difficulties, thanks to
the information superhighway that is offering many
possibilities3.
21st century is the information and knowledge era
characterised with the use of ICT to promote teaching,
research and learning. Unfortunately, libraries in Africa
(Nigeria) are list terms of ICT due to diminishing funding
of higher educational institutions, coupled with
increased students’ enrolment which has led to a decline
in the quality of education and library development4.
65

Although, this is an African problem, but it seems it is
most prevalent in Nigeria. Higher education libraries in
Nigeria are now only a shadow of their former glory.
The quality of scholarship and of the knowledge
generated is constrained by the limited exposure of
Nigerian scientists, academicians, and the scholars to
current literature, adequate resources and the use
modern technologies. This has resulted in their isolation
from global discourse and trends in their fields5.
In Nigeria, and most of the countries in Africa,
awareness to ICTs started gathering momentum two
decades ago. The early exposure came through
lecturers, researchers, academics and students who
studied abroad and had opportunities of attending
conferences on ICTs. This situation is similar to other
universities in most of the developing countries. This
position is not a surprise, because Nigeria and other
countries in Africa have no specific policy for ICT in
education. It was only in February 2007 that the Federal
Ministry of Education in Nigeria created its ICT
department6.

2. ICT AND LIBRARIES OF HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTES
Higher education libraries today are in an
irreversible transformation; technology is spreading
every where, even in the academy. The major changes
brought by the ICT is the transformation of the higher
education libraries into knowledge repositories, and
network environments. This concept of the “new”
pedagogy has been adopted by the governments,
organisations and institutions of learning. The impact of
ICT on library development can be felt at different level.
Some examples of the ICT applications include libraries
services, administration, teaching, resource sharing,
and networking7. In a nut shell, a semblance of ICT
application exist, at the unit levels of the libraries, rather
than departmental, and these units are more in the
universities and research institutes rather than other
higher institutions of learning.
Today, ICT is changing the work of libraries and
information centres more than ever. The libraries in the
higher education of Africa need this technology because
of the advantages these bring. Applying ICT in library
processes will increase number of usage of library
resources and patronage. A greater demand for library
materials, an increase in the amount of material being
published, new electronic formats and sources, and the
development of new and cheaper computers are some of
the reasons for the growing need for ICT in the African
libraries. Adebisi8 stated that “the application of
information technologies in Nigerian higher education
libraries has today become an acceptable norm and the
66

most realistic way and means of providing timely,
accurate, and efficient information services. This
statement is true because the manual process of
rendering services in our libraries is becoming more
frustrating due to inefficiency of the library staffs.
According to Seifer and Mihalynuk,9 Wide spread
use of technology is changing the way we work, learn
and communicate even the way we carry out our
regular daily activities. Based on reality, ICT application
in library activities has the ability to change the pattern
of information resources access and utilisation, it will
also made research and teaching simpler than before.
Similarly, Gilbert and Green10 lamented that “over the
past decade, and in particular within the past five years,
information technology has become common with the
academic enterprise including libraries”.
Today growing numbers of higher institutions in
Africa are bringing ICT into their instructional and
library activities. Emerging uses of the Internet, as tool
for research and information container, and access by
faculty and students, especially the new practice of
using E-mail to enhance communication, share
information and research delivery among students and
faculty may provide ways to change the structure of the
fundamental business of higher education libraries.
Bonzi11 found access to database and use of computers
as engine of development in research and facilitators to
faculty research/production and dissemination.
Commenting on the role played by ICT in library
services, Vitalicy12 opined that: “networking has made it
possible for computers to be connected locally in an
institutional or department to form what is referred to as
an Internet network”. Looking at the global trend today,
universities or higher institutions are now expected to
contribute to the development of society by widening
access to information via research output, continuing
professional
development,
applied
research,
contributing to local economy impact and improving
social inclusion. Information technology however,
provides access to all these.
With all the benefits of ICT there is an issue of
“digital divide”—the gap between those who have access
to technology (telephones, computers and, increasingly,
the Internet) and related services and those who do not
have access to these resources. This digital divide
exists at all the levels of society, e.g., developed
countries vs developing countries. ICT has always been
a vital feature of the move towards knowledge society.
Now it has become a new tool for information access,
organisation, and deliver better services to students and
researchers to achieve good learning abilities, but its
implementation in higher educational system in Africa
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

especially in Nigeria is far behind compared to other
developed world or developing countries. So far, people
awareness of the importance of ICT in Nigeria is not
well-known. Some reasons behind this problem can be:
understood as low computer literacy, lack of computer
resources as well as the limited access to Internet in
prime cities only and slow connection13.
Convergence of computer and communication
technology has brought changes in the social life of
people in obtaining and exchanging the information. ICT
have the potential to create new types of professional
activity and employment opportunities, and enhance the
quality of librarians. They have changed the nature of
work of librarianship, the range of occupations and
skills requirements, making it necessary for librarians
and emerging librarians to acquire a broader and more
adaptable knowledge base on ICT. Nowadays, ICT
terminology, with e- as a preceding letter for short of
electronics widely used in many applications, such as
e-cataloguing, e-services, e-resources, e-learning, edatabases to mention but a few.

3. EFFORTS AND INITIATIVES IN ADOPTING
ICT BY AFRICAN LIBRARIES OF HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTES
ICT, as an information and knowledge-based tool,
has vast potential for participation, networking and
advocacy among African higher institutions libraries. A
few libraries have CD-ROM access, but no initiative has
been taken to produce information products on CDs.
Some libraries have an online connection and are
providing external resource sharing on a limited scale.
Only a few libraries have started networking or resource
sharing or have used the telecommunication system for
data transfer13.
Despite the development of ICT and the plethora of
efforts and initiatives in applying and adopting ICTs in
higher education libraries, it is surprisingly that not
much has been achieved in African higher education
libraries. Such evidences suggested that, the progress
made by libraries is very uneven, both among and within
countries. According to Rosenberg14 some university
libraries in Africa have embraced the ICTs and made
them available to users, others do not have the
necessary infrastructure and adequate funding to
acquire these. Libraries, which automated some years
ago have not been able to upgrade to new systems, so
offer only limited services. Libraries, which have
advanced the digital facilities have yet not user needs in
the digital world and the possibilities of a more dynamic
interaction with ICTs. The philosophy of the academic
library as a passive repository remains dominant. The
necessary changes in service provision and staffing
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

structures have not taken place. Librarians themselves
have not had the opportunities to critically reflect on
what has already been developed and express their
priorities for the future with regard to digital libraries14.
Few areas of ICT application in African higher education
libraries are discussed below:

3.1 Library Automation/Computerisation
One of the key areas where African higher education
libraries made giant stride is library automation and
computerisation with a view to reorganise, restructure
and reorient the library facilities. Various efforts were
made in the acquisition, organisation and circulation
units of the libraries to manage, acquire and organise
the library materials by electronic means (i.e.
automation or computerisation). This was accomplished
using specialised library management system or
software, with modules for cataloguing, acquisition,
loans, serials and OPAC, etc.
In a study Rosenberg found that, library automation
began in the early 1990s14. However, the majority of the
libraries have still not completed the process. Most of
the libraries in the universities began with cataloguing,
but have neither finished that nor moved onwards to
other processes. While other libraries have not yet
started any automation. Rosenberg further stated that
libraries that started the process of automation early are
not necessarily those that have successfully completed
the process. Unless one could afford to migrate onto
new and updated systems, the early start could be a
disadvantage. The fully automated libraries are those
that either started late with donor assistance or have
secured funds to migrate to up-to-date systems.
Libraries, which became fully automated in the 1990s
but could not afford to migrate find their current software
very limiting.
The study of Chisenga15 on the application of ICT in
libraries, found that, although most librarians had
Internet connectivity, almost none were offering webbased information services to their users. Lack of
funding remains problematic in developing ICT services.

3.2 ICT Facilities
An adequate ICT infrastructure could be a
significant factor for understanding the efforts made in
applying or adopting ICTs in the African higher
education libraries. Evidence from researches has
shown that the number of computers provided by each
library for public use are not adequate. The findings of
Rosenberg shows that 85 per cent of the libraries
provide less than one computer for every 100 students
and 36 per cent provide less than one computer for every
500 students.
67

The proportion of library computers connected to the
Internet is also much lower. Only 35 per cent of libraries
have 75 per cent or over of their computers connected to
the Internet, whilst 15 per cent of the libraries are not
connected at all.
Okhiria16 stated that, National Universities
Commission (NUC) in Nigeria, as an agency
responsible for registering and regulating universities,
has prescribed the ratio of personal computer
ownership as 1 PC to every 4 students, 1 PC to every 2
lecturers, 1 to persons below the grade of Lecturer, 1
PC to Senior Lecturer and 1 notebook to Professor/
Reader. While some universities have met this PClecturer ratio, but are unable to meet that of students.
Some universities have equally made giant strides in
campus wide area networking and e-learning course
deliveries16.
Other ICT facility that existed in the libraries is
VSATs, which currently is the most popular method of
connectivity in Africa. An OSIWA project in Nigeria is
connecting libraries by VSAT and the library consortium
in Malawi. Libraries with older established connectivity
tend to use leased lines, which connect to VSATs
eventually. Speed–with computers grinding to a halt
especially in the afternoons–was said to be more of a
problem than reliability, although the latter was severely
hampered by power cuts in some countries.
Other efforts and initiatives in adopting ICT are in
the area of training. Several LIS departments in African
institutions have reviewed their curriculum and
integrated ICT courses to form part of core courses.

4. NETWORKING AND CONSORTIA
ACTIVITIES IN AFRICAN LIBRARIES OF
HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTES
Enormous efforts and progress has been made in
networking and establishing consortia in higher
education libraries in Africa to provide access to
growing quantities of information resources now
produced in electronic format. Support has been
provided in setting up the necessary networked
infrastructure and providing the requisite hardware and
software by different organisations. Most of the libraries
received their e-resources either from funded
programmes or free of charge (open access,
accompanying other material, etc.).
The chief donors were listed as INASP through
PERI, eIFL, WHO, FAO, CTA, TEEAL. (The funders of
PERI include DFID, NORAD, Royal Danish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Sida.) UNESCO, and Mc Authur
Foundation. Negotiation with publishers has resulted in
journals and databases being made available free or at
68

heavily discounted prices through programmes like
AGORA, eIFL, HINARI and PERI.
The PERI programme offers access to over 14,000
journal titles from 11 publishers plus approximately 20
databases, with country licences available in nine
countries
(Ethiopia,
Ghana,
Kenya,
Malawi,
Mozambique, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and
Zimbabwe). Almost all the countries have access to
African Journals Online (AJOL), which hosts the tables
of contents and abstracts of more than 200 journals,
with links to full text of over 80 titles. The HINARI (health
journals) and AGORA (agricultural journals) programmes
are available in all countries, whilst the eIFL programme
includes some journal packages, in particular EBSCO
with over 10,000 titles.
Regarding consortia, efforts were made by
individual countries such as South Africa, Nigeria,
Kenya, and Botswana. In Nigeria, the Nigerian
University Libraries Consortium has negotiated with the
Education Tax Fund to pay for the subscription to
EBSCO for all higher education institutions in Nigeria
from 2005 onwards. The National Universities
Commission in Nigeria is perhaps the nearest that
African countries have got to establishing something
similar to INFLIBNET. A Nigerian Digital Library is
underway, with a lot of local resources digitised and put
on the website with plans to establish a national virtual
library. In South Africa, similar forces have transformed
the country’s library and information services sector
with the establishment of the first formal library
consortium.
However, in most African countries, there are no
consortia that could carry out this cooperation and
networking among the libraries. Consortia in South
Africa have certainly taken on roles wider than
cooperative purchase of e-resource licences. They
have organised purchase of common library
management software, established union catalogues,
provided training, and designed a common information
literacy course for students. However, consortia in other
African countries are in their infancy. They would
require a lot of support and the funding of paid rather
than voluntary staff, if they were to expand their role.

5. IMPEDIMENTS TO ICT APPLICATION
IN AFRICAN LIBRARIES OF HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTES
ICT is not very well spread and utilised in African
institutions of higher learning, especially in Nigeria,
mainly because of poor communication network, limited
access to ICT hardware and software, and
government’s ineptitude to provide adequate funds to
run the libraries. This consequently has made an injury
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

to the educational system and its development in
Nigeria and Africa in general. There are recognised ICTrelated knowledge gaps or digital gap so to say between
Africa and the West. In Nigeria, policy makers are
increasingly calling for the need to go for ICT in higher
education, and not be left behind. Due to the scramble,
traditional approaches to information access and
provision are being abandoned, before even the
efficacy of these ICT fads in library activities are
proven.
There is no doubt that the application and use of
ICT in African higher education libraries is increasing
but at chameleon step which impose several problems
among which are:


A serious neglect of ICT resources acquired over a
period of years, which need upgrading or are out
of usage. They differ in models, ages, efficiency,
compliance with latest software and other
characteristics and this increases the complexity of
managing the ICT resources.



There is crunch trained and experienced technical
personnel to manage, control, and maintain
available ICT resources, this means that their utility
values, effectiveness and efficiency, cannot be
ascertained.



There is lack of theoretical knowledge, practical
management, control and maintenance of these
units being managed, controlled and maintained
virtually on trial and error basis. Some of the
technicians are untrained or semi-trained in the real
sense.



Most of the ICT technical staff are cross breed from
other technical fields such as electronics,
librarianship or mechanics, that switch over to
managing computers, creating a continuity and
credibility gap between professions.



ICT users in Africa are yet to fully become
accustomed and to familiarise with the new ICT
technology so as to appreciate and make it one of
their own daily instruments for information access
and delivery.



There is lack of computer culture in the African
higher institutions libraries which impedes rapid
diffusion of the new technologies.



Lack of knowledge on the importance of ICT is
another biggest problem facing the African libraries.



There is lack of access of ICT to all members of
staff and students. More often than not, the African

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

higher education libraries are competing against
some back street Internet cafés and dubious ICT
centres.
It must be noted that the manner in which ICT was
introduced in African libraries was unsystematic, and
this is a major problem. It was initially a gradual
process, uncoordinated, and in most cases
disorganised. The library management often had little
control over the acquisitions of ICT as agreements were
largely made by the federal government and contractors
or bilaterally between international agencies and the
respective departments concerned. Up-till-now, there
exist very low budgets for the development and
management of ICT in libraries and LIS departments
leave alone the main university expenditure. This points
to lack of recognition by the university management of
the importance of ICT to the organisations. Often, there
are no policy frameworks, at either organisational or
national level, to guide the adoption of this technology to
realise its full potential benefits. These, among other
problems, causes the ill development and have rendered
the application of ICTs into libraries very slow that its
impact cannot be seen or measured.

6. ICT AS A PANACEA TO LIBRARY
DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA
With the dwindling financial support, it is unlikely
that things will improve much. These examples clearly
highlight the ICT-related predicaments faced in the
African higher education libraries, and also that the
solutions attempted to date are inadequate and lack
relevance. One concludes that there is a compelling
need for alternative solutions to the ICT problems found
in African continent.
ICT application has brought new changes in the
library process, but the pleasures they are causing do
not seem to pervade the entire members of African
higher institutions. It is mainly the youth who are really
interested. Of course ICT is a tool; it is a facilitator of
research and information delivery. Everyone can use
the ICT equipments, especially computers and the
Internet like any useful device. One however needs to be
literate. It has been argued that application of ICT’s in
higher education libraries does not carry the obverse
dialect of panaceas and instant fixes now deluging the
modern development. Carnival of ICT in libraries is now
dominating and overtaking our daily lives. ICT is panacea
because it incite, in a greater sense, new tasks and new
challenges for the practices of information providers,
designers and users pedagogy more specifically.
Indeed, we are being compelled at every point to
reconsider what pedagogy means in these
circumstances.
69

ICT application to higher education libraries is a
panacea not a magic solution. Not everything works and
nothing is easy. There are no “push-button” solutions.
For higher education libraries to be effective, specific
technology must be carefully matched to the need and
the environment. Significance of information revolution
will equal that of the Industrial Revolution of the 19th
century. At that moment, having coal and iron ore and
the ability to harness them in steel mills was the critical
step. Using this raw material to build better looms and
spinning machines established the comparative
advantages which put some European countries ahead
of the rest of the world. Today, ICT revolution or
information revolution is the turning point which will lead
to information society. Information society is a
knowledge society that is characterised with the use of
technology to pursue development.

(v) The goal should be the “mindful introduction” of
technology into library operation, not flooding the
mind and the school system with everything that
technology can offer.

Clearly, applying knowledge to everyday business
means that the people must understand and master the
requisite technologies. This requires creating a labour
force that is capable of dealing with information
technology as panacea as such governments-in-charge
of higher education in Africa needs to beer the following
in minds which serve as a panacea to the library
development in Africa.

Panacea, African countries should focus, first on
areas where technology has been clearly shown to be
cost-effective in library operation. Several countries
have had ample experience with the use of interactive
radio, with broadcast television and with satellites.
Indeed, broadcast radio and television have respectable
and predictable cost-effectiveness in many areas of
basic library operation.

(i)

They have been shown to be effective at early
ages. They tend to enhance equity, since they can
reach a large pool of users and youth at modest perparticipant costs. In several cases, these initiatives have
been created and supported by the private sector,
unburdening the governments from their everyday
operations and their costs. However, these solutions
work best when integrated into national educational
strategies.

It is imperative to transform the nature of LIS
education toward building higher-order cognitive
skills, more inquiry and project-focused modes of
operation, and more collaborative working styles,
and toward creating “smart library professionals”.

(ii) ICT can play an important role in the process of
librarianship: By opening access to a wealth of
information, by facilitating the process and by
engaging the interest and attention of the users.
(iii) “Technological fluency” may stand alongside as one
of the essential skills for a successful life. Word
processors became the paper and pencil of the
information age. Spreadsheets replaced the slide
rule of engineers and the calculating machines of
office workers. Databases replaced cabinets and
shelves full of papers. Those unable to operate
these new tools are handicapped in the modern
world.
(iv) Technology provides no “magic bullet.” Indeed, the
introduction of technology on a large scale often
creates new problems to be addressed. There is a
price to be paid. The ticket for admission to
information technology is expensive. In addition to
resources, it requires concerted effort on the part
of many actors in society. This is no minor
challenge.

70

The cemetery of failed experiments is large. Supplydriven initiatives, the result of enthusiastic salesmanship
on the part of technology zealots, do not work. Not all
things work in all contexts. Selectivity is essential.
Understanding what the new technology can offer in
each case is vital. Successful experiments start with a
well-identified need, for which new technologies may be
the appropriate answer. Most experiments to introduce
ICT have taken place in mature and rich economies,
where the resources are ample and the librarians are
well qualified. But the path for African countries, which
lack those resources, remains largely uncharted.

7. CONCLUSION
The rapid technological developments that portrayed
the present information age have left a great impact on
higher education libraries in Africa. The winds of
technological change have been blowing in our direction
not only in the universities but even at secondary and
primary education. The ICT now is playing a momentous
role in the development of libraries. Even though, the
technological absorption has been slow and full of
hitches; understandable because of the differences
between developed and developing countries.
It can be said that much of what ICT has to offer and
its potential to the higher education libraries has not yet
been fully deployed and exploited in African universities.
Lack of funds has been a serious impediment in the
course of ICT acquisition, adoption, utilisation, and
management. Outdated technologies that were first
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

acquired in early 1980s, through 1990s are merely
guarding our libraries, thereby creating systemic
complexities that are increasingly becoming difficult to
sustain. Some universities have achieved a high degree
of development with respect to ICT, in particular the
acquisition of hardware and software and the setting up
of local area networks (LANs) mainly as donations. It
should be noted that technological changes take place
very often and there is a clear need to keep abreast of
the changes when they occur without losing out on
quality. However, this process is either not wellestablished or if established it is not enforced, hence
and its introduction and application will improve the
quality of service to users. This would enable the
integration of a range of ICT’s in the enhancement of
activities into the library operation with range of
multimedia resources, as well as through a web
environment.

REFERENCES
1. Paul, T.Z. & Ibulaimu, K. In search of modernity:
science and technology in Africa. African World
Press, Trenton, New Jersey, 2003. pp. 127-55.
2. Manir, A.K. The Internet as tool for interactive
learning, teaching, and research: A Nigerian
experience. Int. J. Emerging Technol. Learning,
2007, 2(3), 1-4.
3. Castells, M. The information age: Economy, society
and culture, Vol. I: The rise of the network society.
Vol. II: The power of identity, Volume III: End of
millennium Malden, MA, Blackwell Publishers, 1996
and 2000.
4. Ngambi, D. ICT and economic development in Africa:
The role of higher education institutions. Centre for
Educational Technology, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, 2006.
5. Bassey, U.U. et al., Nigerian graduating students’
access to e-learning technology: Implications for
higher education management. In ICT-Learn 2007
Sixth International Internet Education Conference 24 September 2007, Cairo, Egypt.
6. WikiEducator. ICT in education in Nigeria. http://
www.wikieducator.org/ICT4Africa/country.
7. Curran, C. & Fox, S. Telematics in open and
distance learning. Weinheim: Deutscher Studied
Verlag, 1999.
8. Adebisi, O.L. Internet and libraries in the
sustainable national development of Nigeria: The

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(1)

librarian’s perspective. Owena J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2004,
7(1), 88-92.
9. Seifer, S.D. & Mhalynuk, T.V. The use of technology
in higher education services learning community
campus partnership for health. http://www.
altavista.com
10. Gilbert, S.L.W. & Green, K.C. Information
technology: A road to future? National Education
Association (NEA to promote academic justice and
excellence), 1995.
11. Bonzi, S. Senior faculty perception of research
productivity. In Proceedings of the ASIS, Annual
Meeting, Knowledge Industry Publication Inc.,
Washington DC, 1992.
12. Vitalicy, C. The Use of the Internet and Intranet by
teaching staff of the University of Zambia. African J.
Lib., Archives Inf. Sci., 2003, 13(2), 119-32.
13. Manir, A.K. Problems, challenges and benefit of
implementing e-learning in Nigerian Universities: An
empirical study. Int. J. Emerging Technol. Learning,
2009, 4(1), 66-69.
14. Rosenberg, D. Towards the digital library: Findings
of an investigation to establish the current status of
university libraries in Africa. A research report
submitted to International Network for the Availability
of Scientific Publications (INASP) Oxford.
15. Chisenga, J. The use of ICTs in African public
library services: A survey of ten countries in
Anglophone. Africa International Network for the
Availability of Scientific Publication (INASP),
Oxford, UK, 2004.
16. Okhiria, P. ICT tertiary level education: Universities
and colleges of education, 2007.
About the Author
Dr Manir Abdullahi Kamba is
Lecturer in Department of Library and
Information Science, Bayero University,
Kano, Nigeria. He obtained his PhD in
LIS from IIUM, Malyasia. Dr Kamba has
published many articles in local and
international journals, and attended and
presented papers in international and
national conferences. His area of interest include
information-seeking behaviour, ICT applications in
libraries, information science, research methodology in
LIS, and knowledge management.

71

