DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Tecnology, Vol. 30, No. 2, March 2010, pp. 70-78
© 2010, DESIDOC

Assessing Information Literacy Competence among the Undergraduate
Students of College of Agriculture, Raichur: A Case Study
Manjunath B. Hadimani and Iqbalahmad U. Rajgoli*
University of Agricultural Sciences
Raichur Campus, Raichur, Karnataka-584 101
E-Mail: manjunath_ro@rediffmail.com
*ISRO HQ, Antariksh Bhavan
New BEL Road, Bangalore, Karnataka-560 008
E-Mail: iqbal786@isro.gov.in

ABSTRACT
With the increasing complexity in agriculture education due to the technological developments,
developing information literacy competency in students for life-long learning should be the vital element
of agriculture education. In this study, an attempt has been made to know the information literacy competency
among the undergraduate students of College of Agriculture, Raichur (Karnataka, India). Questionnaire
method was used for data collection and results are tabulated and analysed. Outcome of the study has
been discussed and necessary suggestions have been made on the basis of the results for implementing
proper information literacy competency programmes in the College.
Keywords: Information literacy, undergraduate education, agriculture education

1. INTRODUCTION
Today, information has become a major economic
commodity and citizens need to be educated for
productive information use from pre-school through postsecondary education. Librarians play an important role in
the education of people for effective and efficient
information use by teaching them information skills at all
levels of education to enable them to be informed citizen
of the country. In the information-rich world, where the
scope of available information appears limitless, there is a
growing need for students to become critical users of
information. It not only includes knowing how to locate
Internet resources but focuses upon developing the skills
necessary in seeking information from a variety of
resources. What information is found is not important, but
to use that information to complete the assigned task or
research is of great importance.
Today’s web savvy students need to make judgments
of authority, relevance and accuracy on material that may
not have undergone peer review and made available on
Internet, and which is blindly used by the students in their
assignments and project works. It has been noted that
Received on 01 July 2009; Revised on 21 October 2009

students are increasingly developing the feeling that, for
their each and every information need, a search engine
(mostly Google and Yahoo) is a one-stop solution.
Students increasingly rely upon the Internet as their first
and favoured tool for finding information. The educational
institutions have an opportunity, and a challenge, to
prepare students to meet the demands of the Information
Age. Institutions need to identify what graduates should
know and be able to do. Recipients of a quality education
share certain attributes like critical thinking, problem
solving, a global vision and a multicultural perspective,
preparedness for work, and good citizenship.

2. INFORMATION LITERACY
Many definitions of information literacy (IL) are
available in the literature. Few of these are:
Lenox and Walker1 noted information literate person is
one who has the analytical and critical skills to formulate
research questions and evaluate results and the skills to
search for and access a variety of information types in
order to meet his or her information need. Most
definitions, in fact, circle around these stages of need

recognition, search formulation, source selection and
interrogation, information evaluation and information
synthesis and use.
The definition given on the Western Michigan
University Libraries2 website states “information literacy”
as an essential component in the educational
development of each student.” The research process has
become increasingly challenging with technology
contributing to information overload. Students should be
aware of the range of print and electronic resources,
including networked databases, the World Wide Web and
traditional print resources. They need to be prepared to
evaluate and make informed choices about the best
sources for their needs.
Every institution should foster optimal use of its
learning resources through strategies designed to help
students develop IL. It is essential to have an active and
continuing program of library orientation and instruction in
accessing information developed collaboratively and
supported actively by faculty, librarians, academicians
and other information providers.
Lupton3 opined that IL includes: library research skills
and information technology literacy, but it is broader than
these. IL is not just about finding and presenting
information, it is about higher order analysis, synthesis,
critical thinking and problem solving. It involves seeking
and using information for independent learning, lifelong
learning,
participative
citizenship
and
social
responsibility.
Where as Lloyd4 further extended this definition and
felt that “information literate people have a deep
awareness, connection and fluency with the information
environment. Information literate people are engaged,
enabled, enriched and embodied by social, procedural
and physical information that constitutes an information
universe. IL is a way of knowing that universe.”

3. NEED OF INFORMATION LITERACY
The fundamental goal of IL is to develop critical users
of information. IL is considered as a powerful weapon for
life-long learning. It is common to all disciplines, to all
learning environments, and to all levels of education. It
enables learners to master content and extend their
investigations, become more self-directed, and assume
greater control over their own learning. The central
mission of educational institutions should be to develop
life-long skills and provide the continued growth in the
later career of the students.
Information Literacy also aims to teach students how
to find information and prepare them for life-long learning
because they can always find information needed for any
task or decision at hand5. IL has a great significance for
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

economic growth, educational achievement and social,
cultural and personal well-being. It emphasises the skills,
attitudes and values required to locate, access, evaluate,
manage, synthesise and use information effectively. IL
links particularly strongly to the digital divide and closing
the gaps. It also promotes education initiatives at all
levels, the development of skills in the workplace and
community, including regional, economic development, ecommerce, and e-government6.

4. INDIAN LITERATURE ON INFORMATION
LITERACY
Glancing the literature published in India, it is
observed that there is very little output as compared to the
developed countries. There are no specific standards,
reports and policy guidelines for IL brought out either by
government, professional associations or the institutes of
higher learning. Literature survey of the work done in the
field in India shows that, few Indian authors have
published some papers/articles related to IL. It is
interesting to see that all the authors belong to library
profession and are either teachers, research scholars or
working professionals. What India lacks today is the
forums, reports, standards and policy guidelines for
primary, secondary, adult, and higher education.
Karisiddappa has published 15 papers on different
aspects of IL during the period 2003-2009. These papers
are published/presented in journals and conferences at
national and international levels. He strongly emphasised
the need of IL in Indian context for students to become
life-long learners. Karisiddappa7 in his paper strongly
recommended that IL and capacity building should be
included in the LIS curriculum. He has even mentioned
the probable ways of implementing IL programmes in
Indian context.
Pawinun and Kemparaju8 mentioned the range of
education programmes developed by libraries such as
literacy campaign, functional literacy and library
instruction. They too pointed out the importance of IL and
information technology literacy in higher education with
the advent of online services and digital libraries.
Kumar, Choudhary and Shah9 while explaining the
historical,
geographical,
sociological,
political,
economical, and educational background of India,
emphasised the urgent need of having IL programs for
such a diverse country. They have also explained the IL
mission that India should have. Karisiddappa10 brought
out a detailed paper and explained the need of IL
programs in public libraries, methods of implementing IL
programs and the kind of IL movement India should have.
The UGC-INFONET programs of UGC through which
universities are getting access to number of national and
international journals inspired Ramakrishnegowda and
71

Walmiki11 and Devi12 to study the computer literacy and IL
among the fresh entrants in the Kuvempu University and
in Andhra University, respectively.
Tella13, Gopal14 and Rajgoli15 while explaining the
importance of IL in digital environment mentioned the IL
models developed all over the world. They have further
explained the methods of implementing IL programs in
higher education sector.
Chagari16 in her paper presented at the 71st IFLA
Conference explained the survey carried out on three
public libraries in Visakhapatnam. She concentrated
more on the library personnel to know what kind of IL
programs they are organising for the general public. She
also elaborated the programmes developed for the
Women Self Help Groups and Youths in Andhra Pradesh.
Jayaprakash17 dealt with importance of User
Education and IL in promoting and supporting digital
information services in modern era. Gupta18 explored the
role of LIS professionals in the advancement of IL and the
IL methods that can be used.
Ghosh and Das19 in their paper presented at ICIL
2006, discussed the IL initiatives in India with special
reference to emerging knowledge economy. An
interesting paper was brought out by Nair20 highlighting
the relationship between right to information, IL and
libraries.
Gulati
and
Dogra21
explained
the
interdependence of right to information and IL by
highlighting some of the noted initiatives of India.
Karisiddappa and Rajgoli22- 27 have discussed at length
and breadth the importance of IL in higher learning and
research environment and the emerging knowledge
society contexts. Mishra and Maharana28 carried out a
survey of digital IL of the faculty at Sambalpur University.
Chakravarthy29 discussed the importance of IL in the
knowledge society and how it empowers learners for a
better tomorrow. Neelameghan and Chester30 discussed
IL for managing community knowledge in a knowledge
society. Bavakutty and Nasirudheen31 carried out a study
to assess the IL competency of research students of
Kerala University. Professional organisations at regional
and national level have been active in organising seminars
and lectures on IL. Some of the universities have also
taken initiatives and organised the workshops for the
library professionals across the nation. UNESCO has
been very kind in providing financial support for organising
the workshops and playing a pivotal role in IL movement in
India.

new college building in 1989. The intake capacity has
been increased in a phased manner to 55 students at
undergraduate level. The Postgraduate programme
leading to Master’s degree in six departments was
started in 1995 with an intake capacity of 5 students for
each department every year. The college has a total
strength of 57 teachers and 129 non-teaching staff. The
college is headed by the Director of Instruction (Agri.).
There are five divisions in the college, namely, Division of
Teaching, Administration, Accounts, Academic and
others which include Library, Estate Branch, Health
Centre and Hostel.

6. COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE LIBRARY
Central library of the campus caters to the needs of
staff and students of Agricultural College and Agricultural
Engineering College, as well as scientists and extension
personnel of Regional Research Station and Krishi Vigyan
Kendra located in the campus. The library provides
facilities such as photocopying of scientific papers,
compilation of bibliographies and inter-library loan, etc.
Campus library has a novel service for the benefit of
teachers by providing Agri Current Service weekly, which
is a reproduction of contents pages of primary journals
received during the week. Another weekly service provided
to the staff and students is Agri News, which is the
clippings from different daily newspapers concerned to
Agriculture in Kannada language. Glance Me file
maintained, provides information on advertisements,
seminars and conferences. A text book bank exclusively
for the benefit of Schedule Caste/Tribe students is
maintained and the books for this bank are donated by the
Department of Social Welfare, Raichur. Library services
are partially computerised and provided with Internet
facility.

7. NEED AND LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
Information literacy has become an important concept
since the arrival of the information age. Research in this
area in Asian countries such as India is still in its
preliminary stages. The present study is an attempt to
know the IL competence of the undergraduate students of
College of Agriculture, Raichur. The parameters of the
study were:
±

Data collection is confined to College of Agriculture,
Raichur.

±

Data is collected using a questionnaire from the
undergraduate students of College of Agriculture,
Raichur.

±

The study is mainly qualitative, using small number of
samples.

±

Data analysis and interpretation are entirely based on
the feedback received from the respondents.

5. COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE, RAICHUR
The Agriculture College at Raichur was started in
1984 with an intake capacity of 30 students per year with
its functioning in the Regional Research Station and
Agricultural Engineering Institute and thereafter shifted to
72

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Table 2. Ability to know the need for information

8. OBJECTIVES
±

±

±

±

±

To know IL competence of the undergraduate
students.
To know whether the undergraduate students are
applying information-seeking skills in searching the
needed information.
To understand the ability of students in searching the
information resources both print and electronic
available in the library.
To get an insight from the data provided by the
students in order to develop IL programmes in future.
To improve the effectiveness of library instruction by
making recommendations to the concerned
authorities based on analysis of the data provided by
the respondents.

9. METHODOLOGY
Questionnaire was designed using the IL Standards
for Higher Education developed by American Library
Association, USA. A pilot study was conducted by
circulating the questionnaire to 30 randomly selected
students. Depending on the output received from the
selected sample, the questionnaire was modified. The
final questionnaire was circulated to 90 undergraduate
students of College of Agriculture, Raichur.

10. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Response

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

85

94.44

No

5

5.56

Total

90

100.00

Table 3. Ability to know where to find the information

Response

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

90

100.00

No

-

-

90

100.00

Total

10.3 Ability to Access Needed Information
Effectively and Efficiently
From Table 4 it is revealed that all the respondents
make use of library for getting the required information
along with 66.66 per cent of respondents also making use
of Internet as other popular source of information
gathering and 27.77 per cent using other libraries
available in the locality. Table 5 shows that 95.55 per cent
of respondents know exactly what kind of information they
need. From Table 6 it is noted that 94.44 per cent of
respondents contact library staff for accessing the
required information and discuss with their teachers and
Table 4. Places where information was searched
Response

10.1 Demographic Information
Filled-in questionnaires were received from 90
students of whom 58 were male students and 32 female
students (Table 1). All the respondents fall in the age
group of 18-22 years.

Respondents

Percentage

Your college library

90

100.00

Other libraries

25

27.77

Internet

60

66.66

Others

-

-

Table 1. Sex-wise distribution of respondents

Response

Respondents

Percentage

Male

58

64.44

Female

32

35.56

Total

90

100.00

Table 5. Ability to search exact information
Response

10.2 Ability to Recognise Need for Information
In the complex information world it is very important to
recognize the need for information and have the ability to
locate that information. From the data provided by the
respondents it is clear that 94.44 per cent (Table 2) of
them know when they are in need of information and all
the respondents know where to find the needed
information (Table 3).
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

86

95.55

No

04

04.45

Total

90

100.00

Table 6. People contacted to access the information
Response

Respondents

Percentage

Library staff

85

94.44

Friends

60

66.66

Facul ty

65

72.22

Self

70

77.77

73

friends for more clarification. Seventy-seven point sevenseven per cent of respondents access the required
information themselves.

10.4 Ability to Evaluate Information and its
Authenticity
Online access to information is available in different
forms and formats. Everything available online is not
always correct and authentic. Therefore, It is very
important to evaluate the online information for its
authenticity, currency, authority and appropriateness from
other sources and draw conclusions based on the
information gathered as regards to its usefulness.
Questions were framed based on these issues and it is
noted from the data provided by the respondents that
91.11 per cent (Table 7) of them evaluated the gathered
information by consulting other sources of information and
by discussing it with teachers and friends. Table 7 also
depicts that all the respondents believed that it is
important to evaluate information available on Internet,
and draw conclusions based on information gathered as
regards to its usefulness.

10.5 Ability to Classify, Store and Manipulate
Information
Today, when the education is going online, and much
of the information is available in electronic forms and
formats, computer literacy competence (the ability to use
a computer and its software to accomplish a task) play a
greater role. Students should have the ability to classify,
store, and manipulate the collected information. Students
should have the competence in developing search
strategies for retrieving the online information.
The competencies such as constructing searches,
narrowing or broadening searches are key to information
retrieval and storing. The online information can be stored
using copy/paste function or by photocopying and
scanning information available in print format. To store the
information available in electronic format, 47.77 per cent
of respondents used the copy/paste function. For the
information available in print format 41.11 per cent of
respondents used the photocopy facility and 8.89 per
cent of respondents use the scanner to scan, store and

manipulate the gathered information for future use and
2.23 per cent of respondents used audio/visual
equipments also (Table 8).
Table 8. Technology used to extract the information
Response

Respondents

Percentage

Copy/P aste software
fun ctions if the information
is available online

43

47.77

Photocopy

37

41.11

Use Scanner

08

08.89

Audio visual equipments

02

02.23

Total

90

100.00

To preserve the integrity of information resources,
equipment, systems, and facilities it is important to
respect the Copyright and Privacy Laws. All the
respondents said that they respected the access to right
and gave the reference to the information source used in
their assignment and project works. But Table 9 shows
that only 83.33 per cent of the respondents were aware of
the Copyright and Privacy Laws. Table 10 reveals that all
the respondents agreed that the information source
Table 9. Knowledge of copyright laws, privacy laws
and intellectual property rights
Response

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

75

83.33

No

15

16.67

Total

90

100.00

Table 10. Ability to preserve the integrity of information
resources, equipment, systems and facilities
Response

Respondents

Percentage

Respect access rights

-

-

Do not damage information
resources

-

-

Give reference to the
information resource used

-

-

90

100.00

All the above

Table 7. Ability to evaluate information and its authenticity

Ability to evaluate information & its authenticity

74

Response

Percentage

Yes

No

Yes

No

To evaluate the information in terms of currency, authority
and a ppro pri ateness

82

08

91.11

08.89

To consult other sources to verify the information gathered

90

-

100

-

To evaluate information available on the internet

90

-

100

-

To draw conclusions based on the information gathered
and i ts usefulness

90

-

100

-

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

should be properly handled and preserved from damages
for the future generation.

10.6 Ability to Incorporate Information into
one’s Knowledge Base and Value
System

print and electronic format. Table 14 shows that 91.11 per
cent of respondents had the knowledge about the cultural,
ethical and legal issues surrounding the use of
information. The institutional policies related to the
access and use of information sources while storing and
disseminating text, data, image, etc., were being followed
by the majority (94.44 per cent) of respondents (Table 15).

Students should have the competence in
incorporating selected information into knowledge base
and value system. This is possible by sharing the
gathered information with friends and teachers for more
clarification and synthesis. All the respondents said that
the gathered information enhanced their knowledge base
(Table 11) and 85.55 per cent of respondents
communicated new knowledge with friends and teachers
(Table 12). About 83.33 per cent (Table 13) of respondents
used the information technology applications such as
spreadsheet, databases, multimedia and audio visual
equipments to synthesise the information gathered.

Table 14. Ability to understand cultural,
ethical and legal issues
Response

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

90

100.00

No

-

-

90

100.00

Total

Table 12. Ability to communicate new
knowledge with friends and
teachers

Response

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

77

85.55

No

13

14.45

Total

90

100.00

Percentage

Yes

82

91.11

No

08

08.89

Total

90

100.00

Table 15. Knowledge of laws and institutional
policies related to the access and use
of information resources
R espo nse

Table 11. Ability to recognise new information
and enhance knowledge base
Response

Respondents

Resp on den ts

Percen tag e

Yes

85

94.44

No

05

05.56

T ota l

90

100.00

Though it is clear that majority of the respondents had
the information literacy competence but still some of the
IL programmes such as online information search
strategies, extracting online information, copyright laws,
institutional policies related to the access and use of
information sources, both print and electronic, needs to
be developed and demonstrated to the students to
transform them into a information literate person and
lifelong learner.

11. FINDINGS
Table 13. Ability to use information technology
applications to synthesise the information
gathered
Response

Respondents

Percentage

Yes

75

83.33

No

15

16.67

Total

90

100.00

10.7 Ability to Understand the Cultural,
Economic, Legal and Social Issues
surrounding the Use of Information
Now that libraries are providing access to electronic
information online, it is very important that students
should know the cultural, ethical and legal issues such as
privacy and security while accessing information both
DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

The findings of the study have been summarised
below:
±

The majority (94.44 per cent) of the respondents had
the ability to recognise a need for information and had
the ability to locate the needed information.

±

Though majority of the respondents indicated that
they have the ability to locate the needed information,
but needed assistance either by library staff or faculty
members.

±

Among those who indicated that they were
competent to evaluate the information gathered, 8.89
per cent did not thought that it was necessary to
evaluate the gathered information with respect to its
authority, usefulness, currency, and authenticity.

±

Respondents are competent in developing search
strategies and are able to classify and store the
gathered information for future use.
75

±

Respondents have some knowledge regarding the
Copyright and Privacy Laws, but they lack the
competence in electronic access to information and
institutional policies related to the access and use of
information.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Authors would like to thank and express their
gratitude to all the respondents for their valuable time and
participation in this survey.

12. CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

±

1. Lenox, M. & Walker, M. Information literacy in the
educational process. The Educational Forum, 1993,
57(2), 312-24.

The mission statement and planning documents of
the College should include a statement for IL and
Goals and Objectives of IL needs to be included into
the mission statement.

±

College should have a separate funding and the other
measurable support for an information literacy
agenda.

±

Technological infrastructure needs to be implemented
to enable better utilisation of the online resources
being subscribed.

±

Faculty-Librarian should collaborate to develop
programme that deal with discipline specific research
skills and assignment specific tutorials.

±

There is a need to develop and demonstrate tutorials
on Copyright Laws, Electronic Access to Information,
and Institutional Policies related to the access and
use of information.

±

2. Western Michigan University Libraries. (n.d.):
Information Literacy. http://www.wmich.edu/library/
instruction/literacy.php (accessed on 28 October
2008).
3. Lupton, M. The learning connection: Information
literacy and the student experience. In AusLib Press,
Adelaide, 2004. p.12.
4. Lloyd, A. Working (In)formation: Conceptualising
information literacy in the workplace. In Proceedings
of 3rd International Lifelong Learning conference,
Queensland. Central Queensland University Press,
13-16 June, 2004. pp. 218-24.
5. The Association of College and Research Libraries:
Information Literacy Competency Standards for
Higher Education. Chicago, ACRL, 2000.

There is a need to develop tutorials related to
database search skills such as navigating the
database, searching specific interfaces, etc., and
Internet skills such as web browser navigation,
communication on the Internet, web search tools, web
search strategies, evaluation of web resources, using
subject-based portals, and gateways, etc.

6. Doyle, C.S. Outcome measures for information
literacy within the National Education Goals of 1990.
pp. 1-13

±

Library staff should play a significant role in the
identification of relevant sources and should involve in
the hands-on-training of students.

8. Pawinun, P. & Kemparaju, T.D. The information
literacy program: A case study of digital libraries.
SRELS J. Inf. Manage., 2004, 41(1), 67-78.

±

Training for trainers programmes need to be
recognised in order to upgrade knowledge of subject
specific information sources and tools for both library
and faculty staff.

±

Methods of assessment should be defined to ensure
that IL skills are assessed and hence taken seriously
by the students.

9. Kumar, Sudhir; Choudhary, Subhajit. & Shah, Leena.
Information literacy mission in digital environment:
Prospects and plans for developing society in India. In
70th IFLA World Library and Information Congress
held at Buenos Aires, Argentina, 21-28 August 2004.

±

±

76

IL programmes that meets the specific information
needs of the students should be developed by the
library staff in collaboration with faculty staff.
Inclusion of IL component in the agricultural
education curriculum in order to develop the students
to suit the demands of job markets.

7. Karisiddappa, C.R. Literacy concepts in LIS
curriculum. In 70th IFLA World Library and Information
Congress held at Buenos Aires, Argentina, 21-28
August 2004.

10. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Kavita, H.C. Information literacy
for public libraries. In National Seminar on Development
of Public Libraries in India, 28 February- 2 March 2005,
City Granthalaya Samsthan, Hyderabad. pp.114-28.
11. Ramakrishnegowda, K.C. & Walmiki, R.H.
Assessment of information literacy and computer
literacy among post graduate students: A case study
of Kuvempu University library users. SRELS J. Inf.
Manage. 2004, 41(4), 367-82.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

12. Devi, Sugathri. Information literacy and its need: A
case study of students of Andhra University. In 23rd
Annual Conference of Society for Information Science
held at Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, 27-29
January 2005, pp. 309-18
13. Tella, Ramadevi. Best practices to promote
information literacy in the digital era: Case of cord. In
23rd Annual Conference of Society for Information
Science held at Andhra University, Visakhapatnam,
27-29 January 2005, pp. 681-90.
14. Gopal, Krishna. Information literacy in digital era: A
gateway to learning. In 23rd Annual Conference of
Society for Information Science held at Andhra
University, Visakhapatnam, 27-29 January 2005,
pp. 691-99.
15. Rajgoli, I.U. Role of information literacy in digital
information environment. In 23rd Annual Conference of
Society for Information Science held at Andhra
University, Visakhapatnam, 27-29 January 2005,
pp. 700-10.
16. Chagari, Sasikala. Information capability building:
Role of information literacy programmes—a study. In
71st IFLA World Library and Information Congress
held at Oslo, 14-18 August 2005, pp. 1-14.
17. Jayaprakash, A. & Venkateshwaralu, S. Importance
of user education in promoting and supporting digital
information services in modern era. In 23rd Annual
Conference of Society for Information Science held at
Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, 27-29 January
2005, pp. 658-64.
18. Gupta, Sangita. & Singh, S.P. Role of LIS
professionals in the advancement of information
literacy. In 23rd Annual Conference of Society for
Information Science held at Andhra University,
Visakhapatnam, 27-29 January 2005, pp. 673-80.
19. Ghosh, S.B. & Das, A.K. Information literacy
initiatives in India with special reference to emerging
knowledge economy. In International Conference on
Information Literacy (ICIL-2006), Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, 14-15 June 2006.
20. Nair, Raman. R. Right to Information, information
literacy and libraries. In Symposium on Right to
Information, Kerala, 16 November 2006, pp.1-27.
21. Gulati, Anjali. & Dogra, Seema. Interdependence of
right to information and information literacy: An Indian
perspective. In 72nd IFLA World Library and
Information Congress held at Seoul, Korea, 20-24
August 2006, pp. 1-18.

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

22. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. Information
literacy: The process of enhancement of information
handling capacity. In Conference on Bringing the
Digital Divide—Public Library Services in North-East
Region: Opportunities and Challenges jointly
organised by Department of LIS Mizoram University,
Aizwal and RRRLF, Kolkata, 19-21 May 2005,
pp. 82-94.
23. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. Information literacy
in libraries: Need of the hour. In FALA Conference
2005 – National Seminar on Changing Context of
Higher Education: Challenges to Librarians Organized
by the College and University Librarians’ Association,
Andhra Pradesh, 10-11 September 2005, pp. 160-69.
24. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. Need for
information literacy activities in the changing higher
education environment in India. In 51st All India
Library Conference of Indian Library Association on
Libraries, Information Literacy and Life-long Learning
held in Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Haryana,
16–18 December 2005, pp. 202-20.
25. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. Inter-relationship
among the libraries, information literacy and lifelong
learning. Karnatak Univ. J. Soc. Sci., 2006, 31-32.
26. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. Blooming
knowledge society and information literacy in India.
Sri Lankan J. Librarianship Inf. Manage., 2007, 3(1),
1-13.
27. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. In search of
information literacy programmes and practices:
Survey of selected institutions in Bangalore.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2), 28-38.
28. Mishra, Champeswar & Maharana, Bulu. A survey of
digital information literacy of Faculty of Sambalpur
University. Lib. Phil. Pract., 2007, 9(2), 1-9.
29. Chakravarthy, Rupak. Information literacy in the
knowledge society: Empowering learners for a better
tomorrow. In Trends and strategic issues for libraries
in global information society, Chandigarh, 18-19
March 2008. pp. 1-21.
30. Neelameghan, A. & Chester, Greg. Information
literacy for managing community knowledge in
developing countries in a knowledge society
environment. In ICOLIS 2008 held at Kuala Lumpur,
2008, pp.157-71.
31. Bavakutty, M. & Nasirudheen, T.P.O. Assessing
information literacy competency of research students
in India: A case study. In ICOLIS 2008 held at Kuala
Lumpur, 2008, pp.109-21.

77

About the Authors

Mr Manjunath B. Hadimani started his professional career at Prof. S.S. Basavanal Library Karnatak
University, Dharwad as Library Trainee in the year 2003. He also worked in Institute for Social
and Economic Change (ISEC) Library, Bangalore for One year, and later joined Indian Institute of
Management Banagalore library as Project Assistant. Presently, he is working at University of
Agricultural Sciences, Raichur as Assistant Librarian. His areas of interest include digital library,
information literacy, user studies and reference services. He has contributed nine articles in national
journals and conferences.

Dr Iqbalahmad U. Rajgoli obtained his PhD in Library and Information Science from Karnatak
University, Dharwad in January 2008 under the guidance of Prof. C.R. Karisiddappa. He started
his professional career at Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore as Library Trainee in the
year 2003 where he was involved in the Digital Library of India project. He is well exposed in
the digital library and institutional repository technologies. He joined ISRO HQ in February 2005
and is involved in cataloguing and classification of various documents, and ISRO HQ institutional
repository. His areas of interest include information literacy, digital libraries and institutional repositories.
He has contributed 22 articles in national and international journals and conferences.

78

DESIDOC Jl. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(2)

