DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 2, March 2011, pp. 77-83
© 2011, DESIDOC

REVIEW PAPER

Ontology Development Methods
Pratibha Gokhale,* Sangeeta Deokattey** and K. Bhanumurthy**
*University of Mumbai, Kalina, Vidyanagari, Santacruz (East), Mumbai-400 098
**Scientific Information Resource Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Mumbai-400 085

ABSTRACT
An ontology defines a common vocabulary for researchers who need to share information in a
specific domain. It includes interoperability of basic concepts in the domain and relations among them.
The present paper takes a brief overview of different tools and methods for developing ontologies, their
relationship with artificial intelligence, followed by a review of literature on the same. Method for
developing an ontology on energy amplifiers is discussed in brief.
Keywords: Ontology, artificial intelligence, accelerated driven systems, energy amplifiers

1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years the development of ontologies–
explicit formal specifications of the terms in the domain
and relations among them has been moving from the
realm of artificial intelligence (AI) to the domain experts.
They have become common in the World Wide Web
(WWW), which range from large taxonomies categorising
websites such as subject directories to categorising
products for sale such as Amazon.com.
Traditionally, ontology as a subject was the focus of
philosophers and logicians, who used the term to denote
the study of what is what, i.e., what exists, the kind and
structure of objects, properties, and other aspects of
reality of the universe. Researchers in the field of AI used
the term Ontologies to denote a theory, concerning the
kinds of entities and specifically the kinds of abstract
entities that are to be admitted to a language system. The
concept was developed and implemented since the early
1990s. AI researchers use ontologies (in plural) for two
basic purposes: Problem Solving Methods (PSMs) and
Knowledge-based Systems (KBSs). Around the same
time, tremendous developments in the WWW forced Web
developers to find a solution to the problem of intelligent
access to the vast resources available on the Internet.
Thus, the semantic Web Activity was initiated by the
WWW Consortium, towards the development of enabling
technologies. This would allow data on the Web to be
defined and linked in such a way, that it can be used for
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

more effective automation, integration and reuse across
various applications. This led to the development of
standards and tools for effective information exchange
such as the XML, SWAD, DAML+OIL and OWL. In the
field of Library and Information Science (LIS), R&D on
ontologies began in the late 1990s. The growth of digital
information resources and their easy accessibility to
clients have spurred the need for developing new tools and
techniques. But the multi-dimensional nature of digital
resources (both in terms of physical formats and
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary nature of subjects),
posed a challenge to information specialists.
Conventional knowledge organisation (KO) tools like
classification schemes and thesauri resemble ontologies
in a way that they define concepts and relationships in a
systematic manner, but they are less expressive when it
comes to machine language. Ontologies represent a
domain of knowledge and permit relationships such as
the definition of classes, relations, and functions. Despite
their high level of specification, they allow a great deal of
flexibility.
All library and information systems use two distinct
schema for encoding information embodied in a
document. One represents the subject contents of a
document through the use of a classification scheme, a
thesaurus or a subject heading list; the other provides
descriptive information about a document like title, author,
publisher, etc. These are handled by metadata schema
such as cataloguing codes, MARC and other
77

bibliographic description formats and more recently
Dublin Core, FRBR, RDF, and XML. The main problem in
the context of interoperability is a bibliographic
description format that in one library may not be
compatible with the format of another library. If a piece of
information is downloaded from the Internet, it is
represented in an entirely different format. Therefore,
achieving homogeneity in heterogeneous digital
information resources is a real challenge.
An ontology incorporates both a subject
representational vocabulary and a bibliographic
description format, and can be made compatible with any
digital information resource in a library or any webpage
from the Internet. Because at the syntactic level, it uses
web-enabled bibliographic description formats and at the
semantic level, apart from standard IS&R tools, an
ontology also makes use of free index terms, to represent
the subject contents of a document. In this way,
interoperability is achieved both at the syntactic and
semantic levels by applying principle of ontology. Some of
the reasons for developing ontology are:


To share common understanding of the structure of
information among people or software developers



To enable optimum use of domain knowledge in a
specified subject area



To differentiate domain knowledge from operational
knowledge



To do analysis of domain knowledge in the given area
to make it explicit

2. ONTOLOGY DEVELOPMENT TOOLS
There are a number of tools available freely on the
Internet, for developing new ontologies. The important
ones are:
Ontolingua (http://ksl.stanford.edu/software/ontolingua):
It is a set of tools written in Common LISP. It was one of
the first tools to be developed in the 1990s at the
Knowledge Systems Laboratory of Stanford University. It
provides a repository of ontologies to assist the users in
creating new ontologies and amending the existing ones
collaboratively.
WebOnto (http://kmi.open.ac.uk/projects/webonto/): It
was developed by the Knowledge Media Institute of the
Open University, UK. It supports creation and editing of
ontologies and collaborative browsing.
Cyc (http://cyc.com/): It is an AI project that attempts to
assemble a comprehensive ontology and knowledge base
of everyday common sense knowledge with the goal of
enabling AI applications to perform human-like reasoning.
78

3. ONTOLOGY DEVELOPMENT METHODS
As stated earlier, in the field of AI, ontologies have
been used in PSM and KBS. Hobbs1 proposed a general
structure for a different underlying conceptualisation of the
world; one that would be particularly well-suited to
language as opposed to philosophical ontology, which is
independent of language. Reynaud and Tort2, Heijst and
Schreiber3 and Gomez-Perez4 developed ontologies for
PSMs. O’Leary5 discussed the role of ontology in
knowledge bases and knowledge management and in
another paper6, he highlighted the problems in using
ontologies for KBSs. Two pioneering papers described
how to develop and build ontologies. One was by Noy and
McGuinness7 and another by Guarino8.
A comparative review of the state-of-the-art in
ontology design was described by Noy and Hafner9. The
use of specific tools and services to develop collaborative
ontologies was reported by Farquhar and Fikes10 in their
study on the “Ontolingua” server. Borst and Ackermann11
described a formal ontology called PHYSSYS in the
domain of Engineering. Visser12 made a comparative
study of four ontologies in the field of law. Valente and
Russ13 presented a case study in building and reusing an
ontology in the field of air campaign planning. Lopez and
Gomez-Perez14, gave guidelines for developing a
chemical Ontology using two ontology building tools:
MethOntology and Ontology DEsign (ODE).
Duineveld and Stoter15 compared various Ontology
tools available on the Internet for engineering domain.
Holsapple and Joshi16, provided different approaches such
as inspirational, inductive, deductive, synthetic and
collaborative in the design of ontologies. Everett17, et al.,
described means to resolve issues of synonymy through
the use of natural language in designing new ontologies.
Kohler18, et al. paved the way to bridge the gap between
an HTML-based system and an RDF-based system, by
linking words in texts to concepts in ontologies. Kim19, et
al. detailed the development of a methodology for an
ontology management system, based on philosophical
texts. Dahab20, et al. described an automatic ontology
construction method from natural language English text.

4. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN A THESAURUS
AND AN ONTOLOGY
Differences between a thesaurus and an ontology are
shown in Table 1.

5. CURRENT IS&R TOOLS: SOME
PROBLEMS
The development of international databases,
emergence of the Internet, and digital libraries as source
of vast amount of information have stressed the need to
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

Table 1. Difference between a thesaurus and an ontology
Thesaurus

Ontology

It belongs to post-coordinate indexing era.

Its roots are in philosophy.

It is a controlled vocabulary tool with descriptors to
reflect subject content of a source and a subject
domain.

It is a controlled vocabulary tool using free-text terms to describe
a specific subject domain.

It is somewhat rigid in its construction.

It is totally flexible allowing multiple choice of entries.

It has single dimension.

It is multidimensional in nature.

It can be manually created or machine generated.

It can be created only using high level software programs.

It is built on the principle of literary warrant.

Literary warrant concept as well as problem-solving methods
and knowledge-based systems form its basis.

Only three kinds of relationships exist BT, RT, and NT.

The relationships are potentially poly-hierarchical in nature.

It does not provide definitions.

It can provide definitions, meanings, and relationships.

The relationships are exhibited in a vertical manner.

N o fixed pattern of representing concepts can be interlinked as
such.

The super-ordinate and sub-ordinate classes are
determined solely in accordance with the knowledge
domain.

The super-ordination and sub-ordination of classes are mostly
decided by the ontology developer depending on the purpose.

reorganise information in a more effective way. The
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary areas cover several
subject domains simultaneously, making it difficult to
develop appropriate vocabulary, and control or indexing
tools for organisation and dissemination of information.
Construction of both classification schemes and thesauri
is a highly skilled job. There is, therefore, a need to
develop a new tool which can address these problems.
Generally, libraries and information centres use a twopronged approach to information encryption. One system
for vocabulary control (using classification, and other
indexing tools) and another for bibliographic data
description (cataloguing codes, metadata systems, etc.).
Heterogeneous
sources
of
information,
(both
syntactically and semantically), available on the Internet,
necessitate the development of a standard format for
digital information exchange. Therefore, ontologies can be
used for this purpose. An ontology incorporates both a
vocabulary and a metadata format.

6. LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE
PERSPECTIVE
Dahlberg21 was one of the first L&IS professionals to
identify the link between classification structure and
ontology. In her paper “Ontical Structures and Universal
Classification”, she described the Ontological foundations
of modern classification systems. Gopinath and others
reinforced and corroborated her theories. Hjorland22 has
delved into the ontological, epistemological, and
sociological factors, affecting a domain of knowledge.
According to him, all domains are dynamic, and any KO
tool should be able to reflect the constant changes in any
domain and incorporate them in the new ever-changing
structure of knowledge. An experiment to convert a
controlled vocabulary into ontology was reported by Qin
and Poling23. They used the controlled vocabulary of ERIC
descriptors to develop an ontology on education and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

educational materials. According to them, the major
difference between the thesauri and ontologies, lies in the
values added through deeper semantics, in describing
digital objects, both conceptually and relationally. At the
7th International ISKO Conference on Knowledge
Research and Organisation, the second session focused
on epistemological foundations for knowledge structures
and analysis. Silva and Rocha24, suggested an alignment
process at the ontological level for merging ontologies.
At the same Conference, Negrini and Zozi25, focused
on the way ontological structures can aid the
understanding and modelling of works of art. In the
Networked Knowledge Organisation Systems (NKOS)
group, Mai26 held a series of workshops in conjunction
with the Digital Libraries Conference and ACM+IEEE joint
conference on digital libraries since 2001. At their 6th
workshop, “Building a Meaningful Web from Traditional
KO Systems to New Semantic Tools”, all the seven
presentations focused on how traditional systems for KO
can be transformed into Ontologies. In another study,
Gnoli and Poli27, investigated the meaning of ontology as
a model for KO, in the current Internet scenario, Ding28
reviewed the importance of ontologies in the development
of the semantic Web. He discussed the definition of
ontologies, kinds of ontologies, ontology tools, ontology
language and some important ontology projects. Ding and
Foo, in another study, presented a two-part review. In the
first part of the review29, state-of-the-art techniques on
semi-automatic and automatic Ontology generation were
detailed. The second part of the review30 dealt with
ontology mapping and evolving. McGuinness31 and Kim32
summarised their comments on the development of
ontologies and the Web’s growing dependence on them.
As far as methodologies for developing ontologies is
concerned, an important study by Poli33, highlights
ontological sub-theories and the use of domain analysis
79

for developing an ontology. Ironically, this methodology in
the field of AI, utilises domain analysis, an integral part of
L&IS. Similarly, Prieto-Diaz34 also used a domain
analysis and a faceted approach to build ontologies with a
software tool called ‘DARE’. Most of the current
ontological projects, use readily-available ontology tools
for developing new ontologies. Charlet35, et al. describe a
methodology to build a medical ontology from textual
reports, using a natural language processing tool; the
SYNTEX software. Sanchez and Moreno36 described an
automatic and unsupervised methodology that addresses
the non-taxonomic learning process for constructing
domain ontologies. Roche and Kodratoff37 presented a
text-mining approach, to extract candidate terms from a
corpus.
A clustering-based approach for developing cultural
ontologies, was reported by Srinivasan38, et al. The study
concluded that a semi-automated method was useful in
resolving the twin problems of scalability and
interoperability in developing ontology. Another study by
He and Hou39, substantiated Srinivasan’s view that semiautomatic construction of a domain ontology was more
fruitful. They used a statistical NLP technique for mining
of the concepts, developing the taxonomic as well as the
non-taxonomic relationships and formalising the ontology.
Ziyu and Lei40 reported the development of a domain
ontology on high-speed railway, combining terms from a
thesaurus with other key concepts suggested by subject
experts. The Unified Software Development Process, a
widely used standard in software engineering, formed the
basis for developing a methodology for an ontology in the
e-business domain41. The UMLS meta thesaurus was
used by Zeng42, to develop an ontology on traditional
Chinese medicine. Hjorland43 addressed the theoretical
problem in developing ontologies.
According to him, a basic knowledge of concept
theory was essential for information scientists as well as
KO experts. The best understanding and classification of
theories of concepts, is to view and classify them in
accordance with epistemological theories (empiricism,
rationalism, historicism and pragmatism). The strength of
an ontology lies in the use of both standard vocabulary
terms as well as free index terms.
Dotsika44 reinforced this view, by reconciling an
ontology with a folksonomy and also proposed a common
framework for reconciling both a formal descriptive
system as represented by an ontology and an informal
descriptive system, represented by a folksonomy. An
automatic domain ontology construction method based
on FCA, was reported by Lei Wang45, et al. Using Content
analysis, facet analysis, and clustering Deokattey46, et
al., described a method for developing a domain ontology
in the multidisciplinary area of accelerator driven systems
in nuclear physics.
80

7. ACCELERATOR-DRIVEN SYSTEMS
Accelerator-driven systems is an interdisciplinary
and multidisciplinary subject domain. It is a part of the
broad area of physics, particularly particle physics,
atomic and nuclear physics, and nuclear and reactor
engineering. Accelerators are huge electromagnetic
devices that give high energy to subatomic particles,
which then collide with targets. Particles are being used
in a variety of ways for the benefit of mankind. Cancer
therapy, medical and industrial imaging, radiation
processing, electronics, measuring instruments, new
manufacturing processes, and materials are some of the
areas where accelerated particles are being used.
Another promising use of particle accelerators is in
producing clean, safe and almost inexhaustible amount of
nuclear energy. The amount of energy produced is much
more than energy utilised, hence they are called energy
amplifiers (EA).
Accelerator-driven systems are used for several
purposes. Some of the important applications of ADS are
for R&D in Particle Physics, for generating nuclear
energy, for destruction of high-level radioactive waste and
for breeding or producing additional nuclear fuel.

8. METHODOLOGY
For the purpose of developing a sample domain
ontology on EA, INIS database was used for picking up
keywords. Steps followed were as under:

8.1 Process of Conceptualisation
This process was initiated through the preparation of
the final list of keywords and descriptors, which formed
the basis for developing the ontology. Six hundred seventy
nine descriptors were downloaded from the bibliographic
records of the INIS database and saved as an Excel file.

8.2 Grouping and Interlinking of the
Descriptors
In the first step, each descriptor was linked to the
other through a one-to-one or one-to-many
correspondence between the descriptors depending on
the type of the descriptor. Table 2 depicts a sample of
such an interlinked file of descriptors. Among these
descriptors, 10 descriptors with highest frequency of
occurrence were identified as core clusters around which
several minor or smaller clusters were developed. Thus,
each descriptor was a part of a basic semantic unit,
consisting of a minimum of three descriptors. These
descriptors were:
81

transmutation

73

accelerators
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

Table 2. A sample display of one of the main clusters on accelerators

Cyclic accelerators
Quadrupole linacs
Synchrotrons
ECR ion sources
Cyclotrons

59

nuclear-reactions

56

reactors

55

elements

50

beams

50

metals

49

nucleon-beams

49

particle-beams

49

proton-beams

Beams
Beam dynamics
Neutron beams
Beam emittance
Beam inje ction

Under these core clusters, other descriptors
identified and downloaded from the INIS database, were
grouped to form smaller clusters, on the basis of Facet
analysis and semantic similarity. Each of the descriptors
under any of the core groups, could belong to more than
one core group (Table 2).

8.3 Software for Designing the Ontology
A special program was written to develop the
ontology, in a web-based environment. The following
three-tier architecture was used to develop the domain
ontology.


Active server pages



Web server (IIS)



MS Access

8.4 Organising the Keywords/Descriptors File
In the first step, the interlinked Excel file (the
semantic network) of all descriptors on EA was fully
updated.

8.5 Organising the Bibliographic Data File
The bibliographic records on EA (129) downloaded
from INIS database formed the core data for the domain
ontology on EA. These records were downloaded and
saved as a separate text file. Only certain mandatory
fields for each bibliographic record were downloaded from
the INIS database. These fields were Author, Corporate
Author, Title (both original and translated), Publisher, Year
of Publication, Language, Collation, Report No. (in case of
technical reports), Source, Descriptors, and Abstract.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

Targets
Target chambers
Thorium 232 target
Lead 208 target
Eutectics

Neutrons
Neutron beams
Multiplication factors
Neutron transport
Ultra cold neutrons

This edited text file of bibliographic data input was then
saved as an HTML file.

8.6 Uploading Data onto the Web-enabled
Platform
Both the keywords/descriptors file and the
bibliographic file were uploaded onto the Web-based
platform developed for the domain ontology. The
methodology for the present domain ontology on EA was
thus developed using facet analysis techniques, which
are an integral part of LIS studies. This methodology can
be used to develop a domain ontology both for pure
subject domains as well as for interdisciplinary subject
domains.

9. CONCLUSION
The focus of much of the research in AI is on the
emulation of problem solving behaviour. AI applications
include
medical
diagnosis,
natural
language
interpretation, robotics, programming, game playing,
vision, speech, pattern recognition, and fact retrieval.
Therefore, most of the work on the design and
development of ontologies was carried out in the late
1990s and in the beginning of early 2000s. Apart from
domain knowledge, ontologies in the field of AI have to
incorporate operational knowledge, to simulate real-life
problems and function as Expert Systems.
Semantic Web initiatives by the W3C, saw a number
of Web developers designing ontologies for
interoperability among various systems. Ontologies form
an integral part of the semantic Web architecture. The
ontology layer represents the semantic Web’s central
metadata artery, where simple descriptive to complex
classificatory schemas are created and registered so that
agents can intelligently interpret data, make inferences,
and perform tasks. Ontologies are metadata systems. In
the context of information science, ontologies are still at a
nascent stage. There is as yet no consensus on the
definition of ontology. If an ontology has to be developed,
the first requirement would be, that it should be based on
the concept of literary warrant; which means that only
domain knowledge would be utilised to develop an
ontology. Secondly, in the present era of reusable
modules of ontologies for various applications,
interoperability is a major issue, which means an
ontology should be flexible and yet be Web-enabled.
81

Third and the most important area is vocabulary
control. Information Scientists need to think beyond
classes, keywords and descriptors to represent
information, embodied in any document. The basic idea or
the concept as envisaged by Hjorland, would be the key
to effective organisation and retrieval of information. A
concept encompasses keywords, descriptors, and their
corresponding linkages. These linkages should also take
into account, institutional, cultural, and national warrants.
The complexity of evolving subject domains is another
problem area and innovative methods, including
webometric techniques, need to be used to harness
concepts, for developing ontologies in interdisciplinary
domains. The theoretical foundations of classification,
rooted in logic and cognitive psychology, would form the
ideal basis for developing techniques and methods for
creating new domain ontologies.

REFERENCES
1. Hobbs, J.R. Sketch of an ontology underlying the
way we talk about the world. Int. J. HumanComputer Stud., 1995, 43, 819-30.
2. Reynaud, C. & Tort, F. Using explicit ontologies to
create problem solving methods. Int. J. HumanComputer Stud., 1997, 46(2/3), 339-64.
3. Heijst, G.V. & Schreiber, A.T. Roles are not classes: A
reply to Nicola Guarino. Int. J. Human-Computer
Stud., 1997, 46(2/3), 311-18.
4. Gomez-Perez, A. & Benjamins, V.R. Applications of
ontologies and problem-solving methods. AI
Magazine, 1999, 20(1) 119-22.
5. O’Leary, D.E. Using AI in knowledge management:
Knowledge bases and ontologies. IEEE Intell. Syst.,
1998, 13(3), 34-39.
6. O’Leary, D.E. Impediments in the use of explicit
ontologies for KBS development. Int. J. HumanComputer Stud., 1997, 46(2/3) 327-37.
7. Noy, N.F. & McGuinness, D.L. Ontology development
101: A guide to creating your first Ontolgoy. Stanford,
Stanford University, 2001.
8. Guarino, N. Understanding, building and using
Ontologies. Int. J. Human-Computer Stud., 1997,
46(2/3), 293-310.
9. Noy, N.F. & Hafner, C.D. The state-of-the-art in
ontology design: A Survey and comparative review. AI
Magazine, 1997, 18(3), 53-74.

82

10. Farquhar, A. & Fikes, A.R. The ontolingua server: A
tool for collaborative ontology construction. Int. J.
Human-Computer Stud., 1997, 46(6), 707-27.
11. Borst, P. & Akkermans, H. Engineering ontologies.
Int. J. Human-Computer Stud., 1997, 46(2/3), 365-06.
12. Visser, P.R.S. & Bench-Capon, T.J.M. A comparison
of four ontologies for the design of legal knowledge
systems. Artificial Intell. Law, 1998, 6(1), 27-57.
13. Valente, A. & Russ, T. Building and (re)using an
ontology of air campaign planning. IEEE Intelli. Syst.,
1999, 14(1), 27-36.
14. Lopez, M.F. & Gomez-Perez, A. Building a chemical
ontology using MethOntology and the ontology
design environment. IEEE Intell. Syst., 1999, 14(1),
37-46.
15. Duineveld, A.J. & Stoter, R. Wondertools? A
comparative study of ontological engineering tools.
Int. J. Human-Computer Stud., 2000, 52(6), 1111-33.
16. Holsapple, C.W. & Joshi, K.D. A collaborative
approach to ontology design. Communications of the
ACM, 2002, 45(2), 42-47.
17. Everett, J.O., et al. Making ontologies work for
resolving
redundancies
across
documents.
Communications of the ACM, 2002, 45(2), 55-60.
18. Kohler, J., et al. Ontology-based text Indexing and
querying for the semantic Web. Knowledge-based
Systems, 2006, 19(8), 744-54.
19. Kim, J.M., et al. A methodology for constructing of
philosophy ontology based on philosophical texts.
Compu. Stand. Interfaces, 2007, 29(3), 302-15.
20. Dahab, M.Y.; Hassan, H.A. & Rafea, A. Text onto-Ex:
Automatic ontology construction from natural English
text. Expert Syst. and Appli., Feb. 2007.
21. Dahlberg, I. Ontical structures and universal
classification. Bengaluru, Sarada Ranganathan
Endowment for Library Science, 1978.
22. Hjorland, B. & Hartel, J. Ontological, epistemological
and sociological dimensions of domains: Afterword.
Knowledge Organisation, 2003, 30(3/4), 239-45.
23. Qin, J. & Paling, S. Converting a controlled
vocabulary into an ontology: The case of GEM.
Information Research, 6(2), http//:Information R.net/
ir/6-2/paper94.html.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

24. Silva, N. & Rocha, J. Merging Ontologies using a
bottom-up lexical and structural approach. In the 7th
ISKO International Conference on Challenges in
Knowledge Representation and Organisation for the
21st Century. Integration of Knowledge Across
Boundaries, Granada, July, 10-13, 2002.
25. Negrini, G. & Zozi, P. Ontological analysis of literary
works of art. In 7th ISKO International Conference on
Challenges in Knowledge Representation and
Organisation for the 21st Century. Integration of
Knowledge Across Boundaries, Granada, 10-13 July
2002.
26. Mai, J.E. Organisation of knowledge in a networked
environment. Knowledge Organisation, 2002, 30(1),
36-37.
27. Gnoli, C. & Poli, R. Levels of reality and levels of
representation. Knowledge Organisation, 2004, 31(3),
151-60.
28. Ding, Y. A review of ontologies with the semantic Web
in view. J. Inf. Sci., 2001, 27(6), 377-84.
29. Ding, Y. & Foo, S. Ontology research and
development, Pt. 1: A review of ontology generation.
J. Inf. Sci., 2002, 28(2), 123-36.

texts: An experiment for the intensive care units.
Comput. Biol. Med., 2006, 36(7&8), 857-70.
36. Sanchez, D. & Moreno, A. Learning non-taxonomic
relationships from Web documents for domain
ontology construction. Data and Knowl. Engi.
37. Roche, M. & Kodratoff, Y. Text and Web mining
approaches in Order to build specialised ontologies.
J. Dig. Inf., 2009, 10(4), 1368.
38. Srinivasan, R.; Pepe, A. & Rodriguez, M.A. A
clustering-based semi-automated technique to build
cultural ontologies. J. Amer. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol.,
2009, 60(3), 608-20.
39. He, L. & Hou, H. Research on semi-automatic
construction of domain ontology based on statistical
NLP technique. J. China Soc. Sci. Tech. Inf., 2009,
28(2), 201-07.
40. Ziyu, L. & Lei, H. Research on construction
methodology of domain ontology for high-speed
railway. J. China Soc. Sci.Tech. Inf., 2009, 28(2),
195-200.
41. De Nicola, A.; Missikoff, M. & Navigli, R. A. A
software engineering approach to ontology building.
Inf. Syst., 2009, 34(2), 258-75.

30. Ding, Y. & Foo, S. Ontology research and
development, Pt. 2: A review of ontology mapping
and evolving. J. Inf. Sci., 2002, 28(5), 375-88.

42. Zeng, Z. Practice in construction of traditional
chinese medicine ontology. Chinese J. Med. Lib.
Inf. Sci., 2009, 18(4), 1-5.

31. McGuinness, D.L. Ontologies come of age. Stanford,
Stanford University, 2005. (private communication).

43. Hjorland, B. Concept theory. J. Amer. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol., 2009, 60(8), 1519-36.

32. Kim, H. Predicting how ontologies for the semantic
Web will evolve. Communications of the ACM, 2002,
45(2), 48-54.

44. Dotsika, F. Uniting Formal and informal descriptive
power: Reconciling ontologies with folksonomies. Int.
J. Inf. Manag., 2009, 29(5), 407-15.

33. Poli, R. Ontological methodology. Int. J. Human
Computer Stud., 2002, 56, 639-64.

45. Lei, W.; Kuanjiu, Z & Peng, Q. Automatic domain
ontology construction. J. China Soc. Sci. Tech. Inf.,
2010, 29(1), 45-52.

34. Prieto-Diaz, R. A faceted approach to building
Ontologies. (Private communication).
35. Charlet, J.; Bachimont, B. & Jaulent, M.C. Building
medical ontologies by terminology extraction from

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

46. Deokattey, S.; Neelameghan A. & Vijai Kumar. A
method for developing a domain ontology: Case study
for a multidisciplinary subject. Knowledge
Organisation, 2010, 37(3), 173-84.

83

Dr (Mrs) Pratibha Gokhale is currently the
Head of the Department of Library & Information
Science in University of Mumbai and I/C University
Librarary. She has more than 33 years of
wide and varied experience in the field of
Library management and teaching. She has
contributed several articles in professional
journals, national and international conference
volumes. She received C.D. Sharma Award for the best
presented and written article at the ILA National Conference
in 2003. She attended and presented a paper at the 3 rd
International Conference on Grey Literature at Luxembourg
in 1997. She is a resource person, a guiding teacher for
research and has coordinated different continuing education
programmes, workshops, courses, etc. She is currently on
the Editorial Board of DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information
Technology. Her areas of specialsation are: library management,
organisation of knowledge, IT applications to library.
Dr (Mrs) Sangeeta Deokattey has been
working in the field of LIS for the last 25
years. She developed and organised the scientific
and technical reports collection at the Small
Enterprises National Documentation Centre
(SENDOC) at NISIET, Hyderabad. Later as a

84

Documentation Officer at the Research Centre for Women’s
Studies, SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai, she organised
the special collection of Women’s Studies research material
(including archives) and was one of the first in Mumbai to
develop a database on Women’s Studies using the CDS/ISIS
software under a Ford Foundation Grant. Her Research
interests include: classification, indexing, ontologies, preparing
state-of-the-art reports and using scientometric techniques
in knowledge organisation. She did her PhD from the University
of Mumbai, on the subject, “A Methodology for Developing
a Domain Ontology in the Area of Accelerator Driven Systems
in Nuclear Physics: A Study”. She is presently working as a
Senior Scientific Officer in the Scientific Information Resource
Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai.
Dr K. Bhanumurthy is a Metallurgical Engineer
from IIT, Kharagpur. His research interests
include inter-diffusion studies in metals and
alloys, similar and dissimilar materials joining
using advanced solid-state processes, fiction
stir welding, materials characterisation, and
phase diagrams study and evaluation. He
has more than 110 research publications to
his credit. Presently, he is the Head of the Scientific Information
Resource Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

