DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 2, March 2011, pp. 116-120
© 2011, DESIDOC

Role of Ontology in Semantic Web
Kaushal Giri
Don Bosco Institute of Technology, Mumbai-680 651
E-mail: kaushal.giri@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The present generation of computers is changing from single isolated devices to entry points into a
worldwide network of information exchange. Therefore, support in the exchange of data, information, and
knowledge is becoming the key issue in computer technology today. The increasing volume of data available on
the Web makes information retrieval a tedious and difficult task. Researchers are now exploring the possibility
of creating a semantic Web, in which meaning is made explicit, allowing machines to process and integrate
Web resources intelligently. The vision of the semantic Web introduces the next generation of the Web by
establishing a layer of machine-understandable data. The success of the semantic Web crucially depends on
the easy creation, integration and use of semantic data, which will depend on building an ontology. This paper
states the role of ontology in supporting information exchange process, particulary with semantic Web.
Keywords: Ontology, computer technology, information retervial, Internet, semantic Web

1. INTRODUCTION
Today we are living in the information age and society
can be labeled as information society. Knowledge, a
predominant element, pervades and dominates the dayto-day activities in information society. There is a sea
change in information generation, distribution, and
access. In recent years, finding information from the Web
is becoming more and more complex. Searching on the
Internet can be compared to dragging a net across the
surface of the ocean.
The traditional search engines are unable to provide
satisfactory solutions to this. Research is in progress to
build a Web, which is semantically richer than the current
one. The ability to translate knowledge from different
languages is an important ingredient for building powerful
artificial intelligent (AI) systems, by easing the difficult
and time-consuming task of knowledge base
construction1.
The vision of semantic Web proposes an environment
where the data and services on the Web can be
semantically interpreted and processed by machines to
facilitate human consumption. The semantic Web relies
heavily on the formal ontologies that structure underlying
data for the purpose of comprehensive and transportable
116

machine understanding. Semantic Web technology relies
on ontology as a tool for modelling an abstract view of the
real world and contextual semantic analysis of
documents2. Therefore, the success of the semantic Web
depends predominantly on the proliferation of ontologies,
which requires fast and easy engineering of ontology and
avoidance of a knowledge acquisition bottleneck. This
paper discusses about the development of semantic
Web, semantic Web technologies and role of ontology in
the semantic Web.

2. LIMITATION OF THE PRESENT WEB
Current World Wide Web (WWW) is a huge library of
interlinked documents that are transferred by computers
and presented to people. It has grown from hypertext
systems, but the difference is that anyone can contribute
to it. This also means that the quality of information or
even the persistence of documents cannot be uniformly
guaranteed. HTML’s simplicity has seriously hampered
more advanced Web applications in many domains and
for many tasks. This was the reason for defining another
language, Extensible Makup Language (XML), which
allows arbitrary domain and task specific extensions to
be defined. Semantic Web is an XML application,
developed to make the present Web semantically richer.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

3. SEMANTIC WEB
The idea of the semantic Web was conceived by Tim
Berners-Lee, the founder of the WWW. He envisions that
in future, the vast amount of information on the Web will
bear machine readable metadata, resulting in computers
being able to manipulate the contents automatically,
without human intervention. Therefore, the semantic Web
is imagined as an extension of the Web, in which
information is given a well defined meaning. It is the
application of advanced knowledge technologies to the
Web and distributed systems in general. It describes
methods and technologies to allow machines to
understand the meaning or “semantics” of information on
the WWW. To accomplish this, the provided information
should be structured, accompanied by sets of inference
rules that can be used by computers to conduct
automated reasoning.
According to Tim Berners Lee, “The Web has
developed most rapidly as a medium of documents for the
people rather than of information that can be manipulated
automatically. By augmenting webpages with data
targeted at computers and by adding documents solely
for computers, we will transform into semantic Web.
Computers will find the meaning of semantic data by
following hyperlinks to definitions of key terms and rules
for reasoning about them logically”3.

3.1 Development of the Semantic Web
The vision of extending the current human-focused
Web with machine processable descriptions of Web
content was first formulated in 1996 by Tim Berners-Lee,
the original inventor of the Web. The semantic Web has
been actively promoted since then by the WWW
Consortium, the organisation that is chiefly responsible
for setting technical standards on the Web. At this point,
the field of knowledge representation and reasoning took
center stage, but outcomes from other fields of AI have
also been put to use to support the move towards the
semantic Web. For example, natural language
processing and information retrieval have been applied to
acquire knowledge from the WWW4.
As semantic Web is a relatively new and dynamic
field of investigation, it is difficult to precisely delineate the

boundaries amongst these. Semantic Web communities
have defined their community by including those
researchers who have submitted publications or held an
organising role at any of the past International Semantic
Web Conferences, or the Semantic Web Working
Symposium5. Today semantic Web has created its own
importance by developing meaningful results.

3.2 Semantic Web Technologies
The
semantic
Web
contains
resources
corresponding not just to media objects (such as
Webpages, images, audio clips, etc.) as the current Web
does, but also objects such as people, places,
organisation and events. Further, the semantic Web will
contain not just a single kind of relation (the hyperlink)
between resources, but many different kinds of relations
amongst the different kinds of resources. Various
technologies for the semantic Web are shown in the Fig. 1
XML is a simple language that permits users create
their own tags in order to annotate Web documents. It
provides an elemental syntax for content structure within
documents. XML Schema is a language for providing and
restricting the structure and content of elements
contained within XML documents. While an XML
document is a tree, an Resource Description Framework
(RDF) document consists of sets of triples. Each triple
contains a subject, predicate and an object. These triples
can be written using XML tags. RDF is a simple language
for expressing data models, which refer to objects
(“resources”) and their relationships. An RDF-based
model can be represented in XML syntax. In RDF, a
document makes assertions that things have properties,
and this is how most of the data can be described and
further processed by the computers.
RDF schema extends RDF and is a vocabulary for
describing properties and classes of RDF-based
resources, with semantics for generalised-hierarchies of
such properties and classes6. XML and RDF are two
complimentary technologies used to build an intelligent
Web. RDF model uses vocabulary defined by the terms of
ontology. The combination of an RDF model and the
associated XML gives the computer enough information to
discover the meaning of data. Data about other data is

The Semantic Web

XML, RDF, Metadata,
Ontology

Metadata Storage,
Database Storage
Technologies

Information/
Knowledge
Management

Figure 1.Various semantic Web technologies.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

117

often called metadata. XML and RDF deal with metadata,
i.e., they deal with the description of the information
available on the Web. But, if machines are expected to
interact with each other or share data in the true sense of
the word, then semantic interoperability is essential. For
this, a formal specification is required to explicitly define
various terms and their relationships. Ontology was thus
developed in AI to facilitate knowledge sharing and reuse,
and can be built using XML and RDF. But during recent
past, many specific ontology-development languages
have been developed. Knowledge management from the
field of AI provides the necessary means to fill the
knowledge gap. Information that is hard to access for our
machines can be made accessible using an ontology.
Ontologies will play a major role in supporting information
exchange processes in the Semantic Web.

programming, types of objects, or kinds of things.


Attributes:
Aspects,
properties,
features,
characteristics, or parameters that objects (and
classes) can have



Relations: Ways in which classes and individuals
can be related to one another



Function terms: Complex structures formed from
certain relations that can be used in place of an
individual term in a statement



Restrictions: Formally stated descriptions of what
must be true in order for some assertion to be
accepted as input



Rules: Statements in the form of an if-then
(antecedent-consequent) sentence that describe the
logical inferences that can be drawn from an assertion
in a particular form



Axioms: Assertions (including rules) in a logical form
that together comprise the overall theory that the
ontology describes in its domain of application



Events: The changing of attributes or relations

4. ONTOLOGY
Since the beginning of the 1990s ontology has
become a popular research topic investigated by several
AI research communities including knowledge
engineering, natural language processing, and
knowledge representation. More recently, the notion of
ontology is also becoming widespread in the fields like
intelligent information integration, cooperative information
systems, information retrieval, electronic commerce, and
knowledge management.
The reason ontology is becoming so popular is
because it promise a shared and common understanding
of some domain that can be communicated between
people and application systems. Because ontology aims
at consensual domain knowledge, its development is
often a cooperative process involving different people,
possibly at different locations. According to Wikipedia,
“In computer science and information science, ontology
is a formal representation of the knowledge by a set of
concepts within a domain and the relationships between
those concepts. It is used to reason about the properties
of that domain, and may be used to describe the
domain7.

4.1 Components of Ontology
Contemporary ontologies share many structural
similarities, regardless of the language in which they are
expressed. Most ontology describes individuals
(instances), classes (concepts), attributes, and
relations. Common components of ontologies include:


Individuals: Instances or objects (the basic or
“ground level” objects)



Classes: Sets, collections, concepts, classes in

118

4.2 Ontology Construction
The following steps are involved in the construction of
Ontology:


Acquiring the domain knowledge: This step consist of
identifying and collecting appropriate expertise and
information resources to present in a common
language, all descriptive terms with consensus and
consistency



Design the conceptual structure: Identify the key
concepts within the domain along with their
associated properties. Further identifying the
relationships among the concepts



Develop the suitable details: Include concepts,
relationships and various instances to achieve the level
of detail to satisfy the given purpose of the ontology



Verify: Ensure the structure for uniformity. If required,
revise any logical, semantic or syntactic errors
among the elements



Commit/submit: Once domain expert ensures, the
ontology is committed by publishing it within its
planned deployment location. Then the ontology can
be referred and used within the environment

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

4.3 Ontology Languages

4.4 Ontology Editors

An ontology language is a formal language used to
encode the ontology. The advantage of formal languages
is the reasoning mechanism which appears in every
phase of conception, use and maintaince of an ontology.
There are a number of such languages for ontologies, both
proprietary and standards based, which are as follows:

Ontology editors are applications designed to assist
in the creation or manipulation of ontologies. They often
express ontologies in one of many ontology languages.

4.3.1 DAML+OIL
DAML stands for DARPA Agent Markup Language.
DARPA in turn stands for Defence Advanced Research
Projects Agency and is the central research and
development organisation for the Department of Defense.
OIL stands for Ontology Inference Layer or Ontology
Interchange Language. DAML+OIL are a successor
language to DAML and OIL that combines features of
both. In turn, it was superseded by Web Ontology
Language (OWL). DAML+OIL uses description logic (DL)
style model theory to formalise the meaning of the
language.
This is a very important feature to reduce arguments
and confusions, thus giving the language the ability to
precisely represent the meaning of information. This
ability is crucial for automatic reasoning, which is the goal
of the semantic Web8.

4.3.2 SWRL
Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) is a proposal
for a semantic Web rules-language, combining sublanguages of the OWL, Web Ontology Language (OWL
DL and LITE) with those of the Rule Markup Language
(Uniary/binary datalog). SWRL adds rules to OWL+DL.
The reason is that these rules provide more expressive
power to description logic. SWRL plays an important role
in ontology for the semantic Web.

4.3.3 Web Ontology Language
The Web Ontology Language (OWL) is a family of
knowledge representation languages for authoring
ontologies. The languages are characterised by formal
semantics and RDF/XML-based serialisations for the
semantic Web. The OWL was designed to add the
constructs of DL to RDF, significantly extending the
expressiveness of RDF schema both in characterising
classes and properties. It has been designed in a way
that it maps to a well-known DL with tractable reasoning
algorithms9. It has classes, sub-classes, properties, subproperties, property restrictions, and both class and
property individuals. Standardised formal semantics and
additional vocabulary makes OWL to represent explicit
term descriptions and the relationship between entities.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

4.4.1 Protege
Protege is a free, open source ontology editor and a
knowledge acquisition system. Protégé is being
developed at Stanford University in collaboration with the
University of Manchester. This application is written in
Java and heavily uses Swing to create the rather complex
user interface10.

4.4.2 DOME
The DERI Ontology Management Environment
(DOME) is developed by the Ontology Management
Working Group (OMWG). The mission is to create a suite
for the efficient and effective management of ontologies
that provides an integral solution for the overall problem.

4.4.3 Knoodl
Knoodl facilitates community-oriented development
of OWL-based ontologies and RDF knowledge bases. It
also serves as a semantic technology platform, offering a
Java service-based interface or a SPARQL-based
interface so that communities can build their own
semantic applications using their ontologies and
knowledge bases.

4.4.4 Onto Edit
Onto Edit is an ontology editor developed by the OnTo-Knowledge project. It implements an ontology
constructions process. The Editor stores the ontology
conceptual model in the SESAME repository and
produces RDF concrete representations.

5. ROLE OF ONTOLOGY FOR THE
SEMANTIC WEB
The semantic Web relies heavily on the formal
ontologies that structure underlying data for the purpose
of comprehensive and transportable machine
understanding. Therefore, the success of the semantic
Web depends strongly on the proliferation of the ontology
which requires fast and easy engineering of ontology and
avoidance of a knowledge acquisition bottleneck.
Conceptual structures that define an underlying
ontology are germane to the idea of machine processable
data on the semantic Web. Ontologies are metadata
schemas, providing a controlled vocabulary of concepts,
each with an explicitly defined and machine processable
119

semantics. By defining shared and common domain
theories, ontology helps both people and machines to
communicate precisely to support the exchange of
semantics. Ontology language editors help to build
semantic Web. Hence, the cheap and fast construction of
domain specific ontology is crucial for the success of the
semantic Web.

6. CONCLUSION
The semantic Web is not a separate Web but an
extension of the current one, in which information and
services are given a well defined meaning. The semantic
Web is a Web for machines, but the process of creating
and maintaining it is a social one. To make possible the
creation of the semantic Web the W3C has been actively
working on the definition of open standards, such as the
RDF and OWL. Although machines are helpful in
manipulating symbols according to pre-defined rules, only
the users of the semantic Web have the necessary
interpretative and associative capability for creating and
maintaining ontologies. The principal benefit of semantics
is that it provides a formal foundation for reasoning about
the properties of systems that do automated knowledge
translation based on sharing of ontology. Developers are
vigorously building semantic Web services. In spite of
this, as the standards are prepared and the demand for
intelligent agents grows, expertise will be required in the
field of semantic Web services.

REFERENCES
1

Yagge, F. & Akkemans, J.M. Decentralized markets
versus central Control: A comparative study. J.
Artificial Intell. Res., 1999, 11, 301-33.

2. Stabb, S. & Maedche, A. Knowledge portals—
ontologies at work. AI Magazine, 2001, 21(2).
3. Berners-Lee, Tim; Hendler, James & Ora, Lassila:
The semantic web. Scient. Ameri. Mag., 2002.

120

4. Maedche, A. & Staab, S. Ontology learning for the
semantic Web, IEEE Intel. Syst., 2001, 16(2), 72–79.
5. Horst, H. Combining RDF and part of OWL with rules.
semantics, decidability, complexity. In ISWC 2005,
edited by Gil, Y., Motta, E., Benjamins, V.R., &
Musen, M.A. Fourth International Semantic Web
Conference, Galway, Ireland, 2005. 3729. pp. 668–84.
6. Decker, S. The semantic Web roles of XML and RDF.
IEEE Internet Comp., 2000, 4(5), 63–74.
7. Gruber, T.A translation approach to portable ontology
specifications. Knowledge Acquisition, 1998, 5, 199.
8. Horrocks, I. DAML+ OIL: A reasonable Web ontology
language. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS), Springer-Verlag, 2002, 2287. pp. 2-13.
9. Smith, Michael K; Welty, Chris & McGuinness,
Deborah L. OWL Web ontology language guide,
W3C, 2008. pp. 7-15.
10. Knowledge modelling at the millennium the design
and evolution of Protege. In Proceedings of KAW-99,
edited by E. Grosso, H. Eriksson, R. Fergerson, S.
Tu and M. Musen, Banff, Canada, 1999.

About the Author
Mr Kaushal Giri obtained Bachelor’s degree in
Commerce, and Library & Information Science from the
University of Mumbai, and Masters in Library and
Information Science from Documentation Research and
Training Centre (DRTC), Bengaluru. He is working as
Chief Librarian at Don Bosco Institute of Technology,
Mumbai. His areas of specialisations are information
retrieval, knowledge and content management, digital
libraries, semantic web, and ontology.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(2)

