DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 3, May 2011, pp. 159-167
© 2011, DESIDOC

University Libraries in India in the Digital Age
R.K. Bhatt
Department of Library & Information Science, Delhi University, Delhi-110 007
E-mail: rakeshkumarbhatt@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
The paper deals with the current trends of university libraries in India and highlights major roles these are
playing in the digital age. The role of INFLIBNET, UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium and National
Knowledge Commission has been discussed in the context of changing academic library environment. The
paper also advocates the skills needed by the library professionals to meet the challenges of modern
librarianship.
Keywords: University libraries; skills of university librarians; ICT application in university libraries, library skills

1. INTRODUCTION
A university library is the heart of a university.
Dr Shankar Dayal Sharma, late President of India, while
inaugurating the Eighth World Book Fair on 5 February
1988 in New Delhi, said, “A library is more important
than a university because a library can function without
a university whereas a university cannot function
without a library”1. Lenin, emphasised the importance of
libraries by stating that, “without libraries and without an
efficient use of books by readers there can be no
cultural revolution”1.
The library is the heart of a University that actively
performs the activities related to learning and teaching,
research and generation of new knowledge,
dissemination of research results and conservation of
knowledge and ideas along with the extension of
services2. At present, India has 430 universities of
different categories and 20,000 colleges of various
types catering to the needs of around 110 lakh students
and 5 lakh teachers3.
This progress is spectacular particularly when we
compare the status of present day universities,
colleges, students and teachers with those on the eve of
our freedom in 1947. At the time of India’s
independence, India had 18 universities, and 600
colleges3. The university libraries in India have gone
through tremendous changes. The change in traditional
document delivery services, from print to electronic, has
Received
2010, 2011,
revised
04 February 2010
DESIDOC14
J. September
Lib. Inf. Technol.,
31(3)

come about quickly, and the university libraries in India
have undergone significant transformations to
effectively deliver electronic resources to the academic
community. Moreover, the rapid advancement of
information communication technology (ICT) has
brought a revolutionary change in the information
scenario giving rise to number of options to the users’
community to handle varied information sources
conveniently and effortlessly as a result of which eresources have become the lively substance to the
modern library’s reserves in satisfying varied needs of
students, teachers, and researchers with minimum risk
and time. Electronic resources are rapidly replacing
print resources as the largest consumer of library and
information centre’s acquisition budget is spent on
electronic information resources.

2. FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR PARADIGM
SHIFTS IN UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
The factors that are responsible for the paradigm
shift in the university libraries in India are:
(i)

Advent of ICT and its use in library operations has
changed information needs and behaviour of the
users especially looking to have the information in
the multi-disciplinary and multi-lingual nature,

(ii) Change in the mindset of the authorities both at
national and university levels thereby changed
perception and image of the library and that has
159
159

resulted into the setting up of high power
committees and commissions to improve upon the
library collection and services,
(iii) Change of work environment such as teamwork, job
sharing, tele-work, outsourcing, staff downsizing,
and re-engineering, among others. These
developments have necessitated the acquirement
and development of new skills in librarianship along
with the adequate knowledge of the use of ICT
tools.

engaged in teaching and research. In the changing
environment, the job of selecting documents is
becoming complex because of various reasons such as
information explosion, regular exclation in price of
publications, multi-facet nature of information
resources, multi-disciplinary approaches of the users,
different electronic format of the documents, etc. Since,
university libraries are also switching over to electronic
information resources, there is a need to consider
several factors carefully.

The above have helped University libraries in:

Singh4 poposed following points to be considered
for this purpose:

Identification, assessment, and evaluation of the
information needs of the readers;

±

(ii) Need-based collection development and collection
building;

Contents–print, CD ROM and online version of a
product may have different contents, quality, scope,
indexing, referencing and illustrations.

±

(iii) Analyse, evaluate, and organise information
contents of various types of sources as a content
manager;

Cost–the cost of each format will vary and may not
relate to the quality and scope of the document.
One should understand that carefully.

±

Bundling–“it’s a package deal”, that is, when one
title in electronic form is purchased, one may have
also to take a variety of other titles or modules,
“bundled” together as a deal product, whether you
need them or not.

±

Full text/abstract/citation–is full-text database
required? If the database does not contain full-text,
does it have document delivery option? If not, are
the given citations complete enough for placing an
order?

±

Coverage–is the subject area covered adequately?
Is the scope clearly stated? What is the
retrospective coverage of the database? Is the
coverage balanced, if not, are the biases clearly
stated? Are there links to further sources of
information?

±

Different versions–are there different versions
available for the database and is the information the
same in each one?

±

Currency–how current is the information and how
frequently and regularly it is updated? What is the
time lag in the print version and in the electronic
version?

±

Reliability–is the information compiled from valid
sources? What is the authority?

±

Format–can documents be viewed and downloaded
in a variety of formats?

±

Ease of use–is it user-friendly or requires end-user
training?

(i)

(iv) Marketing LIS products and services to promote the
underutilised information resources and enhancing
the use of library resources and services;
(v) Consolidation and repackaging of information
products and services in a fashion that suits and
meets the information hunger of the library readers;
(vi) Intranet and Internet potentiality be used
extensively by organising training sessions,
information literacy programmes;
(vii) Developing the e-learning modules and train the
staff and the readers to make use of these for their
research and development activities;
(viii) Establish or participate in the library consortium for
mutual benefits, especially in the area of journals
subscription through electronic environment and for
this develop the skills of negotiation while signing
the contracts with information providers having
adequate knowledge about licensing and other legal
arrangements for access to digital resources.

3. DYNAMIC TASKS OF UNIVERSITY
LIBRARIAN IN DIGITAL AGE
The basic aim of the university library is to support
the aims and objectives of the university, for which the
university
librarian
should
have
a
clearcut
understanding of the information needs and
requirements, both current and prospective. This
involves understanding the structure of the university, its
functions, its mission, and its several departments
160

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

±

Support and backup–what level of support and
backup is provided by the producer, online help,
support documentation and help desk and training?
Is local support available?

±

Free trial–is a free trial offered to allow a complete
evaluation of a product by the users?

±

Terms of license–restrictions placed on access,
downloading and distribution?

±

User behaviour–assessment of user behaviour has
been treated last, but it is absolutely essential,
particularly when moving from print publications to
e-resources because user’s ability to search,
browse and jump across the titles via hyperlinks in
an e-environment is the pre-requisite for such
sources.

4. APPLICATION OF ICT IN UNIVERSITY
LIBRARIES
According to Oketunji5 the role of ICT in university
libraries can be looked into the context of its application
in various tasks that are being performed by the
university libraries such as:
(i)

cooperation and the formation of library networks;

(ii) easy integration of various activities within a library
and between libraries in a network;
(iii) elimination of some uninteresting and repetitive
work in a library system;
(iv) increasing the range of services offered;
(v) provision of marketing opportunity of its services;

(vii) facilities for sending and receiving e-mail;
(viii) facilities for electronic search;
(ix) facilities for transacting electronic borrowing.
Acceptance to use ICT in libraries has
revolutionised the entire perception of the university
libraries in India especially in the past one decade.
University libraries are now moving towards electronic
resources for which they are now getting the benefits of
UGC-Infonet Digital Library Consortium. But for getting
the maximum benefits of the ICT, it is imperative for the
librarians working in the university set up to acquire new
skills to be competent enough to work in this new
environment.

5. APPLICATION OF INTERNENT IN THE
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
Statistical data available reveals the fact that there
is a increasing trend of Internet users in India. Their
number is doubling speedly. It is being used for both
academic as well as commercial purposes by a large
segment of Indian masses. The university librarians in
India are now advocating Internet connectivity even at
the places like recreational rooms, clubs, hostels,
playground and at every public place in the university
for maximum utilisation and feeding the information
appetite of the users community. But, at the same time
they need to develop more skills and strategies that can
help them to retrieve information from the Internet with
more precision than recall which is need of the hour.
Since technological developments are fast, these call for
regular training to learn more and more new skills and
competencies, which need an intense focus on users
information needs and continuous assessment of their
skills to remain updated.

(vi) ultimately saving or even generating money; and
(vii) increased efficiency and effectiveness. Alasa and
Kalechukwu6 opined that the benefits of ICT in
university libraries are:
(i)

quick and convenient information exchange;

(ii) access to experienced and expert individuals in
many fields;
(iii) access to regular updates on topics of interest;
(iv) enhancement of teamwork across geographical
distance;
(v) transfer of data between machines;
(vi) promotion of a great platform to have fun and be
entertained;
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

6. LIBRARY NETWORKS AND CONSORTIA
The ICT has facilitated the libraries all over the
world to establish networks for resource sharing.
Further, the emergence of e-journals has forced
libraries to opt journals’ subscription in the electronic
format due to variety of reasons. One of the reasons for
opting subscription of e-journals through library
consortium is the best possible bargaining of the prices
and saving attractive segment of money in comparison
to the subscription in the print format. Government of
India consented University Grants Commission to allow
its organ, INFLIBNET, to establish a library consortium
namely ‘UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium.’ This
consortium is providing access facilities to e-journals
and databases to majority of the university libraries in
India. INFONET has helped libraries meet their users’
diverse information needs.
161

7. SUBJECT GATEWAYS AND PORTALS
Though Internet is considered a boon for present
day librarianship and undisputedly, considered as an
essential technology for the research and development
activities almost in every discipline. Its huge information
resources, both available in commercial domain as well
as in public domain, have made it as the first choice to
anyone working in the digital environment. But one of
the biggest problems people are facing while using the
Internet is the vast amount of junk information. To
overcome this problem, a lot of efforts are being made
globally. In addition to many of the workable solutions on
which the professionals are working, the available
solutions are the formation of subject gateways and
subject portals. For example, SOSIG, now known as
Intute is the information gateway in the field of social
sciences. The research in the field of semantic web is
also going on to solve the problems of garbage and
provide more precision than of more recall.

8. DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Creating a digital library is the latest phenomenon
being observed and advocated by the group of
librarians, especially the librarians working in the
academic environment. Digital technology has become
the answer to the problems of preservation, add new life
to rare, brittle and fragile documents in addition to its
potentialities of providing access to information
speedily, accurately, and efficiently. The philosophy of
library cooperation and resource sharing is executed in
best possible manner through the digital technology as it
enables creation of networked libraries.
The big university libraries like University of Delhi,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, Jamia Milia Islami, IGNOU
and many more in India have already started positive
efforts in creating a digital library of their own and
having the mission to put their resources in the Webenabled environment to provide access to their
resources from anywhere in the world in 24x7
environment. Greenstone Digital Library, E-prints
Archives and Dspace are the popular software used by
these libraries.

9. MARKETING LIS PRODUCTS AND
SERVICES
Though little late, the university libraries in India
have realised that if the image building is to be done, if
the maximum fruits of the library services are to be
taken to the doorsteps of the readers, if the problem of
underutilisation of numerous resources of the university
libraries is to overcome, and over and above, if the
present day libraries have to survive and sustain, there
is no other way except to accept and adopt marketing
162

as one of the strategic solutions and promotional tool for
making the role of the libraries much more meaningfull
for the 21st century.
In fact, marketing is not about persuading people to
buy or use something, which they do not really need or
want. Similarly, it is also not a strategy to increase the
sale of the product or service. The Chartered Institute of
Marketing7 defines it as, “management process
responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying
customer need profitably”. Thus, the strength of
marketing philosophy is undisputedly recognised and
thus, university libraries should start to make use of this
philosophy for the overall benefit of library users.

10. INFORMATION CONSOLIDATION AND
REPACKAGING
Days have gone when the reader would have been
satisfied simply by providing him/her the book he/she
wanted to read or to just guide him/her the location of
book on shelves. In the present day environment, he/
she is more concerned with pin-pointed exhaustive
information, and that to in the format which suits him/her
best. This change in the information-seeking behaviour
of the users has forced the university librarians to adopt
the mechanism to consolidate and repackage the
information. The information repackaging process
involves several tasks like selection, analysis, evaluation,
restructuring, and synthesising the information to
provide specific information to users in a bespoke,
tailored manner. In the changing scenario of
librarianship in India, the restructuring and repackaging
of existing information and knowledge is considered as
highly essential to meet the information hunger of the
users with utmost satisfaction.
Seetharama8, in this regard, opined that
“knowledge is the objective of the parent organisation
and, thus, the expressed or established needs of users
play a very crucial role.”

11. OUTSOURCING
One of the new trends at university libraries is to
outsource the various jobs. Though, the downfall in the
work culture in the government organisations is one of
the major reasons to opt outsourcing, yet slowly and
gradually, this is becoming identifiable feature of
university libraries, especially for the jobs such as
cataloguing and classification, retro-conversion,
stocktaking, compilation of bibliographies, automation of
the library, etc.

12. FLEXI-WORKFORCE
Another trend which is being witnessed is the
adoption of the philosophy of flexi-workforce. FlexiDESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

workforce means employing temporary or part-time
professionals and semi-professional staff to save on
fringe benefits and employment costs. Instead of
employing the staff on regular basis, under such a
system, the employees are employed as and when
needed and that to on day-to-day basis.

13. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Knowledge management (KM) is one of the hottest
topics of debate amongst librarians. Though, there is a
dispute on the nature of job involved in the KM when
performed in a library environment in comparison to the
environment of the industrial houses. However,
university libraries have also started to take care of
certain issues related to specialised areas of
knowledge. KM is understood to be the efforts of the
organisations to identify, capture, and retain the tacit
and explicit knowledge. In other words, management of
intellectual capital within the organisation, for which, the
parent organisation creates and maintains a database
of expertise about employees, their experiences of
handling the difficult moments and tasks, decisions
taken in the adverse circumstances that resulted into the
best solutions and benefited the organisation, etc. along
with their complete biographical details and their contact
address, etc., so that as and when the organisation
need their services and valuable guidance, they can be
contacted.

14. PARTICIPATIVE MANAGEMENT
Participative management works on the philosophy
of taking every one into confidence to work as a team to
achieve the goals of the organisation in the best
possible way. It is comparatively a new concept and
was first adopted in the United States and then slowly
and gradually attracted the whole world. Now,
participative management is taught almost in every
management school. The basic characteristics of
participative management is to give an equal opportunity
to each one to understand and learn new things and it
does not have scope to induct anything of disputed
nature. It utilises energies in a more personally
responsible manner, to achieve the goals of the
organisation.To perform the above mentioned tasks
effectively, the librarians need to have skills and unique
competencies. Some of the important skills and
competencies needed by the librarians are discribed.

14.1 Technical Skills
University librarians and other senior professionals
working in the libraries should be capable to do the work
by using HTML and other languages. In addition, they
should have the ability to work on OPAC, and emerging
technologies to find quality online resources along with
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

giving training to the users to make use of technological
facilities available in the library.

14.2 Time Management Skills
University librarians need to be good managers to
manage the library more effectively. They, thus, be
adequately trained in management skills, management
philosophy and made capable of implementing
management principles and functions like planning,
organising, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting,
and budgeting.

14.3 Presentation and Communication Skills
University
librarians
must
have
effective
presentation and communication skills. It is found that
many a times, librarians or senior library officers have
to train the junior staff, market the LIS products and
services, handle the anguish of the staff as well as
readers in one context or the other, and convince the
higher authorities for higher allocation of funds and
other facilities for the library, etc. Further, they have to
negotiate with publishers, vendors and customers for
which effective communication skills are needed.

14.4 Evaluation and Assessment Skills
University librarians and senior library officers
need to understand the existing problems and should be
capable to do the evaluative exercises for the
assessment of the work done in the library so that
pitfalls, if any, can be removed and new things for the
betterment of the library services can be done. In fact,
their skills for using SWOT (strength, weakness,
opportunity, and threat) analysis will affect stakeholders.
In addition, they should have good understanding
and knowledge of policies, procedures, issues and
standards so that whenever they are communicating
with the authorities or the stakeholders they are in a
better position to winover their faith. Similarly, good
knowledge of information sources, portals, information
available in public domain, etc., is a boon for their own
stability, value and existence in the organisation. Skills
of marketing and promotion of library services, project
management skills, digital rights management, KM skills,
etc., will make them strong enough to meet the
challenges of the modern librarianship.
Apart from the trends discussed above, the
landmarks of the development of academic libraries in
India can best be seen in the efforts and initiatives
taken by the UGC since its inception. However, worth
mentioning initiatives of the UGC responsible for the
development of college and university libraries in India
are the establishment of INFLIBNET and UGC-INFONET
Digital Library Consortium. Information and Library
163

Network (INFLIBNET) Centre is an autonomous InterUniversity Centre of the UGC. It is a major National
Programme initiated by the UGC in 1991 with its
HeadQuarter
at
Gujarat
University
Campus,
Ahmedabad. Initially started as a project under the
IUCAA, it became an independent Inter-University
Centre in 19669. Its objectives are10:
±

To promote and establish communication facilities
to improve capability in information transfer and
access that provide support to scholarship,
learning, research and academic pursuit through
cooperation and involvement of agencies
concerned.

±

To establish Information and Library Network
(INFLIBNET), a computer communication network
for linking libraries and information centres in
universities, deemed to be universities, colleges,
UGC information centres, institutions of national
importance and R&D institutions, etc. avoiding
duplication of efforts.
INFLIBNET performs following major activities11:

±

Provides grants to universities to automate the
libraries, establish network facilities and create an
information technology environment.

±

Has developed and distributed integrated userfriendly library management software for University
Libraries (SOUL). The latest version of the software
is compatible with the latest technologies and
international standards such as MARC21, and
Unicode and NCIP-2.0 based protocols for
electronic surveillance and control.

±

Indian Catalogue of University Libraries in India
(IndCat) is an online library catalogue of books,
theses and journals available in major university
libraries in India. It provides bibliographic
description, location of the material in all subjects
available in more than 112 university libraries.
Thus, IndCat has over 10 million bibliographical
records of books from more than 113 universities.
In addition, the database of theses, expert
databases, project databases and SEWAKOFFLINE database access facilities are also
extended to the libraries of higher learning
institutions.

±

164

To enhance the skills of university library staff for
implementation of INFLIBNET programme, it
conducts training programme for library staff, onsite training for member library staff, training on
SOUL, holding CALIBER convention every year
and workshops for senior level staff of the
university libraries are conducted.

±

It has brought out a document entitled ‘INFLIBNET
Standards and Guidelines for Data Capturing’
prepared by a taskforce of experts based on
Common Communication Format (CCF).

Another very important and significant landmark in
the history of higher education and development of
libraries in India is the establishment of “UGC-INFONET
Digital Library Consortium” by the UGC on the
concluding day of its Golden Jubilee Celebrations by
His Excellency, the then President of India, Dr A.P.J.
Abdul Kalam at Vigyan Bhawan on 28th December
2003.
UGC-INFONET is an innovative project launched by
UGC to facilitate scholarly e-resources to Indian
academies through joint partnership of UGC,
INFLIBNET, and ERNET. This includes interlinking of
universities and colleges in the country electronically
with a view to achieve maximum efficiency through
Internet-enabled teaching, learning, and governance.
The UGC- Infonet is overlaid on ERNET infrastructure to
provide assured quality of service and optimum
utilisation of bandwidth resources. The network will be
run and managed by ERNET India. The project is
funded by UGC with 100 per cent capital investment and
up to 90 per cent of recurring costs. UGC and ERNET
India have signed the necessary MoU for this purpose.
A joint technical and tariff committee, has been setup to
guide and monitor the design, implementation and
operations of UGC-INFONET. Information for Library
Network (INFLIBNET) an autonomous Inter-University
Centre of UGC, is the nodal agency for coordination
and facilitation of the linkage between ERNET and the
universities. Under this programme, information and
communication technologies (ICTs) and Internet will be
used to transform learning environment from a monodimensional one to a multidimensional one10. This was
created to help and benefit more than 310 universities
and about 14,000 colleges affiliated with these
universities and approximately 10 million students with
the e-journals, and therefore is a boon to higher
education system in many ways12. The UGC-INFONET
digital Library consortium has the following objectives13:
±

To subscribe electronic resources for the members
of the consortium at highly discounted rates of
subscription and with the best terms and conditions.

±

Promote the rational use of funds.

±

Guarantee local storage of the information acquired
for continuous use by present and future users.

±

To impart training to the users, librarians research
scholar and faculty members of the institutions on
the electronic resources with an aim to optimise the
usage of the electronic resources.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

±

To have more interaction amongst the member
libraries.

±

To increase the research productivity of the
institutions in terms of quality and quantity of
publications

±

Strategic alliance with institutions that have common
interests resulting in reduction of information cost
and improved resource sharing.

The futuristic academic libraries in the higher
education system must globalise if they want to add
value to the academic enterprise, was concluded in the
International Conference on Academic Libraries–ICAL
2009. The academic libraries in India and other
developing countries are at least a decade behind their
counterparts in the developed countries. The ICAL
2009, which was specifically called to reposition
academic libraries as the next generation libraries,
recommended ‘globalising academic libraries’ in the
network environment. The new model proposed by the
Conference in essence envisages collaboration between
libraries at all local, state, national, and global levels on
all library dimensions, for instance, performing library
functions of resource building, cataloguing, and backend operations at consortia level and not at client level.
Technologically, the new model envisages integration of
all participating university libraries in open systems
environment for facilitating management of library
operations, functions and services at consortia level,
and building common resources for sharing and
access.
The pre-requisites of the new model include setting
up of a major centralised facility equipped with the
state-of-the-art ICT infrastructure at the consortia level
offering online avenues for managing library functions.
This sort of new set-up would essentially be helping
client libraries relieving them of the hassles and burden
of managing local library management systems as well
as obviating the need to undertaking capital intensive
and time consuming activity of building cataloging
databases at local level. In the context of
recommendation of the National Knowledge Commission
(NKC) to expand the number of universities in India
from 475 to 1500 in the near future, the new model is
considered highly relevant in terms of economy and
performance, in offering low-end investment options in
the ICT infrastructure at client level, in offering
academic community access, not only to local
resources but to resources of all other university
libraries as well, and in addition opening up new
opportunities for libraries to play more effective,
strategic and educational roles to add value to the
academic enterprise.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

15. LIBRARIES IN INDIA IN THE 21ST CENTURY
The NKC was set up by the Government of India on
13th June 2005 with a time-frame of three years. As a
high-level advisory body to the Prime Minister of India,
the NKC has been given a mandate to guide policy and
direct reforms, focusing on certain key areas such as
education, science and technology, agriculture,
industry, e-governance etc. Easy access to knowledge,
creation and preservation of knowledge systems,
dissemination of knowledge and better knowledge
services are core concerns of the Commission14. The
Commission envisaged the future roadmap for the
growth and development of academic libraries by
imbibing core issues such as setting a national
commission on libraries, prepare a national census of
all libraries, revamp LIS education, training and
research facilities, re-assess staffing of libraries, set up
a central library fund, modernise library management,
encourage greater community participation in library
management, promote ICT applications in all libraries,
facilitate donation and maintenance of private
collections, and encourage public private partnerships
in LIS development, etc15. In this context, the ICAL-2009
recognised that the long era of secluded, stand-alone
libraries is now over and also recognised that things
happen differently with togatherness. The future of
academic libraries, therefore, lies in their coming
together with a view to collaborate in managing their
functions, operations, and services from a common
platform, building and sharing common resources, and
exploring and executing future programmes and
activities of common interest. It is from such a common
pool of resources that academic libraries could think
and hope of adding value to the academic enterprise.
The ICAL-2009, therefore, gave a call for
‘globalising academic libraries’ in the network
environment as the academic library vision for 2020.
Given the challenges on how to develop academic
libraries as the next generation libraries and on how to
enable them to cope with imminent expansion planned in
the higher education sector (as per the NKC
recommendation) from 475 to 1500 universities in near
future.
The ICAL-2009 call for globalising academic
libraries is very timely and relevant. The globalised
academic libraries are to be seen as another but
different library model that advocates futuristic library
development based on collaboration between libraries at
local, state, national, and global level and on all
dimensions of academic library activity. The new model
promises to offer several inherent advantages over the
current library model such as strategic, operational, and
economic on the following lines:

165

±

Enabling utmost economy and performance in the
library operations at the client level.

±

Enabling libraries to build common resources at the
consortia level as opposed to current practice of
building resources at client level in the distributed
environment.

±

Enabling libraries to go in for minimal ICT
infrastructure at client level compared to high-end
requirements mandated at present.

±

Enabling access not only to local resources but
also to resources distributed across university
libraries.

±

Enabling professional staff sufficient opportunities
of develop expertise in core library and information
science areas and not be bogged down with the
requirements to necessarily develop high-end
expertise in the ICT.

±

Enabling libraries to play strategic and educational
roles to add value to the academic enterprise.

The ICAL-2009 proposed 11 points for making the
roadmap for globalising academic libraries. These are:
(i)

To ascertain the strengths and weakness of
libraries under the central and state universities in
India in the form of a status report.

(ii) To identify alternate modes of managing traditional
library functions in the global academic library
mode.
(iii) To identify the new dimensions that could be added
to academic library services by exploiting common
pool of resources.
(iv) To identify the strategic and educational roles that
libraries and librarians could play to add value to
academic enterprise and in the knowledge society.
(v) To undertake new initiatives such as building digital
resources of indigenous knowledge of unique
character.
(vi) To formulate ICT plan for systematic development of
futuristic global academic libraries.

(ix) To identify and formulate appropriate policies,
programmes, and systems for ICT integration at
library client level and consortia level.
(x) To identify the priority areas for talent development
and formulating talent development plans for the
purpose.
(xi) To evolve suitable strategies for change
management, library advocacy and marketing
essentially with a view to change the public image
of the academic libraries.

16. CONCLUSION
The study reveals that university libraries are
switching over from print to electronic information
resources and highlights the role of University Librarian
in the changing environment and requirements of
necessary technical skills, time management skills,
presentation and communication skills, and evaluation
and assessment skills. The creation and formation of
networks and consortia, use of digital technology to
provide access to e-journals and databases to meet the
users’ and marketing of LIS products and services
coupled with information consolidation with outsourcing,
flexi-workforce, and re-packaging for resource
generation to effectively meet out the diverse
information needs. In addition, it is also undisputed fact
that the rate of growth of information and knowledge
which is faster than ever before and is still accelerating,
the subscription rates of foreign periodicals, which are
continuously increasing, the continuous increase in the
publishing cost of reading material and the devaluation
of the Rupee are the most important factors influencing,
in one way or the other, the entire university library
system in India and, therefore, necessitated
establishment and development network and networking
systems like INFLIBNET and UGC-INFONET Digital
Library Consortium. The result of such developments in
India’s academic library environment and acceptance to
such a dynamic change in the library environment by
the academic library personnel, the library
professionals of the university libraries are creatively
and comparatively managing the information and
research resources much more efficiently and
effectively.

REFERENCES

(vii) To formulate plans for ensuring quality and
standards in the functioning and performance of
futuristic global academic libraries.

1. Bhatt, R.K. History and development of libraries in
India. Mittal Publications, New Delhi, 1995.

(viii) To encourage international collaboration on all
library fronts for bringing about qualitative change
in the functioning and performance of futuristic
global academic libraries.

2. Indira Gandhi National Open University. Academic
libraries: School, college and university libraries,
Library and Society, IGNOU, New Delhi, 1999. pp.
29-51.

166

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

3. Tikekar, A.C. Towards 21st century academic
libraries and librarianship. Globalising Academic
Libraries: Vision 2020. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Academic Libraries,
5-8 October, University of Delhi, Vol. 1, Mittal
Publications, New Delhi.
4. Singh, S.P. Special Libraries in India: Some
Current Trends. Library Review, 2006, 55(8),
520-30.
5. Oketunji, I. Computer application in libraries. In
Compendium of the 39th National Annual
Conference of the Nigerian Library Association,
Owerri, 2000. pp. 2-4.
6. Alasa, M. & Kalechukwu, I. Internet and academic
library services development in Nigeria. Nigerian
Libraries, 1999, 33(1), 17-29.
7. The Chartered Institute of Marketing. Our definition
of marketing, 2006. http://www.cimhk.org.hk/
(accessed on 12 March 2010).
8. Seetharama, S. Information consolidation and
repackaging framework, methodology and planning,
Ess Ess Publication, New Delhi, 1997.
9. Inflibnet.
http://www.inflibnet.ac.in/UGC-InfoNet/
ugcinfonet.html#5. (accessed on 12 March 2010).
10. Chakravarty, R. & Singh, S. E-resources for Indian
universities: New initiatives. SRELS J. Inf. Manage.
2005, 42(1), 57-58.
11. Bavakutty, M. & Azeez, A. Library consortia in
India: Initiatives and concerns. SRELS J. Inf.
Manage. 2006, 43(2), 177-84.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

12. Inflibnet. http://www.inflibnet.ac.in.
13. Bhatt,
R.K.
Library
consortium:
Effective
collaborative approach towards resource sharing. J.
Lib. Inf. Sci., 2006, 31(1), 69-79.
14. National Knowledge Commission. http://www.
knowledgecommission.gov.in/about/refault.asp.
(accessed on 12 March 2010).
15. National Knowledge Commission. http://www.
knowledgecommission.gov.in/recomm-enddations/
libraries.asp (accessed on 12 March 2010).

About the Author
Dr R.K. Bhatt is Associate Professor and Former
Head, Department of Library and Information Science,
University of Delhi. He is MLIS from Delhi University,
PhD (LIS) and PhD (History) from Agra University.
Prior to his joining the Delhi University in 1998 he was
Assistant Librarian (in Senior Grade) at IIT Delhi. He
has over 90 papers published in national and
international journals. Dr Bhatt has also written five
books. In addition, Dr Bhatt has also worked as Editor
and Associated Editor of the two ILA Conferences.
Presently he is the Editor of Journal of Library and
Information Science a well-reputed biannual nation
journal published from the Department of Library and
Information Science. Dr Bhatt has delivered number of
invited talks in leading institutions like Tata Consultancy
Services and UGC-Academic Staff Colleges. Dr Bhatt is
also the members of many professional bodies and is
actively involved in their professional development.

167

