DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 3, May 2011, pp. 175-178
© 2011, DESIDOC

Usage of Wi-Fi Service among Users’ of the Postgraduate Institute
of Medical Education and Research Library, Chandigarh
Kiran Baidwan*, Adarsh Bala**, Neelima Chadha*, Monika*
*PGIMER,Sector-12, Chandigarh-160 012
**Government Medical College & Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh-160 012

ABSTRACT
In this era of information accessing Internet has become most powerful and fast growing segment in library
services. Keeping in view the users needs, the libraries provide new technology-based services to them. To
know the utilisation of these new facilities/services among the library users, periodic evaluation is a must for
these services. This study is an attempt to analyse the usage of Wi-Fi technology at Dr Tulsi Das Library of
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh by its users. The
parameters included the purpose, and duration of time and preferences to access the Wi-Fi service. This
study also sought users’ opinions regarding its beneficiality and problems faced by them.
Key Words: Wi-Fi, PGIMER, Internet, information access, library services

1. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in networking technology have
changed the way to communicate the information. Every
day new technologies are emerging in networking field
and libraries are adopting these technologies for the
benefits of the users. Information technology has
unfolded the technical capability to produce and
disseminate information. Information communication
technology (ICT) has not only the potential to transmit
information at greater speed and precision but also the
capacity to deal large amount of diversified information.
Medical science is the field where clinical and nonclinical experiences continue to grow very fast. The
explosion of this scientific information has evolved many
more challenges for information providers. Internet has
played a major role in handling and dissemination of
information. Over the past years, Wireless Fidelity (WiFi) has popularised and become the dominant
networking technology. Earlier networking was done
through wiring but now various light and wave emitting
technologies are in use. Wi-Fi is one of such emerging
technologies, with the help of which, communication
between computers can be done without cables.
Wireless Internet access uses radio frequency signals to
exchange information between a computer and the
Internet. Wireless local area networks enable network
users with laptops or devices equipped with wireless
Received
2010 2011, 31(3)
DESIDOC27J.September
Lib. Inf. Technol.,

network interface cards to remain constantly
interconnected while roaming within the range of a base
station. Fixed access points can also be interconnected
with wide area networks, such as the Internet or intracorporate local area networks.

2. REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Few studies have been done in the past on the
planning, implementation, application of Wi-Fi in
libraries. Insight Media Internet limited has conducted the
evaluation and market research of Wi-Fi services in UK
public libraries in 2007 and 2009.1-2 This survey was an
insight about the type and scale of implementation, type
of service, its functionality
and benefits and
considerations of providing Wi-Fi services among one
quarter of UK public libraries already providing such
services, by one quarter of public libraries currently
planning to provide such services, and the remaining half
not currently actively planning Wi-Fi. British Library
(BL), UK3 has conducted a survey to understand
visitors’ needs for wireless (Wi-Fi) connectivity and
found an overwhelming demand for the services3. To
satisfy the users’ demand, BL then launched a Wi-Fi
service on trial base through HP and again conducted
the survey at the end of the trial period and found a high
level of satisfaction with the service due to its ease of use
and excellent performance. Hugh and Margaret4
175
175

conducted an online survey of students and employees
of Manmouth university to gauge the reaction to wireless
laptop lending program and wireless access available in
library. Results showed the more response for wireless
access in library and across campus as well as their
need to log on to network with their own laptops.
Among the Indian papers Kumar, Choudhury and
Shah5 studied the common standards of Wi-Fi
technology, its cost involvement, hotspots in India and
abroad and its applications particularly in library and
information centres and found that readers found Wi-Fi
services are very useful because it facilitated access of
library OPAC and Internet in any corner of library.
Similarly for library staff there is no maintenance of cable
and coordination with other sections like acquisition,
circulation, technical, etc. Dhanasegaran and Kesavan6
studied the issues related to the characteristics and
architecture of Wi-Fi, consideration of various factors
while planning for Wi-Fi, process of its implementation,
applications and benefits of Wi-Fi in libraries.

3. ABOUT PGIMER LIBRARY
The Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, was founded in 1960
as a centre of excellence. The main aim of PGIMER is to
provide high quality patient care; attain self-sufficiency in
postgraduate medical education to meet the country’s
need for highly qualified medical professionals in all
medical and surgical disciplines; provide educational
facilities for the training of personnel in all important
branches of health activity; and undertake basic
community-based research. PGIMER library known as
Dr Tulsi Das Library plays a very significant role in the
research and academic activities of the institute. The
library is well equipped with all latest technology and
provided all modern facility and ICT based services to its
readers. The library is subscribing to many online
databases like Science Direct, Wiley Interscience, MD
Consult, SCOPUS, Karger, and is a member of ERMED
Consortia. The library is using hi-tech technologies like
electronic surveillance and security system (using RFID
tags for security and library operations). All the
computers of the library are connected through Local
Area Network (LAN).
The library is providing many ICT-based service like
e-mail alert, Internet, online reference service, and the
Wi-Fi service to its users. Wireless local area networks
enable the library users while roaming within the range of
router installed in the library. Library uses Broadband
Business Plan 5000 of BSNL with 1 Mbps internet
connection plan for PC’s and Wi-Fi , one lease line for
website, 10 access points for user to search web. Three
routers of Wi-Fi are placed at ground, 1 and 2 floor.
Modem D-link of 1 Kbps for landline Internet connection
176

and for wireless modem is netgear wireless G54 router
WGR 614 is being used for accessing Wi-Fi by unlimited
number of users.

4. OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY
The main objective of the study was to evaluate the
use of Wi-Fi service among the users of PGIMER library
in their research work and studies. The other objectives
were: (i) to study the frequency and general purpose of
users to visit the library, (ii) to study the purpose of using
Wi-Fi service, (iii) to identify the users preferences and
duration of time for accessing Wi-Fi service, (iv) to study
its impact on the users visit to library, and (v) to explore
the benefits and problems faced by the users.

5. METHODOLOGY
The study was conducted through a structured close
questionnaire distributed among the 100 library users
who generally use Wi-Fi facility in library premises.
Library users includes Faculty (Professors, Associate
Professors, Assistant Professors), Senior Residents,
Demonstrators, Junior Residents, Postgraduate Junior
Residents,
PhD
scholars.
Paramedical
staff
(Technicians, Nursing staff, Pharmacists, Operation
Theatre Assistants, etc.), MSc, BSc students of various
streams. But the survey was conducted among the
Senior Residents, Junior Residents, and PhD scholars
only who visited the library frequently. Dully filled
questionnaires were received from all 100 respondents
and the collected data was then analysed.

6. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
6.1 Frequency and Purpose of Users’ visits to
the Library
Analysis of responses showed that though the
readers came to the library in large number but their
frequency to visit the library varied. (Fig. 1). Sixty-four
per cent users visited the library once in a day followed
by 26 per cent who visited 2-3 times in a day, 9 per cent
who visited once in week, and 1 per cent who visited
once in a month only.
Figure 2 shows that 50 per cent of users visited
library to use Wi-Fi facility followed by 25 per cent for
reading , 10 per cent for using Internet, and 5 per cent
each for consultation, issue-return, and for photocopy
and other services.

6.2 Influence of Wi-Fi Facility on Users’ visits
to the Library
Ninety-nine per cent of users were of the opinion
that Wi-Fi facility in library has influenced their visit to the
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

% of respondents

Once in a day

2-3 times in a day Once in a week

Once in a month

Frequency of visits

% of responses

Figure 1. Frequency of users visits to the library.

Issue & return R e a d i n g Consultation

Wi-Fi

Photocopy
& other

Internet on
library desktop

Purpose
Figure 2. Purpose of users’ visits.

connection at hostel. 10 per cent respondents preferred
from their respective departments. (Fig. 3)

% of responses

library. Only 1 per cent of users were of the opinion that
there was no effect on their visit (Table 1). Ninety-nine
per cent of the respondents are of the opinion that they
have started visiting the library more frequently after WiFi facility was started.
Table 1. Influence of Wi-Fi facility on users’ visits
Users’ view

Number of responses
Yes

No

Influence on the user’s Visit

99

1

Change of frequency of
their visit

90

10

6.3 Users’ Preference to access Wi-Fi
Analyses of users’ preferences to access Internet
either from library through Wi-Fi facility or from Hostel or
Department showed that 70 per cent of respondents
preferred to access the Internet through Wi-Fi facility
from the library premises as against 20 per cent
respondents who prefer to use their own Internet
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

80
 
70
60
50
40
30
20
 
10
0

Series1

Library

 

Hostel

Department

Preferred place

Figure 3. Preferred place for users to access Wi-fi.

6.4 Duration and Frequency of Use of Wi-Fi
Among Users
Analysis of responses regarding frequency of use of
Wi-Fi facility among users witnessed that 70 per cent of
177

respondents made use of this service daily as compared
to 16 per cent and 14 per cent of users who avail this
service monthly and weekly, respectively (Table 2).
Considering the time spent by users to access this
facility, 44 per cent of respondents spent 1-2 h followed
by 22 per cent of respondents who spent 3-4 h and 10
per cent spent 5-6 h. Only 24 per cent of respondents
accessed this facility whenever they got time.

Table 3. Wi-Fi’s beneficiality and type of problems in its accessing

Table 2. Time spent by users to access Wi-Fi

speed, 35 per cent respondents faced the problem of
frequent disconnectivity and 15 per cent faced the
problem of limited connectivity.

Frequency
of use

Number of
responses

Duration of
time spent

Number of
responses

Daily

70

1-2 h

44

Weekly

14

3-4 h

22

Monthly

16

5-6 h

10

Whenever
get time

24

 
6.5 Purpose of Using Wi-Fi Among Users
Figure 4 shows that the main purpose among 75 per
cent of respondents was to avail this facility for searching
articles/research papers through online databases. Use
of this facility for checking e-mail/searching jobs was
common for only 20 per cent of respondents. For
remaining 5 per cent the purpose was to search other
information.

Is Wi-Fi
beneficial?

Number of
responses

Type of
problems faced

Number of
responses

Yes

100

Limited
connectivity

15

No

0

Frequent
disconnectivity

35

Fine

0

Slow speed

50

7. CONCLUSION
With the start of Wi-Fi service in Dr Tuulsi Das
Library, PGIMER, the frequency of users visiting the
library has increased. The service has undoubtedly a
beneficial impact on the research work and study of
faculty, research scholars, and students. They have
easy, quick, and timely access to research material.
Though the service has benefited many but still has some
limitations like disconnection, limited access, and slow
speed. So there is an immediate need to improve the
connectivity and increase the number of desktop
terminals.

REFERENCES

75

1. A review and evaluation of Wi-Fi services in UK
public libraries, 2007. http://www.insight-media.co.
uk/wifisurvey/Wi-Fi Services in UK Public Libraries
July 2007.
2. Wi-Fi in libraries survey, 2009. http://www.insightmedia.co.uk/index.php?id=75.

20
5

3. The British Library Wi-Fi service leads the way, 2004.
http://h20338.www2.hp.com/PublicSector/down
loads/British-Library-LR.

6.6 Benefits and Problems of Wi-Fi

4. Hugh, A. & Holden, M.D. Taking pro-action: A survey
of potential users before the availability of wireless
access and the implementation of a wireless
notebook computer lending program in an academic
library. Lib.Hi-Tech., 2005, 23(4), 561-75.

Analysing the responses regarding benefits of this
facility, it was showed that all the respondents were of the
opinion that the provision of Wi-Fi facility has been
benefitted their research work (Table 3).

5. Kumar, S.; Choudhury, S. & Shah, L. Wi-Fi and
hotspots: Emerging WLAN technology in Indian
context. In 2nd International CALIBER 2004, 11-13
February 2004, New Delhi.

Responses to the problems faced by the users in
accessing this facility showed that, 50 per cent of the
respondents were of the opinion that the facility has slow

6. Dhanasegaran, G. & Kesavan G.D. Wi-Fi
applications in libraries. In 4th International CALIBER
2006, 2-4 February 2006, Gulbarga.

Searching articles

Checking e-mail

Others

Figure 4. Purpose to access Wi-fi.

178

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

