DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 31, No. 3, May 2011, pp. 179-188
© 2011, DESIDOC

Corporate e-Learning: Possibilities, Promises, and Realities
Phuldeep Kumar and Umesh Gulla*
DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054; E-mail: phuldeep@gmail.com
* TERI, Delhi-110 003; E-mail:umesh.gulla@teri.res.in

ABSTRACT
Worldwide corporates are adopting novel and cost-effective ways to update knowledge and skills of their
workforce. Advances in information technology have opened doors for collecting, storing, and disseminating
information in a big way. This paper presents e-learning as adopted by the corporates to boost their employee
training efforts. Concept of corporate e-learning, stimulators for adoption, various benefits and drawbacks,
present state, and e-learning experiences have been enumerated.
Keywords: e-learning, corporate e-learning, online training, computer-based training, self-learning

1. INTRODUCTION
Plato, a Greek philosopher professed that everything
we know comes from within, i.e., more we explore our
soul, more learned we become; thus, learning is simply a
process of inner reflection to uncover that already exists
within us. Aristotle, a disciple of Plato, however was of the
opinion that knowledge is not inborn but can be acquired
through experience. This is an early example of the
classic debate of nativism versus empiricism or nature
versus nurture. The nativist (nature) perspective
assumes that a person’s characteristics are largely
inborn, while the empiricist (nurture) perspective
assumes that a person’s characteristics are mostly
learned1. With the passage of time and evolution of
society, the view of Aristotle could only survive.
Learning may be defined as process of acquiring
modifications in the existing knowledge skills, habits, or
tendencies through experience, practice or exercise.
Learning can be imparted via active or passive medium.
In active learning, the instructor and the learner are in
direct contact and this has been the ritual since the start
of learning process for the mankind. In a passive
medium, instructor and the learner are not in direct
contact, e.g., learning from books.The technological
advances in recent half a century have strengthen the
means of passive learning. This is primarily due to newlyacquired technological capabilities of data warehousing
and tools to disseminate information effectively using
electronic means. Such advances have paved the way
Received
2010 2011, 31(3)
DESIDOC2J.November
Lib. Inf. Technol.,

for an altogether newer way of learning, the ‘e-learning’.
This from of learning is in process of adaptation at the
universities,
governments,
organisations,
and
corporates. The technological developments in this field
and growing realisation of the value it offers across the
society is acting as a catalyst in speedy adoption of elearning across all the possible spectra. Changes on a
global scale are resulting in “a mass higher education
system that is reassessing its learning and teaching
practices and exploiting the use of communication and
information technologies” 2.
For companies to remain competitive in an
increasingly fast-paced knowledge-driven economy,
corporate, worker must be regularly updated about new
developments and be provided with rapid access to new
information. This new form of learning offers
opportunities for the corporates to train their manpower
in required fields related to their work. It is of paramount
importance for the corporate to provide the right blend of
knowledge source at the right time that will keep their
manpower resource the most competitive possible.
Attaining this advantage in a knowledge-based economy
is a challenge; e-learning offers ways and means to meet
this challenge.

2. E-LEARNING
E-learning is dispensation of education or training
using modern information communication tools
(computer, CD-ROM, DVD, Floppy, hard disk, pen drive,
179
179

etc.) and networking technologies (Intranet, Internet,
LAN, WAN, MAN, etc.). This definition addresses:

network used determines the speed of delivery of the
data from the provider to the user.

The What: Educational or training matter;

The Where: On networked computers and stand-alone
computers if using memory devices, viz., CD, floppy, pen
drive, etc.;

Figure 1 presents the formal e-learning concept.
When experiences/information are shared through
education/training, they leads to learning. When
information is exploited technologically it leads to
organised database. When this organised database is
exploited for leaning with intervention of suitable software
it leads to e-learning.

The How: Content delivered in digital form using
appropriate network or other digital delivery methods;

3. CORPORATE E-LEARNING

The When: On demand basis, 24x7x365;

The Why: To make available training or study material for
flexible learning 3.
E-learning essentially depend upon, and shaped by
its enabling technologies; the computer hardware, the
software employed, and the network used. The better is
computer hardware, the more features e-learning system
can display. The software employed has influence on the
ease of accessibility of the provided information. The

Experience /
Information

Technological advances in information and
communication technologies have led to emergence of
newer products and possible services with their use.
Entrepreneurs have mushroomed in this field giving rise
to many corporates and service providers (Fig. 2).
Almost every possible advantage is exploited and
products and services are marketed aggressively.
Technological innovations have expanded the field from
its origins in stand-alone computer-based content to

Education /
Training

Information 

Learning 

Technology 

Organised
Data Base

Browsing
Software

e‐learning 

Figure 1. E-learning concept.
180

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

Experience Sharing,
Research Output 

Subscribed
Information

Presentations,
Technical Reports,
White Papers

Corporate
Knowledge Base 

Centralised Server

Through Internet
Local Server

Through Interanet
Individual Terminals

Employee/Learner

Figure 2. Corporate e-learning concept.

encompass a range of management, delivery, and
collaborations technologies. The by-products of these
innovations are sophisticated e-learning systems. These
systems can be employed by the corporates keen on
developing skills of their human capital.The use of
modern communication tools and networking
technologies, to impart training and develop skills of the
workforce of a corporate, may be termed as corporate elearning. This is e-learning as envisaged in the
corporates. Corporates are using e-learning as means of
communicating, training, and enhancing employee value
across the organisations and countries. Corporate elearning concept is depicted in Fig. 2. The corporate
knowledge base contains all the possible tacit knowledge
the corporate possess. This is very important in present
context, when there seems to be agreement by and large
that “Knowledge is Power”.
Jeske and Grant4 identified four broad stages to an
e-learning
implementation:
planning,
building,
integrating, and improving. Corporate e-learning systems
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

are dynamic in nature. These need continuous
upgradation both for the data hosted and hardware/
software employed. The dynamic nature of e-learning
system is represented in Fig. 3.
At the conception stage corporates make their need
analysis. At the specification stage, these needs are
quantified. During the operations, the concept is put to
practice, and employee’s feedback is also solicited,
based on which new modifications and corrections are
conceptualised. This cyclic iteration goes round during
the entire life-cycle of corporate e-learning system and is
a continuous process. The contemporary corporate elearning systems are integration of e-content and emanagement, where learning styles and preferences are
combined with varying media and delivery systems to
create the most compelling experience. There appear to
be consistent stimulators for the implementation of elearning, regardless the size of the corporate. These are
environmental stimulators, technological stimulators, and
organisational stimulators.
181

Conception

Operation

Corporate e-learning System

Specification

Implementation 

Figure 3. Dynamic nature of corporate e-Learning.

3.1 Environmental Stimulators
The need to comply with increasing array of
government policies and procedures requires the ability
and proof that staff has been trained to the level required
to meet compliance and remain in business5. The
corporates across the world are increasingly
implementing various technologies of material
management, human resource management, enterprise
resource planning software, and learning management
softwares to enhance their competitiveness. This race of
achieving economies of scale is also one of the reasons
that no corporate can afford to lag behind in this area.
The skills gap and the demographic changes heighten
the need for new learning models, where flexible access
to life-long learning is highly desired6. Also with
mushrooming of many service providers in the field of
corporate e-learning, there is an irresistible vendor push.

3.2 Technological Stimulators
Along with the emergence of Internet, many reliable
communication tools, softwares, and services have come
up, which support training, learning, and collaborative
work7. Such tools, softwares, and services provide ample
opportunities for strengthening online training and
learning strategies and activities8. The network
technologies are maturing, giving rise to the enhanced
connectivity capability, which has proved to be most
cost-effective means of information sharing for heavy
loads of information. The prices of both hardware and
software employed in learning management systems are
showing downward trend, both due to increase in
182

demand and increase in number of service providers.
The multimedia capabilities of a personal computer is
also increasing that too coupled with downward trend in
cost of sophisticated hardware employed in it. Also the
use of technology makes the task easier to perform.The
use of technology offers one to all communication
channels, which would have been impossible otherwise,
thus offering corporate employees access to corporate
knowledge reservoir. The quality of training material
catered electronically is also consistently improving both
due to better pedagogical practices and technological
capabilities of computers. This is reaching levels which is
giving serious competition to even face-to-face training.

3.3 Organisational Simulators
In this new age economy, presence of information
systems in the organisations is a rule rather than an
exception. The newer entrants in the organisations are
well versed with modern information communication
tools. Computers are in abundance in the organisations,
so it is natural to have an urge to be more productive with
the available resources.
As cheap networking technology is available, it
makes sense to connect the available computers, which
opens gate for corporate e-learning. The awareness
among employees is ever increasing about potential
information technology applications and the leadership is
ever keen on tapping this. Information technology is
finding place speedily in the business strategy itself.
There is growing realisation across the management that
e-learning offers better return on investment.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

Organisations are also realising that holding
seminars, workshops or conferences detract employees
from their work and result of such practices is at best
weak. Corporate e-learning offers solutions to such
difficulties in providing effective, low cost, immediate,
and consistent training. Organisations, being under
pressure to train their employees in newer technological
developments and to reduce the time lag between
conception and delivery of the final product, find elearning as the only way out.

provided most cost-effectively through a hosted option in
which you pay for actual usage. The corporate may
enter in agreement with some IT training institute to
subscribe to its online courses. The training institute
would provide login id’s for the course, the employee
could access the course through the website of the
training institute.

Their collaborative projects, in which collaborations
are scattered at different centres of the corporate,
corporate e-learning does provide means of sharing the
progress with peers so that co-workers could be saved
from the burden of reinventing the wheel.

Inability to deliver large volumes of multimedia data
through the Internet, where the learning content is
multimedia rich, has made CD-ROMs very popular
enables effective access. The DVD running on a
particular system could be shared on the LAN so that
other employees over the LAN could also benefit from it.
Organisation can use this strategy effectively to deliver
simulation learning, i.e., engaging, which meet the needs
of the learners and the organisation.

4. MODES OF DELIVERY
There can be various possible models of delivering
e-learning to the employees. An organisation may
choose an appropriate model to suit its own
circumstances. Each organisation must assess its own
needs to develop a unique model that may be based on
what has been shown to work effectively for others9.
Corporates generally go for one or more of the following
modes of delivery depending upon their requirements
and capabilities.

4.1 Off-the-Shelf Courses
The courses are made available in CD’s and DVD’s.
The employee interested in any particular course could
ask for its CD or DVD and play it on it’s terminal to learn
from it. Recently many e-books have been provided for
this where the learner has the freedom to navigate
through the books according to his wishes. These also
support multimedia content so that learner may have
much richer experience.

4.2 Intranet

4.4 Using DVD-ROM through a Local Area
Network

4.5 Interactive Satellite Broadcasting
Failure to provide access to the Internet to all
employees and bandwidth issues have forced some
organisations to use interactive satellite broadcasting.
One such model includes the installation of a satellite
receiver at each remote location, together with a training
room containing a television to receive broadcasts and
interactive touch pads to communicate with the trainer.
Training sessions are broadcast at scheduled times from
a central location and have proved to be an effective way
of providing consistent, just-in-time training to multiple
worksites across the globe.
An example of this is FORDSTAR, which is ‘an
instructor led satellite based system for training staff
employed by Ford dealers’10.

4.6 Enterprise-wide Integrated Online
Learning

Some organisations are using online content
created in webpages and placed on company’s Intranet.
These are very primitive sort of e-learning mechanism. In
this, simple webpages are created with hyperlinks to the
pdf or doc files, the user may just click on the page and is
directed to the source material. This is very cost-effective
and simple but is monotonous and unable to satisfy
learner’s curiosity about any unknown fact detailed in the
matter.

Some of the larger organisations have implemented
extensive online e-learning programs that are integrated
with the overall human resource and performance
management systems of the organisations, to provide an
integrated system for tracking and managing all training
across the organisation. Such systems are in place in
organisations with many centres across distant locations.

4.3 Online courses

Online seminars in which participants from various
places connect through Internet or Intranet which
deliberate upon a topics of mutual interest are called
webinars. Such webinars are increasingly becoming
popular among tech savvy employees.

Many organisations choose online courses for IT
training as there is general agreement that this does not
need to be customised for an organisation and can be
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

4.7 Webinars

183

5. BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF ELEARNING
Major corporations have implemented e-learning
widely. Corporates are using e-learning to address the
training challenges of a scattered workforce and to
improve coordination among internal and outside
collaborators in complex business processes and
projects. E-learning do offer some advantages and
disadvantages, both to the corporate and the
employees9,11-16.

±

5.2 Benefits to the Employees
Particular benefits of e-learning to the employees of
the corporates include:
±

On-demand availability enables employees to
complete training conveniently at off-hours or from
home. Unlike traditional classroom training, which is
sometimes scheduled at a time inconvenient to the
learner, in a location requiring travel, e-learning
offers the learner more flexibility with respect to time
and place.

±

Self-pacing for slow or quick learners reduces
stress and increases satisfaction. In most learning
environments, the speed with which individuals can
progress through instruction varies by factors of
three to seven17. Since e-learners are able to
proceed through courses at their own pace, they are
apt to learn the material more thoroughly or less
likely to become bored.

±

Interactivity engages users, pushing them rather
than pulling them through training. The interactivity
typical of e-learning tends to captivate the learner. In
the traditional classroom environment, a student
asks about 1 questions per hour 18. Studies show
that students in e-learning environments can interact
with courseware via question and answer up to 120
times per hour15.

±

Better comprehension according to the American Society
for Trainers and Development, “numerous studies have
shown that workers learn faster with multimedia content;
they more accurately recall what they learned over a
longer period of time; and they are better able to transfer
what they learned to actual performance”14.

±

Confidence that refresher or quick reference
materials are available reduces burden of
responsibility of mastery.

±

Conciseness allows a lot of information provided in
digital form, which would otherwise be difficult.

5.1 Benefits of e-Learning to the Corporate
Some of the most outstanding benefits to corporates are:
±

Reduced overall cost: It is the single most influential
factor in adopting e-learning. The elimination of
costs associated with instructor’s salaries, meeting
room rentals, and student travel, lodging, and meals
are directly quantifiable. The reduction of time spent
away from the job by employees may be the most
positive offshoot. A study across industries found
that corporations saved 50 per cent to 70 per cent of
their overall training cost by replacing traditional
training with online delivery (Training Magazine,
2000). The cost of a Cisco Systems instructor-led
course is $1,200-$1,800, compared to only $120
over the web16.

±

Learning times reduced: An average of 40 to 60 per
cent, as found by Brandon Hall12.

±

Increased retention and application to the job
averages an increase of 25 per cent over traditional
methods, according to an independent study by J.D.
Fletcher13. Studies have indicated that retention of
certain subject matter may be up to 250 per cent
greater with e-learning than with the classroombased model16.

±

±

±

184

Consistent delivery of content is possible.
Traditional classroom training does not always
guarantee that the same information or quality of
instruction is provided to all students.
Expert knowledge is communicated, but more
importantly captured, with good e-learning and
knowledge management systems.
Faster Roll-Out due to the ubiquity of the Internet
and scalability of servers, e-learning can be
delivered immediately to thousands of learners
worldwide. Training that used to take six to nine
months will be compressed to just two to three
weeks, assuring faster time-to-market with products,
and greater productivity.

Better visibility through Internet allows corporations
to disseminate information quickly and costeffectively, thus ensuring that customers, suppliers
and partners will be equipped with the most up-todate information16.

5.3 Shortcomings for the Corporates
E-learning have the following limitations:
±

Up-front investment required of an e-learning
solution is larger due to development costs. Budgets
and cash flows will need to be negotiated.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

±

Technology issues that play a factor include
whether the existing technology infrastructure can
accomplish the training goals, whether additional
tech expenditures can be justified, and whether
compatibility of all software and hardware can be
achieved.

±

Inappropriate content, for e-learning may exist
according to some experts, though are limited in
number may not be suitable for all types of training.

±

Cultural acceptance is an issue in organisations
where employee demographics and psychographics
may pre-dispose them against using computers at
all, let alone for e-learning.

5.4 Disadvantages to the Employees
The ways in which e-learning may not excel over
other trainings include:
±

Technology issues of the employees are most
commonly technophobia and unavailability of
required technologies.

±

Portability of training has become strength of elearning with the proliferation of network linking
points, notebook computers, PDAs, and mobile

phones, but still does not rival that of printed
workbooks or reference material.
±

Reduced social and cultural interaction can be a
drawback. The impersonality, suppression of
communication mechanisms such as body
language, and elimination of peer-to-peer learning
that are part of this potential disadvantage are
lessening with advances in communications
technologies.

6. IMPLEMENTATION OF CORPORATE ELEARNING SYSTEM
The key requirements of e-learning system are
capturing, converting, and delivering useful, current, and
dynamic content, in the face of constantly changing
learner requirements. Multidimensional inputs from all
stakeholders are required for its realisation.
The corporate, based on its assessment, may
decide to implement e-learning system in-house, if all
necessary infrastructure and trained manpower is
available or can be recruited. The other way to go is to
outsource it. Both outsourcing and insourcing have their
own advantages and disadvantages. Few of the
characteristics of both are listed in the Table 1.

Table 1. Comparison of insourced and outsourced e-learning systems
Cha rac te ristic

Insourc ed

Outsource d

M anag em ent

Inte rn al delegation of res po nsibilitie s
to v ario us st akeholders

Co ntrac tua l arrang em ent, m ana gem ent
ta sk lim ited to rep ortin g th e
m alf unc tions to s erv ice p ro viders .

S ec urity

As interna lly con trolled, t herefo re , no
ris k o f da ta be in g st ole n.

Lo t of co mprom ise o n in forma tio n
sec urit y is to be ma de as it is a vailable
to se rv ice prov ide r.

Ca pability

Lim it ed to the sk ill of th e ma npowe r
ava ilable

Gen erally bett er, as the se rv ice
prov iders are s pec ialised in th is .

Co nten t

Ve ry releva nt b ut m ay su ffer du e to
poor rep re se ntat ion .

B ett er as they ex pertise in ped ago gy,
ins truc tio nal des ign, a nd learning
m ana gem ent s y ste ms.

S oft ware

Hav e to ac quire a s oftware or
dev elop in-hou se .

Is prov ided, capab le o f informa tio n
storag e an d retrie va l. Ge nerally
cus tom ised t o the c lient n eeds a nd
de sires , ad ded f eatu re s a va ilable.

S taff

Need s to be trained o r hire exp ert s.

S ervic e prov iders have e xpe rtis e.

Im plem entat ion

Ea sier as us ers and im plem enters
int erac t frequ ently

A prior nee d an alys is is requ ired , whic h
m ay be m ore d iffic ult for service
prov iders.

Fee dba ck

More c om mu nic ation
ch anne ls , s o b etter
feed bac k .

Le ss inte rac tion

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

185

7. PRESENT SITUATION
Nowadays, corporate learning and training have
ascended to a position of strategy in the context of
responding to the shift in the worldwide economies from
industrial age to knowledge age. New universities are
emerging within the confines of corporates called
‘corporate universities’. These cater to the information
and knowledge requirements of the corporate
employees, where the corporate employees are both the
contributors and beneficiaries. As we move forward,
there is growing realisation that for any corporate to
flourish or for that matter even to retain its customers, it
has to acquire, deliver and manage knowledge speedily
and at the lowest possible cost. With two-thirds of
corporate training budgets comprised of travel expenses
alone, managers are turning to e-learning to reduce
costs and increase the scope and potential of their
training programmes.
The global e-learning industry comprises of more
than 5000 players offering varied services, there is no
clear leader in e-learning industry at present. All these elearning service providers could be broadly categorised
as content, technology, and services providers. There
are many companies which provide intersection of these
services and some may provide all solutions. Content
providers make available custom courses according to
the demand placed and also develop courses specific to
some upcoming subject or skill and market it to the
corporates. Certain e-learning vendors license content
from large Brand holders among academic institutions or
professional associations and develop libraries of online
classes targeting the B2B, B2C, and post-secondary
education markets.
Technology vendors provide consultancy about
hardware, software, and network requirements. They
may be roped in for complete infrastructure installation
also. These basically provide all the necessary tools for
creation, delivery, and management of e-learning
system. Service providers offer a variety of learningrelated services, viz., portals, learning management
systems, and virtual reality systems.
Portals provide access to multiple sources by
aggregating, hosting, and distributing content. Learning
management systems provide a platform to easily upload
the courses and easy navigation through these. Their
could be value additions such as offering assessment
and testing services, certification, online tutoring and
mentoring, and Internet-based collaboration services.

8. AN E-LEARNING EXPERIENCE
Schofield 20 found that three of the companies (Ford,
ANZ, Qantas), viewed e-learning as essential in
186

implementing a corporate strategy to deal with the
competitive pressures of global environment. Almost all
the top global corporates with centres in different parts of
the globe have implemented e-learning systems in one
form or the other. Here, the experience of an Indian
multinational company, Infosys is given for illustration.
Infosys has a global footprint with offices in 18 countries
and development centers in India, China, Australia, UK,
Canada, and Japan. Infosys has over 58,000 employees
covering 57 nationalities. In the company, individual and
team training needs are identified based on inputs from
business goals, departmental action plans, performance
appraisals, role-based competency, client satisfaction
survey, 360o feedback. Project level training is imparted
on specific technology needs and a part of the project
effort goes into on-the-job training on technology/
process areas. To provide best in class services for its
customer Infosys has to constantly focus on its
workforce talent development using “Technology
Competency Centre” and has developed an exceptional
hybrid model (traditional/e-learning) to train the fresh
hired graduates in a different environment and train other
workforce on an ongoing basis, all using state-of-the-art
infrastructure and world-class technology solutions. In its
pursuit to build a world-class training facility, Infosys
decided to consolidate its learning activities in Mysore
and started the Global Education Centre.
The
14.5-week
fully-residential
foundation
programme consists of generic and stream-specific
trainings in different technology areas, along with soft
skills and leadership programmes out of which many are
executed or supported on Learning Management System
popularly
called
in-house
“Technology-Assisted
Learning” platforms. Be it technical training, quality
process training, personal effective managerial
programmes or behavioural programmes, “TechnologyAssisted Learning” e-learning model supports all and
allows to match the required scale. Various stakeholders
can create the e-learning contents rapidly based on the
internal published guideline for quick and easy
deployment of the same on Infosys LMS to provide easy
accessibility for geographically distributed people 21.

9. CONCLUSION
In the knowledge-based economy, there seems to be
widespread consensus that corporates need to devise
new mechanisms to impart newer skills to their
employees. Corporates in their endeavour to be
competitive are fostering concept of lifelong learning
among their employees. e-learning offers numerous
possibilities for leveraging knowledge and education
resources in the context of lifelong learning22. The
corporates are trying to improve the quality and abilities
of their own employees through e-learning systems.
When an organisation decides to implement e-learning, it
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

is typically the result of a need for employee training,
professional development, organisational knowledge
management, or customer education23-25. As the
competition among the corporates intensifies, the
corporate e-learning may move towards necessity rather
than desirability.
The main obstacles to e-learning, such as quality
content availability, interoperability, quality navigation
through content, bandwidth, and service integration are
currently being addressed and should not impediments in
near future. At present e-learning market is full of
vendor’s providing ever improving e-learning experience.
Corporates must see that the e-learning system they
deploy is enterprise-wide and scalable according to
changing needs, it should be cost-effective to install,
update and revise, it should have some centralised
tracking feature to see the actual use and evaluate ROI
and it should be marketable among the employees.
Corporates must strive to take their e-learning systems
towards a comprehensive collaborative systems with
communication channels open to all sections of the
corporate to realise the best possible benefits from it.

REFERENCES
1. Powell, R.A.; Symbaluk, D.G. & MacDonald, S.E.
Introduction to learning and behaviour. Belmont,
Wadsworth, CA, 2002.
2. Maier, P. & Warren, A. Integrating technology in
learning and teaching: A practical guide for
educators. Kogan page, London, 2000.
3. Sheoran, P.; Gulla, U. & Singh, M. Corporate elearning: An Emerging Paradigm. In Professional
Education in Knowledge Economy. Excel India,
2008. pp 109-121.

8. Palloff, R.M. & Pratt, K. Lessons from the
cyberspace classroom: The realities of online
teaching. In San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Programs, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Higher and
Adult Education Series, 2001.
9. Benninck, R. Implementing e-learning from the
corporate perspective. 2004. http://flexiblelearning.
net.au/ (accessed on 15 June 2008).
10. Schofield, K. On-line learning: Case studies of the
corporate experience. OVAL Research Working
Paper 02-01, University of Technology, Sydney,
2002.
11. Kruse, K. The benefits and drawbacks of e-learning.
2002. http://e-learningguru.com.
12. Brandon, H. Web-based training cookbook. 1997.
108 p.
13. Fletcher, J.D. Multi. Rev., Spring,1991, 33-42.
14. A vision of e-learning for America’s workforce.
American Society for Trainers and Development
(ASTD). 2000, www.astd.org, (accessed on 16 July
2008).
15. Isodynamic, E-Learning. 2001. available at http://
www.isodynamic.com (accessed on 14 May 2005).
16. Moe, M.T. & Blodget, H. Corporate e-learning–
feeding hungry minds In The knowledge web. Merrill
Lynch & Co, 2000.
17. Gettinger, M.
for learning,
Distributed
Psychologist,

Individual differences in time needed
SCORM, Version 1.1. Advanced
Learning
Initiative.
Educational
1984, 19, 15-29.

4. Jeske, M. & Grant, R. Corporate e-learning:
Identifying and studying key management issues,
edited by Hamilton, Ont, 2003, In Proceedings of the
4th Annual Congress on Management of E-Business,
Milena Head.

18. Graesser, A. & Person, N. Question asking during
tutoring, SCORM, Version 1.1, Advanced Distributed
Learning Initiative. Am. Edu. Res. J., 1994, 31, 10437.

5. Hartel. C. & Tilton P. Australia and online learning–
lessons on strategic implementation and effective
learning, Australian Flexible Learning Framework,
2002. http://nw2002.flexiblelearning.net.au

19. Kaliski, J.; Kalinowski, J.; Schumann, P.; Scott, T. &
Shin, D. Competition in the eLearning Industry: A
Case Study. J. Business Case Stud., 2008, 4(2),
105-21.

6. Urdan, T. A. & Weggen, C.C. Corporate e-Learning:
Exploring a new frontier. WR Hambrecht & Co, 2000.

20. Schofield, K. Think strategy: Corporate e-learning in
four companies. In Online learning: Research
readings, edited by H Guthrie, NCVER, Adelaide, 2003.

7. Klobas, J. & Renzi, R. Selecting software and
services for web-based teaching and learning, edited
by A. Aggarwal. In Web-based learning and teaching
technologies: Opportunities and Challenges. IDEA
Group Publishing, London, 2000. pp.43–59.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

21. Chari, S. & Tiwari, A.R. Rapid and compliant elearning content development for easy deployment in
corporate and academia. Digital Learning, 2007,
3(12), 30-33.
187

22. Maehl, W.H. Lifelong learning at its best: Innovative
practices in adult credit programs. Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco, 2000.
23. Gilbert, S. & Jones, S. E-learning is e-nourmous:
Training over the Internet has become the fastest
growing workplace performance improvement tool
and utilities are using it in several ways. Electric
Perspective, 2001, 26(3), 66-82.
24. Gomolski, B. Train your customers, InfoWorld,
2001, 23(37), 10-11.
25. KnowledgePlanet. Corporate press release, 2001.
http://knowledgeplanet.com/corporate_new/press/
press_2002_07_16.html
About the Authors
Mr Phuldeep Kumar is working as Scientist in Defence
Research & Development Organisation (DRDO). He

188

obtained BE (H) in Electronics and Communication
Engineering and BJMC in Journalism and Mass
Communication from Maharishi Dayanand University,
Rohtak in 2002 and 2004, respectively and MMC in Mass
Communication from Guru Jambheshwar University,
Hisar in 2005. He is Associate Editor of DRDO
Samachar since 2005. He has edited more than twenty
Books, Manuals, Policy Documents, Records, etc. and is
expert in science communication and digital publishing.
He has presented papers in three national and one
international conference.
Dr Umesh Gulla is Associate Professor with Tata Energy
Research Institute University, New Delhi. He has
published papers in reputed national and international
journals/conference proceedings. His research interests
are: Information systems outsourcing, information
systems management, e-commerce/e-business, egovernance, e-learning, enterprise applications.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2011, 31(3)

