OCCUPATIONAL VULNERABILITY: A STUDY OF NOVICE SCHOOL LIBRARIANS

Julie Marie Frye

Submitted to the faculty of the University Graduate School
in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree
Doctor of Philosophy
in the School of Education, Indiana University
July 2014

UMI Number: 3631273

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3631273
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  

Accepted by the Graduate Faculty, Indiana University, in partial fulfillment of the requirement
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.

Doctoral Committee

_____________________________________
David Flinders, Ph.D.

_____________________________________
Barbara Dennis, Ph.D.

_____________________________________
Terrence C. Mason, Ph.D.

_____________________________________
Lara Lackey, Ph.D.

_____________________________________
Carol Tilley, Ph.D.

August 13, 2013
ii

	  

© 2014
Julie Marie Frye
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

iii

	  

This work is lovingly dedicated to my two grandfathers: Kenneth Edwin Taylor and Robert Grover Frye.
Grandpa Taylor, I am grateful that you introduced me to your favorite Book and showed me how to
expect and attempt great things. Your zeal for life, your passion to serve others, and your wise words
continue to inspire me. Grandpa Frye, you kept me focused on what was important during this
process…and in life.

iv

	  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to express my sincere gratitude to those who have talked with me about my research, read
various drafts of it, and provided valuable feedback throughout this process: Vaughn Nuest, Dr.
Flinders, Dr. Mason, Dr. Dennis, Dr. Tilley, Darcy Cross Wiley, David Sabol, Joy Elizabeth Taylor,
Carolyn A. Weber, Dr. Goodman, “Izzie,” Kylea Asher, Tony Stamatoplos, Dr. Lackey, and Robert B.
Frye. Eric McAfee provided extensive feedback that significantly improved the final product. I am also
grateful for the assistance of the eReference Librarians at the Indianapolis Central Library and the
Monroe County Public Library. The Interlibrary Loan and Auxiliary Library Facility staff at Indiana
University surpassed all of my expectations related to library services. My doctoral work has been
funded by the generous support of the Institute of Museum and Library Services, the Won Joon
Memorial Scholarship, the Wells Graduate Fellowship, and Indiana State University’s early career
faculty seed money.
Most of all, I am profoundly grateful to my partner who did not want to wait until my dissertation was
done to create our own family. Because of him, my research and writing was more thoughtful. And my
life has been more full. I am grateful to Vaughn Nuest for his unwavering support and love.
While on my educational journey, I was in a family with and met a number of instrumental people who
ushered me through the doors of education. There were some who sacrificed a great deal for my
education, some who taught me to be passionate about learning for a greater good, and others who
socialized me into academia and encouraged me to particulate in scholarly dialogue. Without these
individuals, my educational journey would look vastly different. Thus, I am grateful to these people
for opening up doors on my behalf. While I owe these individuals so much more, I attempt to thank
them here.
I am extremely grateful to the two unique and loving groups that have encouraged and supported my
educational journey from my first day of preschool: the Taylor and Frye families. In fact, the
pseudonyms I used for my participants are in honor of the matriarchs: Joy Elizabeth Taylor (“Izzie”),
Virginia Ruth Cox Frye (“Ginger”), and Mary Lucille Woods (“Lucy”). You were my first teachers, and
you lovingly shared your passions with me: reading, preserving stories, learning, and the art of
performance.
I have been the student of a great number of master teachers. They taught me the content of their
subjects, showed me ways to steer my own learning, and served as examples of professionals who care.
The best of you did all three. Thank you, Ms. Shingleton, JoAnn Price, Debra Nackenhorst, Leva
Daniels, Carol Booth, Jill Gardiner, Marilyn Hall, Mr. Moulton, Jill Brunic, Mr. Taylor, Penny Kroening,
David Thornton, Al Boehm, Nancy Johnson, Rick Swengel, Lyndon Wall, Jan Borradaile, Linda Burdine,
Joan Ellis, Mike Slack, Anne Sanders, Dr. Jernigan, Dr. Ry Burke, Dr. Kovocik, Dr. Marvin, Betty
Anderson, David Sabol, Tony Stamatoplos, Dr. Fox, Kelly Barnes, Mary Brown Nine, Anne-Elise Imwalle
Smith, Janet Brown, Jeff Eaton, Chad Hyatt, Janet Pfadt, Craig Brinkman, Dr. Tilley, Dr. Callison, Dr.
Irwin, Dr. Boyle-Baise, Dr. Flinders, Dr. Goodman, Dr. Dennis, Dr. Mason, Dr. Davis, Dr. Kunzman, Dr.
Barton, and Dr. Hinderliter Ortloff.
I want to acknowledge my friends who expanded my thinking about the world, the use of language, and
the culture in which I was raised: Vaughn Nuest, Darcy Cross Wiley, David Sabol, Tony Stamatoplos,
Micah Shires-Taylor, Carolyn A. Weber, Kylea Asher (Smith), David Smith, Rachel Vandivier Davidson,
Beatriz Cuevas, Brad Wombles, Jathan Newton, Crystal Nivens, Amy Holmes, Joy Taylor Knight,
Jennifer Cooper, Kelly Barnes, Shannon Gardiner, Mary Brown Nine, Setal Patel, Stephanie Good,
Jeremy York, Holly McKenzie, Tony McGail, Eric McAfee, Geoff Jackson, Fernando Alonso Barrio, Deana
Guido, Robin Moeller, Gabe Huddleston, Kyle Schnepp, Christine Yu, Gail Jean Gardiner, Donna Eder,
David Duffy, Julie Pearson, Bruce Pearson, and Hank Swain. You enlarged my world.
Finally, I am grateful to Shannon and Maxi M. Gardiner who always had an open door and contagious
joy.
v

	  

PREFACE
While serving as a University Supervisor over student teachers, I realized that my conversations
with my pre-service school librarians during their school placements rarely revealed their professional
struggles. It wasn’t until I began offering informal meetings at coffee shops did the student teachers
share their inabilities to reconcile outside expectations with the ethos towards school librarianship that
they had previously developed. During those casual meetings, a few of them voiced frustration and
uncertainty because their personal teaching identities did not fit the mold their mentor teacherlibrarians expected from them. Others expressed concern that their graduate coursework did not
prepare them for teaching young people and collaborating with teachers. While they shared their
anxieties, I listened; I asked questions; I trouble-shot; I shared stories; I promised to run interference
with mentor teachers; and I addressed programmatic concerns with the Associate Dean who revised
curricula.
Quickly, I saw informal benefits of off-site meetings, and I realized that I needed to provide
more opportunities for my student teachers to share and reflect on their professional struggles. As
their University Supervisor, I wanted to help them build confidence and manage the difficult
professional situations that they encountered during their student teaching. Yet while I provided
professional support for my students, I understood that when they entered the school library profession
as certified teachers, they would have few (if any) professional opportunities to share their day-to-day
experiences in the profession, particularly stories that were not consistent with the master narrative of
successful teacher.
As my former student teachers successfully completed their internships and coursework, the
majority of them acquired positions as school librarians. A handful continued to call or email me with
questions about school librarianship, management, and the culture of public schools. Some had
questions about what to expect as “typical” treatment from administrators; others wondered how they
could make changes to their library program without getting fired. An alarming number of the novice
school librarians feared that they would lose their positions because of their school corporations’ fiscal
crises; some worried that their strained relationships with their superiors would end their careers as
school librarians. My conversations with these novice school librarians impelled me to do more than
vi

	  

just acknowledge the difficulties in their socialization process. Their anecdotes fueled my aspiration
to improve the socialization process in school librarianship through this research study. Thank you
Ginger1, Lucy, Izzie, and Kenneth… and all the other pre-service librarians with whom I have worked.
You taught me about your occupational socialization. Your passion for school librarianship and your
resilience after great challenges gives me hope about the future of our profession. I am honored that
you shared your stories with me.

1

	  I	  have	  attempted	  to	  remove	  major	  identifying	  details	  from	  participants	  and	  their	  lives,	  such	  as	  personal	  names	  and	  place	  names.	  	  I	  have	  
replaced	  names	  with	  pseudonyms.	  

vii

	  

Julie Marie Frye
OCCUPATIONAL VULNERABILITY: A STUDY OF NOVICE SCHOOL LIBRARIANS
Using Callahan’s (1962) vulnerability thesis as a theoretical framework, this qualitative case
studies research examines the occupational socialization of secondary, public school librarians. The
study examines three novice librarians’ autobiographical narratives and explores how participants
perceived the influence of professional, critical events. The study addresses the challenges and
successes that novice school librarians encounter or bring about during their early years in the
profession. The study also examines how critical events create professional identities of school
librarians, and how narratives of vulnerability (re)produce culture myths about teaching and
librarianship.
In order to have a better understanding of the occupational socialization of the school librarian
participants, I collected data from multiple sources for each of the cases. The procedures included
direct observations, interviews, and document analysis. The research began while participants were
student teaching, and data was collected until their second year of practice.
The results of the analysis indicate that participants’ student teaching placements provided
polarized experiences to model their practices after: either unrealistic or unacceptable. All
participants express that they were unprepared for their service in public schools, and they were
unsupported by their administrators in their first school librarian positions. In addition, they convey
great discomfort with the “myths” of their clerical work that their administrators or job titles
demanded. The study suggests that in spite of their perceived inadequate socialization, school
librarian participants exhibit strength in the midst of great occupational challenges and role
uncertainty.
_____________________________________
David Flinders, Ph.D.
_____________________________________
Barbara Dennis, Ph.D.
_____________________________________
Terrence C. Mason, Ph.D.
_____________________________________
Lara Lackey, Ph.D.
_____________________________________
Carol Tilley, Ph.D.
viii

	  

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. p. v-vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS……………………………………………………………………………………………………….. p. ix
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………………………………………………………………………

p. x

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION………………………….……………………………………………………………. pp. 1-14
CHAPTER TWO: REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE…………………………………………………………… pp. 15-35
CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY……………………………………………………………………………………… pp. 36-52
Chapter FOUR: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN, NOT THE KINKO’S GIRL………………………………….………. pp. 53-76
CHAPTER FIVE: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN, NOT INTERIOR DECORATOR……………..….………………… pp. 77-105
CHAPTER SIX: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN, NOT SEVENTH GRADE GIRLFRIEND…………………………… pp. 106-139
CHAPTER SEVEN: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION……………………………………………………………… pp. 140-164
REFERENCES………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. pp. 165-175
APPENDIX A: List of Tables ………………………………………………………………………………………….…… p. 176
APPENDIX B: List of Figures ………………………………………………………………………………………….…. p. 177
CURRICULUM VITAE

ix

	  

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

AASL: American Association of School Librarians
AIME: Association of Indiana Media Educators
ALA: American Library Association
NCATE: National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education
NCLB: No Child Left Behind Act
NEASC: New England Association of Schools and Colleges
PFS: Philadelphia Friends School
PGHS: Perry Grove High School
RRHS: Red Rock High School
SLIS: School of Library and Information Science

x

	  

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
Librarian. School Librarian. Materials Specialist. Instructional Resources Consultant. School
Library Media Specialist. Library Media Specialist. Library Media Teaching Consultant. Media
Specialist. Media Coordinator. Media Director. School Library Media Technician. Teacher-Librarian.
Knowledge Educator. Information Professional. Information Specialist. Library Information Specialist.
School Library Information Specialist. Since the first formal meeting of School Librarians in 1925, the
job title for certified personnel working inside a school library, often holding master’s degrees in
library science, has changed numerous times (Gann, 1998, p. 153). In 2010, the American Association
of School Librarians (AASL), a division of the American Library Association (ALA) voted to return to an
earlier job title: the school librarian.
While the majority of preparation programs have accepted the new job title, a number of
Departments of Education have disregarded the change. Most public school leaders in the United
States reject the title of school librarian, and they continue to incorporate the word “media” into the
role and into space in which duties are performed. For example, it is common for principals to define
the role as the Media Specialist who works in the Media Center, instead of the School Librarian who
works in the School Library. In addition to school administrators, many states issue teaching
credentials or additions to existing teaching licensures that also include the word media. Even school
librarians themselves do not altogether embrace their “new” title.
But AASL implemented the name change because of slowing momentum to local, state, and
national advocacy efforts in the last decade. School librarian advocates found it difficult to converse
with those outside of the library profession, partly due to the “confusion, misperceptions, and
inconsistencies” regarding the title and work of school librarians (ALA, 2010).
A sample conversation between a library professional and an academic manager can elucidate
how these shifting titles have fostered an unclear atmosphere. For example, a school librarian
advocate might earn only five minutes per year with an education policy leader or a superintendent.
The advocate might spend the first three minutes discussing the importance of Media Coordinators’
certified positions, how their work affects student learning, and what robust materials budgets can
accomplish. But, as the conversation turns to teaching and assessment, the education policy leader or
1

	  

superintendent might look puzzled and say: “Yes, I agree. These technology leaders are important in
our schools, but our Media Coordinators typically just fix computers and train teachers. They rarely
have access to students, and we certainly do not think they are qualified to teach or assess students’
work.” As the policy leaders or superintendents begin to excuse themselves from the conversation, the
advocate must sacrifice valuable time from activism efforts in order to coordinate titles with the one
used by the policy leader or superintendent. Thus, AASL leadership decided that all this clarification
was simply wasting time: if school librarians could all use the same job title for their work, their
advocacy could be more effective and focused.
What was the original role of the school librarian?
Returning to the old job title alarmed a number of school librarians, because they feared it
could resurrect old job descriptions. The ALA’s first report to summarize the job description of school
librarians was published in 1920. The report articulated expectations for the position in this way:
The librarian in the high school should combine the good qualities of both the librarian
and the teacher and must be able to think clearly and sympathetically in terms of the
needs and interests of high-school students. A wide knowledge of books, ability to
organize library materials for efficient service, and successful experience in reference
work should be demanded of every librarian. Most of all should the personality of the
librarian be emphasized. Enthusiasm and power to teach and inspire are as essential in
the high-school librarian as in the teacher. (Certain, 1920, p. 16)
School librarians’ work included administrative, technical, and educational work (Certain, 1920). The
educational work of school librarians was broken down into three categories: reference, instruction,
and educational and vocational guidance (Certain, 1920).
The ALA did not endorse modern, collaborative teaching responsibilities for school librarians;
instead, they were the primary resource for helping faculty and students find materials (Certain, 1920).
During the school year, school librarians taught high school students six to twelve lessons a year in a
required subject area called Library Instruction (Certain, 1920). Instead of supporting the curriculum
of other courses, school librarians taught students how to care for books and how to use them for
information or pleasure. The lessons were divorced from other school subjects. (Certain, 1920).
Even without the typical responsibilities of a classroom teacher, the ALA believed school
librarians’ education and work experience should be greater than those of teachers. According to the
ALA (Certain, 1920) school librarians should hold an undergraduate degree, have at least a year of
2

	  

professional training at an approved library school, and have one year of previous library work serving
youth. Once hired, the ALA argued that qualified candidates should receive equal pay to department
heads, or at the least, equal to classroom teachers. In addition, full-time library assistants should
support school librarians (Certain, 1920). The ALA advocated that state department representatives
supervise school librarians; the representatives should have some exposure to professional library
training.
The report rejected the idea that school librarians should do clerical work; however, by
modern standards, the basic technical expectations were unambiguously clerical in nature, including
shelving materials, creating systems to check out materials and keep track of circulation, overseeing
interlibrary loans, reporting expenses, and managing policies (Certain, 1920). The ALA also expected
the school librarian to develop, manage, catalog, and index the book, film, slide, and bulletin board
collections; manage library personnel; and conduct reference interviews with faculty and students to
determine what materials were needed and then direct them to the sources (Certain, 1920).
During the decades that followed, the literature showed changes in the expectations about the
role of school librarians, but there was little evidence that actual professional practices changed
(Craver, 1986; Gann, 1998). Some of these are highlighted in figure 1.
Figure 1
Role Expectations

1940s

Conduct readers’ advisory;
Guide students in social
and vocational interests;
Provide audiovisual materials
(Craver, 1986).

Arrange the library’s
physical space and
materials attractively
(Gann, 1998).

1950s

1960s

Select materials;
Formalized expectation of instructional role;
Identity crisis related to instructional role
(Craver, 1986).

Prepare library instruction upon request; 1970s
Prepare instructional program;
Follow lead of teachers;
Liaise between use of materials and knowledge;
Adopt new professional name
(Craver, 1986).

1980s

Integrate computers into curriculum;
Take active role in consulting and
instructing
(Craver, 1986).

Why do school librarians enter the profession in the 21st century?
Over a decade ago, Adams (2002) reported that public schools in thirty-four states were

3

	  

experiencing significant shortages in their open, certified school librarian positions. An AASL
investigation of the shortages discovered that that the massive amounts of Baby Boomer retirements
were only one of the reasons why schools had a large number of school librarian openings (Adams,
2002). Respondents to a survey also cited other reasons why there were vacancies: the lack of job
security, damaging stereotypes about librarians, and poor working conditions (Adams, 2002).
Certainly, the critical job shortages helped school library preparation programs recruit students at the
turn of the 21st century. Some believed their degree or certification would land them a position as a
school librarian. For those individuals who enrolled in preparation programs, working was more
important than the details of their working conditions.
In the 21st century, the majority of school librarians enter the profession after spending part of
their careers as public school educators. They have varied reasons for wanting to leave their
traditional classrooms (Shannon, 2008). Some report candidly that they want a way out of the
classroom, because they are exhausted as classroom teachers and need to escape their present work
situations (Shannon, 2008). Even if they stay in their schools and change positions from classroom
teacher to school librarian, the library offers a varied schedule. In addition, school librarians are able
to teach lessons connected to a variety of disciplines. Other teachers pursue school librarianship
because they have a particular interest in technology, children’s literature, or encouraging recreational
reading (Shannon, 2008).
A smaller number of individuals enter school librarianship with academic training and work
experience other than education. For them, school librarianship is an alternative path to a career in
education. Some recognize they do not want to be classroom teachers, but a position as a school
librarian would still give them access to students. Shannon’s (2008) study shows that these
“alternative path” school librarians express their passion to work with young people at more than twice
the rate of those who enter the profession after serving as classroom teachers.
How are school librarians trained in the 21st century?
Almost a century has passed since the ALA published the first standards on the education and
work of school librarians. Nearly every decade since then, there have been significant revisions made
to the national standards for school librarianship. In 2010, the ALA insisted that individuals qualified
4

	  

for the job of school librarian must have one of the following: a master’s degree from an ALA
accredited librarian preparation program, or a master’s degree with a school librarianship
specialization. According to the ALA, the latter degree with the specialization should come from a
program that has received accreditation by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education
(NCATE) and has also earned AASL recognition (AASL, 2010b). The remainder of this section explains
these ALA sanctioned educational paths that lead to school librarianship; there is a discussion of
alternative paths to the profession as well.
A candidate interested in school librarianship can pursue the first suggested educational path,
a master’s degree from an ALA accredited program, from one of sixty-three higher education
institutions located in the United States, Canada, or Puerto Rico (ALA, n.d.). Many universities with
ALA accredited master’s degree programs have their school librarian coursework offered in Schools or
Departments of Informatics or Library and Information Science. Typically, a general course of study for
all librarian preparation includes courses taught by professors with terminal degrees in Library and
Information Science, Informatics, Computer Science, or Education. According to the Council of the
American Library Association (2008), the curricula of all programs are:
…concerned with recordable information and knowledge, and the services and
technologies to facilitate their management and use. The curriculum of library and
information studies encompasses information and knowledge creation, communication,
identification, selection, acquisition, organization and description, storage and retrieval,
preservation, analysis, interpretation, evaluation, synthesis, dissemination, and
management. (p. 5)
Students who choose to concentrate in school librarianship might take one or two courses in this
specialization. Library practitioners and lecturers are the most likely teachers of the school
librarianship related courses, or, less frequently, former school or public librarians with doctoral
degrees (Church, Dickinson, Everhart, & Howard, 2012). These graduate programs enable future school
librarians to attend general library and information science preparation classes, like the course
Representation and Organization. Their classmates include pre-service academic, public, special, and
corporate librarians.
The second suggested educational path for candidates interested in school librarianship is to
pursue master’s degrees from AASL recognized programs focusing on school librarianship. Those who

5

	  

chose this path can attend one of forty-six institutions of higher education, with programs frequently
housed in Schools or Colleges of Education. Professors may have advanced degrees in library science or
education; adjunct instructors may come from public or school library day jobs. In these settings,
students most likely attend courses exclusively with others interested in school librarianship and have
an entirely different program of study than pre-service school librarians attending ALA accredited
programs (Church et al., 2012). Both of the two aforementioned paths toward education in school
librarianship are delivered by preparation programs in a variety of formats: online, face to face, or
both.
The educational background required for individuals applying to these master’s programs vary.
The majority of individuals seeking a master’s degree with the end goal of becoming a school librarian
already have a teaching credential in a traditional content area (i.e. elementary education, secondary
science education). Upon the successful completion of their coursework and internship, graduates may
apply for a School Library addition to their existing teaching license. There are a few nationally
accredited/recognized graduate programs that allow individuals to earn a teaching credential while
simultaneously completing their library science coursework. Once the pre-service school librarians
complete their library science and education graduate-level coursework, they student teach in both
elementary and secondary school libraries. During student teaching, state-licensed elementary and
secondary school librarians and one university mentor supervises the pre-service school librarians.
After the successful completion of their two student teaching placements, these individuals are eligible
to apply for a K-12 School Library teaching license.
Despite the ALA’s attempts to regulate librarian preparation programs, their power extends
only so far. Some universities do not recognize ALA’s authority in library preparation; thus, a number
of institutions offer school library coursework and degrees without seeking or receiving AASL
accreditation. Also, a number of universities offer graduate level school library courses but do not
require students to complete their master’s degrees. Instead, upon the completion of a number of
credit hours, those with existing teaching credentials are eligible to apply for a school library addition
to their existing teaching license.
What is the work of school librarians in the 21st century?
6

	  

In the last century, the emphasis of school librarians’ work expanded from managing the
collection to teaching; specifically, school librarians should be teaching students how to access and use
information to meet school-wide curricular goals (Gann, 1998). As the information landscape continues
to diversify, AASL expects school librarians to expand their roles from instructional support to
instructional leaders and program advocates (Gann, 1998). While each public school or district may
define the role of the school librarian differently, AASL (2009) published four major responsibilities as
the foundation of the profession: (1) developing visions for learning; (2) teaching for learning; (3)
building the learning environment; and (4) empowering learning through leadership.
Determined to have these focal points define the work of school librarians heading into the
profession, AASL began collaborating with NCATE to ensure that school librarian preparation programs
developed these competencies in school librarian candidates. Thus, many school librarian preparation
programs revised their curricula based on the 2010 ALA/AASL Standards for Initial Preparation of School
Librarians to earn reaccreditation (2010a). Reflecting the role responsibilities above, these standards
include these five focal points: (1) teaching for learning; (2) literacy and reading; (3) information and
knowledge; (4) advocacy and leadership; and (5) program management and administration. The ALA
and AASL designed these standards to serve three purposes: first, to establish common expectations for
school librarians; second, to guide non-ALA accredited school librarian preparation programs; and
third, to increase the likelihood that school librarians would remain relevant in 21st century schools.
The 2010 ALA/AASL Standards for Initial Preparation of School Librarians portray a shift in
school librarianship. The evolution in the expectations of a school librarian reflects how 21st century
school librarian jobs differ from those nearly a century ago in two areas: teaching and management.
As mentioned before, school librarians in the 1920s taught students how to use a book. 21st century
librarians still point out tables of contents and indices. But, they also are expected to be effective
teachers and instructional designers who:
…demonstrate knowledge of learners and learning and who model and promote
collaborative planning, instruction in multiple literacies, and inquiry-based learning,
enabling members of the learning community to become effective users and creators of
ideas and information. Candidates design and implement instruction that engages
students' interests and develops their ability to inquire, think critically, gain and share
knowledge. (AASL, 2010a, p.1)

7

	  

School librarians are expected not only to be successful teachers, but also to serve as instructional role
models for other teachers in the building.
The 1920s standards articulated the management relationship between school librarians and
their support staff and volunteers. Nearly a century later, the 2010 standards focus on librarians
creating strong relationships with teachers, administrators, other librarians, and the community so that
they can be effective advocates for programs, environments, and professional development (AASL,
2010a. Standard Four describes this in depth:
Candidates advocate for dynamic school library programs and positive learning
environments that focus on student learning and achievement by collaborating and
connecting with teachers, administrators, librarians, and the community. Candidates are
committed to continuous learning and professional growth and lead professional
development activities for other educators. Candidates provide leadership by
articulating ways in which school libraries contribute to student achievement. (p. 14)
The AASL endorses relationships with influential school personnel and community members as essential
to school librarian advocacy. Furthermore, school librarians are to function as leaders.
What are the professional challenges for school librarians?
School librarians face a number of challenges in public schools, both localized and systemic.
First, the public generally remains confused about the teaching responsibilities of school librarians and
the educational background needed for success as a school librarian. Recent ambiguity, especially on
the national level, has had a significant impact on districts’ choices about whom they hire to manage
their school libraries and whether the doors of the school library remain open. Second, with a growing
number of professional responsibilities, school librarians have a difficult time selecting which activities
are the most important for personal job security and/or student achievement. Third, some school
librarians have not had positive role models in the field after whom to pattern their practice. Fourth,
school librarians are isolated from their peers during daily practice.
Ambiguity
Despite the efforts of AASL to reform preparation programs and provide job descriptions to
inform principals of school librarians’ 21st century roles, AASL (2010c) acknowledges some overlap in
school librarianship with the work of instructional leaders, instructional technology specialists, and
literacy instructors. While the commonalities present confusion among school administrators, the most

8

	  

alarming misunderstanding is related to school librarians’ work as teachers. While it is clear to
scholars and leaders inside the library profession that school librarians are teachers, other national
bodies like the United States Department of Education continues to classify school librarians as
“Support Staff for Instruction” (AASL, 2010c). These injurious misperceptions can be directly tied to
financial support or education policy.
Even though the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Congressional Act recognizes school librarians as
instructional staff and encourages funding to school libraries to promote students’ literacy and reading
skills, NCLB makes no attempt to define the academic training of a “Highly Qualified” school librarian
(An Act to Close the Achievement Gap, 2002). In short, NCLB articulates no expectations for who
should be managing the school library. School library leaders have anticipated that these oversights
and/or omissions make school librarians and school libraries targets for reductions in or elimination of
funding, especially during a national recession.
In spite of awareness and activism from inside the profession, national education policies have
not been revised regarding school librarianship, and there have not been any changes to recognize or
secure funding for school librarianship. Consequently, public school librarians and libraries have
suffered considerable personnel, print and electronic material, and supply budget cuts. In 2010, in one
Midwest state alone, over eighty certified school librarian positions were cut from public school
budgets, leaving schools without full-time school librarians (AIME, 2010). A number of other states
have proposed similar cuts (Sullivan, 2013). Scholars and practitioners agree: school librarianship is in
crisis (Harvey, 2011); many believe school librarians face extinction (Sandford, 2013).
In spite of advocacy work and preparation program reform conducted by the AASL and ALA,
some state leaders have been successful in their de-professionalization of a number of teaching
careers, including school librarianship. In at least one Midwestern state, persons who hold a teaching
credential in any subject area may take a school library content area exam. If they pass the test, they
are eligible to add school library to their teaching license with no academic training in school
librarianship. The same Midwestern state allows people holding Bachelor’s degrees with a 3.0 grade
point average to earn an adjunct teaching permit by taking a content area and pedagogy exam. In
short, people who have never had any academic training in education or library science may pass two
9

	  

exams, receive the title of “Workplace Specialist,” and fill school or district roles as school librarians.
If the Workplace Specialists have positive evaluations from their administrators, they may renew their
licenses upon the attendance of professional development conferences or college courses.
At the same time, some public schools do not require a school library teaching credential to fill
their positions; instead, they only require a teaching credential. Even worse, other public schools have
filled their certified school librarian positions with clerical staff or closed their school libraries entirely.
Instead, they encourage teachers to build their own classroom libraries. For teachers who cannot
afford a personal classroom library, they may instead check out materials from their local public
libraries. Even with greater dependence on them, these libraries, too, are experiencing significant
reductions in funding.
Prioritizing and performing duties as assigned
Perhaps because of the ambiguity about the role for and education of school librarians, a
second challenge to those in the profession is prioritizing and performing all of the duties to which they
are assigned (McCracken, 2001; Hartzell, 2002; Sandford, 2013). In Case and Lowrey’s (1973) Behavior
Requirements Analysis Checklist, the authors articulate seven major competencies, 75 job functions,
and 676 tasks, used as a performance assessment tool for school librarians and their administrators.
While designed to be a flexible checklist “continually in the process of revision and transition,” the use
of the word “requirements” in the text’s title displays an inflexible, mandatory nature to its target
audience (ix). This introduction to the checklist applies the same rigidity, commencing with a
discussion of “requirements” and “tasks that should be performed” (vii-viii). These behavior
requirements, produced forty years ago, continue to influence school administrators, scholars,
education programs for pre-service school librarians, and state credentialing offices (Shannon, 2002).
If school librarians had the autonomy to select which tasks from Case and Lowrey’s (1973) list
they preferred to complete, perhaps the overwhelming number of responsibilities would not present
obstacles to those in the profession. However, school librarians receive conflicting information about
their professional duties from their preparation programs and their principals, teachers, and
technology directors (Johnston, 2012). While preparation programs are beginning to revise their school
librarian curriculum based on AASL standards, school librarian graduates cannot always embody the
10

	  

ideals of the AASL and/or their preparation programs within the constraints of the public schools. For
example, while some school librarians value their roles as instructional partners and curriculum
experts, they may not be able to perform these duties if they have a fixed, locked schedule (Fedora,
1993; Putnam, 1996, McCracken, 2001). Others find that if they do not embrace traditional roles of
librarianship, they disappoint their school leaders and teachers (McCracken, 2001; Smith, 2013).
Consequently, some school librarians liken their position to that of a professional juggler (Cherry,
2011).
One aspect of school librarianship that has definitively emerged as a priority is evaluating
students’ work. The 1920s school librarians might have wondered if student evaluation was a part of
their job description, but the 21st century professional knows that assessment data has significant
power in public schools (Abilock, 2007; Kramer & Diekman, 2010; Moreillon, 2013). Thus, school
librarians are looking for ways to evaluate students’ information and digital literacy skills, and they
rely on existing relationships with other teachers to get consistent access to students (Harvey, 2012).
Extended contact with students is not as easy for school librarians in this data-driven era of education,
where students’ scores on national standardized tests directly impact school funding. Public school
administrators strongly correlate teacher evaluations and student performance to salaries, making
individual teachers ultimately responsible for their students’ test scores. Because of this, many
teachers isolate themselves from other teachers to prepare their students for standardized tests. Even
when the school librarians’ instructions show direct correlations to what is being assessed on the
standardized test, teachers are hesitant to give up valuable time when they are the lead teacher
(Britzman, 2003). Without easy, unrestricted access to students, it is difficult for school librarians to
incorporate formative and summative assessments into all of their “instructional encounters” (Kramer
and Diekman, 2010). And without access to student data directly related to librarian instruction, it is
difficult to communicate to administrators and state leaders how school librarians’ work directly
impacts students’ learning – and ultimately students’ performances on standardized tests (Kramer &
Diekman, 2010). Many administrators claim that standardized tests are “the only game in town”
(Elford, 2002). Without consistent access to students and data related to teaching and learning, the
school librarian cannot play ball.
11

	  

Unsuccessful Apprenticeships of Observation
Third, while school librarianship places considerable emphasis on the importance of positive
role models for professional practice, the role of school librarians has drastically changed even in the
last decade. Many beginning careers have not benefitted from remembering previous school librarians;
thus, they have few concrete ideas about how they can pattern their present professional practice.
Educational research points to the “apprenticeship of observation” as one of the most powerful
predictors of how novice teachers fashion their practice (Lortie, 1975). In short, novice educators
teach the way they were taught; they recreate the teaching practices they observed in their earlier
educative experiences. Some current school librarians find it difficult to recall the work of their
childhood and adolescent school librarians. Yet, even if they could, the instructional standards for
school librarians have been altered by emerging technologies and hardware now available to all
students and housed in the school library. In the midst of this technological revolution, however,
school librarians’ instructional practices have “not kept pace with technology availability” (Sandford,
2013, p. 46). Even if school librarians could pattern their practice based on what they observed, it
would still fall short of present standards.
Isolation
Fourth, many school librarians feel isolated in their positions. Typically, the school librarian is
the sole individual in the school with this educational background, and sometimes the librarian is the
only one within the entire district/corporation. While most librarians have access to teachers,
technology experts, and administrators, they are “perceived to stand alone, not quite of one world or
the other” (Matthews, 1998, p. 89). Their world, isolated from other school librarians, prevents them
from having daily professional development experiences with equally trained peers. Who does a
librarian consult when trying to develop an engaging lesson on selecting the best research databases
and evaluating information sources? Who does she ask when she is looking for information literacy
assessments? While AASL and state-level library organizations offer some support, neither are built-in
support systems inside the public school framework. The majority requires membership dues,
registration fees, and travel costs for the novice librarian. While some school-library related
professional development opportunities are available online, the majority occur in conference settings.
12

	  

Without informal or formal processes for occupational socialization after graduate school, novice
school librarians can feel isolated and “different” from others in their school community (Hartzell,
2002). Instead of reaching out to mentor teachers who may not understand the work they do, many
novice school librarians internalize their professional struggles.
Purpose of the Study
While conversations about the endangered nature and potential extinction of school
librarianship reverberate among the walls of academic buildings nationwide, perhaps scholars and
practitioners in the field can learn from the work of the World Wildlife organization. They:
fight to secure a future…[and] bring back [species] from the edge of extinction. [They]
are giving isolated, dwindling populations [of species] a second chance. [They] continue
to keep habitats and landscapes thriving. [They] envision, create, test, and deliver
solutions… [They] work with partners on all levels, from community leaders to
governments… But [their] work is far from done, and [they] constantly strive to protect
the species we all care about. (World Wildlife Fund, 2013)
While some school librarian advocates are engaging in this type of work, it is difficult to fight for and
protect a profession about which we are still learning. We still know relatively little about how the
challenges school librarians face affect novices. If they are our hope for our profession to survive the
posed threats, we should learn more about their preparatory and professional experiences. It is my
belief that before we can save the profession, we must understand the professional experiences of
those that are in it.
The purpose of this study is to contribute to the understanding of the occupational socialization
of secondary, public school librarians in an era when novices and experts face significant professional
challenges. This study examines novice librarians’ autobiographical narratives and explores how
participants perceived the influence of professional, critical events. The study was constructed to
address the following questions: (1) What challenges and successes do novice school librarians
encounter or bring about as they enter the profession? (2) How do critical events create professional
identities of school librarians (if at all)? (3) How do critical events narratives (re)produce culture
myths about teaching and librarianship (if at all)?
The remaining chapters are designed to answer these questions. In chapter two, I introduce
the theoretical frameworks and guiding literature for the study. Chapter three explains the

13

	  

methodology of the study. In chapter four, I present Ginger’s case study about her occupational
socialization as a novice school librarian working in a Navajo school. Before Ginger, the school had
never employed a school librarian. In chapter five, I aquaint readers with Lucy’s occupational
socialization as a novice school librarian hired by a school that was focused on earning accreditation.
In chapter six, I offer Izzie’s case study about her occupational socialization as a certified school
librarian who accepted a clerical position immediately after the principal eliminated the certified
school librarian position. Chapter seven focuses on the findings of the study and their implications for
theory, future research, and practice.
This study has the potential to inform pre-service school librarian professors about the
professional experiences of novice school librarians. Specifically, the study could alter their approach
to who trains school librarians and in what ways universities and colleges deliver instruction on library
advocacy, management, and teaching methods. In addition, this study does what few other studies
have done. It presents the challenges and successes of novice school librarians. The case studies have
the potential to inform pre-service school librarians about their future profession in a way that no
textbook about school librarianship ever could: through intimate, biographical accounts.

14

	  

CHAPTER TWO: REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
Formal systems of socializing novices into work environments were established at the end of
the Middle Ages for a number of professions related to the trades or other skilled industries (Parkyn,
1897). Called apprenticeships, the Traditional Craft systems were designed to protect the authority of
formally trained or “socialized” workers and to hinder others from competing in the workplace if they
had not received extensive training. In addition, apprenticeships imposed social and moral
expectations upon those involved.
The apprenticeship required two parties to enter into a contract, which outlined expectations
for both parties, and both parties had something to gain from the contracts. The junior party was
called the apprentice, aged approximately eight years or older, who personally or through his/her
family expressed a desire to be taught a trade. The apprentice, after completing approximately seven
years under the careful eye of the master, could independently work in the trade or industry for which
s/he was trained. The apprentice received instruction on the “whole of his trade,” in order to
understand the work and the culture that governed it, including its moral and ethical standards
(Parkyn, 1897, p. 172). Apprentices would also receive food from and lodgings with their masters.
The senior party, or the master, was accomplished in a particular vocation and was willing to
teach it to the apprentice. The masters received “exclusive service” from their apprentices to help
them with their own businesses (Parkyn, 1897, p. 169). The apprentices contributed to the masters’
work at “all reasonable hours,” and the masters seized all profits earned (Parkyn, 1897, p. 47). In
addition, masters had legal grounds to correct and discipline their apprentices, as long as they did not
impose “severe” physical harm (Parkyn, 1897, p. 170). Masters, through contractual language, often
made it difficult for apprentices to work independently upon the successful completion of their
apprenticeships; instead, they continued to work for masters or ran away (Van Horn & Schaffner,
2003).
Traditional Craft systems in the United States were greatly impacted by the industrialization of
the 19th century. Individuals no longer needed a deep understanding of a particular trade or desired
acclimation into the social settings in which the work was performed; rather, workers were assigned
one or two specific tasks to perform. Once completed, workers passed products on to the next worker.
15

	  

With the introduction of the assembly line and mass production, Americans were not as dependent on
traditional crafts and the people who specialized in them (Van Horn & Schaffner, 2003).
This movement away from Traditional Craft systems was furthered by the United States’
entrance into World War II. A great number of workers, including a population that had never worked
outside the home, were needed to fulfill the production demands of war. There was little time for
training; thus, superiors assigned men and women a few responsibilities that they continuously
performed in a factory or on the field. When further training was needed for particular jobs, military
personnel used a new method, film, to train soldiers and workers for more complex responsibilities
(Fagelson, 2001).
A few apprenticeship systems continued to socialize novices into the workforce after World
War II. Vickerstaff (2007) looks closer at the benefits of thirty individuals who were apprentices to
masters in a variety of occupations between 1944 and 1982. Her interviews reveal that apprenticeships
offer more than skill acquisition or an understanding of the culture of the work environment. For a
number of participants, apprenticeships serve as a rite of passage into adulthood providing
opportunities to grow personally as well as vocationally. For participants, the apprenticeship was
about “growing up, learning to get [along] with people, [and] learning to stand up for yourself. It
meant something to be an apprentice: it was an expected, respected and structured path to
adulthood” (p. 342). The participants learned the trade, while also learning how to communicate with
others to explain an alternative view or to defend a position. By the 1950s, however, the socialization
process for vocations was rarely the responsibility of the master worker; instead, novices were trained
by academics working in higher education institutions for vocational and professional training.
Because this study focuses on novice school librarians who are ultimately socialized into two
professions, literature from the fields of education and library science inform this study.
Occupational Socialization
Education scholars have not agreed on a definition for the term socialization, as it relates to
acclimating into a profession. Lortie (1975) is among the first to define the socialization process into
the teaching profession as a “…subjective process…something that happens to novices as they move
through a series of structured experiences and internalize the subculture of the group” (p. 61).
16

	  

Reynolds (1992), using a more anthropological approach, defines socialization as “the process by which
an individual acquires the norms, values, and behaviors of the group… Socialization is the development
of an initial world view” (pp. 637-8). While both of these definitions speak to the changes occurring
inside the novice, neither considers the constant state of change also taking place in the subculture
(Lortie, 1975) or the group (Reynolds, 1992).
Wolcott (1991) in his discussion of propriospect, explains that novices do not obtain cultures or
subcultures; rather, individuals learn limitless “social knowledge” by observing new behaviors (p. 266).
This exposure, according to Wolcott (1991), does not require individuals to reject previously regarded
cultural knowledge. Instead, he states, “we are all multicultural” with the potential to prosper in a
variety of different social groups (p. 263).
Unlike Lortie and Reynolds, Britzman (2003) claims the occupational socialization process is
“not limited to what happens to the person” (p. 70). She applies a broader context for socialization
that seeks to understand “what [educators] make happen because of what happens to them and what
structures their practice” (p. 70). Thus, Britzman’s broader view of socialization is employed in this
study because it captures a more dynamic process for socialization into school librarianship.
Just as there is disagreement about how to define occupational socialization, faculty serving in
preparation programs, administrators, and expert teachers have a myriad of beliefs about the best way
to socialize individuals into teaching professions (Britzman, 2003). Depending on how their beliefs are
manifested in systems and structures, sometimes there are unwritten expectations of what it means to
be “in” the profession. Because the novice does not anticipate these, they may be classified as the
hidden curriculum. Bullough (1989) explains four themes of the hidden curriculum and the potential
consequences they can have on unsuspecting novices:
(1) how work is organized within schools; (2) how teachers, students, administrators,
and other school personnel interact with one another; (3) what behaviors are modeled
by veterans; (4) and how rewards and punishments are dispensed. [This distribution]
send[s] powerful messages to the novice about where the boundaries of appropriate
behavior lie and what the appropriate ways of understanding teaching and the
responsibilities of teachers are. The pressures to conform, although usually subtle, are
considerable and ever-present. Novice insecurity and vulnerability, along with anxieties
about fitting in, add to the pressure to conform, even as points of contention between
personal and institutional values begin to emerge and seek expression. (p. 93)
While eager novices intend to begin a career in a profession, those already inducted may have very
17

	  

specific expectations about how to structure their practice.
While some people assume that occupational socialization occurs the moment an individual
enters the occupation, Britzman (2003) discusses four stages in the chronology of educator
socialization, all of which are considered in this study. The first stage is observing teachers as a
student; second, attending a preparation program; participating in student-teaching or a teaching
internship; and fourth, teaching as a novice. Clark and Corcoran (1986) define this last stage as
“occupational entry and induction” which includes on the job training and “learning while doing” (p.
23).
Occupational socialization is likely to have a profound impact on an individual’s personal and
professional identities. Becoming an educator is challenging work, and the ways in which good and bad
teaching are defined can ignore the existential crisis that has the potential to fertilize the heart, mind,
and spirit of novices to become (Britzman, 2003). When there is a conflict between the individual’s
beliefs and the subculture’s expectations, the tension must be reconciled for the educator to flourish.
According to Danielewicz (2001),
…in order to thrive as teachers once they leave [their preparation programs], [novices]
must develop an external, public, collective, identity as a teacher. This involves learning
how to participate in the discourse community of education, becoming members of the
teaching profession, and seeing themselves and being seen by others as teachers. (p.
151)
However, some novices choose to ignore the inherent existential crisis. They make no attempts at
reconciliation between personal beliefs and the subculture of their profession. Instead, they learn new
social knowledge, adopt the subculture of their profession, and ultimately hide who they are/were
(Britzman, 2003).
Learning to teach does something to the novice’s state of becoming (Britzman, 2003). During
socialization, “We make our ‘selves’ through activities and practices like classification (she is a
teacher), association (I am like her), and identification (I want to be like her). Conversely, our selves
are also made for us through similar processes enacted by other persons, discourses, and institutions”
(Danielewicz, 2001, p. 35). Both occupational socialization and professional identity formation are

18

	  

dynamic processes that cannot be expected to productively occur on their own (Beauchamp & Thomas,
2009, p. 188).
The Role of the Apprenticeship of Observation in Occupational Socialization
Lortie (1975) is the first to introduce the idea that educators begin their occupational
socialization process long before they enter the academy. He likens a high school graduate’s nearly
13,000 hour-long observation of teachers to an apprenticeship that he coins “the apprenticeship of
observation” (p. 61). These observations instill ideas about what successful and unsuccessful teaching
looks like.
In recognition of the differences between the apprenticeship of observation and tradition
apprenticeships, Lortie acknowledges the status difference between students and traditional
apprentices. Students are passive observers and obedient; they are engaged in the process of learning
a subject matter not a profession; and they rarely reflect on pedagogy. In contrast, traditional
apprentices have access to their masters’ thinking about the work and the work culture. This access
gives them an opportunity to think critically about their masters’ work and construct an individualized
social knowledge.
Even with these differences, Lortie (1975) suggests that teachers are models for future
teachers, as novices often imitate the actions and practices they observed during their apprenticeship
of observation. Unless an intervention is made in the occupational socialization of a teacher, Lortie
proposes that “traditional patterns of thought and practice,” including attitudes and beliefs, are
transmitted from one generation of teachers to the next (p. 24).
While a great number of education scholars have added to Lortie’s (1975) theory about the
apprenticeship of observation, very few scholars in library science have used his theoretical claims to
study the occupational socialization of librarians. Sandford’s (2013) qualitative case study examines
how four novice school librarians describe their professional identities and how their personal histories
influence their construction of professional identities. While Sandford’s participants note some
“lasting impressions” from their experiences as students with librarians in K-12 schools, they were not
significant influences (p. 224). Their adult observations of librarians have the greatest influence on
their understanding of school librarianship.
19

	  

Sandford (2013) postulates that Lortie’s theory is not easily transferred to librarianship,
because of the amount of time students spend with their school librarians is significantly less than the
amount of time they spend with their teachers. Consequently, according to Sandford, school librarians
have less ability to impact the identities of the next generation of workers. Instead of focusing on the
transference of professional identity from school librarian to student, Sandford extends Lortie’s theory
to observing the practices of school librarians in the position of co-worker, family, or friend. Observing
school librarians as adults, claimed Sandford’s participants, influenced participants’ construction of
professional identities.
While individuals may struggle to remember the actions and roles of their school librarians,
many can remember the physical makeup of their school library. Goodin (2011) claims that the
physical spaces of school libraries are important aspects in the apprenticeship of observation. Students
who become school librarians, teachers, and school administrators form beliefs about libraries based
on the library spaces they inhabited as students. Thus, it is also the observation of the physical
space/library that has the ability to impact attitudes and beliefs about what can and should take place
in libraries.
Related questions: While there are some scholars who point to the negative role the apprenticeship
of observation can have, how do school librarians with reduced amount of exposure time transfer
actions and practices to the next generation of workers and supervisors (if at all)? How do weak
apprenticeships of observation affect the occupational socialization of novice school librarians?
The Role of Preparation Programs in Occupational Socialization
In spite of criticism about the training of educators, Schools and Colleges of Education continue to be
the primary entrance routes for careers in education. Faculty members in preparation programs agree
that formal training is a necessary, important, and complex component of the occupational
socialization of teachers. It is the primary role of faculty members to foster the transition from
student to educator. Yet, they often disagree about the best, formal ways in which to prepare future
educators (Zeichner, 1983; Hansen, 2008). Prioritizing one of four theoretical conceptualizations,
preparation programs have different methods to aid students in their development. Each
conceptualization or paradigm has unique goals, roles for mentors and students, and beliefs about the
20

	  

role of teachers to create a just society. A summary of these four approaches, based on Zeichner’s
(1983) work follows in table 1.
Table 1
Zeichner’s Conceptualization of Teacher Education Programs

Goals

Behavioristic
teacher education
(p. 4)
Develop [in future
teachers] apparent
skills of teaching
related to student
learning suitable to
cultural expectations
of teaching

Personalistic
teacher education
(pp. 4-5)
Address anticipated
needs [of future
teachers];
Develop cognitive
skills [of future
teachers];
Develop [future
teachers] to be
effective helpers;
Promote the mental
and emotional
maturity [of future
teachers]; and

Theoretical
Underpinnings

Mentor roles in
preparation

Teaching is an
applied science in
which educated
young people are
produced by teachers

Presents professional
content knowledge
and teaching skills
based on research;
Provides specific
expectations for
success; and
Grades based on
specific criteria

Prioritize the revision
of [future teachers’]
beliefs and
perceptions over the
proficiency of
content knowledge,
skills, or behaviors
Teacher education is
a form of adult
growth; and
Future teachers are
in the process of
becoming, not just
learning how to
teach
Rarely presents
content knowledge
and skills in advance;
Focuses on the
quality of students’
experiences, analysis
of behaviors, and
effects of behaviors;
and
Provides a safe and
caring environment

Traditional Craft
teacher education
(p. 5)
Teach [future
teachers]
to analyze students’
needs and learn to
develop educational
programs based on
trial and error; and
Acclimate [future
teachers] to an
extensive sequence
of skills and when to
apply them

Teaching is a craft;
and
Teacher education is
an apprenticeship

Reveals professional
content knowledge
and teaching skills
based on experience;
Teaches ‘rules’ of
craft;
Shares information
about the culture of
schools; and
Engages in trial and
error to discover and
teach best teaching
practices

Inquiry-oriented
teacher education
(pp. 5-6)
Advance critical
inquiry skills [in
future teachers]; and
Prepare future
teachers to not only
have the content
knowledge, skills,
and behaviors to
teach, but also to
analyze these based
upon the effects they
have on students,
teaching settings,
and society

Critical inquiry is
necessary component
of teaching; and
Teachers are change
agents;

Advances and
sustains future
teachers’ habits of
inquiry and reflective
action;
Encourages students
to examine the
cultural assumptions
and myths embedded
in teaching practice;
Reminds students
that the state of
schools and society
can be altered;
Teaches technical
skills to further the
role of inquiry; and
Responds to the
needs and concerns
of future teachers

21

	  

Student roles in
preparation

Questions related to
social justice

Passively receives
education; and

Actively participates
in education;

Masters and executes
concepts as defined
by scientific laws and
principles governing
successful teaching

Becomes more
mature; and

Why change
anything?

Passively receives
education;

Contemplates
actions, the
consequences of
actions, and the
limitations on/of
actions; and

Discovers personal
best practices;

How can I become
the best teacher I
can be for my
students?

Actively participates
in education;

Why change
anything?

Controls and changes
actions and
limitations
How can I reshape
the structures that
define my school and
society?

While teacher education programs often emphasize a conceptual orientation, the majority of
programs employ a variety of paradigms based on the range of professor beliefs (Zeichner, 1983;
Hansen, 2008). These paradigms acknowledge the belief that teaching is a learned practice or
profession (Shulman, 1987); however, they vary in their acknowledgement of the power of the
apprenticeship of observation. Inquiry-oriented teacher education programs, for example, attempt to
identify the damaging assumptions acquired and critical myths perpetuated during the apprenticeship
(Sumara & Luce-Kapler, 1996; Britzman, 2003).
Contained in each paradigm are different approaches to curriculum within each School or
College of Education. Dewey (1904) criticizes programs that require students to zoom in on one grade
level to develop lesson plans or instructional plans. Instead, he believes that it is only when future
teachers zoom out on the entire curriculum can they produce effective instructional units. In addition,
Dewey (1904) outlines the structure he views as effective in training future teachers before their
student teaching. These four components are outlined in figure 2.
Figure 2
The Structure of Dewey’s Pre-Service Education Program
Observations of:
expert teachers in action
students learning in action
Introduction to:
lives of children
work of school
educational problems
Selecting and arranging subject matter for:
a group of grades with an emphasis on continuous growth
Teaching
without close or critical supervision

22

	  

Once pre-service teachers are successful with these components of their preparation, Dewey (1904)
considers them ready for a formal apprenticeship similar to student teaching.
Even with the competing goals and paradigm structures of educator preparation, most scholars
agree that preparation programs play a role in the development of professional identities
(Hammerness, Darling-Hammond, & Bransford, 2005; Beauchamp & Thomas, 2009). While some faculty
in preparation programs might assume that participation in and successful completion of teacher
education courses will automatically produce professionals, Beauchamp and Thomas (2009) argue that
developing the professional identities of teachers requires targeted efforts. According to Hammerness,
Darling-Hammond, and Bransford (2005),
Developing an identity as a teacher is an important part of securing teachers’
commitment to their work and adherence to professional norms…the identities teachers
develop shape their dispositions, where they place their effort, whether and how they
seek out professional development opportunities, and what obligations they see as
intrinsic to their role. (pp. 383-384)
Consequently, educator identity not only defines teachers’ practice, it also relates to their dedication
to it. Overall, evidence suggests that educator identity has a relationship to teacher retention.
In spite of well-defined curricula and theoretical approaches to the preparation of education,
questions remain about the effectiveness of preparation programs in the socialization of educators
(Lortie, 1975; Richardson, 1996). This is true for librarian preparation as well (Nelson, 1980; Shannon,
2002; Dilevko, 2009; Sandford, 2013). Unfortunately, there is limited research available on the
preparation of school librarians. The majority of the published studies target populations in specific
training programs and use a variety of methods to gather data (Callison, 1998).
Because of the different paradigms that inform and configurations to organize preparation
programs as previously explained, these studies cannot always be generalized in terms of the influence
of preparation programs. However, guidelines for school librarian training programs have been
published nearly every decade. To maintain accreditation or recognition, librarian preparation
programs establish new expectations (Tilley & Callison, 2001). In spite of revisions, skills taught in
school librarian preparation programs do not always match skills needed on the job. This may impede
the pre-service school librarians’ occupational socialization (Woodruff, 1994; Harada, 1996; Shannon,
2008). With the focus on the acquisition of skills and dispositions and defining library work as a
23

	  

science, many preparation programs embrace a Behavioristic orientation. Because of library science’s
interest in inquiry, some preparation programs also incorporate the Inquiry-Oriented paradigm.
Some might claim the incompatibility of skills taught in preparation programs and the skills
actually needed on the job is a curriculum issue. Upon reviewing thirty ALA accredited Schools of
Library and Information Science (SLIS), Bronstein (2009) claims that most courses focus on three major
topics: information content; technology; and discipline-specific subject area knowledge (i.e. medical
librarianship). Programs of study include courses that teach pre-service librarians to summarize,
organize, and protect information, but they rarely require classes on pedagogy. Instead, programs
depend almost entirely on other disciplines to socialize their future librarians into the acts of teaching.
As a result, some pre-service librarians’ skills related to teaching have not been advanced.
Based on Bronstein’s (2009) study, the majority of SLIS embrace the Academic Paradigm
(Zeichner, 1983). This paradigm focuses on the delivery of Library and Information Science theories
and philosophies to train future librarians. Some claim that this philosophical approach to socializing
pre-service librarians does not guarantee that pre-service librarians can transfer theoretical and
philosophical knowledge into the creation of meaningful instruction or practices (Britzman, 2003). This
is especially true if Stephens (2011) assertion is correct: that SLIS professors are “out of touch with
true practice” (p. 38). If professors are not equipped to make connections between theory and
practice, and if students cannot do it on their own, preparation programs do little to support novices in
their journey to become school librarians.
This is the case in Sandford’s (2013) study of four novice school librarians who took library
preparation courses either entirely or mostly online at different institutions. For all four participants,
their librarian preparation programs were unable to instill a new view of school librarianship. Instead,
participants expressed “continued allegiance” to their previous understandings of school librarianship
based on their apprenticeship of observation (p. 228).
There was one participant in Sandford’s (2013) study who claimed that a librarian preparation
professor contributed to her understanding of her professional identity. Sandford postulates that the
participant’s professional identity construction was fostered by attending class in person, interacting

24

	  

with practitioners, and reflecting on personal experiences. The three other participants’ experiences
in their preparation program appeared to have little, if any, impact on their professional identities.
Related questions: How do pre-service school librarians, without a foundation in educational
practices, make sense of their academic, theoretical training? How do school librarian preparation
programs that are based on theoretical approaches contribute to the occupational socialization of
school librarians?
The Role of Student Teaching or the Library Practicum in Occupational Socialization
The third stage of an educators’ occupational socialization is student teaching/the internship,
which symbolizes and embodies the transition from university preparation to professional work. Some
preparation programs place a great deal of emphasis on this stage, and university personnel sometimes
use it as a way to weed out pre-service teachers who are deemed unfit for a profession in education.
The high stakes and the often seemingly unfamiliar environment of K-12 school makes student teaching
an intense and emotional experience for student teachers and a rich environment for researchers
(Intrator, 2006; Richardson, 1996). The remainder of this section defines the teaching triad along with
their roles and responsibilities; articulates the concerns commonly associated with student teaching;
and shares the role student teaching/the internship has in library science (Knowles & Cole, 1996).
While universities use a variety of different titles, most student teaching configurations include
the student teacher; the cooperating teachers; and the university supervisor. These three individuals
make up the student teaching triad. Table two outlines responsibilities that are often assigned to each
member of the teaching triad.

25

	  

Table 2
Responsibilities for the Members of the Student Teaching Triad
Student Teacher
“Learn to hear, formulate and
articulate…own questions
about…experience of teaching”
(Grumet, 1978, p. 26)

University Supervisor
“…establish a dialectic form of
reflection upon experience that the
student teacher can adapt to
pedagogical practice” (Grumet, 1978,
p. 26)
“…inform, position, and fashion the
student teacher and her ‘teaching’ in
both practice and theory” (Britzman,
2003, p. 219)
“…establish harmonious working
relationships” (Slick, 1997, p. 724)

“…negotiate…, construct…, and
consent… to identity as teacher”
(Britzman, 2003, p. 221).

Cooperating Teacher
“…establish a dialectic form of
reflection upon experience that the
student teacher can adapt to
pedagogical practice” (Grumet, 1978,
p. 26)
“…inform, position, and fashion the
student teacher and her ‘teaching’ in
both practice and theory” (Britzman,
2003, p. 219)
give “maximum…liberty” to the
student. They should not be too
closely supervised, nor too minutely
and immediately criticized upon
either the matter or the method of
their teaching” (Dewey, 1904, p. 27)
Critically discuss teaching of student
teacher…and “the educational results
obtained” (Dewey, 1904, p. 27)

“…develop… productive working
relationship[s] with cooperating
teachers”
(Knowles & Cole, 1996, p. 659)
“… act upon intellectual initiative”
(Dewey, 1904, p. 27)

“…[steer away from] criticizing
[student teacher] too definitely and
specifically upon special features of
her work” (Dewey, 1904, p. 27)
evaluate the student teacher (Slick,
1997)

“…[steer away from] criticizing
[student teacher] too definitely and
specifically upon special features of
her work” (Dewey, 1904, p. 27)
evaluate the student teacher (Slick,
1997)

“…accept the authority of mentor
teachers” (Danielewicz, 2001, p. 37)
“…develop authority in order to be
teachers in placements (Danielewicz,
2001, p. 37).

Critically discuss teaching…and “the
educational results obtained”
(Dewey, 1904, p. 27)
“…judge [teaching]critically, to find
out… in what respects [she] has
succeeded and in what failed, and to
find the probable reasons for both
failure and success” (Dewey, 1904, p.
27)

Critically discuss teaching of student
teacher…and “the educational results
obtained” (Dewey, 1904, p. 27)

“…maintain the integrity of the
teacher education program and the
profession” (Slick, 1997, p. 724)
Serve as liaison between placement
and university (Slick, 1998)

In this study, cooperation teachers are referred to as mentor librarians.
Although not represented formally in the triad, a group who should exist in more than just the
shadow of the student teaching experience is the teacher educators employed in the preparation
programs. Slick (1997) encourages them to articulate expectations and standards for the teaching
triad. Once these are shared, Slick (1997) advises that teacher educators stay involved by assisting
evaluators and maintaining standards.
A number of scholars articulate roles for the student teacher to assist their efforts in becoming
a teacher. While in the state of “becoming” (Britzman, 2003, p. 9) there should be obvious identity
development indicated by the types of rhetorical questions the student teacher asks (Fuller, 1969).
Initial questions are absorbed in role identity concerning the self, for example: Am I in charge here? By
26

	  

the end of student teaching, she should be able to focus more on the quality of her work. For
example, one question may be: How am I doing? By the end of the student teaching experience, preservice school librarians should be able to answer the following question: Is there a place for me in the
teaching profession? They can only adequately ascertain this if they have executed enough teaching
tasks, experimented abundantly, and experienced the joys and difficulties of teaching (Danielewicz,
2001).
Even with the most prevalent representation of the Traditional Craft philosophy, there are still
problems associated with the student teaching experience. First, there is some role confusion
concerning both the cooperating teacher and university supervisor (Knowles & Cole, 1996). Some claim
that there is such an overlap in the two roles that the university supervisor position should be
eliminated altogether (Slick, 1997; Zeichner, 1980). Second, even if roles were more clearly
articulated, the cooperating teacher and university supervisor may have different teaching
philosophies, which guide the practices of student teachers and the policies which govern the
experience (Griffin and others, 1983). Third, because there is often a bond that unites the student
teacher with the cooperating teacher, the latter takes on the role of encourager with “well-meaning
praises” and provides guidance on the managerial duties of the classroom (Feiman-Nemser &
Buchmann, 1987, p. 272). Fourth, cooperating teachers often redirect students’ classroom
management plan from a shared power model learned in preparation programs to an authoritarian
approach. Despite the function cooperative teachers serve, Britzman (2003) urges them to recognize
the value attached to their selected practices; furthermore, they should not neglect the vulnerability
student teachers experience while simultaneously teaching and learning how to teach.
While Lacy & Copeland (2013) claim that ALA accredited preparation programs “place value”
on fieldwork often conceptualized as an internship, its prominence in the curriculum of the majority of
librarian preparation programs communicates something different (p. 135). It is possible, Lacy and
Copeland assert, for students who are enrolled in preparation programs to never have contact with a
librarian during this stage of their occupational socialization. Even with the disconnection between
preparation programs and actual library practice, professors claim that library schools prepare future
librarians for the workplace. Unlike the theoretical preparation of academic, public, corporate, and
27

	  

special librarians, the majority of school librarians are governed by state regulations to complete
student teaching or internship experiences before receiving their teaching credential.
Stephens (2011), an academic librarian practitioner, suggests that librarian preparation
programs not only adopt formal mentoring programs but that they do it in the early stages of university
preparation. In addition, he drafts a teaching quadruple: student mentee, library science professor,
librarian mentor, and a library administrator/principal. He explains that in this type of model, future
librarians learn skills from and practices of librarian practitioners. Pre-service librarians also have a
better understanding of work hierarchies and the decision-making processes of those in authority.
Related Questions: In library science training programs, what is the structure of school librarians’
student teaching experience? What role does the teaching quadruple play in facilitating the
occupational socialization of school librarians?
The Occupational Socialization of Novices on the Job
Many believe that becoming an educator occurs upon receiving academic credentials; they
believe it is a seamless transition (Britzman, 2003). However, Carter and Doyle (1996) emphasize the
process of becoming an educator occurs well into the first years of teaching. To them “…becoming a
teacher means (a) transforming an identity, (b) adapting personal understandings and ideals to
institutional realities, and (c) deciding how to express one’s self in classroom activity” (p. 139). These
responsibilities, coupled with feelings of loneliness, self-doubt, and defeat, make the transition from
novice to expert appear distant if not impossible. And this transition is not the same for all novice
educators (Britzman, 2003).
Attention on the first year of teaching is of particular interest, because of the role it has in
shaping the future beliefs and practices of novices. Gold (1996) argues,
Few experiences in life have such a tremendous impact on the personal and professional
life of a teacher as does the first year of teaching. The initial experiences are imprinted,
embedding perceptions and behaviors regarding teaching, students, the school
environments, and their role as teacher. This phenomenon of imprinting etches
impressions and feelings during a critical period of the teacher’s life. When
encountering similar experiences throughout their career, those feelings and
impressions are elicited. Thus, a teacher’s instructional and teaching-related behaviors
are influenced significantly by initial imprinting… When the initial experiences are
pleasurable, their imprinting is mainly positive and the transference is positive;
however, when the first experiences are negative, paired with feelings of

28

	  

discouragement and discomfort, the imprinting is negative, and these feelings and
behaviors are elicited in similar circumstances in the future. (p. 548)
When the imprinting has been negative, educators consistently reproduce similar negative experiences.
Ultimately, a great number of these educators leave the profession (Gold, 1996). Yet, with alternative
support and intervention, many believe these teachers could have remained in the profession.
In the late nineties, successful support teacher systems moved away from placing experts on
platforms as mentors with the responsibility of shaping novice mentees (Gold, 1996). Instead, a system
of reciprocity is visible in some public school socialization programs/support systems. In this system,
expert teachers listen to and share their own emotional teaching experiences with their new colleagues
(Odell, 1989; Gold, 1996).
Chapman and Green (1986) advise that administrators play an active role in the socialization
process of novices. But the support of expert teachers and administrators still falls short. The most
beneficial support, according to Gold & Roth (1993), has been the integration of counselors into the
transition experience. Counselors provide an evaluation-free environment where novices can share
stories, identify needs, and reconsider decisions. In turn, counselors help teachers develop practical
skills to move from reactionary, self-absorbed, negative thinkers, to capable problem solvers.
Group support systems for novice teachers have also been put in place (Gold, 1996). While
they are intended to complement instead of replace personalized attention, when appropriately
implemented, they have the potential to harvest a redirection in novice teachers’ thinking. In the first
stages, novice teachers are focused on themselves. The spotlight gradually shifts to teaching, and
ultimately to their students (Gold, 1996).
While it is true that a large number of school librarians have served in public schools as
teachers and have been socialized into the culture, there are some school librarians who enter the
profession from fields other than education. These novice school librarians do not have previous
socialization experiences upon which to call. Yet, they remain expected to fill leadership roles in
areas of instructional design, pedagogy, and technology. Without mentors inside their schools who
understand the nature of their work, many novice school librarians suppress their professional
struggles.

29

	  

Much literature has focused on the occupational socialization of other school professionals (i.e.
teachers and administrators), but very few studies have been conducted on the occupational
socialization of school librarians. Those published have used a quantitative framework and have
focused on all types of librarians: college, public, special and school librarians (Cravey, 1989). The one
qualitative study related to the occupational socialization of school librarians has focused primarily on
identity formation (Sandford, 2013). However, participants who Sandford (2013) defined as “novice
school librarians” had a wealth of professional experiences working in schools as teachers or other
instructional roles. Thus, their experiences did not always represent those of “true” novices.
Related Questions: What are the emotions that novice school librarians associate with their work?
What support systems are available for novice school librarians? How do these support systems
facilitate the occupational socialization of school librarians (if at all)? What is the role of the school
administration in the occupational socialization of school librarians? What role does the first year as a
school librarian play in the shaping of practice and person?
Because the literature lacks specificity about school librarians’ socialization process, combined
with the import placed on novice’s first year of teaching, this study seeks to provide new insights on
the occupational socialization of novice school librarians. Participants’ work experiences in public
schools will be two years or less, which will permit a better understanding of the experiences of
“novice” school librarians.
Theoretical Frameworks
The conceptualization of this study will be informed in part by the philosophical movement of
Existentialism. Greene (1967) explains that teachers are surrounded with existentialist thought in their
preparation programs and the places in which they teach, despite often being unaware of its presence
in their own thoughts and vocabulary. Teachers also integrate some existential concepts (i.e. the
process of becoming) into their ideas about teaching and learning, yet many teachers cannot define the
philosophy. Defining Existentialism is not an easy task and many agree with Beauvoir’s (1976) claim
that it is a philosophy of ambiguity. With this in mind, scholars do agree on major themes that
dominate existentialist writings (Flynn, 2006). Among the existentialist themes, three informed my
study: individualism, responsibility, and authenticity.
30

	  

Individualism
Individualism is a major theme that occurs in existentialist writings. Existential philosophy
focuses on a person’s ever-changing identity and is not limited to one particular point of time in a
person’s life. According to existentialists, humans are “fundamentally a work in progress, a story in
the process of being written” (Flynn, p. 69). Sartre, perhaps the best known existentialist, asserts that
the existential individual writes her/his own life narrative:
But is a man what he is? And more generally, how can he be what he is when he exists
as a consciousness of being? If candor or sincerity is a universal value, it is evident
that the maxim ‘one must be what one is’ does not serve solely as a regulating
principle for judgments and concepts by which I express what I am…it is necessary that
we make ourselves what we are. (as cited in Solomon, 2005, pp. 228-229)
Not everyone embraces his/her potential as an existential individual. For this reason most
existentialists look more closely at what or whom writes the individual’s story: society or an “ongoing,
self-defining practice” (Flynn, 2006, p. 69). They place great value on the “…individual’s pursuit of
identity and meaning amidst the social and economic pressures of mass society for superficiality and
conformism” (Flynn, 2006, p. 8). This pursuit, according to Greene (1967) is no easy task for teachers.
Those committed to individuality instead of conforming could face great challenges existing outside of
social norms (Flynn, 2006, p. 25; Greene, 1967).
Responsibility
One cannot become an existential individual without being accountable to oneself; thus,
responsibility is another important theme to existentialist thought. Existentialism challenges
individuals to continuously “own up” to their life choices; to acknowledge who they are; and to
progress beyond that by refining one’s character, morality, and politics (Flynn, 2006, pp. 64, 88). Yet
Flynn (2006) admits that Nietzsche’s advice to ‘become what you are’ is rarely followed; instead, most
people “flee their existential individuality into the comfort of the faceless crowd” (Flynn, pp. ii, 64).
Authenticity
Those finding security in conformity reject the significance that existentialists place on
authenticity. Existentialists believe in persistent examination of the genuineness of our society and our
personal lives (Flynn, 2006, p. 8). This type of reflective analysis reveals that most individuals imitate
the attitudes and beliefs that are compatible to their occupational and social roles in life (Flynn, 2006,
31

	  

p. 77). In other words, they reject living authentically to live as others expect and in some cases
demand. Kierkegaard explains the fate of those who are not authentic selves in his Either/Or:
Do you now know that there comes a midnight hour when everyone must unmask…I
have seen those in ordinary life who have deceived others for so long that at last they
were unable to show their true nature; I have seen some who played hide and seek…
can you think of anything more frightening than having it all end with the
disintegration of your essence into a multiplicity…so you would have lost what is most
inward and holy in a human being, the unifying power of personality?...In every person
there is something that up to a point prevents him from becoming wholly transparent
to himself, and this can be true to such a high degree, he can be so inextricably
interwoven in the relationships of life that extend beyond him, that he cannot unveil
himself. But he who cannot unveil himself cannot love, and he who cannot love is the
unhappiest of all. (as cited in Solomon, 2005, pp. 12-13)
Authentic living, according to Kierkegaard, is not just about self-preservation or self-improvement; it
also determines the fate of our relationships with others.
The Existential Crisis
Affiliated with the existentialist belief that humans are constantly in the state of becoming is
the existential crisis, or being challenged to adopt a new self (Kotarba & Johnson, 2002). Outside
existential circles, the existential crisis is also called a critical event, critical incident, or critical phase
based on its significant role in the life of the author/storyteller. While some scholars attribute
different characteristics to these terms, for the purposes of this study the terms will be used
interchangeably. According to Webster & Mertova (2007), critical events are recognized by the
following characteristics: (1) the author/storyteller admits a change of understanding or worldview
after the event occurs; (2) the event positively or negatively affects the author’s/storyteller’s work
performance; and (3) the event incorporates a physical or social risk, traumatic experience, or overt
public attention.
Some scholars seek to understand educational careers by having participants (re)write and
(re)tell their critical, professional events (Measor, 1985; Woods, 1993). This approach corresponds well
with the four stages of occupational socialization previously discussed; all affected by critical events.
Occupational socialization for educators is full of tension; teachers are at odds with themselves, the
people around them, or the society in which they live. Critical events put teachers out of balance and
“caus[e] individuals to reorganize, strengthen, or alter their system of thinking,” knowledge, beliefs,
or feelings (Gomez, Black, & Allen, 2007, p. 2109).
32

	  

Occupational Vulnerability
While existentialists analyze authenticity in the midst of critical events, Callahan (1962)
investigates what hinders professional authenticity in public schools. His well-known vulnerability
thesis identifies structural pressures that stand in opposition to educators becoming existential
individuals. Callahan (1962) asserts that school administrators’ positions of leadership, as defined and
enforced by external forces, create an “extreme weakness and vulnerability” in their professional
lives. Ultimately, this prevents them from attaining professional autonomy (pp. ii, iii). Their
vulnerability generates a type of professional fear that not only hinders personal growth, but also
causes administrators to act against their students’ best interests. Prioritizing external opinion as a
starting place for professional decisions, administrators choose to compromise in order to keep their
jobs (Callahan, 1962; Lutz, 1996; Wisener, 1996).
While Callahan primarily focuses on the vulnerability of superintendents, other scholars have
extended his vulnerability thesis to other school professionals (Wisener, 1996; Lutz, 1996). Lutz (1996)
believes vulnerability is the nature of the human experience. He asserts that humans “…make
decisions with self-interest high among the decision-making criteria. Individuals in all walks of life
make compromising decisions to survive” (Lutz, 1996, p. 39). Lutz (1996) also claims that the power
structure of public schools makes all employees vulnerable. However, he points out that unlike
teachers, administrators get paid well for their positions of vulnerability.
According to Wisener (1996) those in vulnerable school positions, specifically administrators,
are unable to be change agents because reform unsettles the communities in which they work. These
communities, primarily through the school boards and administration, reject an atmosphere of reform;
thus, those advocating for school-wide change are often dismissed (Wisener, 1996, pp. 52, 54).
Adding to Callahan’s scholarship, Apple (1982, 1986) examines the power structures in
American public schools; however, he demands changes in the patriarchal configuration. Apple (1982)
describes the local power structure with administrators on top, securing this location after succumbing
to political and economic pressures. To protect their power further, many administrators seek to
control teachers and undermine their work structurally (Apple, 1982, p. 34). Apple (1982) describes
administrators’ weakening of the profession by “…separat[ing] mental [labor] from manual labor;
33

	  

divorc[ing] conception from execution; and deskilling [teachers]” (p. 32).
While Apple (1982, 1986) examines the labor structures established within the schools, he also
considers the class structures that define the teaching profession. Teachers’ university education
could situate them firmly in the petty bourgeoisie, but the present-day structure of schools often
positions teachers in the working class. Residing in multiple classes, teachers possess “contradictory
interests” (Apple, 1986, p. 32). These contradictory interests, according to Apple (1986), lead
teachers to produce contradictory actions. At times, teachers (when claiming their petty bourgeoisie
status) oppose hegemonic ideologies; in other moments, teachers (when embracing their working class
identities) reproduce the cultural myths or assumptions that guide their labor processes (Apple, 1982,
p. 25). Defining these moments of reproduction as losses, Apple (1986) asks how “…teachers’ lived
culture [could] be reorganized [without] reproducing…elements [of a] patriarchal domain” (p. 52)?
While some may not be troubled by a labor orientation for teaching, the revised practices that define
the profession have strong leaning towards civil service (Wilson & Youngs, 2005, p. 621).
Cultural Myths
Britzman (1986) adds to Apple’s (1982, 1986) explanation of the hierarchical structure of public
schools, yet she explores the cultural myths and assumptions that “rationalize and legitimize the
existing school structure[s] as well as…provide a semblance of order, control, and certainty in the face
of the uncertainty of the teacher[s’] world” (p. 448). These influential teaching myths or assumptions
misinform pre-service and newly-certified teachers with ideal thoughts, behaviors, activities, and
orientations that secure the ideological interests of those in power.
Britzman (1986) articulates three cultural myths common to the master narratives of preservice and novice teachers: “…everything depends on the teacher; …the teacher is the expert;
[and]…teachers are self-made” (p. 448). These three teaching myths place great emphasis on the
notion that teachers bear sole responsibility, instead of shared accountability with administrators,
parents, and their local communities (p. 448). These cultural myths create a master narrative of
teacher as hero; consequently, narratives of conflict, seclusion, doubt, and confusion are dismissed
(Britzman, 2003).
I began this chapter by summarizing a brief history of apprenticeships. Next, organizing by
34

	  

Britzman’s (2003) four stages of occupational socialization, I offered the education and library science
literature that informed this study. The chapter concluded with a discussion of the theoretical
frameworks that guided the study: existentialism, occupational vulnerability, and cultural myths and
assumptions in education.

35

	  

CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY
The purpose of this study is to contribute to the understanding of the occupational socialization
of school librarians by studying the preparatory and professional experiences of novice school librarians
working in secondary schools. The study examines novice librarians’ narratives of vulnerability and
explores how participants perceived the influence of these critical events. I conducted this study in
order to address the following questions:
(1) What challenges and successes do novice school librarians encounter or bring about as they enter
the profession? (2) How do critical events create professional identities of school librarians (if at all)?
(3) How do narratives of vulnerability (re)produce cultural myths about teaching and librarianship (if at
all)?
I wanted to understand the socialization process of novice school librarians and how
participants viewed the role of Performance MyStory, a narrative inquiry tool, in their attempts to
develop as professionals.
Research Design
I selected research methods from the qualitative tradition, and my research design used
descriptive, multiple-case studies (Yin, 2009). For this study, I employed a version of the narrative
inquiry tool Performance MyStory (Denzin, 2003; Dennis, 2009) in an attempt to understand the novice
school librarians’ professional experiences, in particular their vulnerable moments as school librarians.
Not only was I interested in exploring the phenomenon of the occupational socialization of school
librarians, it was also my desire to analyze the similarities and differences across the cases based upon
Callahan’s (1962) and Apple’s (1982, 1986) theories about occupational vulnerability in schools.
What follows in this chapter is a discussion of the metatheory that informed the design of the
study; a detailed description of the research methods and data collection employed; and the analysis
techniques used. The chapter concludes with a summary of the study’s reliability, validity, and ethical
considerations.
Methodological Metatheory: Narrative Inquiry
Many cultures have disseminated stories about educators informally across generations,
because of the positive influence storytelling has on life experiences (Webster & Mertova, 2007).
36

	  

Finding merit in the way people make meaning through communicating life events, narrative inquiry
has been used as a research methodology to understand the work of teachers for decades (Connelly &
Clandinin, 1990; Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 1999; Lyons & LaBoskey, 2002). Narrative inquiry has the
potential to benefit not only the researcher applying the method, but also the teacher participants, for
a variety of reasons. First, narrative inquiry has the potential to demonstrate the emotional
complexities of teaching and can help create a new knowledge about pedagogy. Second, narrative
inquiry allows teacher participants to recall critical events from the past, articulate and analyze events
as they are remembered, and determine how (and whether) they inform their future practice (Carr,
1986; Webster & Mertova, 2007). Teachers can release themselves from the constraining power of
their stories through the emancipatory act of storytelling (Gough, 1991; Langellier, 1999). For these
reasons, researchers and employers have applied narrative inquiry as a professional development tool
for educators.
While researchers can conduct narrative inquiry in a variety of ways, few studies in education
and library science have utilized performance based narrative inquiry. This study focuses on one
specific performance based tool: Performance MyStory (Denzin, 2003; Dennis, 2009). Performance
MyStory involves the creation of one single, autobiographical narrative to explain an existential crisis,
significant turning point, or noteworthy experience in life. After dramaturgically describing the
moment and fashioning it into a text, the writer performs the narrative in front of an audience. At the
end of the performance, the researcher facilitates a discussion between the audience and the writer
through a series of questions. From this discussion, the writer recognizes the cultural representations
and voices that define the experience. After the performance, the writer reflects on the
deconstruction of the narrative and lessons learned by producing another written text.
Research focusing on the emotional dimension of school librarianship is rare, despite the
significance of this research toward building professional development strategies (Palmer, 2007).
However, Nias (1996) articulates the cost when educators’ emotional responses to their work are
restricted or disengaged: teachers are unable to teach well… if at all. She claims, “Without feeling,
without the freedom to ‘face themselves,’ to be whole persons in the classroom, [educators] implode
or walk away” (p. 305). Despite scholars’ requests for more ways to systematically reflect on
37

	  

vulnerable stories about teaching (Kelchtermans’, 1996), academic institutions have explored very few
alternative methods (Day, Kington, Stobart, & Sammons, 2006). Given its roots in narrative therapy,
Performance MyStory has the potential to not only reveal the occupational challenges of novice school
librarians but also could serve as a formal, systematic method to alter the participants’ negative
associations with their occupational crises.
Ulmer (1989, 1994) developed the concept of Mystory out of his frustration for traditional
academic writing that focuses on expressing truth. He designed these electronic, unconventional texts
in order to stimulate curiosity about what is called truth. Ulmer’s peers described Mystory as a genre
of writing or a writing heuristic that incorporates media/technology. Providing no examples or models
to aid his students’ exploration, Ulmer intended for Mystories to explore the arts, literature, and
language (Gye, 2003). Ulmer hoped the process of creating Mystories would convince students that
they themselves were producers of art. Thus, Mystories would give students confidence to participate
in formal academic discourses related to their writing (Rutsky & Macdonald, 2003; Gye, 2003).
In contrast, the Performance MyStory narrative inquiry tool does not necessarily explore the
arts, literature, and language, nor does it produce electronic texts; rather, it focuses on
autobiographical, critical events. Also, Performance MyStory provides writers with examples, models,
and/or approaches to create the autobiographical narratives. Even with departures from the Mystory
scholarship, Peformance MyStory does share some similarities. Like Ulmer’s (1989) Mystory genre,
Performance MyStory joins the “private, popular, and disciplinary culture[s]” (Ulmer, 1989, p. 39).
While this joining of the personal, popular, and academic discourses may not necessarily occur
explicitly in a text, the Performance MyStory tool connects the discourses during the performance.
This allows the audiences to participate in the (re)creation of the narrative’s meaning.
Population and Setting
This study involved two different groups of participants: first, the school librarians and second,
their selected audiences/focus groups. The primary focus of the research was based on participants
with three years or less of experience as school librarians. I purposefully selected the school librarians
who participated in this study. I served as an university mentor for School Library Media student
teachers at a Midwestern university. Thus, I invited six of my former student teachers to participate in
38

	  

the study. One of these invited participants withdrew from student teaching a few days before her
placement began, and she completed her student teaching with a different university supervisor.
I invited these six school librarians in particular, from a group of fifteen former student
teachers because they stood out as thoughtful, reflective educators who were open to critique. In
addition, during their student teaching, they shared with me their frustrating occupational stories
while maintaining the belief that they could make a difference in school librarianship if given an
opportunity to manage their own library.
It was my desire to keep the sample size small, so that I could study the occupational
socialization of individual school librarians in depth (Patton, 2002; Miles & Huberman, 1994). Thus,
from a group of four interested participants, I selected the three who shared the following attributes:
female, Caucasian, secondary school librarians who worked in public schools in the United States. The
librarian participants, Ginger, Lucy, and Izzie, graduated from the same School of Library and
Information Science at a Midwestern university and ranged in age from 24 to 34. Selecting participants
from the same school library preparation program gave me an opportunity to examine a cohort with
similar schedules and professors; thus, I had greater familiarity with their university-sponsored
preparation.
Ginger, Lucy, and Izzie student taught in the Midwest, but only Izzie accepted a library position
in that part of the country. At the time of the study, Izzie was no longer working in a school library;
thus, I did not observe her teaching as a part of the study. Ginger accepted a position out West on a
Navajo Reservation, and I conducted all post-student teaching observations in her school library.
Because Ginger resigned from the school where her critical event took place, my observations of Ginger
took place at her second school library on the Navajo reservation. Lucy accepted a position on the East
Coast, and I conducted all post-student teaching observations in her first school library where her
critical event took place.
I also consciously tailored the second group of participants, which were the audiences/focus
groups, for the revealing narratives that the school librarian participants shared. Because Ginger,
Lucy, and Izzie were seeking input from others about their critical events, I asked them to select their
own audiences with suggested guidelines. For example, I advised the librarian participants to select a
39

	  

mixed group of individuals who resided inside and outside of the library profession and inside and
outside of the school in which the critical event occurred. I suggested other criteria, including the
selection of people who: (1) were insightful; (2) could challenge feelings and ideas about the critical
events; (3) would honor and keep the experiences of the school librarians in confidence. I requested
that the audience range in size between three and twelve, not including me. Ginger, Lucy, and Izzie
gave me the email addresses of potentional audience members, and I invited them to the performances
hosted in locations selected by the school librarians.
Ginger performed her critical event in front of an audience of one female and four males. Two
of the audience members were Navajo and three were Caucasian Americans. One audience member
was associated with the school in which Ginger’s critical event occurred and three were associated
with the school in which Ginger worked at the time of her performance. The audience members
brought diverse backgrounds to Ginger’s performance. One participant worked in libraries for over
twenty-five years and was a guest lecturer for Ginger’s library preparation program, one served as a
technology manager for Navajo schools and was a pre-service teacher, two were educators, and one
held a school clerical position. Because Ginger was concerned about attendance, she permitted two of
my colleagues to attend her performance and join her self-selected audience. Ginger’s performance
took place in the Navajo Nation school library where she worked at the time of the study; it was not
the school in which her critical event occured.
Lucy performed her critical event in front of an audience of two females and two males. Three
participants were Caucasian Americans and one was Asian American. One participant held the position
of young adult librarian in the local community and had completed a number of school library media
courses during her librarian preparation program. Three held teaching assistantships in an East Coast
higher education graduate program. Lucy’s performance took place in the living room of her East
Coast apartment.
Izzie claimed that she had “overshared” her frustrations about work to those she knew, and she
desired an audience she did not know well or at all, who were unfamiliar with her work experiences
(Izzie, November 20, 2012). She asked me to select an audience for her reading, because she believed
the conversations would be “more interesting, and [Izzie] would get more out of the experience”
40

	  

(Izzie, February 10, 2013). Izzie performed her story to four strangers and two individuals whom both
she and I were acquainted; four audience members were female and two were male. One audience
member was Asian American, while the others identified as Caucasian Americans. One participant was
a novice school librarian and a graduate from Izzie’s library preparation program; another worked in
libraries for over twenty-five years and was a guest lecturer for Izzie’s library preparation program;
two held uncertified teaching positions in public schools despite having teaching credentials; and two
held teaching posts affiliated with the institution that awarded Izzie’s Library Science degree. Izzie’s
performance took place in my living room located in a wooded 1970s housing addition in the Midwest.
Data Collection
In order to improve my understanding of the occupational socialization of the school librarian
participants, I employed multiple means of data collection for each of the cases (Yin, 2009). These
data collection methods included field notes, interviews, physical artifacts, and direct observation.
The research began while participants were student teaching and continued until their second year of
practice.
I first acquainted myself with these participants by reading their student teaching applications.
Then, I interviewed participants days before their student teaching experience in school libraries
located in the Midwest in order to understand their feelings about their preparation for student
teaching and to establish shared goals related to teaching and librarianship. While participants were
still classified as student teachers, I interviewed and observed them for a combined thirty-five hours. I
took extensive notes during the interviews and observations; completed evaluation rubrics; and offered
written feedback to record the progress of these student teachers’ transitions from students to
teacher-librarians. In addition, I read and responded to their weekly teaching journals, in which I
prompted them to document their ideas, beliefs, and experiences about their transition.
Upon graduation and expression of interest to contribute to the study, the school librarian
participants wrote narratives of their most vulnerable, critical events as school librarians. After Ginger
and Lucy wrote their stories, I visited their schools and conducted fifty hours of observations in their
respective school libraries. I was also able to observe their lives outside of school, participating in
41

	  

twenty hours of recreational activities with them. Before all three school librarian participants
performed/read aloud their stories to their audiences/focus groups, I conducted a combined fifteen
hours of semi-structured, individual interviews with them, digitally recorded using two separate
devices. These interviews took place at locations that the school librarian participants selected. I
interviewed Ginger in her school library located on the reservation; I interviewed Lucy in her East Coast
school library and then later in the public library that served her school population; and I interviewed
Izzie at a local coffee shop in the Midwest.
Upon the completion of the interviews, school librarian participants performed their critical
event narratives to their audience. Their audio-recorded performances and the subsequent
conversations with the audience members/focus group participants lasted a combined ten hours. I set
up two audio recorders in different locations in the rooms. While I gave each school librarian
participant the authority to move the conversations in ways she desired and encouraged her to ask
questions of and explain her experience further to the audience, I led the audience member/focus
group conversations with the following questions:
(1) Do you have any clarifying questions regarding the story?
(2) What feelings or images did the story evoke for you?
(3) What cultural representations, myths, or stereotypes did you hear in this story?
(4) What voices were heard? What voices were silenced?
(5) What stories in your own life resonate with this story?
(6) In what ways has tonight's performance altered the way you think about being a school librarian,
the vulnerabilities associated with teaching, or your own professional identity?
After the performance, the school librarian participants reflected on the deconstruction of
their critical event narrative in a written reflective text. I asked the participants to reflect on their
writing process, their performance, the conversations between the participants and the
audiences/focus groups after the performances, and their thoughts and beliefs about their critical
event. After I received the school librarian participants’ reflections, I conducted three to five followup interviews with each participant. The first interviews took place within a week after the
performances and the final ones took place approximately five months after the participants’
42

	  

reading/performances. All were digitally recorded with two audio devices and, when combined, the
follow-up interviews lasted fourteen hours.
Data Analysis
Because I framed the study around the vulnerable experiences of school librarians to
understand their occupational socialization, I used an adapted version of Critical Events Analysis as the
primary technique to synthesize data in each of the case studies (Webster and Mertova, 2007). The
four stages of Critical Events Analysis are described below, along with further explanation on how this
study modified some aspects of the analysis.
Stage #1: Analysis of Criticality
While Webster and Mertova (2007) advocate for researchers to identify participants’ single
critical event, I modified their approach. Instead, I gave the participants the opportunity to define
their most significant moments as novice school librarians. Although these critical events were the
primary document used for analysis, participants shared multiple narratives in the telling and
explanation of their critical events. Because these narratives captured other important professional
moments, I transcribed them all and included them in my analysis.
Using the comment feature in Microsoft Word, I descriptively labeled the participant-defined
critical events in my transcription record. After reading through the transcriptions approximately five
times, I began to think of other important events from participants’ professional accounts. To honor
how participants sensed events through “sameness” and “differentness,” I read the data again to find
recollections similar to and different from the critical event (Webster and Mertova, 2007, pp.78-79).
This economical and organized focus on stories similar to and different from the critical event kept me
from getting overwhelmed with data (Webster and Mertova, 2007). In addition, finding “like” and
“other events” tends to confirm the authenticity of the narratives; in other words, the critical event
did not occur in isolation or out of thin air (Webster and Mertova, 2007).
Again, using the comment feature, I labeled “like events,” which shared common
characteristics with the critical events, such as repetition and context. I also noted “other events”
which contradicted the critical events or showed something entirely different but had “informal
43

	  

associations which intuitively inform[ed] the critical event[s]” (Webster and Mertova, 2007, p. 78).
Other comments or statements fit into “like” and “other” events but were not fully developed stories.
Table three provides an abbreviated visual depiction of my analysis of criticality on Ginger’s
data, including one of the seven topics of analysis. The numbers below served as a transcript line
number locater - to easily relocate the information in Ginger’s transcript. After identifying like and
other events or statements, I reconstructed the meaning of the “central places” of the critical event
and labeled their distinct meaning or quality of the events (Webster and Mertova, 2007, pp.78-79).
The three other stages of Critical Events Analysis - Event Structure Analysis, Identity Analysis, and
Modified Content Analysis - were drawn from this first stage.
Table 3
Abbreviated Analysis of Criticality
Distinct qualities
& meanings
Once a superior
makes a decision,
the conversation is
over.

How
Critical Event
delivers meaning
Once the administrator
told me the printer
would be my
responsibility, I
resigned. [Ginger/56,
59]
When the administrator
talked with me about
the printer, she made it
clear that she was the
one with the power, not
me. [Ginger/573-574]

Like Events
If I’m told to do something, I do it.
[Ginger/119]
When my administrator wanted me to keep
working while breathing construction fumes, I
did. [Ginger/311-314]
When the power went out, the administration
made us keep working the dark. [Ginger/315316]

Other Events
When my university
advisors said I couldn’t
student teach on the
reservation, I skipped
student teaching and got a
job here instead.
[Ginger/130-135]
My principal wanted me to
teach a publications class,
and I said I could not.
[Ginger/668, 670, 672]

Stage #2: Event Structure Analysis
The next stage of my work, event structure analysis, articulated the plot structure of the
participants’ critical event narratives based on Woods’ (1993) structure of six well-defined phases.
Event structure analysis allowed me to examine the elements that comprised the event within the
articulated timeline. Without this analysis of the event elements, it would be difficult to understand
the critical event (Webster & Mertova, 2007). Figure three displays Woods’ (1993) characterization of
these phases.

44

	  

Figure 3
Woods’ Narrative Phases

Phase 1:
Conceptualization:
What spark sets the
critical event in motion?

Phase 2:
Reaction, Preparation,
and Planning:
How does the participant
respond to the
spark/conceptualization?

Phase 4:
Convergence:
How and in what ways was a
plan presented?

Phase 5:
Consolidation:
How does the participant
move forward or refine
basic plan, ideas, or
world view?

Phase 3:
Divergence:
What is the unexpected
opportunity that is
presented?

Phase 6:
Conclusion:
What makes the ending?

Stage #3: Identity Analysis
Stage three of Critical Events analysis fuses the events of the narrative with the motivations
and intentions of the narrator. This allows the analysis to not only focus on what happened in the
story, but also gives insight on the character and nature of the storyteller. To do this, I read through
the full critical event that Ginger performed, and I synthesized the parts of the narrative that revealed
a claim about Ginger’s identity. After naming these claims, I scrutinized which claims were repeated.
Whenever possible, I revised claims to fit broader categories. I did this to find repetition in the
identity claims. Finally, I identified the degree to which each claim was obvious by labeling it explicit,
implicit, or tacit.
Stage #4: Modified Content Analysis
In stage four, I used a four-step hierarchical classification system to analyze the content within
the participants’ critical events. First, I classified the types of experiences each critical event
articulated. Second, I described those experiences. In table four, I include an abbreviated example of
this description from Ginger’s data.

45

	  

Table 4
Types of Experiences Based on Modified Content Analysis
Types of Experiences
Experiences of disrespect

Description
*Superintendent expresses his
preference for Navajo and claim nonNavajo teachers weren’t desired.
*Administrator did not pay Ginger
based on her academic qualifications
and refused to acknowledge Ginger’s
teacher status.
*Administrator did not support
Ginger’s policies, book orders, or
technology needs.
*Grant writer receives a grant for a
printer that is placed in library.
Ginger is informally told she will be
in charge of it, but is never trained
how to use it or for what purposes it
will be used.
*Technology personnel claim they
aren’t going to train Ginger how to
use the printer because it is too
complicated for her.

Line Numbers
Ginger/5-9

Ginger/28-29; 31

Ginger/31-32
Ginger/34-40

Ginger/46-49

Third, I identified the conditions of the events and what they meant to each of the
participants. In table five, I include an abbreviated example of this from Ginger’s data.
Table 5
Conditions of Events Based on Modified Content Analysis

Experiences of Disrespect

Conditions

Events

Meaning

Line #s

There is no written or agreed
upon belief about how the
library is to be used (as a
classroom; storage place; or
gathering place).

The printer is placed in the library.

The printer is Ginger’s
responsibility, even though she
doesn’t know how or why to use it.

Ginger/
34-35

There is no written or agreed
upon job description for
Ginger.

Ginger’s professional status is not
recognized, and she is assigned
responsibilities outside what she
believes her professional role is.

*Ginger has too many
responsibilities.
*Teachers and others take advantage
of school librarian, because they
don’t know what she does or is
supposed to do.

Ginger/
18-19;
21-26

There is a lack of
communication between
school leader and personnel.

*No one talks to Ginger about
printer.
*No one tells the technology
personnel to train Ginger how to use
the printer.

*Ginger feels uninvolved in making
the decisions about the library and
her role in it.
*No one trains Ginger.

Ginger/
34-40;
46-49

Technology personnel are
unsupportive of
teachers/librarians.

*Technology personnel don’t give
access to sites and ignore Ginger’s
requests.
*Technology personnel don’t train
Ginger on how to use the printer.

Ginger feels like she can’t be
successful in managing the printer,
so she has to get rid of it.

Ginger/
42-45;
46-49

Fourth, I labeled the feelings that were expressed in association with the events. In table six,
46

	  

I include a brief example of this from Ginger’s data.
Table 6
Effect of the Event Based on Modified Content Analysis
Effect of the Event
Effect
Ginger feels: Anger, Frustration,
Indignation

Event
Techs refuse to train Ginger

Reliability & Validity
Webster & Mertova (2007) remind scholars that narrative inquiry’s purpose is to expand the
understanding of individual persons and characteristics of a collective humanity instead of predicting or
controlling them. They contend,
It can neither be expected or assumed that the outcomes from one narrative or a
collection of stories will consistently return the same views or outcomes. With
narrative’s emphasis on individual human experience of reality and the impact of critical
events on our understanding, the differences between individuals are to be expected,
indeed valued (p. 93).
Therefore, my aim was not to focus on assembling results that could be reproduced or generalized;
rather, narrative inquiry scholars are absorbed in pointing to “individual truths” from “individual
interpretations” (89). Furthermore, Webster and Mertova (2007) argue that narrative inquiry should
not be critiqued by the same measures of traditional quantitative and qualitative methods, and they
provide guidelines for narrative scholars concerned with reliability and validity.
Reliability
In narrative research, the term reliability usually speaks to the data’s dependability not the
measurements’ strength (Webster & Mertova 2007). Thus, reliability depends on participants who can
verify or confirm their recounts. While researchers rely on participants’ memories to collect some
data, place names and exact dates are not important to understanding the narratives.
I incorporated a number of measures within the structure of data collection to ensure the
reliability of the data. For example, I used at least two digital recording devices during interviews and
performances, and I placed them strategically in the settings of the interviews. While transcribing, I
listened to one primary recording and then I confirmed or corrected the data with the secondary one.

47

	  

In addition, during my extended observations of the school librarian participants, I performed
consistency checks when I noticed contradictions in their stories or actions. And because of the
prolonged access to the participants, I had the opportunity to interview them repeatedly about their
occupational socialization. They retold a number of stories in later interviews.
In addition, two participants at two of the performances read all of the data associated with
the focus groups along with the analysis. Both had the opportunity to confirm or revise the data, based
on their understanding of what took place at the performances. Upon the completion of each case
study draft, I conducted member checks to ensure the accuracy of the narratives and my descriptions
and interpretations.
Validity
In narrative inquiry, the term validity characterizes the contextualized description of and
access to the data and the strength of the data analysis (Webster & Mertova 2007; Reissman, 2008).
Therefore, I present the description of my study’s validity with a summary of the description of and
access to the data; then, I explore how strength is measured in narrative scholarship.
In the Data Collection section above, I described the data sources I used to gather information
on the participants’ occupational socialization, including field notes, interviews, physical artifacts, and
direct observation. I provided straightforward access to these data sources through my modified
critical events analysis by using a coding system. This structure employed a tracking system, because
transcription document names allow researchers to retrieve all analyzed data from their original
sources by using the corresponding line numbers. Moreover, direct quotes from the participants
frequently support the claims in the case studies.
Because narrative scholars believe in multiple truths, they reject the practice of winnowing the
narratives down to one truth. Consequently, they claim that individuals who read the research should
perform the ultimate assessment of validity. Readers can access the insights that are relevant to their
own situation. Narrative scholars believe this approach is more valid than using the common practice
of triangulation (Webster & Mertova, 2007). It is the reader, then, who determines whether a case
study is valid and believable.
I structured the study with validity checks during the data collection as well as after the study
48

	  

was completed. Not only did the school librarians’ stories and critical events resonate with my
previous experience as a librarian, the audience members and focus group participants accepted them
as well. None of the narratives incorporated unrealistic Hollywood endings where the school librarian
overcame the professional obstacles and emerged as a hero (Bloom, 1998; Webster & Mertova, 2007).
Indeed, during the conversation following the school librarians’ performances, audience
members/focus group participants were asked to discuss or write about how the critical event
narratives resonated with stories in their professional lives and how the narratives altered the way they
thought about school librarianship, teaching, and professional identities. Focus group participants
shared detailed connections between their professional work and those of the school librarians, and
many acknowledged altered views of school librarianship after the readings and conversations. These
connections and new understandings, according to Webster & Mertova (2007), demonstrate the validity
of the school librarians’ retelling of their critical events and the transferability of their stories to other
professional settings.
Another way the structure of the study enhanced the validity of the data was related to the
involvement of the audience members/focus groups at the school librarians’ readings/performances,
which mirrored the role of critical friends (Webster & Mertova, 2007). Because all readings included
audience members/focus group participants who knew the school librarians during their critical events,
they became sources that could confirm or refute the narratives. While the audience generally
affirmed the descriptions, timelines, and emotions related to the critical events, at one reading a
participant amended the school librarian’s claim in her narrative. Specifically, the school librarian
asserted that she did “everything” her administration requested of her before her critical event, but a
male audience member mentioned one aspect of her job that went overlooked and the school librarian
confirmed his statement.
Ethical Considerations

In the fall of 1997, I enrolled in a writing fiction course that required the reading of O’Brien’s
(1998) The Things They Carried. I was completely engaged with the book from the opening line. I
remember reading the narrator’s assertion that “stories can save us” (p. 256). As a writer, teacher,
49

	  

and librarian, I have believed and often times identified with this claim. Yet as a doctoral researcher
employing narrative methods to understand stories of vulnerability, I had to consider contradictory
theories about the power of stories. Did stories have the power to also endanger, drown, or even damn
storytellers?
Before I chose Performance Mystory as a narrative inquiry tool for this study, I conducted three
pilot self-studies in order to expose myself to the same types of emotional experiences in which I
intended to ask others to participate. Just as my participants in this study did, I wrote narratives; I
was interviewed by another scholar; I performed my stories; and I wrote reflective texts based on what
I learned from the interviews, performance, and the audience. In addition, I facilitated two other pilot
studies for another doctoral student (Kylea Asher) also using this narrative inquiry tool. Based on the
findings of these five studies, Asher and I concluded that Performance Mystory has the potential for
personal and professional transformation; in short, the benefits outweighed the risks. At the same
time, we believed certain cautions should be exercised. Because all five pilot studies were classified
as self-studies, many precautions were taken to protect the audience members/focus groups (in fact,
two received Institutional Review Board approval). However, very little was done to protect the
storytellers (Asher or me), which furthered our vulnerability. These pilot studies led Asher and me to
believe that certain ground rules should be established at the performance. Upon the completion of
the five pilot studies, Asher and I articulated the following ground rules to use with Performance
Mystory: (1) Ultimately, the story belongs to the storyteller; (2) The storyteller reserves the right to
withdraw at any time; (3) The storyteller receives the last word; (4) At any point, the storyteller may
ask for what he or she needs from the audience and/or facilitator; (5) The storyteller chooses the
location where she tells and performs her stories; and (6) The storyteller selects the members of the
audience, and can ask people to leave at any time. In addition, Asher and I recommended that the
storyteller be given the chance to respond to comments of the audience/focus group whenever
possible, to whatever degree she prefers. In some cases, the facilitator may need to redirect or
reframe an audience member’s comment into a question, and pose it to the storyteller. For example,
“Would you agree with X that this was a case of sexual harassment?” We wanted to ensure that
comments were not taken for granted and that the audience did not misinterpret or reinterpret the
50

	  

story in a way that did not fit with the storyteller’s rendition. Ultimately, I used these ground rules for
the present study on novice school librarians. The ground rules were explained in the consent forms,
and I read them at the start of all the performances.
I told all of my participants about the pilot studies I conducted, and all three asked to review
the narratives I wrote for the performances. Two asked to review my final reflective texts. I shared
these documents with them, and I invited them to ask me questions about my experiences of
professional vulnerability as well as my experiences using the narrative inquiry tool. In addition, I
shared my hope that the study would be an exchange of ideas and stories, and I invited the participants
to ask me questions about my journey as a student, teacher, and librarian during the interviews or
through email. This happened at different times with all three of the participants to differing degrees.
Lucy reflected on her questions posed to me in this way:

I saw that you also had struggles as a librarian, and that you also believe the most
important thing in your life is not your job... It made me feel really good to see that in
you… Sometimes as a twenty-something with a job, I feel like I’m losing myself. (May
25, 2012)
One of the participants even held off on answering one of my questions during an interview, and she
asked me to answer the question before she did. From these encounters, I believe my participants
recognized my desire for reciprocity.
At the beginning of the study, even with the pilot studies completed, I did not fully grasp the
social, psychological, or financial ramifications that the sharing of these intimate, professional
narratives could have on participants. Writing and sharing their stories presented occupational and
emotional risks for the participants. In spite of the risks, Ginger agreed to participate in the study
because she wanted to get “confirmation,” “closure,” and to “help a friend finish up her research”
(May 29, 2012). Lucy mentioned what I could do for as one of her reasons for her participation. She
stated, “I thought it would be a nice excuse to see you and garner some advice about my library” (May
25, 2012). Izzie’s reasoning related more to her hope of what the study could do for school
librarianship:

I agreed to be a part of your study because I liked you, and it sounded really interesting
to be a part of a dissertation. I think school librarianship is not discussed or studied
51

	  

nearly enough and anything that helps bring more attention to it helps improve the
profession. (February 10, 2013)
There were no participants fired from their jobs for sharing their stories (two had already resigned
from their positions in which their critical events took place), and no participants claimed to desire or
require mental health services related to sharing their stories or otherwise. However, if I were to use
Performance Mystory in future studies, I would study and learn more practical strategies from narrative
therapy experts concerning what to do when the storytelling hurts instead of heals.
The next three chapters share the results of my data collection and analysis in relationship to
the occupational socialization of my participants. In chapter four, I share the case of Ginger, who
struggles in a foreign school environment to emerge as a teacher and collaborator, instead of a clerical
staff member who monitors the printers. In chapter five, I present the case of Lucy: a novice school
librarian who envisions an active and productive school library, but is hindered by her superintendent’s
understanding of her work and the physical condition of the library and its resources. Chapter six is
devoted to Izzie’s case where the prospect of transitioning into a school librarian career in less than a
year lured her into accepting a menial, clerical library position.

52

	  

CHAPTER FOUR: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN, NOT THE KINKO’S GIRL
The hope I dreamed of was a dream,
Was but a dream; and now I wake
Exceeding comfortless, and worn, and old,
For a dream's sake.
I hang my harp upon a tree,
A weeping willow in a lake;
I hang my silenced harp there, wrung and snapt
For a dream's sake.
Lie still, lie still, my breaking heart;
My silent heart, lie still and break:
Life, and the world, and mine own self, are changed
For a dream's sake. (Rossetti & Crump, 1979, p. 55-56)
I first met Ginger Allenby2 the weekend before her student teaching experience began in an
urban elementary school in the Midwest. There, at the Starbucks across the street from her extended
stay motel and minutes away from her student teaching placement, a slender woman in her midthirties greeted me as I entered the corporate coffee shop. Ginger shook my hand firmly, smiled
easily, and appeared eager to start her summer school placement. Her mentor librarian, Mrs. Moulten,
also joined us.
During our one-hour meeting, I explained the expectations that the university had for Ginger
and Mrs. Moulten over a cup of soy, no water, chai. Bella, Ginger’s daughter with long dark braids,
played quietly at a different table in the corner of the Starbucks. Ginger spoke to her occasionally
throughout our hour-long meeting. “Bella, I’d like to introduce you to two people: my professor and
the woman who directs the school library,” Ginger said. “We’re going to talk about my work in the
library this summer. Is there anything you need from me before we begin our meeting?” Ginger asked.
Each time Ginger spoke to Bella like she was an equal in their family.
Ginger came to the student teaching meeting more prepared than other Library Science
students, as she had been a high school librarian for Native American students at Red Rock High School
in New Mexico for a year. Despite having secured a school librarian position thousands of miles from
her graduate program, Ginger informed her mentor librarian and me of her determination to learn as
2

	  I	  have	  attempted	  to	  remove	  major	  identifying	  details	  from	  participants	  and	  their	  lives,	  such	  as	  personal	  names	  and	  place	  names.	  	  I	  have	  
replaced	  names	  with	  pseudonyms.	  

53

	  

much as she could. She desired to return to Red Rock to make a difference in the lives of young adult
Native Americans. As she shared her vision for student teaching, she spoke slowly, as if deliberately
selecting each of her words with care.
In my first observation of her teaching about a week later, Ginger was jittery as she greeted
me, and she confessed that she was nervous. Yet, as she taught, I found her graceful movements to be
captivating. She was the first student teacher in school librarianship that I had ever seen teach with
her entire body. For this particular lesson, Ginger had to distribute cameras to students, explain how
they worked, and also give students time to practice using them. Most school librarian student
teachers would have focused on rules, rules, and more rules. But, Ginger distributed cameras without
a long list of rules and regulations. Also, the way she presented information to students looked
different than other student teachers. Her presentation style looked more like dancing than traditional
teaching. Her limber fingers passed cameras to students; she made small jumps as she emphasized
teaching points; and she bowed as students returned cameras to her. When we discussed her
movements after the lesson, Ginger explained that her study of Hula dance made her especially
conscious of the movement and physical interactions between teachers and students. For her, every
teaching experience deserved her best physical performance. And she delivered; her students adored
her. In a few short weeks, Ginger established positive relationships with students, despite her student
teacher status.
Ginger believed that having the professional experience trying to set up the library at Red Rock
High school before student teaching helped her “tremendously” (April 11, 2012). She already felt
skilled at operating and understanding the resource catalog, and she was comfortable interacting with
students. “It was just a dream,” Ginger remembered, because Mrs. Moulten “…already had [the library
program] set up; [she] already had collaboration going” (April 11, 2012). Contributing to a healthy,
functioning library under the care of her student teaching mentor, Ginger wondered if she was
experiencing the best moments that her professional life would ever deliver.
Journey to the Library Profession
Ginger did not grow up with visions of being a teacher or a school librarian. She attended a
small Quaker college in the Midwest and majored in history with a minor in environmental science. At
54

	  

the end of her program, she completed an unpaid internship at a science and technology museum
where she provided outreach services for children, followed by the achievement of a Fulbright
scholarship that allowed her to study Hula dance rituals in Tuvalu and other locations in Polynesia.
Upon her return to the United States, she was pregnant and had few leads for employment. A
trusted college mentor suggested she take a library clerk position at the Philadelphia Friends School
(PFS). PFS could not afford to employ a certified librarian, so Ginger would be expected to teach
students how to use the library and conduct research, while also performing the clerical duties needed
to operate a school library (i.e. checking out books to students).
Although Ginger claimed she did not know what she was doing in her position at PFS, she
listened thoughtfully when a colleague gave her some suggestions. Those recommendations, Ginger
remembered, “just opened the doors” for her to see herself in the role of a school librarian (March 29,
2012). She developed confidence in her library duties: purchasing new books, teaching students how to
find information, and leading tours to the downtown Philadelphia public library. The most rewarding
aspect of her position was seeing young children find books that they really wanted to read.
At PFS, Ginger began developing what she believed was an “idealistic” philosophy about
teaching (April 11, 2012). Ginger thought she would enjoy being a certified school librarian because
she wanted to “…be around kids, be around teachers, people who I thought would have the same
mission and goals in life: to just give kids everything and watch them change and grow” (April 11,
2012). Because she greatly enjoyed the school environment, Ginger entertained the idea of becoming
a traditional classroom teacher. Yet, when she considered the level of responsibility required to have
her own classroom, Ginger claimed it made her “feel like panicking” (March 29, 2012).
After two years of working in a support role at PFS, Ginger was faced with another
occupational decision: to follow her passion for Polynesian-inspired dance in a doctoral program or to
attend library school and earn a master’s degree. She chose a doctoral program in Hawaii, but she only
stayed a semester. Immediately afterwards, she enrolled in a Midwest university’s library school and
focused her studies on school librarianship. She never considered being any other type of librarian.
Although the library science school in which Ginger enrolled was accredited by the American
Library Association, numerous times she claimed that her coursework did not prepare her for a role as
55

	  

a school librarian. She wished for more practical training from her library science coursework that
empowered her daily life as a librarian. Ginger reflected on what was lacking in this way:
I think what else we need, though, is the little things that you don’t think about,
like… how to fix a book. You think that would come naturally. It [does] not!
What do you use? Glue? Tape? It sounds silly, but it would be really nice to know
some of that kind of stuff. Or to see a school that has everything, and see how
they do it…so you can see what you can reach for. Another [missing curriculum
component was] a [required] grant writing class. At this school? I need that. I need
that skill… You see the application form to even start… and I don’t know the answers to
half of these questions! It’s confusing. So, that usually stops me… (April 11, 2012)
The only course Ginger found useful was Information Inquiry for School Teachers. She
recalled that it was:
perfect…the best class I took. I feel like it made me a teacher. The class
made me able to understand what a lesson plan was, what standards were…
I finally understood the magic that teachers do… That was the best [course].
(April 11, 2012)
Ginger’s description of becoming a teacher did not include living out her educational
philosophy, having confidence in her content knowledge, or successful teaching in front of a class.
Instead, she described becoming a teacher the moment she understood “the magic” teachers conveyed
behind the scenes through writing lessons, as well as the techniques and standards used to write them
(April 11, 2012). According to Ginger, the Information Inquiry for School Teachers course helped her
understand the potential similitudes between teachers and librarians. “I learned we are a vital role,
and we can make teachers’ lessons stronger. Better. If they are willing to collaborate with us”
(December 10, 2012).
To complete her library training and receive a teaching license, Ginger needed to student
teach in elementary and secondary placements that collectively totaled twelve weeks. The university
offered student teaching placements in the state and also on Native American reservations. Because of
her interest in other cultures, Ginger attended the informational Native American Student Teaching
Experience meeting. There, she was informed that she would need to teach in the state, because she
had a school-aged daughter and no car for transportation. According to the student teaching
supervisors affiliated with her university, a Native American student teaching placement would be too
difficult for Ginger. Ginger remembered, “…basically [all of my plans were] nixed, [because they
were] like ‘you can’t do any of that’” (April 11, 2012). Instead of focusing on what Ginger had to offer,
56

	  

the staff in the student teaching office seemed to look at what Ginger did not have: after-school
childcare or transportation. Ginger struggled to understand how these two things were required to
successfully live and teach on a reservation.
But Ginger did not give up her dream of a non-traditional teaching experience with diverse
students. Within weeks of receiving a formal rejection email from the university about her request to
student teach on the Navajo Nation, Ginger saw a teaching opportunity at a Native American high
school on her library preparation program’s job listserv. Ginger thought, if there wasn’t a large
applicant pool, then perhaps they’d hire her before she student taught. This just might be her way
around the student teaching office’s rules. Thus, Ginger applied for the school library media specialist
position on the reservation. When the Navajo Nation hired her after merely a phone interview, Ginger
decided to student teach later.
After a year in her position as a school librarian on the Navajo reservation, Ginger returned to
the state in which her library preparation program was located. There, she student taught during
summer school. Because of her school librarian experience on the reservation, Ginger’s library
preparation program only required her to student teach five weeks in an elementary school.
Ginger successfully completed her student teaching and degree requirements for a Master’s
degree in Library Science and a state teaching credential in School Librarianship. Then, Ginger
returned to Red Rock High School with new ideas about how she should manage her library.
School Culture
Initially, because she was hired over the phone, Ginger’s only exposure to the school’s culture
was through a webpage. At that time, the school promoted its commitment to provide “a nurturing
and safe environment where culturally based and academically challenging programs are utilized in
providing holistic, experiential, and problem based learning” (December 9, 2012). They also fostered
life-long learning, in hopes that all knowledge would benefit Navajo, First Nations’ people, and global
societies.
Ginger showed up on the reservation excited to give all that she had to the students and the
community, but she recognized her outsider status. She wanted to show respect to the community.
She remembered her thoughts in this way: “I wanted to be silent…I wanted to listen… That’s what I
57

	  

learned in Tuvalu is to listen to people. Know what they want from you” (April 12, 2012).
During her first week of school, Ginger faced another aspect of the school’s culture. At the allstaff meeting, the Superintendent3 introduced the concept of what Ginger later learned was called
“Navajo Preference” (April 12, 2012). According to Ginger, if there were two candidates applying for a
job with the same qualifications on the reservation, the Navajo candidate would always get the job.
Ginger initially had no problems with this hiring practice, but she did find it difficult to understand the
relevancy of Navajo Preference after a hiring decision had been made.
After the Superintendent’s greeting to the staff and before his words of inspiration for the
school year, he informed the non-Navajo staff that they needed their jobs more than Red Rock Schools
needed them. He explained the “privilege” the non-Navajo teachers had to work at the school (March
29, 2012). According to Ginger, this introduction to Navajo Preference created an intentional culture
of fear among those who did not identify as Navajo:
I remember sitting by myself wondering if what he was implying was that he didn’t want
white people working at the school. When the meeting was over, I walked over to some
of the other white teachers, and they seemed to have felt the same way… And it
couldn’t have been a misinterpretation… I kept telling myself that, but that day I went
home and I was just miserable... Aggghh! It just didn’t feel good…and to [hear from the
superintendent] that ‘you’re just lucky to have a job,’ ‘you’re lucky that we hired you,’
‘you should be grateful.’ I always thought it was the other way around. They should be
grateful that they are getting all these interesting and intelligent people coming in... We
all felt we were not welcome based on our skin color. (April 12, 2012)
Ginger and her colleagues who did not identity as Navajo adopted an “under the radar”
approach, which pushed Ginger’s initial instinct to listen first to an extreme (April 11, 2012). Because
of concerns about losing their visas, those who were not American took an unspoken vow of silence.
Ginger recalled, “They never felt like they could say what they wanted to say” (April 12, 2012).
Another one of Ginger’s approaches to her outsider status was attempting to blend in. She
celebrated that she could pass for half-Navajo, because of her hairstyle and tanned skin. Another way
she blended in with the Navajo community was by having a bi-racial daughter who had dark skin, eyes,
and hair. Another way Ginger blended in was through her selection of a Navajo partner. While she
could not answer how or why “blending” became such a significant part of her existence, Ginger did
recognize that it silently dominated her daily life (April 10, 2012).
3

	  Neither	  the	  superintendent	  nor	  the	  principal	  were	  interviewed	  as	  a	  part	  of	  this	  study.	  	  Instead,	  this	  chapter	  relies	  on	  Ginger’s	  stories	  of	  
occupational	  socialization.	  
58

	  

Those who did not identify as Navajo did not contribute to the school culture freely and
openly, and it appeared to Ginger that her principal had no regard for creating professional
communities or prioritizing professional dialogue. In fact, when the administrator was visible in the
hallways, Ginger always saw her walking with her “head down” (April 12, 2012).
Quickly, Ginger grew tired of “all this lack of communication. And no community. And no
discussion…” (April 11, 2012). Ginger soon noticed that the non-Navajo were not the only ones
excluded from conversations about school life. She stated, “I don’t think anyone is asked… how they
feel… how they are doing… They assume that you are going to do your job. And I don’t think a job
like this is… You need to talk to your staff. You need to… find time for them. It’s a relationship” (April
11, 2012).
Ginger began wondering what exactly was expected of her and how she would be evaluated.
As the only caregiver for her daughter, Bella, Ginger needed to keep her job to provide financial
stability. She believed she could exceed the expectations, if only she knew them. In response, Ginger
was compelled to write her own job description because the school did not have a formal one written
for or distributed to her. Ginger’s responsibilities were not the only ones that were in question. It
appeared to her that others did not have clear roles, responsibilities, or job descriptions either. She
remembered thinking that the technology assistant was responsible for maintaining the school’s
webpage and even said to him, “Well, that’s your job isn’t it?” (April 10, 2012).
Ginger’s Philosophy about the Role of School Librarians and School Libraries
Ginger’s first memory of a librarian was located in her high school experience, where the role
seemed to be that of a “shadow” (April 11, 2012). Ginger claimed, “I don’t remember much of what
she did…she was just present” (April 11, 2012). Without a solid understanding of librarianship from her
school years, it was during her service at PFS when Ginger began viewing the role of a school librarian
as a “Cool Aunt” (April 11, 2012). This image appealed to Ginger’s need for autonomy and emotional
distance from students. She saw her role of a school librarian as “[having students,] but I would have
that other adult to manage the classroom while I did what I wanted. And then [the students] could
disappear… The library was the place for me, because they would go away” (April 11, 2012).
Ginger did not maintain this “Cool Aunt” philosophy after she left her preparation program to
59

	  

work for Red Rock High School. This change in philosophy may have grown from Ginger’s sense that
the students needed to be connected to their teachers. The majority of students lived on the school’s
campus or with their grandparents. Many students’ parents were either working off the reservation, or
living in a manner that neglected their status as parents.
Rather than establishing a distant relationship with students, Ginger found that her students
did not often “go away” from the library (March 29, 2012). She remembered, “[the students] were my
joy... They’re the ones who would tell me crazy stories, or there were times when they just had to
tell me things that they just couldn’t tell anyone else” (April 11, 2012). This frustrated Ginger at
times, because she did not feel equipped to listen and counsel students. However, she recognized that
students saw her as a “safe person” (April 11, 2012).

Despite her discomfort, Ginger remained an

attentive librarian who listened when “they couldn’t go to other teachers...” (April 11, 2012).
As a school librarian, Ginger acted more like the “Loving Grandmother” (April 11, 2012). She
let students “hover” over her while she completed traditional library tasks like returning books to the
shelves in Dewey Decimal order (April 12, 2012). She remembered the sounds of students in her library
with fondness: “Talking and talking and talking…laughing and we’re all laughing… Those were my
favorite times of the day” (April 12, 2012).
Ginger believed that a school librarian had three major functions: support teachers, co-teach
technology integration into an already established curriculum, and promote reading to students. She
believed the model school librarian taught “research lessons in collaboration with the teachers’
content lessons and research projects… Students [would use] the library with ease and familiarity”
(March 29, 2012). Before her student teaching experience, Ginger attempted to establish her teacher
identity at Red Rock with the teachers with whom she worked. She came to embrace her role as a
“guide,” and often reminded herself to guide students to knowledge instead of deliver it (April 11,
2012). “I try to keep that mentality of ‘You can do this without me. I’m here to guide you, but you
can do this’” (April 11, 2012).
Ginger, the Librarian Guide, came to see the library as a classroom where there was enough
space for serious work and controlled fun. But before Ginger’s arrival, the library was a storage closet
for the school’s bulky, audio-visual equipment like extra televisions, VCRs, DVD players, color printers,
60

	  

aged computers, and the laminator. The library also housed teacher supplies like the colored butcher
paper. The supplies not only occupied physical space, teachers and students actively used them during
hours when Ginger was teaching. Ginger recalled these interruptions with frustration: “I was doing a
lesson, and a class just walks in and starts ripping the paper. And that’s all you heard was crussssshh.
It really was disruptive. Ughh!” (April 11, 2012).
Unlike a “Cool Aunt” who owned unusual items that children could look at but not touch in her
dwelling, Ginger willingly gave over the library’s supplies and collections. Perhaps because both she
and the students lived on campus or at least within walking distance, Ginger willingly transformed the
library into a comfortable place for students. Students were always welcome, and she generously gave
her space over to them at all hours. She remembered,
I have such great memories of them, like at lunch time, I would just stay open. Because
they needed to be there….They would wait at the doors if I was like ‘guys, I just need to
go home and have a break.’ They would sit and wait! Ms. Allenby, Ms. Allenby, Ms.
Allenby!… They were just dying to get in there and hang out, and I would have students
play their guitars. There were students in the middle [of the library] reading magazines,
hanging out. (April 12, 2012)
Ginger’s Critical Event
At the end of her second year at Red Rock, two incidents stimulated Ginger’s critical teaching
event. First, a number of people, including the technology staff, took advantage of Ginger’s
willingness to take on new responsibilities that others working in her position had not. Ginger felt
abused because instead of collaborating with teachers, a few were dumping students in library for her
to unexpectedly teach on her own. Next, the school’s grant writer received a large format printer. A
few faculty and staff members informally told Ginger that the printer would be housed in the library,
and that she would be responsible managing it. Before the printer arrived, Ginger questioned the
relationship between her role as the school’s library media specialist and the management of the
printer. She wondered why the administration automatically determined that managing the printer
was her professional responsibility.
When the larger format printer arrived, the technology personnel set it up in the library.
Ginger viewed this as an unexpected opportunity, because the technology personnel knew how to use
the printer, and they used it in her space. However, they never invited Ginger to watch them use the

61

	  

printer nor did they offer to explain how to use it. Ginger realized that she could not manage the
printer without having been trained how to use it; thus, she asked the technology personnel why they
weren’t including her in the usage and training of the equipment.
When a technology employee told her the printer was “too complicated” for her to learn, she
altered her plans to learn how to use the equipment (March 29, 2012). Instead, on the last day of
school, Ginger went to her supervisor and requested the printer be moved. Her administrator curtly
claimed that it was Ginger’s job as the media specialist to manage the printer. This response led
Ginger to resign immediately, because she had worked too hard to become an effective librarian only
to be known as and treated like “the Kinko’s girl” (April 11, 2012).
To Ginger, her story was about a person or a group of people deciding what her responsibilities
were without consulting her. Her frustration was that she was not respected enough to be consulted
about the printer before it was ordered or set up. She also felt ignored when she finally “stood up for
[her]self” (April 11, 2012).
As a novice school librarian, Ginger faced many obstacles to a smooth socialization experience
into her chosen profession. While Ginger’s critical event pointed to issues within the walls of Red Rock
High School, her challenges in that moment were related to more than just the personnel at Red Rock.
To better understand Ginger’s narrative and why it came to represent the critical event in her
professional life, an exploration of the challenges she faced and the successes she experienced in her
occupational socialization follows.
Pre-Professional Challenges
Before Ginger went to Red Rock High School, she believed that only one of her graduate
courses prepared her for the professional life she would encounter as a teacher of school library media.
While it is common for novice teachers to view their pre-service training as ineffectual, most teachers
have their “apprenticeship of observation” to inform their responsibilities and to define their
professional role (Lortie, 1975). Yet, Ginger could not recall her experiences as a student with her
school librarian with any clarity, and the “shadow” of the librarian had little to offer Ginger about her
professional role (March 29, 2012). Without knowing what school librarians do by watching her own,
and without confidence in her preparation program, Ginger experienced high levels of doubt in her
62

	  

ability to perform the managerial responsibilities that her professional role demanded. These
responsibilities included library policy creation, grant writing, collection development procedures, and
collection repair.
Entering the teaching profession can be difficult even after a student teaching experience;
however, Ginger became Red Rock’s school librarian a year before her student teaching. Without this
important induction into the profession, Ginger had no formal mentor who showed her how a school
library should be managed. Without a clear mental model of school librarianship during a student
teaching experience, Ginger was forced to spend a great deal of time defining her professional role on
her own without much of a foundation.
Challenges of the Newly Arrived Teacher
After what Ginger called a “rough start” at Red Rock, she began to realize there were gaps in
her knowledge about the profession (March 29, 2012). Even though she was aware that there were
things she did not know, no one else seemed to notice when Ginger needed help. Instead of feeling
like she was adopted by the established teachers, she claimed, “I felt my co-workers resisting me. I
even had a co-worker come up to me and be like, ‘I can’t even look at you because of [your] nose
piercing” (April 12, 2012). Ginger blamed the resistance and lack of connection with other teachers on
the “huge generation gap” between her and the older, veteran baby boomer teachers (April 12, 2012).
Ginger’s professional isolation was so profound, that she felt as if she were in her own “glass
bubble” (April 11, 2012). Although Ginger felt abandoned, she did not withdraw from her
administrative responsibilities. Instead, she attempted to figure things out on her own. Ginger
“guessed, made up policies, and hoped that it was okay” (April 11, 2012). Because her administrator
did not seek involvement in Ginger’s library policy making, Ginger assumed the administrator would
back Ginger’s work. Yet, her supervisor never did assist her professional efforts: “She didn’t support
my policies and how I managed the library; and when I needed technology support or purchasing
support, she was not there to push for my book orders or technology needs” (March 29, 2012). Ginger
interpreted her principal’s lack of involvement as a do-it-on-your-own expectation, but when she did,
the school leadership did not reward her with favor, support, or even acknowledgement.
Ginger tried to put an end to some of her professional guesswork by writing her own job
63

	  

description, because no description of her duties existed when she began her work at Red Rock.
Drafting it in defense of potential accusations that she was not doing her job, Ginger attempted to
create a stable work environment for herself. As she remembered it, the administration could “pull
your job just because you aren’t Navajo. I felt that way all the time. And I was like, ‘Ahhh! What if I
do something wrong?’” (April 12, 2012). What Ginger did not realize was that performing written job
duties could not prevent unfair treatment in an environment that built safety around a racial identity
that Ginger could never claim. Furthermore, the job description had little effect on how her
administration or teaching colleagues viewed her position as the school’s librarian. Instead, most of
the school’s personnel operated under their previous notions of what a school librarian did at the
school.
Promoting her work accomplishments and her library philosophy were serious challenges for
Ginger at Red Rock. At first, Ginger blamed her avoidance of self-promotion on her personality when
she claimed, “I’m a very under the radar type of person” (April 11, 2012). She believed that when
teachers saw her in action, they would automatically understand how Ginger represented a new
generation of librarians with extended or even new roles and responsibilities. With this modest
approach to marketing her role, she believed she would receive her colleagues’ sincere affirmation.
I hope that if I’m doing a good job, it’ll show. Students want to be in here; students
want to read books; teachers want to be in here, and they want to work with me. And
that should be very visible. If you’re looking. If you’re here. (April 11, 2012)
Ginger did not attempt to be a librarian crusader who promoted her good work outside the library to
convince doubters to believe in her work.
Later, when Ginger discovered the need for self-promotion, she still rejected it. She
characterized her realization in this way: “Okay. So I really have to promote myself. And I didn’t feel
like that was necessary, because [administrators] should know what we’re doing. Not micromanage us,
but at least poke their head in and have a look” (April 11, 2013). She cited two reasons for her
continued rejection of self-promotion: (1) she thought people who “beat [their] drum as loud as
possible” were “obnoxious;” and (2) she believed it was the administrator’s role to discover Ginger’s
services on her own (April 11, 2012).
Ginger put the responsibility of learning about the role of a school librarian in the hands of her
64

	  

administrator. It seemed simple to Ginger: if the administrator wanted to know what Ginger did as a
school librarian, she would come to the library and find out. Ginger could find no reason to approach
or—even worse—to bother an administrator with information, if the administrator did not show interest
in wanting to know.
Pointing to her unofficial teacher status, Ginger believed the administrator’s lack of interest
was not personal. Ginger came to Red Rock High School with excellent academic and professional
credentials. She attained an undergraduate degree, and her master’s degree was from a nationally
recognized School of Library Science. In addition, Ginger held a K-12 School Librarianship teaching
license from the state in which her preparation program was located. However, New Mexico did not
offer teaching licenses in School Librarianship as an initial license; instead, School Librarianship was a
content area that could only be added as an endorsement to an existing teaching license in a
traditional area of teaching (i.e. Elementary Education or a secondary content area like Secondary
English Education). Thus, the state where Ginger enrolled in a librarian preparation program
recognized Ginger’s teacher status, but New Mexico did not.
In Ginger’s mind, the licensing structure of New Mexico influenced how her administrator
viewed her work at the school. It did not matter what her previous state called Ginger; she was
working in a state where she was not a certified teacher. And even though she was working for the
Navajo nation who prided itself on being separate from the state authorities, the top Navajo
administrators at Red Rock adopted the state’s definition of a teacher in this instance.
If her administrator observed her in the act of teaching, Ginger believed that her administrator
might alter her beliefs about Ginger’s teacher status. Yet, Ginger’s administrator declined an
invitation to observe her teaching. Her administrator tried to excuse her indifference by rationalizing:
“Well, you’re not a teacher” (April 11, 2012). Ginger did not know how to respond to her principal’s
excuse and internally questioned its merit: “I’m like ‘what kind of statement is that?’ If you have
someone qualified, sitting there, who is intelligent... Why not use them? Why not give them the
respect they deserve?” (April 11, 2012).
Ginger expressed repeated frustration, as she remembered the constant battle she fought to
earn teacher status at Red Rock High School.
65

	  

My supervisor was not working with me on my salary and other paperwork that
supported my status as a library media specialist with an MLS. In fact, she did nothing
but make me feel that I was not a legitimate teacher until I had my New Mexico
teaching license. Her words? ‘You’re not a teacher…’ She disregarded my degrees and
experience… And she kept my salary really low… I cried a lot that year. (March 29,
2012)
Because Ginger fully embraced her own teacher status, she only questioned her administrator’s lack of
respect toward her as a teacher. Ginger never pointed to a concern about an administrator who was
uninterested in the school’s support staff as well.
While Ginger desired official teacher status, she was not eager enough to accept an offer from
her principal to teach a high school journalism class. Ginger believed serving as the library teacher and
the library clerk was more than a full-time job. Without teacher status, Ginger was not assigned a
teaching mentor, nor did her administrator attempt to fill that role herself. Reflecting on the solitary
nature of her work without a mentor, Ginger claimed,
I hate doing it by myself. Because I like to interact with someone else. And bounce
ideas off [of] someone. But when it’s just me, it’s like ‘I don’t know if I’m doing this
right. I don’t know if this is what the school wants. I don’t know…’ and that’s where
having a supervisor who wants to work closely with me would be ideal…Like ‘hey how’s
it going? Do you need things? What are your concerns?’ But… I’ve yet to see that
happen with a supervisor. They’re either never here, and if they are, they are just
so bogged down with the work that piled up when they were gone, that they don’t have
time for [me]… to know what is really going on [in the library]. (April 11, 2012)
Ginger admitted to being “idealistic” about school communities: she maintained her
expectations for her administrator even after this administrator proved to operate outside an idyllic
framework (April 11, 2012). Ginger believed that administrators should have interest in their faculty’s
work with and for students, and she continued to operate inside a traditional power structure. She saw
the administrator as the sole member of the school community who checked in on others and held
them accountable. At the same time, Ginger saw no evidence that a promotional campaign about the
responsibilities of school librarians would have changed the administrator’s beliefs about her
responsibilities as a librarian. Based on her understanding, Ginger did not have enough clout within the
school hierarchy to convince others what her role should be in the school. Nonetheless, she attempted
to do this one teacher at a time, even though she saw the majority of the faculty as static, unable to
change and unable to offer what she freely gave: a listening ear. She reflected:

66

	  

…everyone will be… well, they’re who they are… That’s the funny thing about me…
I want to be heard! But then, I like to listen to people, too. And that’s my role
most of the time… I just want to listen. And especially in environments like this where I
don’t belong; I don’t come from here; it’s more important…it’s even more vital that I
listen… I did a lot of listening, but no one wanted to listen to me. (April 11, 2012)
The teachers at Red Rock had never worked with a certified and trained school librarian,
because, up to this point, clerical assistants had filled the school’s librarian position, and their primary
responsibility was to check in and out books. Thus, teachers did not instinctually seek out Ginger’s
knowledge and expertise. Instead, Ginger claimed that she
…found teachers, and I collaborated on their lesson plans...I was teaching students how
to use the library catalog, where to find their books, and getting online resources all on
their own. Teachers and students were introduced to virtual tours, Comic Life, Audacity,
Blogger, Google Apps, and Windows Movie Maker. The library was becoming the
heartbeat of the school, where students were interacting with information. (March 29,
2012)
While teachers saw Ginger take on responsibilities typically associated with teachers or
technology personnel (like managing the school’s website), Ginger did not see them with the potential
to alter the administrator’s perception of her job: “I had lots of teachers who really liked what I was
doing, but they were also in a position where they couldn’t speak up” (April 12, 2012). Most teachers
appeared to have a cordial relationship with Ginger, yet they failed to come to her defense. Thus, it is
difficult to assess whether teachers saw the need for a certified school librarian, or if they were just
relieved that someone else was easing their own professional burden.
Some teachers assigned Ginger unfair responsibilities, borne either from the weight of their
own teaching responsibilities or their laziness. Ginger began to feel abused and explained,
Teachers who collaborated with me would leave their class with me, without leaving the
necessary supplies to teach the class. ‘Oh, I’ll be right back! Is that okay?’ they would
say, and then disappear. Substitutes began walking in unexpectedly to babysit their
class, because they didn’t have a lesson plan from the absent teacher. Teachers were
sending in students who finished their work to just play on the computer in the library.
(March 29, 2012)
Ginger believed that the teachers did not understand what a school librarian should have been doing,
so there were times when they embraced her teacher status for their benefit. Others thought she just
checked in and out books, and they were eager to drop their responsibilities into her lap. Yet, in other
instances Ginger remembered, “there were times when it was convenient [for teachers] to be like,
‘you’re not a teacher.’ Like ‘don’t do that’” (April 12, 2012).
67

	  

Ginger believed that the school personnel continued to define her status based on those who
had occupied her position in previous years. She explained, “The reality at these schools is that they
never had a media specialist before. So, I’m the first one that was certified…who understood…the role
that they’re playing now in the 21st century…They’ve just had aides who ‘shush’ everyone and tell
them to ‘be quiet.’ …At this school the lady would just point to the wall ‘the book’s over there!’”
(April 11, 2012).
Even though Ginger assumed teacher responsibilities, she also had to manage all of the clerical
responsibilities expected of the previous library assistants. She processed, delivered, and inventoried
all repairs for the audio-visual equipment. She managed the computer lab and made posters. She
processed teachers’ laminating requests in addition to managing a library collection of over 16,000
items. She interpreted these responsibilities in this way: “I was beat down to just a Kinko’s worker”
(April 11, 2012).
Beyond managing the existing collection, Ginger was given a sizeable budget for acquiring new
library materials. Ginger felt hindered by the clerical responsibilities that she saw fitting better with
technology personnel or someone in a clerical role: “The basic management of ordering, keeping books
shelved, and more was in and of itself a lot of work. It began to overwhelm me, because I wanted to
do everything and I felt limited” (March 29, 2012). She made attempts to reassign or move equipment
that either interrupted the teaching in the library or could be housed in a more communal space for
teachers, but her requests were disregarded by her administrator and the technology staff.
According to Ginger, the technology personnel had little regard for teachers or the media
specialist. Once Ginger overheard them blame teachers for viruses on the school’s computers. They
pronounced, “Teachers just don’t know how to use technology” (March 29, 2012). Ginger recalled the
faculty and staff’s private joke about them in this way: “The joke was that we had to bribe them with
food to get them to work… [Some]thing to get them to fix a computer… or help me…put a program on a
computer that I wanted…” (March 29, 2012; April 11, 2012). Despite the technology personnel’s lack of
initiative in collaborating with teachers, Ginger needed their help to accomplish her personal teaching
goals even if that meant “wrangling” or “bribing” (March 29, 2012; April 11, 2012). Thus, she
continued to make work requests for/with the technology staff that were either “ignored” or “denied
68

	  

[for] very pathetic reasons” (March 29, 2012). The technology personnel appeared to have a clear
understanding that Ginger’s role as a media specialist was not a teacher. She realized this when she
showed the technology personnel what she recently introduced to the teachers. They responded, “Why
would you do that?...That’s just more work. That’s their job, not yours” (March 29, 2012; April 11,
2012). This was not an isolated incident; the technology personnel repeated this sentiment to Ginger
many times afterwards.
Ginger’s challenges were great: she was an unprepared outsider with new (to Red Rock) ideas
about the role of school librarians. She accepted a job from an administration that never expressed a
desire to redefine the work of their high school library employees; rather, they wanted to fill an open
position with a person who would perform the duties that had always been executed. While the
administration did not articulate what those duties were, it is evident that they did not believe the
library workers were teachers or technology employees. Furthermore, the administration was content
with the library being a technology closet, and they endorsed the concept of an adult who worked in
the physical space of the library who “shushed” students and checked in and out books (April 11,
2012).
Ginger’s work environment did not meet Callahan’s (1962) requirements for what created
occupational vulnerability. External forces did not formally define or enforce her leadership position.
Perhaps it was the vagueness and uncertainty that surrounded her role that led Ginger to her most
vulnerable professional moment. Or maybe the vulnerability came from her role as a novice.
Certainly, the power structure endorsing Navajo preference made all who did not identify themselves
as Navajo, including Ginger, vulnerable.
Ginger’s administrator failed to understand that the work of a school librarian includes both
mental and manual labor. The mental work is the foundation of the library profession, and it involves
the co-creation of curriculum and the teaching of information literacy skills. Instead of mental work,
Ginger’s administrator required that she focus her efforts on the manual labor related to librarianship.
Apple (1982) describes administrators’ separation of mental and manual labor as an intentional act in
order to weaken teaching professions. However, Ginger’s administrator seemed to intend neither good
nor harm, nor did she appear to target Ginger in any way. Rather, she just never comprehended
69

	  

Ginger’s abilities.
Ginger’s Successes
In spite of these occupational obstacles, Ginger still achieved success as a school librarian at
Red Rock High School. Even though the methodology employed for this study focused primarily on
Ginger’s professional challenges, Ginger also shared a number of obvious successes. Her
accomplishments centered around her work as a teacher and collaborator. As a novice librarian, she
was able not only to envision how a library program should look, she also created a place where
students could find recreational and academic information with ease.
Ginger believed the students were the only group of constituents at Red Rock that always
recognized her as a teacher. They valued her personal opinion, and they sought out her teaching
expertise. According to Ginger, the students’ interactions revealed that her professional investments
did pay off:
I mean, they really wanted to hear what I had to say… ‘Ms. Allenby! How do you do a
citation again?’…Or ‘Where that catalog? How do I get to that?’ Those were some of
the things that made me feel so good, and I was like ‘yes! I’m reaching out to these
guys, and they’re reading good books, and they love to read!’ (April 11, 2012; April 12,
2012)
Her students gave Ginger the affirmation she needed.
Another professional accomplishment was Ginger’s campaign to convince high school students
that there was no shame in reading picture books. After reading aloud a Dr. Seuss book and discussing
the adult content that children never recognize, Ginger ordered more and promoted the picture book
collection. Soon after, she noticed the students gravitated toward them.
Ginger collaborated with unlikely partners, including Mr. Price, the teacher of the Building and
Construction class, who was so afraid of technology that he did not even use email. Ginger did not let
his peculiarities stand in her way of the collaboration. She taught Mr. Price how to use Blogger, so that
his students could sell the dog houses they built based on a small-scale hogan design. Using the
technology not only taught the students how to use the social media site, it allowed them to surpass
expected hogan sales in record time.
Ginger’s successes, existing on the periphery of her narrative of vulnerability, reveal how
determined Ginger was to operate as both a teacher and a collaborative partner. Despite the
70

	  

challenges, Ginger was able to find avenues in which she could practice and succeed in the role of the
“teaching librarian” that she adopted in library school and student teaching (March 29, 2012). While
these challenges and successes help illuminate Ginger’s professional life and the competing interests
that plagued her work life, the next sections explore two other aspects of Ginger’s narrative.
Professional Identity
Throughout her critical event narrative, Ginger revealed explicit, implicit, and tacit identity
claims. Table seven categorizes these identity claims. Next to each claim is a numerical value that
corresponds to the number of times Ginger claimed it.
Table 7
Ginger’s Identity Claims in Critical Events Narrative
Identity claims about herself
“I am deserving of professional
respect.” (10)

Identity claims related
to her needs from others
“I want to be supported.” (5)

Identity claims related
to work environments
“I want professional stability.” (1)

“I want to be accepted.” (2)
“Others take advantage of me.” (6)

“I want to be informed.” (1)

“I privately question authority.” (5)
“I believe I can make a difference.”
(4)
“I am solitary.” (2)
“I am professionally ambitious.” (2)
“I am honest.” (1)
“I don’t know how to set professional
boundaries.” (1)
“I want to do everything, but I get
burned out.” (1)
“I do not always communicate my
needs clearly.” (1)

Ginger focused a great amount of import on her critical teaching event, and the vulnerability
she experienced during this teaching event impacted her professional identity in a number of ways. An
entire year after the final encounter with her principal, she continued to question if being a school
librarian was really the occupation for her. Because she was much happier in her role as a student
teacher than as a school librarian, she began applying for positions as an assistant to the school
librarian. She explained,

71

	  

I struggle a lot in this position, because I do have to manage the library. I have to create
the policies. I have to be the one…making all these rules… And I hate it. I hate that part.
I could see myself being an assistant. (April 11, 2012)
Even a year after her critical teaching event, Ginger believed that as an assistant she could have a
better chance of doing the work of a teaching school librarian. Although Ginger seemed determined at
Red Rock to prove her teacher status and achieve professional respect, she was willing to give up her
librarian title in order to free herself from the expectations of fulfilling clerical work by herself.
Ginger no longer wanted to be a trailblazer for school librarians or school library programs on the
Navajo reservation. She applied for a number of assistant librarian positions in Western States.
Ginger did leave the reservation and New Mexico, but she never received an interview for any
of the assistant librarian positions to which she applied. She accepted a school librarian position at a
prestigious charter school with a well-established school library. A year and a half after her critical
event, Ginger was able to point out the altered identity claims and to whom or what she attributed the
shift in her professional identity. These are arranged and labeled in table eight.
Table 8
Ginger’s Post-Performance Identity Claims
I no longer identify with this claim,
because I made a change.
“Others take advantage of me.”

I no longer identify with this claim,
because a new school culture changed
this for me.
“Others take advantage of me.”

I no longer identify with this claim,
because a new administrator changed
this for me.
“I privately question authority.”

“I don’t know how to set professional
boundaries.”

“I don’t know how to set professional
boundaries.”

“I don’t know how to set professional
boundaries.”

“I am solitary.”
“I want to do everything, but I get
burned out.”
“I do not always communicate my needs
clearly.”

Ginger struggled to recognize her involvement in the shift of her professional identity. What she saw
instead was that she left a bad work environment in search of a good one. This caused Ginger initially
to point to a new school culture and a new principal that instilled the changes in her identity. Her new
school culture was collaborative, where teachers took responsibility for their students and their work.
Staffed with a full-time clerk, Ginger no longer felt over-extended. In fact, she claimed to no longer
have professional needs. She also believed that when a good administrator was in place, there was no
72

	  

need to question him privately.
With further storytelling, she did come to view herself as possessing limited abilities to change
her professional identity:
I’ve thought a lot about how I have been running my current library. I was very strict on
rules such as food and drinks in the library. I think I will rethink that so that more
students will come in the library to use it. I’ve also realized that because of my stressful
environment [at Red Rock], that I tried very hard to protect the library space
[here]…Students do not come in to hang out. (May 29, 2012)
Ginger’s experience at Red Rock pushed her to set strict professional boundaries to keep others from
taking advantage of her. In this case, her rules imposed restrictions on students – Ginger’s former joy
at Red Rock – instead of on those who previously took advantage of her (teachers or technology staff).
While Ginger did not identify with the stereotypical, rule-oriented librarian, it was difficult to maintain
her free spirit after her critical event.
However, Ginger mostly pointed to an external locus of control responsible for the changes in
her professional identity. She feared that if she returned to an abusive work environment she would
struggle with the same concerns and probably take on a similar professional identity that she had at
Red Rock. “It would repeat itself,” she said knowingly. “I’d have to be stronger” (December 18,
2012). While Ginger saw her critical event as powerful enough to impel her to resign, it was not
powerful enough to change who she would be in another stressful work environment.
Reproduction of Cultural Assumptions, Myths, and Stereotypes
Three assumptions from the culture of American schools played out in Ginger’s narrative: (1)
school librarians are clerical support staff; (2) those in authority don’t care for their subordinates; and
(3) once a superior makes a decision, the conversation is over.
Perhaps the most significant cultural assumption presented in Ginger’s story was the
administrator’s belief about what a school librarian’s role in the school was. The administration
earnestly believed that a school librarian was a clerical, staff position that supported the faculty.
Despite major advances in the responsibilities of school librarians, the Red Rock principal continued to
operate on the assumption that librarianship had not changed in the last fifty years. Before Ginger
came to Red Rock, the administration was content with hiring library clerks who checked in and out
books, helped others fix jammed printers, and “shushed” students who were talking too loud (April 11,
73

	  

2012). Unlike other professions, the school administration never had the opportunity to see a teacherlibrarian in action to understand the profession’s historical shift from clerical tasks to meaningful
teaching and assessment responsibilities.
Furthering the culture of library ignorance, the Department of Education in New Mexico did not
educate people on their role, and the state university that granted library science degrees did not have
an active school media program or a public promotional campaign on the role of librarians. Because
the Red Rock administration was never able to view Ginger’s role beyond the librarian myth, Ginger
struggled to be the school librarian she was trained to be. Ginger made it clear that she did not earn a
master’s degree in library science to be what they sought: a Kinko’s copy girl.
Another cultural assumption that played out in Ginger’s story was that those in authority do not
care for their subordinates. Ginger’s administrator disregarded her position and did not support her
ideas. When Ginger expressed her desire to have the printer moved, her administrator did not want to
know why. Instead, she pushed all things media onto Ginger, and strictly defined what Ginger would
do. This administrator did not entertain questions and cut short the conversation with top-down
demands. Ginger imagined unsaid words from her administrator in this way: “‘I’m in power, you’re
not. I have all of this power. You’re just a little person. I’m too busy for you. I’m big, you’re small’”
(April 11, 2012). Ginger saw her administrator fixated on power, instead of focusing her energy on
relationships with her subordinates.
The neglect for Ginger as a human being was also present in and outside her narrative. For
example, the administrator told Ginger that she could never take a sick day, because she could not
staff the library in her absence. Once, during a construction project at the school, fumes filled the
library. When Ginger finally convinced her to close the library for students’ safety, her administrator
demanded that Ginger remain working in the toxic environment the rest of the day. Throughout the
construction project, Ginger was expected to breathe contaminated, dusty air. Even though Ginger
sought fervently to make decisions that were in the best interests of everyone, her administrator could
not treat her humanely.
A final cultural assumption evident in Ginger’s story was that once a superior makes a decision,
the conversation is over. Ginger had little access to her administrator; the administrator routinely
74

	  

gave her signs that she was busy doing more important things. If Ginger did initiate conversations with
her administrator, Ginger felt rushed and unimportant. When Ginger described how she felt in these
conversations, she said the undercurrent was always, “‘[As your supervisor] I’m in charge, so you’d
better do what I say’” (April 12, 2012). So when Ginger heard from her administrator the actual words,
“You’re the media specialist, and that’s your job,” Ginger did not extend the conversation (March 29,
2012). Ginger did not feel that she had enough professional capital to change the administrator’s
beliefs about the role of a school librarian. It was clear to Ginger: the administrator wanted the Red
Rock High School librarian position to remain clerical. This realization, after investing two years in a
school where communication and respect were non-existent, made Ginger feel hopeless about being a
change agent in the school. Alternatively, she chose to be an obedient subordinate, and she resigned
quietly from her position.
Significance of Participation in Study
Ginger attempted to put her critical moment behind her, and it was difficult for her to write
the first draft of her narrative. She claimed, “I didn’t want to go back to that moment and remember
how horrible I felt” (May 29, 2012). When she did begin drafting her narrative, she recalled being
“angry and wanting to scream just as I felt the day it happened. I wanted to go back to the school and
yell at the people who didn’t listen to me, and have them feel the way I felt” (May 29, 2012). Yet she
continued, because she wanted to share her story with future school librarians.
A week after finishing the first draft, Ginger moved from angry to reflective. She remembered,
“I began to process the situation over and over again, thinking about how I could have handled the
situation better” (May 29, 2012). Yet, her reflection led her right back to feelings of anger towards the
administration and technology personnel. Later she questioned her rationality in the moment, and
thought, “It was just a format printer!” (May 29, 2012). At other times, she wondered if she had
experienced some kind of psychosis while working in the stressful environment. One moment she
apologized for being emotional, and blamed it on her hormones. But the more she reflected, the more
she realized that the critical event was not really about the format printer; it was about the return on
her two-year investment at Red Rock. Ginger gave her best work in a school where the administrator
never respected her role or fostered a culture of collaboration.
75

	  

After performing her narrative, Ginger felt relieved and empowered. Her audience assured her
that her feelings were not wrong, and she was not wrong to leave the school. They cited ways in which
Ginger was strong, while before the performance Ginger had focused on the ways in which she was
weak. She believed, “I felt that I could stand up for myself [and] that my feelings were legitimate. My
job is legitimate” (May 29, 2012). Ginger claimed that performing the story and hearing the audience’s
reactions gave her “closure. I definitely had angry feelings just lingering that I ignored, so [after the
writing, performing, and discussion] I could move forward” (May 29, 2012).
Ginger also believed that the act of writing, performing, and discussing her critical event
strengthened her resolve to communicate with her new supervisor. The day of her performance, the
administrator gave Ginger a formal work performance evaluation. Ginger wondered how the principal
could evaluate her if no observation had been done. Instead of just being content with a positive
evaluation, Ginger set up an appointment and asked her administrator about the criteria she used to
give her the performance evaluation. Without revisiting her story from Red Rock, Ginger claimed she
would not have requested the meeting or formally questioned her administrator’s data collection
procedures.

76

	  

CHAPTER FIVE: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN, NOT INTERIOR DECORATOR
Lucy4 seemed even smaller when she sat up straight in her assigned seat during her sixth grade
Language Arts class; her toes would not even touch the tile floor. Yet, Lucy’s size and discomfort in
her chair did not seem to matter. Instead, she was anxious to open the book in front of her. In her
left hand was Avi’s The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle, the novel her sixth grade Language Arts
class was reading together. Tracing her right index finger along the young woman’s outline and the
transatlantic ship’s sail on the book’s front cover, she was outwardly obeying Mrs. Johnson’s orders to
keep the novel closed until her teacher finished taking attendance. On the inside, though, Lucy was
seriously annoyed. Why can’t I just read quietly at my desk? I’ve got to find out what happens!
The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle was like no other book Lucy had ever read. She
immediately felt a kinship with the book’s heroine, Charlotte, because of their common upbringing by
cultured and educated people. Demonstrating poise in social settings and respect to elders were ways
both young women sought to earn their parents’ approval and praise. Yet, it was the novel’s adventure
that really appealed to Lucy. As the youngest and only daughter of parents who met and fell in love on
a college backpacking trip, Lucy pined for the types of adventures her parents affectionately
remembered. And Charlotte’s tale delivered excitement from the “Important Warning” that began on
the book’s first page:
Not every thirteen-year-old girl is accused of murder, brought to trial, and found guilty.
But I was such a girl, and my story is worth relating even if it did happen years ago. Be
warned, however, this is no Story of a Bad Boy, no What Katy Did. If strong ideas and
action offend you, read no more. Find another companion to share your idle hours. For
my part I intend to tell the truth as I lived it… I would follow my parents…traveling
without them…on a fateful voyage across the Atlantic Ocean in the summer of 1832…
(Avi, 1990, pp. 1-3)
As a sixth grader, Lucy knew that books could deliver information and sugary stories, but The True
Confessions of Charlotte Doyle liberated Lucy’s ideas about what books entailed by hinting at an
alternative life for a young woman. Charlotte proved that girls could have adventures, girls could be
heroes, and some girls could pull off being nice while also disregarding all the rules. Perhaps Lucy
would one day be this type of woman.
4

	  I	  have	  attempted	  to	  remove	  major	  identifying	  details	  from	  participants	  and	  their	  lives,	  such	  as	  personal	  names	  and	  place	  names.	  	  I	  have	  
replaced	  names	  with	  pseudonyms.	  

77

	  

Journey to the Library Profession
Even though Lucy loved books and learning, she never gave a career in education careful
thought. Moreover, throughout her high school years, she had no idea what career path she would
pursue. Lucy’s parents did not require her to have a clearly defined professional goal as a prerequisite
for going to college. Her parents and brothers pushed her to “Go! Go to school! Just go! For
anything!” (April 25, 2012). After some prodding from her family, Lucy attended a state university in
the Midwest immediately following high school. She did not, however, declare a major until the end of
her sophomore year. Because a number of her family members were liberal arts majors, studying
History fell within Lucy’s and her family’s comfort zones. Despite her choice in major, her mother
constantly gave her the same career advice throughout her undergraduate experience:
My mom…was always saying that I should get a teaching certification, and I always said I
would never be a teacher. Probably…because I didn’t want to become my mom... And I
don’t know what my plan was. I don’t know what I thought I was going to do. (April 25,
2012)
Like many college students, Lucy ignored her mom’s unsolicited guidance.
Lucy viewed herself as a visionary person, one that imagined what life would look like in the
future. After college, she had two distinct visions about her future self. Her father’s urging her to join
him in New York helped spawn the first version of the future Lucy. Desiring to please her father, Lucy
completed a digital preservation internship in New York City during the summer immediately after her
college graduation. But urban life was her father’s dream for her. After tasting city life for a summer,
Lucy recalled seeing images of herself as an outdoorsperson living “the dream” out West (April 25,
2012).
Lucy packed up her two luggage bags that contained everything she thought she would need,
including her backpacking and rock climbing gear. Her parents and her brothers stymied her vision
with a more cynical, pragmatic outlook: Lucy would live with family and search for a minimum wage,
retail job. Yet, Lucy tried to not let their comments diminish her joy; Wyoming was exactly the place
Lucy dreamed about. With a job instead of a career, Lucy believed she could spend the majority of her
time doing what she loved: hiking in nearby National Parks and exploring the countryside.
Living in Wyoming was the first time in Lucy’s adult life when she remembered having an image

78

	  

of how her life was going to look— how it was supposed to look based on her mental image—and then
her reality did not match her dream. She recalled,
I think I really liked being outside, and so I sort of romanticized being in Wyoming. [After
a couple of months,] I was feeling really bad about…living with my family…and [Wyoming] was
wonderful. But it wasn’t as wonderful as I thought it was going to be. And I had never really
thought about how important it was to have a job that I could support myself with, and not
just… a fun job… And it was great and wonderful, but I saw… how valuable it was to have a job
that had health insurance, and those typical things. While I was in Wyoming, I frantically
applied [to] and [later] went to library school [back in the Midwest]. (April 25, 2012)
While living a backpacker’s “dream” in Wyoming and supporting her modest life with a retail
job, Lucy remembered “feel(ing) some pressure to do something…worthy” (April 25, 2012). Instead of
accepting a job from Outward Bound as a canoe guide in the Everglades for adolescents with criminal
records, she decided to attend library school.
The Wyoming experience, however, was not Lucy’s inspiration for attending library school.
Instead, she pointed to her unpaid internship at the New York City Historical Society and the fact that
she enjoyed reading.
That summer… I did a lot of photo digitizing...The material was great…but I basically
interacted with no one. That’s where the idea of going to library school sort of came
into my head. It’s funny, I keep saying this. I am thinking about what I thought and the
reality… Now that I know the reality, I feel almost silly saying the things that I thought
[about becoming a librarian]. But, I love to read. And I don’t know if that’s a good
reason to become a librarian, but I think that’s the reason that I did… So I went… (April
25, 2012)
Similar to her undergraduate experience, Lucy had no set occupational goal for her career in
library science. She described a hierarchy of librarianship and claimed she “trickled down” to
subordinate tiers of the profession after considering archival work and academic librarianship (April 25,
2012). She came to realize:
…public libraries or school libraries were probably more appropriate for me, because…
in library schools, there are…two camps. And they’re the people who like being part
of a community, and talking to people, and interacting. And then there’s the people
who are…interested in organization... And I would not fit into that camp as much as this
one [school librarianship]. In my mind, I slowly [chose to become] a school librarian. I
thought in my head, and now it sounds so funny to say this, but I thought ‘I’m going to
get my certification so that I will be safe. So if I can’t find a[nother] library job, I’ll just
find a school library job.’ (April 25, 2012)
Lucy used others as guides to make her occupational decision. She did not connect socially with
individuals seeking archival and academic careers in library school. Even before their induction into

79

	  

their chosen library profession, Lucy allowed her peers to influence her decision about what archival
and academic librarianship could offer her. Thus, she aligned herself with librarians that seemed to be
more interested in working with people. Electing a school library endorsement was based primarily on
practicality; Lucy wanted a job after library school.
When asked about her career preparation in library school, Lucy quickly claimed, “I don’t think
it prepared me [for being a school librarian]” (February 6, 2013). Immediately following, she stated
what it did give her:
I suppose it made me familiar with the jargon, and…the vocabulary… I did appreciate
my time in library school. I felt like there were some classes that I very much enjoyed.
But as far as preparation? It would be nice to have…maybe a little more vocational
support. [Some of the library science courses were] very vocational…but more geared
toward a different vocation than the one I have. I feel like I learned a lot, but I don’t
think… as far as school libraries? I don’t think…my time at SLIS really prepared me at all.
(April 25, 2012; February 6, 2012)
Despite being equipped with the jargon of librarianship, as a school librarian Lucy would rarely use the
new vocabulary. After all, school librarians rarely have other school librarians in their building with
whom to interact. Lucy pointed to the library science curriculum as addressing the vocational needs of
academic librarians, not those entering careers in education with teaching responsibilities. The library
science foundation courses, in Lucy’s view, did not appear to address the teaching responsibilities of
any type of librarian:
To be totally frank, I didn’t really think of [a] librarian as someone who teaches research
skills or inquiry [methods]. Now that’s a big part of my job. I do think [the Inquiry for
School Teachers course] prepared me. And then forced me to do things like write lesson
plans, or think about how you would have to collaborate. And I never really thought
about any of those things [before]. (February 6, 2013)
Without a teaching credential from her undergraduate coursework, Lucy completed her
Master’s Degree in Library Science while also working on her school library teaching certification; thus,
she was required to take four graduate courses in the School of Education. While courses in education
are typically viewed as vocational training, Lucy found them to be very theoretical in nature.
Even those…education classes…are a little frustrating, because they feel very
theoretical, which is interesting. It would be nice to have…a little more
vocational support. But, I felt like my education courses prepared me more than [my
library science courses]... It just feels like being a school librarian is so much more
about education than it is the roles…of other….[librarians]…And I don’t think [my
master’s coursework] prepared me for that at all. For embedding yourself into the
curriculum, or… [understanding] child development, or… any of that! (February 6, 2013)
80

	  

Lucy found her education graduate courses more practical for conversations at martini parties than her
role as a school librarian, perhaps because her education professors also did not understand the role of
a school librarian. She claimed,
I took [the Curriculum in the Context of Instruction] course. Sometimes I’ll be
somewhere and someone will say ‘Piaget!’ And I’ll… remember that name from [my]
curriculum [class]… But, I don’t feel like it really prepared me at all. And in
those…School of Education classes, they never really know what the librarian is
supposed to do anyway. Including your professor. So there’s not a lot of attention
towards that role from SLIS or the School of Education. (February 6, 2013)
Lucy believed she “would have benefited from a vocational curriculum more than [what we actually
were taught]” (February 10, 2013). After spending over ten minutes trying to articulate what was
valuable from her master’s degree coursework for her work as a school librarian, Lucy boiled it down
very simply: “…You could probably fit [everything important that I learned in two years] into one
course… The things that you need to know [as a school librarian] like collection development,
managing the space, and teaching” (February 6, 2013).
Student Teaching
With no teaching experience, Lucy’s final requirement for her master’s degree was successfully
completing her student teaching commitment. She was required to student teach for six weeks in an
elementary school and six weeks in a secondary placement. Because her library school’s local
community was inundated with student teachers from all disciplines, Lucy was advised to complete her
student teaching in another part of the state. Because she was willing to return to her hometown and
live with her mother for the semester, Lucy’s advisor was able to schedule Lucy’s student teaching
placements in Colby, approximately thirty minutes from her hometown.
According to Lucy, her middle school librarian mentor, Mrs. Sanders, handed over the reigns
almost immediately in her first student teaching placement. The two worked alongside each other
easily, and Lucy pointed to Mrs. Sanders as teaching her:
…the value of treating people kindly at work… Everyone loves Mrs. Sanders. The kids
love her. And she has a little candy machine in her office and people would come
through all the time. And she was just so nice…and not to her detriment. She was
doing [important] things. I just loved my mentor teacher. She was wonderful and made
[student teaching] very pleasant. It was…this idealized version of working in a movie.
They live in this great town, and she’s the school librarian. And she’s been in the district
for thirty years. (February 6, 2013)
81

	  

However, there were some challenges for Lucy related to teaching. Lucy began to feel overwhelmed
with the task of creating information-literate students in the small amount of time classroom teachers
were willing to share with her.
When I initially heard of Mr. Thornton’s plans [for researching in the library], I thought
of about a hundred other things that seemed necessary for this project…I could do some
sort of note-taking lesson with the kids. Also, what about citing sources? Shouldn’t
seventh graders be doing that in some way? I could do a bibliography lesson. Mr.
Thornton only wanted to come for one period. So I thought I’d see if he’d stay for
maybe another period, [but] he seemed reluctant. He said he didn’t have enough time
to get everything done in the classroom. I can respect that… I have to keep in mind that
classroom teachers are under time constraints and pressure to meet certain state
standards. So maybe this is just a baby step to show Mr. Thornton that we can address
standards and time constraints while providing real learning opportunities. (September
8, 2010)
With the help of Mr. Thornton, Lucy finally decided to present a mini-lesson about using the online
book catalog and conducting smarter searches on search engines. As she prepared for her first formal
teaching experience in her career, Lucy reflected on the content she was going to teach and believed
“there was good integration of information seeking skills with the curriculum” (September 8, 2010).
Lucy rehearsed the words of her mini-lesson over and over, and she even delivered them during
the thirty-minute car ride from her home to the middle school. As she drove, she envisioned how the
students would receive the lesson. Once again, reality did not exactly match her vision:
Things did not go nearly how I imagined them. However, I guess I should learn to expect
the unexpected, which is what Mrs. Sanders is constantly reminding me. I am a little
frustrated with the results. They did not go poorly, just not how I had imagined.
(September 8, 2010)
Lucy was distressed by the unexpected. While her presentation was “smooth,” Mr. Thornton created
the assignment and its assessment without Lucy (September 8, 2010).
[On the day of the lesson,] Mr. Thornton handed me the final requirements of the
project… The requirements were so specific, students ended up addressing those far
more than actually using the
resources. For example, they had to provide all members
of the group a list of vocab words with accompanying definitions from their chapter. All
of these words and definitions were in the[ir text]books! They also had to create a quiz
and review game for their groups. Therefore, they spent most of the hour using the lab
for word processing. Despite my encouragement, not one student used the catalog all
day. One or two looked at the encyclopedias. (September 8, 2010)
Lucy was frustrated with the disconnection between her instruction and the students’ project; the two
were clearly not synchronized. Quickly, she began to see how librarians could not merely be part of

82

	  

the instructional team if students were to become information literate. Her dreams of being a
successful librarian could not be realized just by rehearsing in the car on the way to work and sharing
her knowledge about searching. Library school did not prepare her to know exactly what to do to
ensure teaching success.
Maybe I should have changed things up more. However, I still felt it was important to
let [students] know about these resources. Was I right? I don’t know. Maybe I should
have just showed them how to use Word! But I also wanted to show Mr. Thornton what
we could do in the future. I felt like I was proving to him that there was more to be
done in the media center than word processing. I think I could have had a longer
planning meeting and maybe avoided some of these hiccups. Also, I think it would be
helpful to plan the project from the start. I don’t know how realistic it is or how much
pushing you would have to do to actually get in on a teacher’s project planning.
However, if I had been in the initial planning, I could have suggested other alternatives
besides copying vocab from their health book! I could have showed him different
technologies they could use or other creative ideas for final products. (September 8,
2010)
During student teaching, Lucy felt part of a stable and important library program that
introduced her to the enormity of the school librarian’s instructional responsibilities. Her mentors
were respected by the administration and the community. In fact, the librarians from grades K-12
were invited to march in the high school’s homecoming parade to promote the “One School, One Book”
campaign led by her middle school mentor, Mrs. Sanders (February 6, 2013).
I felt pretty excited, because it wasn’t just me. I think if they would have said, ‘Would
you march in the homecoming parade representing the librarians in the corporation
alone?’ then I would’ve felt a little like, ‘I’m busy that night.’ But…it felt really nice. It
just felt nice to be part of a little unit. It felt cool… The library was cool. (February 6,
2013)
Lucy valued being a part of something greater than herself: the Colby school library program. She
identified with her colleagues, and she was willing to go outside of her comfort zone with them. She
marched proudly in the library parade around the town square.
I borrowed some library clothes: a vest with books all over it…and some silly
librarian t-shirt from my mentor librarian. And we marched in the parade, and we
pushed the book carts… with signs on them, and we handed out bookmarks [to
stimulate interest in the campaign]. And I loved it! I was so lucky that I was in Colby for
my student teaching, because…I really liked Colby, and even that little parade through
town. I liked the size of Colby. It just felt really nice to be part of the community like
that… It just felt very relaxed. It felt like a movie about being a librarian. It was the Fall,
and we were in Colby, and…and everyone loves books and Mrs. Sanders. (February 6,
2013)

83

	  

For Lucy, student teaching was pleasant and practical, but not an opportunity for her to witness or
contribute to library innovation, especially during her elementary school placement with Ms.
Nackenhorst as her mentor.
I felt like what I was learning from student teaching wasn’t… to be innovative… I felt like
what I was learning… was the library. How to survive in a [public] school. Or what the
library really, in reality looks like. Not how to push the envelope. And…if I read
something, I take it to heart. I just believe it… so if I’m student teaching and Ms.
Nackenhorst is my supervisor, then she’s doing it right. I never really thought that it
could be wrong. We read Halloween books and everyone wore a costume, and… it was
just happy. (February 6, 2013)
Content with what she learned during student teaching, Lucy successfully completed her requirements
for a Master’s Degree of Library Science and a state teaching credential in School Library Media in
December of 2010. Immediately, Lucy began looking for a school librarian position on the East Coast so
that she could be close to loved ones.
School Culture
The December wind resisted her efforts to push open the door, yet Lucy managed to get into
Samuel Prescott High School’s newly constructed, stately entrance. A school crest and numerous
banners hung from the third story ceiling. To her left were clean, floor-to-ceiling windows that
encased the office. Noticing a woman through those windows, Lucy hoped that the woman could point
her in the direction of the principal’s office; Lucy did not want to get lost and be late for her
interview. Opening the glass door, the woman Lucy spotted was a beautiful, middle-aged blonde in a
black power suit. She was working at a desk behind a waist-high, blue, Formica wall.
Neither the racket from the glass door opening and closing, nor the rubbing of Lucy’s sleeves
onto her olive green North Face jacket’s waistline caused the woman to look up. For at least five
minutes, Lucy “felt like a fool” standing on the other side of the wall (February 6, 2013). Since it was
only her second professional interview, she wondered what to do next: “Should I say ‘excuse me?’
Should I clear my throat? Should I say ‘hello?’ Or could I stand in a way so that she would acknowledge
me?” (February 6, 2013).
While she could not recall what finally relieved the awkward moment, Lucy did point out its
significance in defining the town of Prescott and the high school culture. She claimed, “It all felt very
surface…nothing was genuine. How good they looked was more important than what was actually
84

	  

happening. It’s very surface, not very warm and friendly” (February 6, 2013).
Lucy’s interview for the position of school librarian began in the principal’s office. It went
even worse than her interaction with the blonde office manager. She recounted,
The principal5 had no idea what to ask me, and I had all of these things prepared. I left
the interview thinking ‘Wow! That went really poorly. I’ll learn from this, and the next
time I’ll be able to…even if [the person] doesn’t ask the right question, I’ll just insert the
answers that I have prepared, like for example, this project that I worked on…’ But, I
remember clearly thinking, ‘[This principal] doesn’t know what to ask.’ He didn’t
understand what a librarian does, and I found that so interesting. (April 25, 2012)
After the question and answer session, the principal gave Lucy a tour of Prescott’s neglected library. A
librarian had not managed it for over a year, and the school had abandoned the book collection years –
perhaps a decade – before. There were numerous warning signs that signified to Lucy that the library
was a forgotten space. Books had not been properly shelved. Lucy noted, “I knew what I was getting
myself into…[The library] looked terrible when I walked through. And I knew there would be no [book
or supply] budget” (April 25, 2012). But this did not keep Lucy from dreaming about what the place
could be with a little elbow grease.
The principal offered Lucy the job before she left the school premises. But, because she had
been coached by her family to never accept a position on the spot, she told the principal that she
would “think about it. And then I got in the car, and I couldn’t believe I had a job. Yeah! ‘Someone
wants to hire me!’ I was shocked” (April 25, 2012). Lucy never pondered why a school librarian would
be an important hire for the Prescott High School principal in January, after a year without one.
Instead, she focused on her good fortune to find a school library job in the middle of the school year,
only twenty minutes from her loved ones.
After she began working at Prescott High School, Lucy recognized that the library was not the
only thing that the administration neglected. Poor instruction from teachers, administration’s
indifference toward teacher professional development, and scarce funding were all problems Lucy
noticed within weeks of her hire. While the Prescott school corporation attempted to hire its own
graduates, some teachers from other school systems cautiously shared their observations with Lucy:
Mrs. Hall [wa]s just dumbfounded about the poor staff support [and] low expectations
for the things that are valued… When she worked [at another high school] there were
5

	  Neither	  the	  superintendent	  nor	  the	  principal	  were	  interviewed	  as	  a	  part	  of	  this	  study.	  	  Instead,	  this	  chapter	  relies	  on	  Lucy’s	  stories	  of	  
occupational	  socialization.	  
85

	  

higher expectations and much better preparation [for Ivy League Universities]. (February
6, 2013)
Mrs. Hall explained how much she appreciated Lucy working as a teacher for Prescott, but further
commented that after years in education she no longer “had the time or energy to devote to
contributing to a higher quality school system” (February 6, 2013). Information like this, about the
instruction and student learning, reinforced Lucy’s first impression about the school: “all about
appearances, rather than any real meat” (February 6, 2013).
Lucy’s Philosophy about the Role of School Librarians and Library Media Centers
Before library school, Lucy never had a close relationship with a librarian. Thus, she did not
have a clear image of what a school librarian should be or do; she had no role model to help her form
beliefs about the profession. In fact, one of Lucy’s greatest professional fears, even after library
school, was being forced to articulate a philosophy about the purpose of school librarians or libraries.
Being the advocate for the library and feeling that I have to defend myself all the
time…is really difficult for me…I don’t defend myself all the time, but maybe I feel like I
should. Or that I’m supposed to, or I need to rationalize my position. People will say
‘Libraries… aren’t they obsolete?’ Or ‘It’ll all be e-books soon…’ Or ‘We have the
internet.’ Or ‘Who goes to the library?’ I should really work on developing a response to
that… [but] I don’t feel like I should have to defend libraries. So when someone makes a
comment like that, I just kind of shrug it off or laugh it off. I don’t respond. Maybe I
don’t have a good answer? Maybe in my head - I don’t know… I don’t know how to
articulate why I think libraries are good. I’ve never really tried to articulate [it]. Maybe
it goes back to this nostalgic feeling I have about [the library]. It’s just this innate
[thing]. I just think they are important, because I just do. Because I always have. Not
because I’ve really thought about why. (April 25, 2012)
Lucy’s difficulty in verbalizing a philosophy could reflect that she is the youngest in a family of “big
readers” (February 6, 2013). She never had an opportunity to envision life without books or libraries.
Lucy recollected, “I come from a family of readers. There were always just books around and the
adults [in my family] were always reading… it just always felt really natural to read” (February 6,
2013).
Even though Lucy’s beliefs about libraries were difficult to formulate, she heard her mother
communicate her beliefs about patronizing libraries.
I…remember in high school…getting into an argument with my mom, because I had
gone to Barnes & Noble…. That was when Barnes & Noble felt very sophisticated. So,
that’s what my friends and I did on a Friday night….go to Starbucks…and Barnes &
Noble... But one time I bought… a paperback copy of Into Thin Air, and it [cost] $5.95 or
$7.95. I brought it home, and my mom and I got into an argument because my mom
86

	  

doesn’t believe in buying books. ‘Why would you spend money on that when you could
just get it at the library?’ That’s what she always said. She is big advocate of the library,
and she thinks that…buying books is absurd. (February 6, 2013)
To Lucy’s mother, the library was in their community so that everyone had access to books: the rich
and the poor. To buy a book was to undermine one of the greatest community resources ever
established. Lucy did not agree with her mother then as a high school student, nor did she a decade
later as a librarian.
Even without a clear mental image of librarianship, Lucy definitely had a clear sense about how
a library should feel, based on her many delightful experiences in her public library as a child. She
stated,
My family spent a lot of time at the library… specifically my mom… It’s not even that we
ha[d] a close relationship with a librarian or anything. We just [we]re always stopping in
the library…It feels very natural to be in the library. I always loved going a lot when I
was a kid. And I have a lot of fond memories with the library. And still, when I go home,
even if I’m home for a three-day weekend, I still make it to the library and check things
out. Which is kind of ridiculous! (April 25, 2012; February 6, 2013)
Lucy thought her time as a school librarian would be spent providing a space with flexible hours
for student researchers, similar to the public library from her childhood. She remembered:
…saying things in the interview about…what I wanted for the library. And I remember talking
how I wanted it open for kids to come and go, and before school and after school, and during
lunch. And just very free. And, I don’t think I understood high schoolers at this point…
Because I remember the principal [stating] ‘Hmmm. Well, they can’t. They’ll have to have
passes.’ (April 25, 2012)
Lucy believed that if students used the space, their presence would naturally provide a venue for her
to promote recreational reading. Lucy envisioned that there would be:
…kids checking books out and there would be cool bulletin boards and there would be a
lot of energy, and they would be well-behaved, and it would be this idyllic place. And I
would run the show… like a basketball on my finger - just spin it around. It would be perfect.
(April 25, 2012)
Prescott presented another opportunity for Lucy to envision the future. Even with high school students
involved, she believed things would be perfect.
Lucy also wanted to collaborate with teachers on their lessons and make the library an inviting
place for them to use as a research classroom. At the same time, she knew it would take time to
convince teachers to collaborate with her. Because she consistently felt more effective in one-on-one
settings, Lucy tended to shape her proposals for establishing a library program around individual
87

	  

engagement more often than large groups. Lucy recollected, “I just thought it would be” (April 25,
2012). Lucy’s logic led her to believe that with a librarian in charge and a space for students to
gather, a library program would naturally develop.
Lucy’s Critical Event
Among a number of potential critical events, Lucy selected one that occurred during her
second semester at Prescott High School. Three factors galvanized her critical event. First, because
there was no separate office building for district administrators, the Superintendent’s office was just
down the hall from the school library. This enabled the Superintendent, Ms. Stevenson, to oversee the
daily functions of the high school as she desired. Ms. Stevenson was known to contact high school
administration and teaching personnel to impulsively address concerns of the School Board,
accreditation reviewers, parents, as well as her own. The Prescott teachers learned quickly from
others: stay off of administrators’ radars. Teachers claimed that others were removed from their posts
when they said too much or when they formally pushed back against administrators’ philosophies.
Second, and related to the absence of a separate administrative office, another circumstance
that set Lucy’s critical event in motion was that the School Board bi-monthly business meetings were
held in Prescott’s library. The School Board meetings were televised for local broadcasting, so that
community members not in attendance could stay abreast of School Board business. Lucy had never
attended a meeting, nor did she know where the meetings took place.
Third, the Prescott High School library’s book collection had been neglected for at least a
decade. Shelves were crammed with books. Instead of rearranging the collection or shifting books
from one shelf to another, previous library employees placed books that would no longer fit on the
shelves directly on top of them. Many of the books had active mold growing on them, and Lucy was
concerned that the mold would spread throughout the collection. Furthermore, after decades of
neglect, some of the collection contained inaccurate information while others contained offensive,
racist perspectives on African and Native Americans. Lucy had no book budget to replace the books,
yet she was committed to managing the books she inherited. She wanted students to find quality,
useful books for their research projects; however, Lucy could not promote the collection to students or
teachers because of its poor condition. Thus, she began the massive undertaking of examining the
88

	  

condition of each item in the collection and reorganizing the books.
With a high school student volunteer, Lucy began to weed books in poor condition or books
with outdated or inaccurate content. This substantial collection project created a number of book
piles in just a couple of days: books that were out of place that needed to be shelved in their Dewey
Decimal order; books to permanently remove from the collection; and books to remove from the
collection that contained maps or images useful for special projects. Lucy believed the floor was the
most convenient place for these piles; this location would keep them separate from the rest of the
collection and out of the hands of the students.
Lucy’s critical event took place during this library reorganization. After being notified through
email that the Superintendent wanted to see her immediately, Lucy went to speak with her. Ms.
Stevenson, Lucy’s “abrasive” Superintendent, demanded that Lucy decorate the library on a bi-monthly
basis with new posters and student work for each School Board meeting as they were always held in the
library (April 25, 2012). There was no consideration to how could Lucy redecorate the library without a
supply budget or without access to student work. In addition, Ms. Stevenson forbade Lucy to ever put
books on the floor again because it upset the School Board. This one and only conversation with Ms.
Stevenson gave Lucy insight into what was valued: good appearances. For Lucy, their interaction:
…really put the nail on the coffin about what is valued, and what is important to the
people that are in charge of me, that are instructing me…and therefore, where I should
spend my time. And… if it’s important to them, then it should be important to me.
[But] what really bothered me and brought such a strong reaction [in me was that] the
students’ wants and needs were not heard. My supervisor was prioritizing the surface
and looks of the library rather than the program, collection, and needs of the students.
(April 25, 2012)
This conversation made it clear to Lucy that the students’ needs and her work were not valued by the
administration. Her critical event culminated in the realization that she was not respected as a
professional.
Not once during or after the critical event did Lucy ask the Superintendent or her principal for
supply funds to decorate the space as demanded. Instead, Lucy went to a paper supply store, and
purchased turquoise and white polka-dot paper with her own money. Twice a month, Lucy would
spend at least half a workday using this colorful paper to create a new backdrop for the School Board’s
meeting and straightening up the library. Because she was rarely involved with the production of
89

	  

student work and the Superintendent clearly wanted it in the library, Lucy was forced to explain her
critical event to the Art Teacher. The Art Teacher reluctantly parted with a handful of pieces that the
students produced; Lucy would rearrange them every two weeks.
Even with Lucy’s new attention on decorating the library for the School Board meetings, her
administration did not trust her to redecorate the space as directed. The rest of her career at
Prescott, Lucy received a bi-monthly email from the Superintendent’s secretary. In it, Lucy was
reminded to decorate the library for the School Board meeting. Even the principal occasionally
wandered into the library the day of the School Board meeting to serve as an in-person reminder. This
encounter, along with other professional frustrations at Prescott, destroyed Lucy’s dream for the
Prescott High School library. It also made her question whether or not she should be a librarian. Lucy
sobbed,
…Honestly, I don’t even picture that space anymore as a great space. Or as if it has
potential. It just is what it is, and I don’t see it changing…Maybe I’ve internalized, given
up, and written it off. I really visualize…how together I’m going to be in the future. And
how everything is going to look great. But, now in the library, what I want it to be is
just… I don’t even know. I feel lost at this job. Yeah, just feeling totally lost and
questioning, almost questioning, whether or not I should have even gone to library
school. What’s hard for me is I went to [library] school without having any real job
experience, and I spent a lot of money. I don’t know if it’s the right fit, which is difficult
to admit. But, it’s also difficult to think I’m going to have a knee-jerk reaction to this and
completely change, just because I had a bad experience. [My dream of this job] feels so
tainted. It feels embarrassing to say ‘I spent all this money and time on something that I
might not…’ I’ve been working a year and a half, and am I willing to just… I don’t want
to keep going if it - if it’s a bad fit. But I don’t want to just throw in the towel… (April 25,
2012)
In short, Lucy could not fathom going to library school to spend her workdays rearranging posters. It
was difficult for her to understand that her administrators valued this job responsibility over everything
else. She went to graduate school to be a librarian, not an interior decorator. While Lucy acted out
the role cast for her, she lost her vision for the perfect library space at Prescott. Furthermore, she
wrestled with her place in the profession.
As a novice school librarian, Lucy faced many challenges that presented significant barriers to
an enjoyable occupational socialization. While Lucy’s critical event pointed to her Superintendent’s
lack of interest and understanding of her work, Lucy’s professional challenges extended beyond their
one interaction. To better understand her narrative and why it came to represent Lucy’s most

90

	  

impactful, critical event in her professional life, an exploration follows with the occupational
challenges she faced and the successes she experienced.
Pre-Professional Challenges
Without an “apprenticeship of observation” to acquaint Lucy with school librarianship, and no
memorable contact with any type of librarian, Lucy depended on library school to help her construct
the image of a school librarian (Lortie, 1975). Nonetheless, she walked away from library school with
scant information upon which to build a professional image. While Lucy enjoyed library school,
multiple times she claimed that it did not prepare her for being a high school librarian. This amplified
Lucy’s lack of confidence as a school librarian, making her dependent on her administrator for
direction. Specifically, in relation to her critical event, library school did not prepare Lucy for the
culture of schools; cultural beliefs about how books should be treated; how to negotiate professional
conflict; or how to be an advocate for a library program.
Without any preparation for conflict management, Lucy held on to her belief that the authority
figure was always right, whether the authority was a principal or a teaching mentor.
I tend and have always tended to take my superiors words as truth. Even in college I had
a hard time debating or discussing and disagreeing with my professors. I sort of
assumed that whatever he or she said was the truth…Maybe it was because of their
authority. I assume that because they are more educated or more experienced than I
am, they have a more valid opinion. And that is how I feel about my superiors. I assume
that they know more and have done more as professional[s]. I never really thought
that [a supervisor] could be wrong… Therefore, I trust their words. So when someone
gives me [negative] feedback, it…rocks me to my core. (May 25, 2012)
Library school did not alter Lucy’s extreme respect for authority. She continued to believe that the
opinions of her superiors were more valid than her own, because of their education and experience.
Lucy’s idyllic student teaching experience prepared her for long days in schools, and her two
school librarian mentors established images of how school librarians conducted library business.
Neither mentor expressed frustration about their administrators. In fact, the mentors never discussed
the process of developing relationships with administrators.
We never really talked much about administrators in either placement. [It was if] they
never thought that much about them either. Neither seemed concerned about job
[security], or anything like that. It just felt very relaxed. (February 6, 2013)

91

	  

Student teaching in a developed and well-funded library program - with librarians who were valued by
their administrators - gave Lucy the notion that these professional experiences were common.
Neither graduate school nor student teaching gave Lucy the confidence that she was an official
librarian. Lucy shared, “If I had graduated from SLIS and never gotten a librarian job, I don’t think I
ever would have felt like a librarian” (February 6, 2013). Even student teaching did not serve as the
intended bridge between student and professional librarian. Lucy entered the profession without
feeling like a library professional.
Challenges of the Newly Arrived Teacher
Before joining the Prescott faculty, Lucy had never heard of the acronym NEASC before. She
knew enough about No Child Left Behind to understand that teachers were pressured to get students to
perform. But, Lucy did not know how schools were held accountable by accreditation bodies like the
New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC). One NEASC (2011) accreditation standard,
named School Resources for Learning, specifically addressed having a licensed school librarian. She
soon learned that it was NEASC this; NEASC that; everything was about NEASC.
Lucy also discovered during her first semester that the Prescott administration and a handful of
faculty did not think they needed a high school librarian; however, desiring a good accreditation
review, they were forced to hire one. Lucy soon realized that she was Prescott’s token librarian during
their accreditation review. Perhaps this was why she never received a job description or why there
were no conversations about what was expected of her. It was Prescott’s goal to pass NEASC with
flying colors, and the administrators believed that hiring Lucy the same semester as the NEASC
evaluation would help renew their accreditation.
The administration regularly consulted the NEASC standards that clearly articulated the role of
the school librarian. To receive full accreditation, Prescott was held to a number of standards for its
library program. According to standard nine, NEASC (2011) expects:
Library/media services are integrated into curriculum and instructional practices and
have an adequate number of certified/licensed personnel and support staff who: are
actively engaged in the implementation of the school's curriculum; provide a wide range
of materials, technologies, and other information services in support of the school's
curriculum; ensure that the facility is available and staffed for students and teachers
before, during, and after school; are responsive to students' interests and needs in order
to support independent learning; conduct ongoing assessment using relevant data,
92

	  

including feedback from the school community, to improve services and ensure each
student achieves the school’s 21st century learning expectations. (¶7)
The Prescott administration ignored the majority of these expectations. The school’s leadership hired
Lucy, ensuring that the library facility was available and staffed. Her principal assumed she would eat
lunch in the library and maintain all library services during her lunch, despite the language in the
teachers’ contract. The contract stipulated that teachers received a lunch break without duties. Even
so, Lucy had to request for an alternate in the library so that she could take a lunch break.
But Lucy’s administrators did not view her as a teacher, despite her teacher pay. They were
not concerned with the NEASC (2011) expectations of her to “actively engage in the implementation of
the school’s curriculum” (¶7). At the same time, Lucy did not view herself as a teacher either. Two
years into her career as a school librarian Lucy confessed, “To be kind of frank, I still don’t really think
of myself as a teacher” (February 6, 2013). Perhaps the rejection of her teacher identity and status
prevented her development into an instructional leader. Instead, Lucy was much more comfortable
with the traditional roles of a librarian: clerical library work and one-on-one interactions with students
and faculty. Lucy enjoyed guiding a student to a book in the stacks or showing someone how to use a
research database. Lucy was bored, but she was willing to be the token librarian because she needed
employment.
While her administrators expected Lucy to know and perform her library duties, they were not
actively involved in her mentoring. However, they did assign Lucy to a teaching mentor from the
English department. This mentor, according to Lucy, was a big fan of libraries. In fact, Lucy found her
to be “ten times more confident [than I was] in why she believes in libraries” (April 25, 2012). Yet,
Lucy’s mentor did not influence her teaching identity or equip her to be a library advocate. Lucy
explained what she did learn:
The one thing I learned from her, and she was always really, super polished, and she had
on her Talbots outfit, and… even though we have different styles – I did think it was nice.
I liked it. And that’s one thing I think I’ve taken away from Prescott: you dress like you
care. It felt like people treat you… the kids take you more seriously or something. It
doesn’t necessarily mean you have to be wearing something fancy or expensive. But, if
you try! And that’s my issue. I just get up ten minutes before I have to leave. I don’t
look like I’ve put much effort into it. ‘What is not wrinkled?’ But, I think…if you dress
like you care, I think people respect you more. Or, treat you a little nicer.
(February 6, 2013)

93

	  

By example, Lucy’s mentor advised her that the outward appearance of a teacher could foster respect.
However, she did not expand Lucy’s beliefs on instructional strategies or methods, or how to build a
library program from scratch. The attention was on dressing the part of a teacher, instead of actually
being the part.
Because Lucy joined the faculty after the winter break, Prescott’s library had been without a
librarian for an entire semester. The administration knew that the library had become place for
students to skip class, and they wanted someone to check passes. Their idea of the school librarian’s
role was akin to a study hall manager. Because this was mentioned during her interview, Lucy desired
to excel in this role to please her superiors. It was not easy, though, as the students were very skilled
at deceit. She reflected,
When I first started here, there was no one here [in the library]. So, [students] just
skipped class in the library. And I was so naïve [when] they would say, ‘Oh, I just need
to do my work on the computer.’ I didn’t even think that they were supposed to be
somewhere else. I just thought they’re here doing [what they were told]… And now, not
that I want to discourage anyone from coming to the library, but I’ve become much
more, ‘Where’s your pass? Sign in.’ And, I got really into that... (April 25, 2012)
Lucy complied with the administration’s mental model of her role as the study hall monitor.
Historically lacking either a dynamic librarian attuned to the job’s 21st century expectations or any
motivation to implement more than the superficialities of the NEASC requirements, Prescott’s
administrators fostered a library climate that, by modern standards, diluted the programming to the
point that it ceased to exist.
Their low regard for Lucy’s professional knowledge manifested itself during the annual
Christmas party for retired school personnel, held in the high school library. It was this moment when
the administration communicated that Lucy was clerical staff. Lucy remembered:
Apparently [the party is] a whole big thing. It was ham and party invitations… They
called and asked that I go down and cover the phones [in the Superintendent’s office],
because even the secretaries and everyone from the Superintendent’s office was
[attending the party]. (February 6, 2013)
While Lucy found their request to be “ridiculous,” she found herself “relieved” instead of angry
(February 6, 2013). She recalled:
I just sign passes, and it was depressing. I was relieved to not be in the library, sitting
behind the desk, feeling like a fool while they were all there. [At the same time,] I was

94

	  

nervous that I was going to mess something up. I was more scared of that than
anything…answering phones and not transferring a call [correctly]. (February 6, 2013)
Lucy felt as if she would be an outsider in the library during the party, even though her name was on
the door, and she was responsible for the library. Perhaps she felt more useful doing a specific task,
rather than stamping hall passes or dusting the shelves in her boredom.
Although her persistent efforts appeared inconvenient to school personnel, Lucy nonetheless
attempted to offer more to the school than a study hall monitor. For example, Lucy wanted to take
responsibility for the library schedule just as her student teaching mentors did. She believed that if
teachers came to her to reserve the computers or the physical space of the library, she could then
discuss potential teaching collaborations. She thought if teachers knew what she could do, then she
could begin teaching more information literacy skills to students. Even if teachers did not want her to
be actively involved in the teaching, Lucy could at least serve as a support to the teachers’ lessons and
assignment, which could only happen if she discussed with the teachers their curriculum plans. Lucy
believed she could optimally discuss her potential contributions at the time when the teachers signed
up to use the library.
But, at Prescott, this had never been done before. For more than a decade, the secretary
managed all the schedules of the special teaching spaces: the library and the computer labs. While
Lucy recognized the value of the office personnel knowing where the students were at all times, it
undermined instructional collaboration. Lucy recalled it being:
…one of the first things I asked the principal about when I got there. And he said he’d
look into it, and then he got back to me and said it wasn’t going to happen. And the
assistant principal [had] an hour-long conversation with the secretary and it [still]
never happened. She wasn’t open to an electronic schedule system, because… when
the Internet would go down, what would they do? (February 6, 2013)
This response was frustrating, but Lucy did not press the matter further. After all, the secretary’s
husband was on the School Board. Lucy was warned by other teachers not to push people in power.
Instead, every morning Lucy walked down to the office and wrote down the day’s schedule, but
this was not a perfect method. She was often surprised by teachers whose names did not appear on
the schedule in the morning but had apparently signed up in the middle of the day. Other times, after

95

	  

making extensive preparations, Lucy realized there were no-shows who crossed their names off after
7:30 A.M. Lucy elaborated:
It was just such a hassle, and it made my job feel like even more of a joke, because
anyone could come to the library. It didn’t matter if I was there or not. They didn’t
need me. They just had to sign up… and that was it. So…if they really needed me – they
would have to contact me separately, but nobody ever did. It just felt very stupid.
(February 6, 2013)
Lucy’s most opportune times for planning and promoting her services were either at lunch or when
teachers were in the middle of their library visits. Ultimately, instructional collaboration rarely
happened, and Lucy had very few opportunities to develop a teaching identity or to gain confidence in
her role as an instructional librarian.
When she did find collaborative partners, Lucy did not feel like she could offer traditional
curriculum and research support with the library’s book collection. The state of the collection was so
poor that she did not feel as if she could beg teachers to come to the library and have nothing valuable
to offer them. When she accepted the job, Lucy knew there was no budget for books, so to press the
issue with her principal seemed unwise. Soon, Lucy found herself trapped in her clerical role.
There wasn’t really any way to move… There was only so much that I could do. I don’t
want to be the only one who wishes we had more books. And I know there are kids
there, but they don’t even expect the books to be there. They know the books are not
going to be there. (April 25, 2012)
Students found their research and recreational books at the public library, and Lucy began to focus all
of her teaching efforts on promoting the free research databases offered by the state library.
Once NEASC evaluated the school and shared its findings, Prescott realized the review board
devoted an entire section of its response to improving the library program. One of the
recommendations was to update the book collection; thus, Lucy’s principal agreed to “find” some
funding for library materials (February 6, 2013). Lucy was directed to put together an order, but he
would not define the budget. Later, he told her to create a budget with as much money as she
wanted, and then he would “cut it from there” (February 6, 2013). With the help from other school
librarians and collection developers, Lucy put together a library budget based on national averages and
the library budgets of peer high schools. The final dollar amount was nearly $35,000, and it did not
consider the nearly useless status of the non-fiction collection. If it had, the budget would have been

96

	  

significantly larger.
When she could not reach the principal in person on two occasions, Lucy emailed him the
detailed budget proposal with allocated funds for specific collection categories such as graphic novels,
biographies, nonfiction, and fiction. Before the school day was over, Lucy’s principal came to her in
urgency. She recalled him saying, “I’m giving this back to you because I don’t want anyone to find it…
because it’s so absurd. There’s no way you’re going to get this” (February 6, 2013). Lucy felt
ashamed, but she remained in the conversation. She expected him to tell her what budget she would
receive. When he did not offer a number, she asked him directly for one. He responded with
something along the lines of $7,000-$8,000. Once the principal left the library, Lucy broke down and
cried. For Lucy, this interaction made Lucy realize:
It was a bad place for me to be [because of the] hardball playing. It just feels so
unnatural to me. And, I…never expected that. And I know there’s some of that at every
job. I don’t think that it’s just the library [profession] by any stretch of the imagination.
I thought it was going to be like student teaching with Mrs. Sanders in Colby, where
everybody loves her… with the teachers she taught when they were kids. She was
everyone’s grandma. That’s what I wanted. I’m sure she’s had some uncomfortable
things, maybe not [this] bad. But, [this is] not what I was thinking of when I thought of
being a librarian. (February 6, 2013)
The job Lucy envisioned never came to be. At Prescott, her role as a librarian demanded that she be
an advocate and a negotiator. According to Lucy, she had neither of these skills, and she had no
interest in acquiring them. In her mind, people should not have to defend libraries; their value should
be common sense. After the conversation with her principal about the budget she proposed, Lucy
believed the principal thought she was “crazy” (February 6, 2013). She appreciated his action of
protection, to get rid of the proposed budget, because she did not want other administrators to
question her sanity. Not once did Lucy question her principal’s motives during this interaction;
however, the interaction deeply affected her. She shared her obvious exhaustion:
I’m kind of fed up with the whole thing. I mean I want new things, and I want people to
want to check them out. I want them to come back. And I want… I just want [the library] to
have energy. And I don’t want to be the only one that’s stumping for the books. I don’t
know… I’m definitely fed up with the way it is. And I don’t want to take on the task anymore
of… championing the library. And maybe I am getting the support, or I’m starting to get the
support, and I just…can’t see it anymore. [At first] I thought the support meant money. But
maybe it means more than that. Like someone who actually cares about it, and not throwing
money at a problem just so it looks like we have a functioning library. It’s too little too
late…I’ve kind of already made up my mind [about working at Prescott]. (April 25, 2012)

97

	  

While Lucy internally revised her definition of “support,” she felt more confident about her future at
Prescott. In less than a month after the interaction with her principal about the budget, Lucy turned
in her resignation. Before she left, Lucy submitted a revised budget with specific requests for
purchase, but the principal never ordered a single item.
Lucy’s superiors informally defined her—the token librarian—as clerical staff on numerous
occasions, further enforced by clerical staff, including the office secretary and the Superintendent’s
secretary. Thus, Lucy’s work environment qualified for what Callahan (1962) defined as occupational
vulnerability. This led her to, as Callahan and others predicted, compromise in order to keep her job
(Callahan, 1962; Lutz, 1996; Wisener, 1996). Even though Lucy never desired to be a change agent,
the Prescott administrators dismissed her early attempts to create a library program because there was
no library budget. In Lucy’s mind, without a budget there could be no library program. What she was
unable to see was that the school corporation had invested in the greatest resource for a library
program: a certified school librarian. Their reasons for doing so did not nullify their financial support.
In some ways, it was not the external forces that created Lucy’s greatest occupational
vulnerability. It was her internal desire to please others, to be what her superiors told her to be.
Instead of being accountable to herself first, she allowed the school administrators to be responsible
for what she would value and how she would spend her time. Their values became her values. She
explained,
I receive far more attention about changing posters and displayed student work than
any other part of my job. It has forced me to refocus my efforts from projects that I
believe in as a professional to tasks I need to complete to keep in my superior’s good
graces, to keep a job. (April 25, 2012)
Lucy’s adoption of her administrators’ values came at a great cost. In the process of her conformity,
Lucy was able to keep her job. But, she was forced to act in ways that were in direct opposition to her
core beliefs about libraries and teaching.
Lucy’s Successes
Lucy found it very difficult to discuss ways in which she was professionally successful. At the
time of her performance for this study, Lucy was in the middle of an existential crisis: she wanted to
leave Prescott and she wanted to return to the Midwest. In less than a month her apartment lease

98

	  

would be up, and the moving trucks would arrive for her belongings. Yet, she had not resigned from
Prescott, and she did not have another position secured. If she did not find another job, Lucy did not
know what she would do.
The majority of Lucy’s successes, as noted below, occurred early in her career at Prescott High
School. As the professional obstacles increased, Lucy’s successes diminished along with her ability to
recall them. Each professional hurdle she cleared seemed to impact her professional stamina to take
on additional responsibilities outside of what was expected of her.
Lucy’s greatest successes were in developing relationships with the faculty and students at
Prescott. Even Lucy recognized that initiating “small talk” was easy for her (April 25, 2012). After a
weekend, teachers looked for Lucy as soon as they arrived in the building. Lucy always asked them
about their weekends, and they were prepared with stories and photos taken with their Smartphones.
Lucy lengthened these interactions by asking questions and showing enthusiasm for how the teachers
spent their time away from school.
Likewise, Lucy’s friendliness allowed her to develop good relations with Prescott students as
well. After a semester of working at the school, Lucy recognized that students were seeking out
opportunities to talk with her. When they walked through the library during passing periods, students
would not wait for Lucy to greet them. They would approach her first, and she would ask them about
their lives as well. Lucy attempted to learn all 1,000 of their names, even though she had few
opportunities to interact with them. Students seemed to believe Lucy was sympathetic and
trustworthy; they talked with her about their struggles to select a university and shared their joy after
receiving their acceptance letters from their dream colleges. A handful of students even joined her
after-school book club.
The ability to build relationships was not the only skill Lucy brought to Prescott. When she first
started, Lucy began doing what many librarians fear: weeding the book collection. Despite the
overwhelming task that other administrators seemed to have neglected for decades, Lucy took
managing the collection seriously. She also created book displays, developed a website for the library,
decorated bulletin boards, created signage for easier access to the books, and she rearranged the
library’s furniture.
99

	  

In her first semester, Lucy wrote and received a grant from a local foundation to purchase
books for reluctant readers. In her second semester, Lucy hosted a Barnes & Noble book fair in the
library. She not only promoted the fair to the school community, she also promoted online sales to her
family members, well-to-do friends, and previous professors. Because the fair happened right before
the winter holidays, she encouraged people to purchase books as gifts while also supporting Prescott’s
High School library. The fair was successful in getting new books in the hands of her high school
students, and her efforts were rewarded with a Barnes & Noble gift certificate for nearly $500 for the
purchase of library books.
In summary, Lucy’s successes manifested her professional skills as a relationship builder. While
this came naturally for Lucy, it was also something her student teaching mentor prioritized. In
addition, her successes revealed her strengths as a collection manager and fundraiser. Even before her
superiors demanded it from her, she showed a desire to decorate the library. She also promoted the
book collection using physical and electronic methods.
Lucy’s challenges and successes provide insight into Lucy’s professional life and why her critical
event altered her professional role. The following sections return to the context of her critical event
to explore two issues: (1) Lucy’s professional identity as a novice school librarian and (2) the
reproduction of cultural assumptions and stereotypes in Lucy’s narrative.
Professional Identity
Lucy expressed explicit, implicit, and tacit identity claims throughout her critical event
narrative. In table nine, these identity claims are arranged by the claims she made about herself and
what she needed from others. Next to each claim is a numerical value that corresponds to the number
of times Lucy claimed it in her critical event narrative.
Table 9
Lucy’s Identity Claims in Critical Events Narrative
Identity claims about herself
“I privately question authority.” (12)

Identity claims related to her needs from others
“My work isn’t valued.” (16)

“I am not confident.” (6)

“I am not respected.” (5)

“I am compliant.” (6)

“My superiors don’t trust me as a professional.” (3)

“I am embarrassed by my emotions.” (6)
“I fear conflict.” (6)
100

	  

“I don’t avoid things.” (5)
“I care about the opinions of others.” (5)
“I am physically affected by my emotions.” (4)
“I fear authority.” (3)
“I care about appearances.” (3)
“I am naive.” (2)

Lucy placed a great amount of emphasis on her critical event, which influenced her professional
identity in a number of ways.
Lucy resigned from her position before the end of the school year, and she left the East Coast
without having a job in line for the fall. She spent the summer leading canoe trips in the Midwest, and
she accepted an elementary school library position immediately before the fall term began. A year
after her critical event, Lucy could point out the identity claims that had been altered and to whom or
what she attributed the shift in her professional identity. These are arranged and labeled in table
ten.
Table 10
Lucy’s Post-Performance Identity Claims
I no longer identify with this claim,
because I made
a change.
N/A

I no longer identity with this claim,
because a new school culture changed
this for me.
“My work isn’t valued.”

I no longer identify with this claim,
because a new administrator changed
this for me.
“I am not respected.”
“My superiors don’t trust me as a
professional.”
“I fear authority.”

A year after Lucy’s critical event, there were very few identity claims that were altered.
Perhaps this was because the strong overlap between her personal and professional identity. According
to Lucy, the study gave her an opportunity to:
…reflect on the way I carry myself not only at work but in my [personal] life. There are
reasons I act the way I do - or make certain decisions - or have emotional responses.
They aren’t exclusive to my job. Those responses carry over into other aspects of my
life. I [now] recognize the connections between my personal life and my professional
life. (May 24, 2012)

101

	  

Lucy tried to put on a professional persona at work, and she realized that there were some parts of her
that did not cease to be, simply by stepping into her work environment. Even though Lucy began to
recognize the connections between her personal and professional identity, she did not alter – or
attempt to alter – behavior that could have contributed to her critical event. For example, Lucy
admitted that she seeks approval in her professional life – just like in her personal life. A year later,
Lucy wanted to work “…on being more confident in my opinion and recognizing that it is as valid as
anyone else’s. And maybe one day I’ll try being more vocal” (May 25, 2012). Continuing to seek the
approval of others, Lucy did not emerge as a fully independent and confident person or professional.
Furthermore, Lucy resisted recognizing any modifications she made to her professional
identity; instead, a new school culture and a new administrator made the difference. Lucy pointed to
the external shift from a program that was not established (Prescott) to one that was highly
functioning. Her new school’s culture had high expectations of what children could find in the library,
which led to greater respect for her role as a librarian. She postponed the work involved in selfimprovement to “one day” in the future (May 25, 2012). Thus, Lucy viewed an external locus of
control as responsible for the shift in her professional identity. While Lucy saw her critical event as
powerful enough to change her beliefs about the library profession, and it made her question whether
she belonged in the profession, it was not influential enough to make personal changes. Lucy
illustrated this best while discussing her “I am not confident” identity claim. In her new position at the
elementary school, she still suffered with what she called an “imposter syndrome” (February 10, 2013).
She claimed, “I still feel like I don’t know what I’m doing” (April 25, 2012). Lucy thought that getting
“more experience” (February 10, 2013) might be the only means of altering this identity claim.
Reproduction of Cultural Assumptions and Stereotypes
Three assumptions from the culture of American public schools played out in Lucy’s narrative:
(1) school librarians are clerical support staff; (2) people in power are terrible leaders; and (3) work is
not a place to be emotional.
Perhaps the most significant cultural assumption presented in Lucy’s story was her
Superintendent’s belief about the role of a school librarian. The Superintendent believed not only that
Lucy had the time to create bi-monthly displays and bulletin boards; she, perhaps unwittingly,
102

	  

prioritized it among her job responsibilities because it was the only thing she ever discussed with Lucy.
Even though the Superintendent often shared with the community her support for libraries and
collaborations with the city’s public library, she believed that the high school librarian should do
clerical work, including answering phones and decorating the library.
Before Lucy began working at Prescott, the school’s administration was content with leaving
the library unattended; they saw no value in having a librarian on the faculty. If teachers wanted to
use the library, the administrators believed teachers could schedule themselves and monitor the space
themselves. Unlike other school personnel, the school administration never had the opportunity to see
a school librarian in action. This affected the administration’s ability to comprehend the shift in school
librarianship - from clerical priorities to directly impacting student achievement.
A second significant cultural assumption played out in Lucy’s story related to leadership:
people in power are terrible leaders. The Superintendent never introduced herself to Lucy; she never
welcomed her to the school corporation or to the East Coast. She never expressed an interest in Lucy
as a member of the corporation’s community; she never asked if there were ways in which she could
support Lucy. Only during a perceived problem did she have interest in speaking to Lucy.
During the critical event, Lucy explained that the Superintendent never attempted to
understand Lucy’s actions by asking questions; she did not pretend to care why Lucy had stacked the
books on the floor. Instead, the Superintendent’s response concentrated on ways to ensure that Lucy’s
choices would not reflect poorly on her position as Superintendent. The Superintendent perceived
herself as looking unprofessional in front of the School Board because of Lucy’s actions, and she
seemed determined to not have it happen again. Hence, she chose to reprimand Lucy face-to-face in
the administration office, an unfamiliar place to Lucy. While she could have made her request through
email, or even through her secretary, the Superintendent chose to reprimand Lucy in the most feared
location in the entire school: her office.
Even after the rebuke, the Superintendent was unable to trust Lucy to do as she was told; she
was unable to move beyond Lucy’s oversight and believe Lucy would perform the required tasks after a
reprimand. Instead, she instructed someone at the bottom of the school hierarchy (a secretary) to
remind a person with a master’s degree (Lucy) to redecorate the library every School Board meeting
103

	  

thereafter.
Lucy’s Superintendent was not interested in school reform, despite NEASC’s attempts to foster
substantive change. Instead of demonstrating concern with student learning or faculty development in
the library, the Superintendent valued the library’s appearance. The library was known by many as a
“joke,” but the Superintendent never took the time to learn about or address the areas which needed
improvement (February 6, 2013).
A final cultural assumption that was evident in Lucy’s story was that work is not a place to be
emotional. Lucy would not allow herself to show her emotions in front of the Superintendent out of
fear that she would not be seen as a professional. Afterwards, Lucy attempted to talk herself out her
feelings. She was embarrassed by her external signs of emotion: the uncontrollable shaking of her
hands. Even in the library, Lucy did not want to cry. Instead, she locked herself in the faculty
bathroom to shed her tears privately. When she returned to the library, Lucy was only willing to cry in
front of the person who had an office inside the library workroom: the school psychologist.
Lucy was not only concerned about showing emotions in front of her colleagues, she also
experienced anxiety about how her self-selected audience would view the emotions she expressed in
the narrative. As a result, Lucy revised her narrative. Lucy wondered:
What they would think of me if I told them this story? I started to worry my
[audience] would think I was nuts. I became self-conscious of the story. Was this
experience that bad? I was convinced I was overreacting and that everyone there would
think I was weak or too sensitive. I even modified the narrative slightly to include those
thoughts. I added in parts of the narrative so that my audience would know I was
concerned and almost embarrassed of my emotions. Those add-ins were real and true
parts of my thought process during the event, but I wanted to reiterate them to make
sure everyone knew I was conscious of my overreacting. The add-ins included the parts
where I question myself: ‘Why am I overreacting?’ [and] ‘I’m not a burn victim or a
leper’ I wanted [the audience] to know that I knew I was overreacting, which sounds a
bit crazy. (May 24, 2012)
Even with trusted colleagues and companions, Lucy altered her narrative to soften her emotion by
explaining it as an overreaction.
Significance of Participation in Study
Lucy initially viewed her participation in the study as a “favor” (May 24, 2012). She pitched
the idea to potential audience members as a “good time, a nice excuse to get together and eat food”
(May 24, 2012). After the first interview, Lucy panicked. She reflected,
104

	  

I had such an emotional response to our discussion. It was a rough time at work and in
my personal life. [We] were making all of these connections between my personality,
upbringing, life, and job that were so insightful and fascinating. I was overwhelmed and
shocked by my emotions. After that interview, I started to worry about the
performance... I had no idea I would have such a raw response and was worried I would
act the same way at the performance. It turns out I did, but I wasn’t as worked up as I
anticipated. (May 24, 2012)
During her performance, Lucy cried. Instead of moving forward with her reading, she stopped reading
to regain her composure. After nearly one minute, Lucy broke the silence and finished the
performance. Afterwards, the audience’s response surprised Lucy, because most of the members were
empathetic and had similar experiences at work. This “validated” Lucy’s experience, and she felt that
she was “not the only one who reacts the way I do, and that it isn’t just me who takes things personally
or has emotional responses” (May 24, 2012). Perhaps it was Lucy’s tears that communicated how
significant the story was to her, and it was the act of being emotionally vulnerable that brought about
the audience’s gentle and caring responses.
Since the performance, Lucy has felt more comfortable expressing her emotions with tears. As
a child, she was proud of herself when she did not cry. Even though she claimed to be “very quick to
cry,” (December 3, 2012) she was always embarrassed when she did so. She explained further,
And as an adult, I would feel so ashamed at bursting into tears. I still feel that way
sometimes, but [participating in this study] has made me much more comfortable with
that emotional display. I don't feel that I have to apologize as much as I did in the past.
It is okay to be upset. It is okay to have emotional responses. It doesn’t mean you’re
weak or dramatic. (December 3, 2012)
This new belief about emotional expressions at work could extend beyond Lucy’s concept of herself. It
has the potential to improve Lucy’s ability to comfort other teachers who express their emotions
instead of judging them. In time, this could create a more authentic work environment.
Lucy was surprised to find the study to be more about her personally than as a librarian. Even
though she was forced to examine herself and her professional experiences “more objectively,” she
found the study to be “almost therapeutic” (May 25, 2012). She believed she never would have told
the story of getting called into the Superintendent’s office again without participating in the study;
thus, she could never have learned all that the experience had to offer.

105

	  

CHAPTER SIX: SCHOOL LIBRARIAN, NOT SEVENTH GRADE GIRLFRIEND
“One day long ago, God’s Word came to Jonah, Amittai’s son: ‘Up on your feet and on
your way to the big city of Nineveh! Preach to them. They’re in a bad way and I can’t
ignore it any longer.’ But Jonah got up and went the other direction to Tarshish, running
away from God. He went down to the port of Joppa and found a ship headed for
Tarshish. He paid the fare and went on board, joining those going to Tarshish—as far
away from God as he could get. But God sent a huge storm at sea, the waves towering.
The ship was about to break into pieces. The sailors were terrified. They called out in
desperation to their gods. They threw everything they were carrying overboard to
lighten the ship. Meanwhile, Jonah had gone down into the hold of the ship to take a
nap. He was sound asleep. The captain came to him and said, ‘What’s this? Sleeping!
Get up! Pray to your god! Maybe your god will see we’re in trouble and rescue us.’
Then the sailors said to one another, ‘Let’s get to the bottom of this. Let’s draw straws
to identify the culprit on this ship who’s responsible for this disaster.’ So they drew
straws. Jonah got the short straw. At that, the men were frightened, really frightened,
and said, ‘What on earth have you done!’ As Jonah talked, the sailors realized that he
was running away from God. (Jonah 1:1-15, Message Version)
Even though Elizabeth6 (Izzie) did not embrace Judeo-Christian beliefs, she strongly identified with
Jonah’s narrative from the Old Testament. She, too, was called to do something of great significance.
Hamstrung by fears, Izzie recalled spending years avoiding the career for which she was naturally
gifted. Despite her attempts to avoid her destiny, there was no Jonah-sized fish to temporarily
imprison her. Izzie’s prison was a raft of uncertainties, bobbing on the waves of indecision, drifting
from university to university. She also pursued employment typically associated with the working
class. All her preoccupations were distant from her Nineveh; the currents carried her far from a career
as a secondary classroom teacher.
Journey to the Library Profession
Izzie’s parents were members of the upper-middle class, a social standing that carried
expectations for their daughter. Adamant that she pursue a degree in higher education, her mother
advised Izzie on ways to enhance her college application as early as Izzie’s sophomore year of high
school. Izzie’s mother wanted to make sure that she looked good enough on paper to be admitted to
the college of her choice. While Izzie remembered being “greatly indifferent” to attending college, she
was unable to articulate her reservations about higher education to her parents (April 2, 2013). It was
easier to just go along with the family plan for her life:

6

	  I	  have	  attempted	  to	  remove	  major	  identifying	  details	  from	  participants	  and	  their	  lives,	  such	  as	  personal	  names	  and	  place	  names.	  	  I	  have	  
replaced	  names	  with	  pseudonyms.	  
	  
106

	  

I didn’t really care about [getting ready for college]. I didn’t care if I studied. It just
didn’t really do it for me. My mom was like ‘You need to prepare for college. You’ve got
to take your SATs and join clubs.’ And so I did all the stuff, but it was really in a halfassed way. I didn’t particularly care all that much. I went through the [motions],
because it was pretty clear that it was not an option for me to not go. I knew I wanted
to go someday, but I was not ready at eighteen. (April 2, 2013)
Despite her indifference, Izzie had the grades and the national examination scores to gain entrance
into a number of state and private universities.
Izzie never believed that higher education was about job training; instead, she adopted the
view of Educational Perennialists by focusing on the cultivation of the intellect instead of the
acquisition of essential job skills. She:
….[considered people who] treated college like job training lame. [College] should be
old-fashioned… just about bettering yourself. It shouldn’t be about making money.
That’s a very upper-class way to think, though. And, in retrospect, I’m very embarrassed
about that. (April 2, 2013)
As a senior in high school, Izzie thought the best place for her to get what she wanted out of college
was at a small, private, liberal arts college. Thus, the second semester of her senior year, Izzie
selected Reed College on the West Coast, located about three hundred miles from her seaport
hometown.
Despite her mother’s involvement in her preparation for college, the move to the college
campus was disquieting; Izzie did not feel she was ready for college life. It was not the concentrated
intellectual experience that presented obstacles; rather, it was the intense socialization that living in a
dorm demanded. Three days into college life, Izzie was very unhappy with the new life she was
expected to create with strangers.
I was such a mess! I wasn’t ready to go to college after high school, and I [still]
went anyway. Everyone did. You’re supposed to! I went to Reed College, and I lasted
three days. It was too far away from home. I didn’t know enough people. And I just
could not deal with it. I totally flipped out. If you had a rough day in high school, the
best part of it was that you got to go home at the end of the day. I realized [at] college,
you don’t ever get that break. It was like being at summer camp, but forever! You
never get to go home! (April 2, 2013)
Izzie was unwilling to wait for college life and her roommate to grow on her. Perhaps her impatience
was related to the toll college took on her mother’s well-being decades before. During the first
semester, her mother withdrew from her courses at a Big Ten university. The departure had nothing to
do with her mother’s intellect as an eighteen year-old; rather, she had an emotional breakdown and
107

	  

never finished her baccalaureate.
While Izzie initially pointed to anxiety about the lack of predictability of on-campus living, she
also realized that her lack of interpersonal relationship skills hindered her transition to college. She
revealed:
I’m very controlling in social situations, and [college felt] very uncontrolled to me. And I
didn’t like that. I was really bad at making new friends and very socially awkward. I
just didn’t get the rules of how you did that kind of stuff. And you’ve got this
roommate… who is this person? And you have to make a whole new network of friends.
You’re supposed to date people. I thought, ‘I can’t do this. No, I can’t do it!’ It freaked
me out and [I did not want to] deal with it. (April 2, 2013)
While her mother clearly wanted her to attend college, she did not interfere when Izzie withdrew from
all of her classes at Reed. Three days after dropping Izzie off, her mother returned again to help Izzie
pack her belongings. Together, they returned home.
The journey home was a difficult one for Izzie and her mom. While her mother tried to hide
her disappointment, Izzie felt the tension in the car.
We had to do the ‘drive of shame’ home. [My mom] was pissed! She did a really good
job of not showing it, because I think she knew how embarrassed I was about the whole
thing. But, I think she really flipped out. She thought, ‘Oh my God! My daughter’s
going to be a failure!’ (April 2, 2013)
Izzie felt her father was much more relaxed about her almost immediate return to home, perhaps
because of his decision to drop out his freshmen year of his first university experience. At eighteen, he
was seduced by drug experimentation and other competing interests: joining a band and traveling
across the country on a motorcycle. Her father expressed his thoughts simply; he wanted Izzie to chart
her own path and to not worry about walking away from Reed.
Even with her parents’ acceptance of her withdrawal, Izzie was extremely embarrassed about
her inability to make the transition to college life. It was not a decision from which Izzie could easily
escape. When others mentioned it, she immediately felt the shame she associated with her decision.
I consider it a real failure to go to college and not be able to hack it. I had to move back,
and you can’t just come back home. Everyone [asked] ‘Didn’t you just go to college?
What happened?’ I found it deeply embarrassing at the time. (November 20, 2012;
April 2, 2013)
Izzie applied for jobs immediately upon her return home, but over the course of the next decade, she
would not turn her back on higher education. During this period, she enrolled in three more colleges as
108

	  

she sought a clear course for her life and her eventual path to graduation.
After Reed, Izzie attended Oregon State for her second college experience. It was there that
she declared her major in History. While her high school history teachers made the subject interesting,
her Oregon State History professor explained the academic subject in a new way.
I remember he opened the class by saying, ‘When you study History, you’re trying to
speak to the dead. And you’re trying to go back in time. It’s about time travel more
than anything else.’ And I thought, ‘that is exactly it!’ The study of history became
a philosophical pursuit for me. There was nothing else that was going to be as
interesting of a subject as history. (April 2, 2013)
While Izzie pursued her history degree, she grew more comfortable with the social scene on her
campus. But Oregon State was not an institution from which she wanted a diploma. In short, she did
not want the school permanently attached to her name on her diploma and resumes. A year and a half
after enrolling at Oregon State, Izzie was ready for something new.
After the spring semester ended, Izzie decided to head to the Midwest by herself on what she
defined as a spiritual journey. Her aunt and uncle owned an organic farm, and Izzie envisioned that
she would live with and work for them while reconnecting with the land of her birth.
I wanted to do other things [besides attend college]. I thought that doing the normal
thing… being in college and graduating when you’re twenty-two and getting a career
was boring. I thought, ‘I want to do something more interesting than that.’ So, I got in
my car and drove across the country. I had nothing; there were no cell phones. And I
had this really old car, and I really had no map most of the time. It was crazy! I had all
kinds of [bad] things happen, but it was cool. It was very good [to go back]. I was born
in Ohio, and I always had much more of an affinity for it than I ever did for [the West
Coast]. So [returning] just seemed like the natural thing to do. (April 2, 2013)
Taking a three-month break from academic life, Izzie worked on the farm alongside her Midwestern
family. The required physical labor restored Izzie, and she felt emotionally equipped to return to
college and the social scene it provided. Thus, she enrolled at nearby Earlham College. Admitting that
she had no particular interest in the Quaker school, Izzie recognized that her enrollment had nothing to
do with academics or any concrete plans for her future—only geographic proximity.
At midterm, during her second semester at Earlham, Izzie withdrew from her courses, and she
decided to work full-time. Izzie blamed her “free spirit” as the reason why she once again abandoned
college (April 2, 2013). She explained further,
I just got to this place where I thought, ‘I’m over this. I kind of just want to work.’ So I
marched into the Admissions Office and dropped out. Oh God! And then I just stayed in
109

	  

Richmond and worked for a while…Then, I decided I wasn’t making enough money in that town,
and so I should move to back to the West Coast. So I drove the entire way,
and I lived there for two and a half years. I just worked and hung out. That was fun. But, I
wish I hadn’t wasted thousands of dollars of my parents’ money. That… I feel very bad about.
(April 2, 2013)
While Izzie expressed some guilt about withdrawing from classes long after the deadlines for full or
partial refunds, she rationalized that her impulsive decisions provided her much-desired excitement.
Admitting that there was “no thought process” involved in her decision-making, Izzie had no
“concrete plans” for her future (April 2, 2013). In fact, she claimed to be baffled by people who
articulated their well-defined life plans. She stated, “When I meet people who are driven and have
plans for their life, I’m amazed by that. ‘That’s what you think about? Interesting!’ Because I just
didn’t. I didn’t at all” (April 2, 2013).
After Earlham, Izzie changed jobs nearly every year; leaving more jobs, in the end, than
universities. With outward signs of embarrassment, Izzie listed her types of employment one by one:
stock person in a grocery store; cashier; dairy department personnel; barista serving coffee at a West
Coast chain; waitress at a number of places; and the Nordstrom accounting office. She finished her list
with AmeriCorps.
It was this last job, AmeriCorps, that gave Izzie a clear view of her Nineveh. At first glance,
Izzie was petrified at the thought of tutoring students in the school; she never intended to work in a
classroom. She believed,
AmeriCorps was a total fluke position! I had been a waitress, and I didn’t have a college
degree. And, I walked out of a waitressing job. I was really mature at that point! I
thought, ‘Well! I’m unemployed! I don’t really know what to do with myself. I should
probably go to college, but it’s the middle of the year.’ On the spur of the moment I
thought, ‘I’ll do AmeriCorps!’ I just showed up at the AmeriCorps office. I had no
concept of what I was going to end up doing. [At that point in the semester,] every
single AmeriCorps slot was filled up except for [one in] the Oregon Reading Corps, which
[involved working] in schools and helping kids with literacy. [The position was available]
because no one wanted to do it! I think it was seen as kind of a scarier prospect. So,
that’s what I did. I didn’t choose it. [The AmeriCorps director] just assigned me to it.
And I thought, “Okay. Yeah, I’ll do this!’ I was terrified. (November 20, 2012)
In short, Izzie needed a job, and AmeriCorps was willing to hire her on the spot: no reference check
and no interrogation about her work history. Immediate employment was difficult for Izzie to refuse.
On her first day working for AmeriCorps, her trepidation returned. Izzie referred to it as the
“single most terrifying moment of my entire life…” for these reasons (November 20, 2012):
110

	  

I’d never worked with kids before. I had no idea. I was like, ‘Oh my God! I don’t know
what I’m doing!’ No clue…If you’ve never worked with children before, and [you sit
down next to a] third grader? I didn’t know what to do!’ (November 20, 2012)
Yet, this did not keep Izzie from showing up each day for work at the under-resourced school in what
was rumored to be the worst neighborhood in greater Portland.
Soon after her first day, Izzie began to discern that she had a rare gift. While her own
educational path included a number of teachers who seemed unable to access their feelings and
experiences as a child, Izzie retained vivid memories of her young life:
For some reason, I have a very good memory of what it’s like to be a kid. Some people
forget. And for some reason, I didn’t. And so it’s easy for me to be like, ‘Okay, in third
grade, I would’ve liked to do this. This is what I would’ve wanted a teacher to do. This
is what I would’ve wanted to talk about.’ And, I think that helps. And then [I] realiz[ed],
‘Oh, it’s okay. I can do this. I remember what it’s like to be in third grade. I can talk to
these kids.’ It’s actually easier to talk to these kids than it is to talk to adults. I began to
believe, ‘I can do this. I’m comfortable with this. It probably only took a couple of days
before I was okay. (November 20, 2012)
After nearly a year, Izzie’s AmeriCorps contract ended. It was the first time Izzie had experienced joy
at a job, instead of receiving gratification from walking away from one. Her success in the position
gave her a new resolve to complete her undergraduate degree. A year and a half later, Izzie received
a degree in History from the University of Washington at twenty-seven years old.
Upon her graduation, Izzie did not work toward a teaching credential. Even though she knew it
was her calling and everyone expected that she would become a teacher, she was consumed with
fears: being mediocre, being terrible, and the fear of not recognizing either when they occurred. She
recalled,
I’ve always thought teaching to be a terrifying prospect, because I take it so seriously.
Because it is such a big deal. You remember every teacher you have: you remember the
good ones; you remember the bad ones. You can either really change someone’s life
profoundly for the better or for the worse. And I’ve seen both. And I took it so seriously
that it paralyzed me. The problem was that I took teaching so seriously that I was
terrified of actually being a teacher. What if I was terrible? Or, even worse, what if I was
mediocre and didn’t even know it? What if I ruined a year (or more) of my students’
education? Oh God! That really flipped me out, and so I just sort of panicked. I’m aware that
this is a bit melodramatic, but I’m also shocked that more people don’t feel this way. I feel
like many teachers cavalierly wander into the profession without giving it the appropriate
amount of consideration. (October 23, 2012)
Because of her trepidation, Izzie spent two years trying to find something else to do that she would
enjoy even fractionally as much as teaching. During those two years Izzie returned to work at

111

	  

Nordstrom and suffered from depression.
Finally, one of Izzie’s college friends talked her into attending graduate school for library
science. Her friend had taken a similar path; she received an History degree and then attended library
school. The idea made sense to Izzie, because being a librarian was academic; it was service-oriented;
it might open doors to work with children; and her friend had found a job immediately after
graduation. Working dead-end jobs had grown tiresome for Izzie; thus, she again avoided her calling as
a teacher and pursued librarianship instead. Izzie confessed that library school was:
…a cop out. I really should have gone into education. And I knew I should’ve gone into
education, but I was terrified. And I didn’t do it. I went into something else that was
kind of related to education, but not as scary as being a teacher. And honestly, I found
the prospect of being a librarian much less intimidating to me than being a teacher. And
maybe that isn’t fair to the [library] profession, but it’s true! So I was like “Yeah, that
sounds good… I could help people research and hopefully work with kids. Yeah, cool.
I’ll do that!” But, that’s not a good reason to go into it, and I immediately regretted it.
(November 20, 2012)
Even though Izzie believed that library school in the Midwest was not a good fit for her almost
immediately after her first day of courses, it became the first time she did not pack her bags and
abandon her coursework when she experienced educational discontentment.
Izzie craved and expected “tweedy intellectualism,” but she did not find it in her informatics
courses, even though they appeared to be situated at the top of the School of Library and Information
Science (SLIS) hierarchy (October 23, 2012). In fact, the simplicity of library science became a running
joke among her friends in SLIS.
People were like, ‘Library Science? I can’t take this seriously.’ We were so angry at
the lack of intellectualism in library science. One of my friends finally said, ‘Forget it!
This is ridiculous!’ Coming from a more rigorous academic background, SLIS just wasn’t
hard… and I don’t understand that. It drives me bananas. Does SLIS not understand
that they are not going to get good librarians if this is the way they teach them?
(November 20, 2012)
Even though she wanted to be academically challenged, Izzie reasoned that if she immediately altered
her path and pursued a degree in education, she would be in school many more years. Again, she
chose not to pursue her calling. Instead, Izzie was determined to finish her master’s degree in library
science in two years.
Izzie was drawn to the perceived bottom of the SLIS hierarchy: school librarianship, and she

112

	  

found her school librarianship and youth services classes to be the most rigorous in her program of
courses.
They were the only classes that I felt like challenged me or interested me at all. Even
though the SLIS administration did not value them, I found them to be the most
difficult, and I got practical knowledge from them. (November 20, 2012)
Because graduate school did not inspire Izzie to grow intellectually, she seemed to appreciate the
courses that provided definitive vocational training. However, the only concrete skill she recalled
learning in graduate school was writing lesson plans. “Everything else in librarianship,” Izzie claimed,
“is common sense” (November 20, 2012). It was difficult for Izzie to point to courses that helped
prepare her for a career in school librarianship.
It was her course in Collection Development and Management that she criticized the most from
SLIS. Izzie struggled to understand why collection development was not integrated into another
course. She explained,
I never could quite figure out why there was a whole class on collection development!
I’m not saying there aren’t some subtleties to it. To me, that always just seemed like
you buy what will be read, and what is ‘good literature.’ So I never felt like that class
was necessary. (November 20, 2012)
To Izzie, the purchasing and collecting aspect of librarianship was about knowing one’s reading
population and staying abreast of what was popular with the masses and what the intellectuals valued.
Because Izzie did not discover that she could complete a master’s degree in library science
while simultaneously earning a teaching credential in school library services until her second year of
graduate school, she chose to finish her degree first. But before she could earn her master’s degree in
library science, she was required to complete a library internship. Izzie completed her poorly
supervised internship at Perry Grove High School (PGHS). Neither her university or school practicum
supervisor assisted or mentored her in her transition from graduate student to librarian.
School Culture
After being turned down for an unpaid public library internship, a friend suggested that she
volunteer in PGHS’s library with Mrs. Lin, the high school librarian. While it was not her first choice,
she realized working in a school library could be “a back door into education” (October 23, 2012).
Izzie also recognized that she needed experience if she wanted a library job after graduation; many of
113

	  

the job posts she reviewed required library work experience in addition to a master’s degree in library
science.
On the day of her first visit to PGHS, Izzie was greeted by school grounds similar to a college
campus. The school boasted an enormous baseball diamond and football stadium, as well as plenty of
green space at the entrance. Upon parking her car, she entered the school by way of the 1960s
limestone atrium that, to Izzie, had been “ruined” with a 1990s remodel (May 16, 2013). While she
climbed the nearly fifty stairs to the school office to sign in and get directions to the library, she
noticed the marble wall beside her. Etched into the stone were the words of Plato (1888): “a life
without investigation is not worth living” (p. 25). The school would not have invested this kind of
money in Plato’s sentiment, Izzie thought, if they did not prioritize the great books and the habit of
intellectual inquiry. While finding her way to the library, Izzie convinced herself that this unpaid
volunteer experience would be an excellent environment for her to teach the nearly 1,700 high school
students and to learn alongside them simultaneously.
Izzie believed that PGHS neither encouraged nor rewarded academic excellence. While Izzie
deeply respected a small number of teachers who “tried to elevate the intellectual rigor of the
school,” she soon came to realize that academics were secondary to athletics (February 10, 2013).
Every day that Izzie walked into PGHS, she perceived that she entered a fictitious world. She felt as if
she were:
…transported back to the 1950s that I didn’t really think had ever existed. The football
and basketball players were popular and dated the cheerleaders. Students wore
letterman jackets. Most kids were excited to go to pep rallies. Cynicism [about high
school] was uncommon. (February 10, 2013)
Organized athletics was prioritized by the administration, and their focus paid off with a number of
state championships. Boys’ athletic events were well-attended by the students and the community,
and it was not uncommon for the school to sell every one of the stadium’s three thousand seats.
Izzie pointed to the school’s principal, Mr. York7, as the primary instigator of this athleticcentered school culture. Over forty years before Izzie appeared at PGHS, Mr. York attended the
school. His claim to fame, according to Izzie, was as the star of the high school basketball team. His

7

	  Mr.	  York	  was	  not	  interviewed	  as	  a	  part	  of	  this	  study.	  	  Instead,	  this	  chapter	  relies	  on	  Izzie’s	  stories	  of	  occupational	  socialization.	  
114

	  

former athletic identity appeared to shape his professional identity and define his professional
relationships. Izzie believed that Mr. York’s:
…entire professional goal was to continue being the popular ‘big man on campus.’ He
seemed most concerned with creating a cult of personality that would allow him
complete control over the administration and faculty of the school, and was almost
entirely successful on this count… [PGHS] featured absolute male dominance where
stereotypical male priorities took precedence over everything else. Clearly [Mr. York’s
favorites] were his basketball cronies. The coaches in general were his main group. And
then there were certain teachers he was very close to and kept around him.
Unfortunately, he really enjoyed hiring very young, very attractive women: twenty-one
year olds… twenty-two year olds. Fresh out of undergrad, [with] no experience. He had
a very big reputation for hiring based on sexual attractiveness. The men were there for
sports and to run things, and the women were there to either be motherly secretaries or
to be cute young things. And the people he didn’t like, he would really turn everyone
against them and force them out of the school. He was very vindictive with people he
saw as being enemies. (November 29, 2012)
And despite not being a notable athlete or a bleached-blonde Barbie doll fresh out of undergrad, Izzie
was comfortable with and fascinated by professional life at PGHS. She wondered, however, if she had
fit Mr. York’s type-cast, could she have become more successful?
It was obvious to Izzie that the athletic-driven culture not only isolated serious educators who
were focused on academics; PGHS was also not a welcoming place for all students. Izzie remembered,
“…this type of culture reinforces conservative social norms as well as ‘traditional’ gender roles, and
any students who didn’t fit into these narrow molds were marginalized almost entirely” (February 10,
2013). It was the library and the people who worked in it, Izzie believed, that could serve all the
students and teachers, not just the popular ones. But Mrs. Lin, under whom Izzie worked, was
unequipped to provide the kind of service Izzie envisioned. Thus, Izzie began spending “too much
time” fantasizing about what she would do if she ran the library after she received her master’s degree
(October 23, 2012).
As the school year at PGHS came to an end and Izzie finished up her coursework for her
master’s degree in library science, Izzie began to believe that her year-long fantasy of running the
library could materialize. The school district decided to eliminate all elementary and middle school
certified librarian positions to reduce salary costs during an economic crisis; however, central office
leaders strongly advised principals to preserve their certified high school librarian positions in order to
adhere to state accreditation requirements. Mr. York, however, appeared to have something else in

115

	  

mind.
Izzie believed Mr. York saw the economic troubles of the district and the discharging of most
primary school librarians as an opportunity to force out Mrs. Lin, his underperforming librarian at the
high school. District administrators showed little evidence of opposition, as he couched his elimination
of her position in terms of fiscal responsibility. Mr. York publicized his intent to hire a school librarian
once the school’s finances were stable, well before the next accreditation review.
Izzie had mixed emotions about Mr. York’s decision to eliminate Mrs. Lin’s librarian position,
partly due to the relationship triangle in which she found herself, alongside of Mrs. Lin and Mr. York.
Izzie remembered,
He didn’t treat her well, but at the same time she was a really weak librarian. The way
he treated her was not okay, but she was really not doing a good job, so I understood
why he was upset with her. There was no collaborating with teachers; there were no
lessons; there was nothing. So it was this weird situation where they were both wrong.
And I was in the middle of that. It was bad all the way around. (November 29, 2012)
Both Mr. York and Mrs. Lin tried to involve Izzie in their battle; thus, Izzie found it difficult to remain
unaffiliated with the arguments of either party.
Although what was playing out in the library at PGHS worried Izzie, her greater concern was
that the corporation’s decision to eliminate positions was another sign of the demise of school
librarianship as a profession. Izzie noted that the elimination of school librarians was a trend that was
playing out on a larger scale across the state and the nation. Thousands of principals were eliminating
certified librarian positions that they did not see as necessary or valuable. This, according to Izzie,
was because academic training programs were not graduating qualified people. Izzie explained,
I think school librarianship is a really important profession. And I think on so many
levels, we’re blowing it. All levels, probably. And that bothers me, and it’s going to
disappear as a profession, as a vocation… if we don’t do something about it. (November
20, 2012)
Izzie saw herself as one person who could restore an administrator’s faith in the role of the school
librarian. In fact, she believed she could “convince [Mr. York] of my and all librarians’ value and talk
him into reinstating the position” (October 23, 2012).
Therefore, Izzie began to see how she could derive some professional benefits from the
elimination of Mrs. Lin’s position. Izzie articulated,

116

	  

All of this, while bad for the school librarian profession, was good for me. A noncertified
[library] aide position opened up at the high school, and I was the only person around
who really knew how to run that library. I had graduated [with] my master’s degree in
library science, but I wasn’t sure that I wanted to spend another year getting my
teaching certification [in school library services]. This job seemed like a perfect way to
try out being a school librarian without needing the extra education, and, more
importantly, without the pressure of responsibility that comes with a professional
position. (October 23, 2012)
Izzie wanted to fill the role, but she feared that she would not excel in the field. She reasoned that
the benefits of working as the sole librarian representative at PGHS outweighed the drawbacks, and
after some encouragement from Mr. York, Izzie applied with reservations for the library aide position.
Izzie’s Philosophy about the Role of School Librarians and School Libraries
Before library school, Izzie used libraries, but she could not recall any significant interactions
with school, public, or academic librarians. Without a professional role model or a mentor, Izzie
looked inward to form her philosophy about librarianship. She based her approach on what she needed
(and often did not receive) as a student; she also built her philosophy on what she discovered about
herself as a tutor for AmeriCorps.
Izzie embraced a child-centered approach that prioritized students in everything she did in the
school library. Because Izzie did not have a homeroom or a specific group of students for whom she
was responsible, interacting with students was critical to living out her professional philosophy. Izzie
described herself by contrasting her approach with one she believed fit a more traditional librarian:
I think a lot of old-fashioned librarians are different; they come to the profession for the
actual duties of librarianship. And then working with students is an add-on for them.
‘Oh yeah,’ they say, ‘and there are kids in the library, too.’ The librarian I'm working
with [during my internship] is definitely from the old school of school librarianship that
seems to be mostly concerned with collection development… and book checkouts. Not
me! There's nothing wrong with these activities, but these are not the things that I
think I want to focus on in my professional life. Interacting with kids comes first for me.
I’m not as good with the library stuff, and that does not interest me as much. I like
collection development… sure! But, that’s not where it’s at. It’s not what interests me.
I am much more interested in collaboration with teachers and teaching technology skills.
(August 28, 2011; November 20, 2012)
After working alongside of two certified school librarians, Izzie discovered that both of them found
their way to the profession in response to their discomfort and discontentment as classroom teachers.
For them, clerical duties defined the job of a librarian, resulting in fewer intense interactions with
students than when they were classroom teachers. But for Izzie, it was working with and knowing

117

	  

students that drew her to the profession.
Izzie was committed to creating a library environment that respected students instead of
treating them like guests or outsiders. She struggled to understand why many school librarians
welcomed teachers but treated students harshly. Izzie shared her disapproval of her colleagues in this
way:
Sometimes, the way adults come at kids? I wonder, ‘What are you doing?’ I want to tell
them, ‘This is a human being! They’re just younger than you! We’re not different
species!’ It’s very weird to see, because I connect with kids and teenagers easily. The
first thing I [try] to do is learn all the students' names and use them during check out as
well as during lessons. They're always shocked and happy that I know their names. I
don't notice my supervisor doing this, but I assume that she already knows most of the
students and they know her. (August 31, 2011; November 20, 2012)
Izzie did not correct or try to influence her supervisors or colleagues, perhaps because she was never in
a position of leadership. However, she intentionally demonstrated to the librarians and teachers an
alternative approach of engaging with students. Her method of communication incorporated humor to
develop rapport.
Extending beyond words and actions, Izzie’s approach manifested a genuine outpouring of
respect for young people. She based her actions on a desire to care for every student who walked into
the library. Izzie recognized this professional aspiration as different from many teachers, even the
ones she had as a child; thus, she intentionally developed a teaching philosophy that differed from
ones to which she was exposed. Izzie illuminated her philosophy based on caring for her students in
this way:
This is my big thing with teaching: I remember being a little kid and having teachers, and
knowing the teachers who liked me and those who didn’t…especially in elementary school.
Kids can sense that, and having teachers who didn’t like me was devastating.
Oh boy, that’s huge! If you know that a teacher doesn’t like you, you shut down. Even
as an adult, when I have teachers who don’t like me I wonder, ‘Do you know what
you’re doing? You’re totally screwing this up.’ It matters, you know? So when I go in to
any teaching situation, I have to like every single kid…even the kids that are very
challenging to like. I have to find a way to like them genuinely, so they feel like ‘She is
somebody I can trust. She is somebody I can open up to. She is safe.’ I think you really
do have to like and respect and care about every student. (November 20, 2012)
Even though it would have been easier to use students’ research interests to define them, Izzie looked
beyond “Hemingway researcher” or “Immigration reform” to get to know students as whole people
with developing aspirations. After all, she realized, it was often the teachers who assigned the

118

	  

research topics. Some educators criticize child-centered approaches like Izzie’s for increasing the
likelihood of classrooms without rules, where teachers are friends with their students. Izzie, however,
acknowledged this possibility and believed in setting boundaries.
Recognizing her influential role, Izzie intentionally promoted what she was passionate about to
her students in an attempt to move them beyond their adolescent indifference. Thus, she advanced
her casual relationships with students by moving conversations beyond greetings of ‘hello’ to sharing
what really moved her: the pursuit of knowledge.
Librarians [are] vital to helping students guide their own learning [by] teaching students
the tools to do so. The school librarian’s responsibility is to teach students how to
become lifelong learners. I think the phrase ‘lifelong learners’ has become a total
cliché, but that does not make it any less true. So many people stop being curious when
they leave school (some before that) and their intellectual life withers. Librarians should
help people continue to learn throughout their lives. School librarians should give
students the tools to extend learning time outside of the school day. I really like to
learn, so in my free time, I research. That’s what I like to do. It’s fun! And because I
genuinely enjoy that, I think I’m good at getting kids to be interested in it. I told my high
school students, ‘Hey, there’s tons of interesting stuff! Life is interesting!’ And [with
some time] they respond, ‘Life is interesting!’ (September 5, 2011; November 20, 2012;
February 10, 2013)
Izzie believed that the school library should be a place to research anything and everything about
which students were curious. Thus, she was committed to using her position in the school library to try
to move students from passive, bored teenagers to active inquirers about the world in which they
lived.
Libraries, according to Izzie, should be the centers of schools. To make this happen, Izzie
believed that librarians had to focus on advocacy and teacher collaboration. She prioritized other
aspects of librarianship as well:
[In my work as a librarian, I] bought high-quality popular books while weeding old and
unused books, chose useful electronic resources and then trained staff and students to
use them. I taught classes about research and information gathering…, acted as a
resource on literature and technology, and encouraged reading for pleasure with
displays and book club activities. (February 10, 2013)
Even with these varied professional concerns, Izzie believed that librarians should invest a great deal of
energy in the creation of “atmosphere” in a library (November 29, 2012). This atmosphere, Izzie
explained, should “make the library a place where kids want to hang out and talk about books”
(November 29, 2012). Viewing librarianship as “very important work,” Izzie invested herself in the role

119

	  

because she recognized that “kids deserve the very best” (November 20, 2012).
Izzie understood the value of exposing students to new ideas, and she believed that education
was a path to social justice. Even though her role as a school librarian required that she work with all
teachers, her experience as an AmeriCorps volunteer left her with very little tolerance for teachers
who were slackers:
I felt really angry at them because [we were working in] a very poor school… almost all
of the students were minorities at this school… a lot of immigrant children. These are
kids who need the best. They need the best teacher, and they need the best resources.
And, of course, they don’t have it. And there were teachers [who were] close to
retirement, just sort of floating. A lot of them were racists. And I just thought, ‘You are
ruining these kids’ lives, at least educationally. And, you’re just doing it so you can get a
pension…’ That was unacceptable to me, and so I felt angry. I still do. I still see this:
teachers who don’t care, or don’t see that what they’re doing is inadequate or
damaging. I have rage about that. (November 20, 2012)
Izzie was committed to doing her best at all times, and she had high expectations for those who
worked alongside her. In her mind, it was a privilege to be an educator, and slackers did not belong in
the profession.
Izzie’s Critical Event
Izzie identified only one critical event during the entire year that she worked full-time in the
Perry Grove High School’s library as the library clerk. Three conditions laid the groundwork for this
critical event.
First, the state in which she worked plunged into an economic recession, which greatly
affected public funding for education. Public schools initially experienced a 20% reduction in financial
support from the state; within a year, schools received notification that the State would cut another
3% of funding (nearly $300 million) in the middle of the school year (Ansel, 2009; Powell & Davey,
2011). School budgets could no longer depend upon a stream of support to supplement their funding,
as voters agreed upon property tax caps to help alleviate burdens to homeowners during a statewide
foreclosure crisis (Kinghorn, 2011).
Without the experience of a steady-handed surgeon, administrators indiscriminately hacked
nearly every line in the new budgets as a response to statewide educational cuts. Some school districts
proposed the elimination of all student transportation; others closed schools; some eliminated certified
teaching positions. Administrators, teachers’ unions, and advocacy groups did not anticipate the
120

	  

massive cuts; thus, they did not devise a backup plan to protect any school jobs. Rumors circulated
that the State Superintendent of Public Instruction gave school leaders a short list of positions to axe
that the public would not contest; among them was the school librarian. While no audio-recording of
this short list existed, superintendents across the state nevertheless began eliminating certified school
librarian positions and replacing them with clerical positions.
The second condition influencing Izzie’s critical event was more localized. Because of reduced
state funding, Perry Grove’s School Corporation determined that it must reduce the salary budget line
by nearly one million dollars. The school board chose to eliminate fourteen school librarian positions.
Middle and elementary school librarians were pink-slipped, and from that group there were eleven with
additional teaching certifications that could bump teachers out of positions based upon their seniority.
A number of Perry Grove librarians interviewed for positions outside the state. Even though the school
accrediting body required that there would be a school librarian to run the high school library program
and oversee the others in the district, Mr. York chose to eliminate his high school librarian position
temporarily, under what appeared to Izzie as a guise of fiscal stewardship.
The third and final condition was the fact that Mr. York’s temporary elimination of his high
school librarian position gave him the flexibility to reinstate the position at his convenience. Thus, Mr.
York redefined his clerical librarian position as a proving ground for the future PGHS librarian. He
mentioned this possibility when he interviewed library clerk candidates, and he considered it an
incentive to attract overqualified candidates.
Izzie’s critical event took place during the summer after her first year as PGHS’s librarian
under the title of library clerk. From the beginning of the school year, she had assumed that her
principal, Mr. York, would reinstate the high school librarian position. Izzie stated,
He dangled that carrot really early on like, ‘This is a library clerk position now, but we
might reinstate it.’ So that went on the whole school year. That was almost a solid
calendar year, of him pulling me into his office and being like, ‘So… let’s talk. Let’s
strategize about how we can bring the position back.’ He really spent a lot of time
talking to me about this, and I don’t know. It was weird. (November 20, 2012)
While she believed that she had exceeded every job description and outperformed every school
librarian who had worked in the school for decades, Izzie realized that the reinstatement of the
position had little to do with what she actually did in the school library. Instead, she claimed, it had
121

	  

“everything to do with the cult of personality around Mr. York and what I could actually do to get on
his good side” (October 23, 2012).
Because she was dependent on Mr. York’s favor to reinstate the position, the hierarchical
relationship that once existed while she was a library volunteer/intern and he was the high school
principal quickly intensified. The new relationship was something vaguely familiar to Izzie, and she
began to define their status in this way:
Knowing that my presence was conditional, the principal kept hinting that he might
bring the librarian position back, intimating that he’d only gotten rid of it because the
last few librarians had been so uninspiring. And this is when Mr. York became what I
like to call ‘my seventh grade boyfriend.’ Did he like me? Or not? What was he really
thinking about? When was he going to respond to my email? (October 23, 2012)
Similar to a middle school love, Izzie convinced herself that their relationship was more significant
than it really was. Focusing on Mr. York’s words instead of his actions, Izzie believed that she was
fated to land the high school librarian position.
Mr. York used his charisma each time he discussed Izzie’s future in the school, which made her
feel even more secure. Yet even with his outward signs of approval, Izzie did not stop reinforcing the
merits of a school librarian or the program she built in this library. Izzie recollected:
I set up meetings with him, regaled him with statistics and academic papers showing the
positive effects of a certified librarian, and I really thought I was making headway. He
would periodically pull me into his office and initiate conversations about the library,
discussing strategies to reinstate the position and obstacles in hushed tones. He
absolutely had me going. (October 23, 2012)
Convinced that she would be hired as the high school librarian in the fall, Izzie planned to spend her
summer completing her school library services certification. She enrolled in twelve credit hours of
graduate education courses and was registered to complete a five-week intensive student teaching
placement.
When the summer approached, Izzie wanted a formal confirmation of her new position with a
letter of intent or a teaching contract. Mr. York never supplied anything concrete, and Izzie began to
feel as if he was avoiding her. She explained that her principal:
…strung me along all year and into the summer, in true seventh grade boyfriend-style. I
kept meeting with him to see what was happening – after all, the new school year
started in less than two months, and he kept putting me off. With only a few weeks to
go until summer school was over, he came into the library and asked for my letter of
resignation, saying that he would use that as a bargaining chip with Human Resources to
122

	  

get more money. I dutifully typed the letter and gave it to him, hopeful that this ploy
would work. (October 23, 2012)
Yet when the school disabled Izzie’s email account a few days later, she still did not realize she had
been dumped from its payroll. Recalling her year of conversations with Mr. York, Izzie continued to
believe that he would reinstate his librarian position.
Ever hopeful, Izzie requested one final meeting with Mr. York. At the agreed upon time, she
made her way to Mr. York’s office. As she opened the door, Izzie noticed he had softened the bright
light with floor lamps. They created an amber glow throughout the room instead of harsh white. Mr.
York asked her to sit on one of his black leather couches. As she did, he sat down to face her. That
was when Izzie finally understood what was to become of her. She recalled,
It was the pivotal point. It was kind of everything… By the look of trepidation on his face, I
knew things weren’t going to go my way. He uncomfortably told me that Human
Resources wouldn’t give him the money to reinstate the librarian position. ‘But, maybe
I can talk to the Superintendent,’ he said. ‘She might be able to allocate more money.’
‘No,’ I said. ‘If you don’t reinstate this position I’m quitting, because I can’t do this. It’s
bad for the profession for me to keep doing this. I have to quit. You have to tell me
what’s going on.’ And he wouldn’t tell me! ‘I need this to be done,’ I said. ‘You have to
just end it. I can’t do this. Just tell me you’re not going to reinstate the position. I can’t
keep hoping that this is going to happen. I need to move on with my life.’ And I had to
force him [to give me an answer], and even then he wouldn’t admit that it was him. And
it was totally him! I know it was him. He has total control over what positions are kept and
not. (October 23, 2012; November 20, 2012)
Even with her clear request, Mr. York struggled to be direct with her. Finally, Izzie was able to realize
the truth. Mr. York chose to not reinstate his librarian position, even though he appeared to have
complete control over how the high school distributed the personnel budget. Yet, he never took
responsibility for his decision. Mr. York continued to blame the district administration.
Izzie could not understand the termination of her employment at PGHS, because she had
successfully performed C.P.R. on the library program. She believed that she had exceeded her own,
the teachers’, and the administrators’ expectations. But, her performance did not matter. In the end,
Mr. York chose not to have a functioning library staffed by a certified school librarian. He made this
decision even after every other school librarian position in the district had been reinstated – because of
a public outcry. Izzie feared that Mr. York’s decision was ultimately her own failure and explained, “I
fear that if I had done a better job, or been more politically savvy, I could have changed things. It
haunts me that even while doing my absolute best, it wasn’t good enough to make any real difference”
123

	  

(October 23, 2012). In her opinion, life at PGHS would proceed just as if she had never been there.
Izzie focused on her programmatic failures, instead of on her moments of success with individual
students.
Mr. York’s choice not to reinstate the position was devastating to Izzie’s professional dream
and ego. It also made her almost certain that she should not pursue a career as a school librarian.
Izzie shared the impact of his decision:
It was devastating, because it made me cynical. Because it [proved that it] doesn’t
matter how good of a job I do. It makes no difference. That was the conclusion I came
up with. I can bust my ass all year. Do everything just right. Do advocacy. Collaborate
with teachers. I can do all of these things, all the textbook things you’re supposed to do
to be a good school librarian… It doesn’t matter… It makes no difference! It’s all
political. If I was a coach, I probably could’ve gotten a position. And that’s just what it
came down to. Well, shit! Do I really want to do this anymore? Because what happens
here, the [presence of the] good ol’ boy system? You’re going to find this everywhere!
And, I don’t have the patience for this. I don’t want to have my professional career be
dependent upon politics. And that’s what it is. That’s absolutely what it is in a lot of
places. And that just killed me… So, I think [I experienced] the death of that idea… that
you’re rewarded for good work. No! There are [teachers at PGHS] who are terrible…
Beyond terrible! And they keep their jobs! (November 20, 2012)
In short, Izzie could not fathom that all of her hard work would go unnoticed without external reward.
While she was new to professional employment, she truly believed that fairness could exist in a culture
run by those she identified as good old boys. Because there was no sign of transparency, Izzie
questioned whether she could ever work in a public school environment again.
As a novice school librarian, Izzie faced personal and professional hurdles that prevented a
satisfying occupational socialization. While Izzie’s critical event pointed to her administrator’s lack of
understanding of and support for her work, Izzie’s professional challenges extended to university
mentors and district librarians. To better understand her narrative and why it came to represent the
critical event in Izzie’s work as a librarian, an exploration follows, featuring the occupational
challenges she faced and the successes she experienced.
Pre-Professional Challenges
While Izzie brought a number of strengths to the library profession, she was plagued by an
intense fear of failure. Izzie allowed this fear to hold her back professionally, and it often prevented
her from taking professional risks. She acknowledged her fear:

124

	  

This has been true for me for most of my life. If I take things very seriously, I won’t do
them. I have to know I’m going to be good at something, or I’m not willing to go into it.
I don’t want to try really hard at something and fail. That’s very upsetting, and it always
has been. And even worse, what if I did put the full effort in and still wasn’t great? I
don’t think my ego could handle it. (November 20, 2012)
Because of her fear of failure, it was initially a challenge for Izzie to apply for and accept the position
at PGHS. But she did both, and she did not stop there. She added to her duties an overwhelming
challenge: it was her goal to save the school librarian position at PGHS. This professional goal held
unprecedented significance for Izzie, but she chose to embrace the challenge.
Before library school, Izzie had no “apprenticeship of observation” to familiarize herself with
the role and responsibilities of the school librarian (Lortie, 1975). Thus, Izzie relied upon her library
preparation program to acquaint her with and prepare her for the role. Even though Izzie’s library
science program was nationally ranked for school librarianship, she only had one adjunct instructor who
had any school librarian experience: Ms. Kate Holloway. Ms. Holloway was Izzie’s only chance to
connect with a professional role model from her School of Library Science.
Izzie had attended enough colleges and universities to know how she learned best. She needed
exposure to multiple theories that she could analyze and explore; she enjoyed assignments with
flexible guidelines; and she desired autonomy so that she could come to conclusions and findings on her
own. But it was Ms. Holloway’s forceful rigidity that Izzie immediately noticed about her:
‘You do this; and you do this; and you do not do that over there!’ [Ms. Holloway’s
teaching approach] was a little too constricting. She has so much knowledge, and
passion, and amazingness up here [Izzie tapped to her temple], and can’t deliver it in a
way that feels good. I always felt, from the first day I had her, I was under attack. She
was always like, ‘You’ve got to be toeing the party line, or you’re terrible, and you suck,
and get out of school librarianship.’ And I was like, ‘Whoa! I don’t even quite know if
this is what I want to go into. Calm down!’ (November 20, 2012)
Izzie learned early in her Information Inquiry for School Teachers course with Ms. Holloway that the
online forums were not a place to explore ideas freely. Instead, she felt that Ms. Holloway was always
ready to pounce on those who did not believe exactly as she did. Izzie found it difficult to express her
ideas about teaching in the school library; instead, she completed assignments in order to please Ms.
Holloway and receive a favorable grade. Ultimately, Ms. Holloway’s reflection assignments were not
very useful to Izzie.
While Izzie found it difficult to embrace her mentor’s teaching approach, she attempted to use
125

	  

Ms. Holloway’s strict beliefs about school librarianship as a framework instead of a doctrine. As a
graduate student, Izzie tried to visualize the role of a school librarian by contrasting it with what she
understood. She recollected how her ideas developed: “Okay, this is sort of what school librarianship
is about. It’s not about being an academic librarian in a high school. No, no, no! That’s not the way
it’s going to go. It’s going to have to be different than that” (November 20, 2012).
Even as her ideas developed, Ms. Holloway’s harsh precision invaded Izzie’s understanding of
her future profession. Ms. Holloway made it clear that there was only one way to be a school librarian,
and Izzie did not have an opportunity to envision her unique self in the role. Nor did Izzie feel as if Ms.
Holloway gave her an opportunity to grow from novice to expert during graduate school.
I think a lot of school librarians were teachers, and then became school librarians…
which of course is a much better way to go. And I didn’t have that. I didn’t have
formal classroom teaching experience at all. And so Holloway was watching me at the very
infancy of my development. And I wanted to explain to her that this is not going to be great
right now! I did learn a lot from what she said, but I just wish it had been
delivered in not quite so harsh terms. That was rough. She was like ‘You suck, and let
me tell you why.’ I just ended up feeling really crappy about myself and about the
profession as a whole, because my examples of school librarians have been really bad.
(November 20, 2012)
Because Izzie could not imagine herself becoming another Ms. Holloway, she chose not to complete her
school library services certification.
Whereas Izzie discounted Ms. Holloway as a school librarian mentor, Izzie continued to ponder
which, if any, of her childhood teachers she would emulate if she ended up in education. But when she
reflected on her favorite teachers, she could not articulate specific traits or approaches she would
model. She portrayed her favorite teacher in this way:
Mr. Boehm taught Honors World History at my high school. And he was famous! He
was one of those teachers who everyone adored. And he just blew our minds, because
we were used to hippy-dippy West Coast teachers who were like: ‘Hey man! Let’s just
rap about things.’ Uh-uh! He did not do that. And, I don’t even know how he did it. I
could not tell you what he did to make the class so incredible, but it was. He had the
same curriculum every year. It wasn’t like he changed things up. It wasn’t even that he
was particularly creative. There was just something about the way he [taught] that
made it the most fascinating thing you had ever learned! (April 2, 2013)
Even though Mr. Boehm made a fine role model, Izzie could not put her finger on exactly what he did
to make his teaching so effective. His specific approach eluded Izzie, and she classified his teaching as
magic, not a likeness she could mirror.

126

	  

Neither graduate school courses nor her library practicum at PGHS provided Izzie with the
confidence that she was a skilled teacher or a librarian. While she learned how to write lesson plans,
her librarian mentors-in-name-only were either critics or entirely uninvolved in her education. In
addition, Izzie did not prepare for the highly political environment she would enter as a school
librarian.
Challenges of the Newly Arrived Teacher
The aspects of work life that others might perceive as obvious professional challenges did not
seem to concern Izzie while she was working at PGHS. The economic crisis, the firing of district
librarians, and the administrator who believed that he could replace a school librarian with a clerk—
none of these fazed Izzie. Instead, the five challenges she named were related to how others treated
her at the workplace.
First of all, Izzie found it challenging to work for a “jive-talking” principal (October 23, 2012).
With her vast work experience, Izzie had worked for a number of supervisors. In fact, she had been a
supervisor herself. Thus, she knew a leader when she saw one. With Mr. York, it was not just what she
saw that made her question his authority, it was what he said. It was a common narrative among
teachers that Mr. York would use his charisma and charm to get his way with his faculty and staff. His
method was even rumored to work with his superintendent and the school board. Izzie remembered,
“A fellow teacher once said to me after talking to him, ‘I feel like I was just sold a used Buick.’ He’s
very shady. He’s known to be very shady. Everybody knows that this is the way he operates”
(November 20, 2012). Recognizing this trait, Izzie moved forward with Mr. York cautiously. However,
Izzie could not assimilate this knowledge of him with his claims to reinstate the school librarian
position.
Second, Izzie found the inherent hierarchy of public schools to be cumbersome. Even though
she was doing the work of a school librarian and she earned her master’s degree, she found that the
teachers still demonstrated their higher status. Izzie remarked,
Teachers tended to put up barriers between themselves and me. They were like, ‘You’re
support staff, so we’re not peers.’ They made it very clear we were not peers, and so I never
felt like I was able to find a teaching mentor. (November 20, 2012)

127

	  

Even though Izzie had more education than many of her peers, the majority of her colleagues could
never move beyond her job classification. This prevented her, and perhaps them, from achieving
further professional development.
Third, Izzie was initially frustrated by teachers’ perceptions of what a school librarian did. She
found it difficult to alter their mental models to believe that librarians were teachers. Izzie explained,
The idea that teachers have about librarians is irritating. The kind of box teachers put
you in? And I think you can train them out of that. But that kind of, ‘Oh, no-no-no!
You just check out books all day, and you do these little tiny lessons over here!’ And
they’re not really willing to move outside of that mentality. That was annoying. But at
the same time, I didn’t blame them. (November 20, 2012)
Even though Izzie did not consider this a huge occupational obstacle, teachers’ perceptions did initially
stand in the way of her being invited to co-teach or lead research sessions.
Fourth, because Izzie could not recall interactions with her own school librarian, nor did she
have any school librarian mentors, the task of envisioning exciting library lessons challenged her. She
expressed her professional impediment with unabashed honesty:
There are some things that we are expected to teach that I’m not a big fan of. I think I
understand why it’s like that, but it doesn’t mean I enjoy it. I don’t particularly enjoy
teaching note-taking lessons. I don’t particularly enjoy citations. I don’t particularly
enjoy the research lesson. Like ‘Oh, here’s how you use a database.’ I don’t think those
topics are very… I’m not saying you couldn’t do them in an interesting way. I haven’t
figured that out yet. So, to me, it seems very dull. And because it seems dull to me, I
think it’s dull to kids, too. (November 20, 2012)
Among the different situations where Izzie had to relate to students, the teaching of library-related
lessons rarely motivated her. In fact, she did not display passion she held for teaching concepts
related to information literacy. But, she placed the onus for figuring out how to creatively teach
library concepts entirely on herself.
Often embolden by upon the company of other school librarians, novices like Izzie typically
look forward to participating in district librarian meetings. But the other school librarians did not
accept or embrace Izzie; instead, they opposed her acceptance of a clerical library position that was
not paid commensurate with her credentials. Izzie remembered painfully,
I had to deal with the ire of the other school librarians, who treated me like a scab. I
sort of understood why they did this, but I truly felt like I was on their side and working
for the good of the profession, at least in the long run. I felt like I was really trying to
do what was best for the profession, and they thought I was trying to undermine them.
Why would I try to do that? That doesn’t make any sense for me, either. I didn’t want
128

	  

them to get fired and be replaced by aides. That’s stupid! ‘But,’ I thought, ‘the way you
guys have been doing things from the outside is not working. It’s not helping!’ [My
approach had] a better chance, instead of just being pissed off at everybody… which is
what they had been doing. Even worse, I felt like they were blindly supporting librarians
who hadn’t done a good job simply because they were certified. It was a really awful
position to be in, but I knew I would feel vindicated if the principal restored the librarian
position. (October 23, 2012; November 20, 2012)
The district librarians believed that Izzie was proving what PGHS administrators and school board
members claimed: there was no need to pay a certified school librarian. Izzie proved that overqualified people would willingly fill clerical positions. The district librarians did not hide their beliefs
that Izzie’s failure was imminent, or that the principal would not reinstate the high school librarian
position.
Izzie’s Successes
Izzie was not comfortable discussing ways in which she was successful as a school librarian.
Her experience as Ms. Holloway’s student destroyed her confidence, and Izzie blamed herself for Mr.
York’s decision to not reinstate the librarian position. Nonetheless, Izzie embodied the role of school
librarian in a number of noteworthy ways.
Izzie was able to apply her student-centered educational philosophy in the school library. She
genuinely loved high school students, and Izzie desired to assist their perplexing transition from
adolescence to adulthood in ways that some librarians would avoid. She recalled one specific moment,
Do you know the book Forever by Judy Bloom? It’s a losing your virginity book. This
book is old, and it got checked out all the time. And I remember having this ballsy girl
come up to me and request, ‘Are there more books like this?’ And I asked, ‘You mean
books about losing your virginity?’ And she said, ‘Yeah.’ I just bet that given
the past librarians at PGHS that there were not. And I told her, ‘I’m going to make
this happen for you,’ so I researched [to create] this vast collection of fiction books
about losing your virginity appropriate for high schoolers… That was not exactly a daily
experience, but [I did] things like that. They felt really important, and they hadn’t been
done before. But they were, because I was there. (November 29, 2012)
Exploring sexuality is a high-interest reading topic for teenagers, but the librarians at PGHS had
neglected this important part of the library collection for over three decades. Izzie used a good
portion of her $16,000 budget to provide books for this young woman and the many students who came
after her, curious about human sexuality.
Izzie was also a successful advocate for recreational reading. She decided to host a high school
book club, and five people joined at the beginning of the year. By the end of the year, Izzie
129

	  

recognized that she “got the book club rockin’!” (November 29, 2012). Her group of teenagers had
grown to thirty, and the students talked her into a number of fundraising schemes that were fairly
successful. It wasn’t necessarily the books they chose to read that attracted students to the club.
Instead, it was one of the few opportunities at PGHS that gathered students who weren’t athletes in a
casual, uncompetitive way.
Even though Izzie had very few opportunities to practice the science of school librarianship
formally, she was determined to use her time at PGHS as an experiment. Her ambition was not just to
determine whether she wanted to pursue a school library services teaching certification; rather, she
desired to experiment with teaching methods and other aspects of librarianship. She identified that
the administration’s indifference to her job as providing the autonomy she needed to be experimental:
The administration really didn’t care what I did, and while that’s not a great thing for a
school, it was fabulous for me. I was allowed to do whatever I wanted, try things out,
create programs, teach classes, collaborate with teachers, write grants, buy whichever
books I felt were best. It was amazing and I didn’t want it to end. (October 23, 2012)
Perhaps because Izzie’s administration did not regularly check in on her, Izzie’s fear of failure
lessened. If Izzie failed while attempting something, Mr. York would likely never find out; afterwards,
she could try a new approach. When he did learn about Izzie’s progress in the library, Mr. York
cautioned her. While she was not supposed to be teaching in a clerical staff position, he did not
demand that she stop. Instead, he asked her to keep her work discreet. He did not want her to
advertise her services, especially to the Teachers’ Union Representative.
Izzie’s challenges and successes provide a greater understanding of Izzie’s professional persona
and make the significance of her critical event more evident. The following sections return to the
context of her critical event to explore two concepts: (1) Izzie’s professional identity as a novice school
librarian and (2) the reproduction of cultural assumptions and stereotypes in Izzie’s narrative.
Professional Identity
While Izzie declared that it was difficult for her to define her professional identity in a cover
letter or a conversation, she expressed explicit, implicit, and tacit identity claims throughout her
critical event narrative. The tables below list identity claims, along with a numerical value that
corresponds to the number of times Izzie articulated the identity in her narrative.

130

	  

Table eleven below arranges Izzie’s identity claims by the statements she made about herself,
what she needed from others, and what she needed in a work environment. Because her narrative
described the timeframe before and after her critical event, this section will analyze Izzie’s
professional claims from both time periods. Before the event, Izzie’s narrative made these claims
about her professional identity:
Table 11
Izzie’s Identity Claims Before Her Critical Event
Identity claims about herself

Identity claims related
to her needs from others

Identity claims related to what she
needed in a work environment

“I am hopeful.” (11)

“I am not professionally respected.” (12)

“I need autonomy.” (8)

“I am confident.” (14)
“I believe I can make a difference.” (1)
“I trust people in leadership.” (5)
“I like a challenge.” (6)
“I let my fears hold me back.” (5)
“I am a visionary.” (12)
“I am assertive.” (12)
“I am critical of others.” (19)

When Izzie first volunteered to participate in this study, she did not find her story particularly
interesting. She knew that her experience represented an existential crisis, but she did not spend
much time thinking about its importance or the effect it had on her professional identity. However,
Izzie’s narrative and oral recollections revealed the critical event significantly altered her professional
identity. After her critical event, a number of Izzie’s identity claims contradicted the ones expressed
before the event. This is displayed in table twelve.
Table 12
Izzie’s Identity Claims After Critical Event
Altered from “I am hopeful” to “I am regretful.” (10)
Altered from “I am confident” to “I am not confident.” (7)
Altered from “I believe I can make a difference” to “I don’t believe I can make a difference.” (7)
Altered from “I trust people in leadership” to “I can’t trust people in leadership.” (13)

Immediately after her critical event, Izzie’s principal used her letter of resignation to complete
131

	  

her dismissal process. A few days later Mr. York hired an unemployed music teacher to replace Izzie as
the school library clerk. The following fall, Izzie completed the state requirements for a school library
services certification by student teaching in an elementary school in the same district where her
critical event occurred. Then, she accepted a position as an Academic Interventionist in the building
where she completed her student teaching, followed a year later by a position as a Homebound
Instructor for high school students in the same district.
Two years after her critical event, Izzie discussed the transformation in her identity claims and
to whom she attributed the shift in her professional identity. Table thirteen arranges and labels these
transformations:
Table 13
Izzie’s Post-Performance Identity Claims
I no longer identify with this claim,
because I made a change.

I no longer identity with this claim,
because others influenced me
to make a change.
“I am not confident.”

“I am regretful.”
“I am assertive.”
“I don’t believe I can make a difference.”

Upon further analysis, Izzie found that she had recovered many of the self-affirming identity
claims that she made before her critical event. While the critical event did temporarily negate some
of the most positive characteristics of her professional identity, the passing of time and physical
distance from the school allowed her to restore much of her original identity. Even though she
continued to work for the same school district, Izzie found that working away from the high school and
the library environment was instrumental to her healing process.
Izzie accepted the majority of the responsibility for the deterioration in self-perception that
affected her professional identity. While Izzie saw her critical event as powerful enough to alter her
opinions about the library profession, she pointed to an internal locus of control as ultimately
determining who she was as a professional. Table fourteen explains the why she no longer fully related
to the identity claim she originally made.

132

	  

Table 14
Izzie’s Change in Identity
I no longer identify with this claim, because I made a change.
“I am regretful.”
“I no longer regret my job performance at PGHS; I did the best that I could. But, I do regret pursuing a career as a
librarian. School librarianship was a dead end for me, so now I’m more interested in teaching literacy and reading” (May
16, 2013).
“I am assertive.”
“While people may still believe that I am assertive, this experience caused me shift to use that ability to serve as a
student advocate in schools. I am even more focused on student needs, instead of focusing on the preservation of my
position” (May 16, 2013).
“I don’t believe I can make a difference.”
“This experience certainly took the wind out of my sails, and I don’t think about making a difference in the lives of
students as a librarian anymore. But, I have not completely given up on the idea of impacting a principal. I am more
realistic about my own limitations, though, and I recognize that some administrators cannot be reached with logic” (May
16, 2013).
“I personally believe I can and will make a difference, but I recognize systemic problems that hamper things from
changing. But, at the end of the day? Yes, I believe I can make a difference” (May 16, 2013).

The one identity claim that Izzie found difficult to overcome entirely on her own related to her
lack of confidence. This identity claim obviously did not simply emerge at the moment of the critical
event; instead, it was a facet of her personality that Izzie has fought for nearly twenty years.
Dependent on the praise of others, Izzie noticed that her confidence level increased. She commented,
I am more confident about how I performed in my first professional job at PGHS. Just
because I was not beloved by the principal, it doesn’t mean that I’m not good at being a
librarian. But, I needed other people saying that there wasn’t anything more I could
have done to let myself off the hook. I got good feedback from others, and I did a good
job. I believe I can make a library functional, and I left the school ultimately saying that I
was worth more than $8.35 per hour. That’s confidence, right? (May 16, 2013)
Perhaps because of Izzie’s long-term struggle with confidence, she could only change her selfperception with the help of other people. They had to tell her what they saw, and some even
pointedly addressed the errors in her thinking.
Reproduction of Cultural Assumptions
Three significant assumptions from the culture of American schools played out in Izzie’s
narrative: (1) school librarians are clerical support staff; (2) superiors take advantage of subordinates;
and (3) education is valued. Perhaps the most significant cultural assumption presented in Izzie’s
narrative was her principal’s belief that school librarians performed the work of clerical staff. Mr.
York’s assumptions were profoundly evident when the school district decided to eliminate school
librarian positions and replace them with support staff members. Despite major changes in the

133

	  

responsibilities of school librarians, Mr. York continued to operate on the assumption that the work of
librarians had not changed since he was a student at PGHS. Because much of his student and
professional career took place inside the walls of PGHS, Mr. York was only exposed to two school
librarians before Izzie; both of his previous librarians focused on the clerical aspects of their jobs and
neglected their roles as teachers; collaborators; promoters; advocates; and curriculum specialists.
Izzie believed that Mr. York adopted the cultural stereotype of librarians because of a negative
interaction he experienced with a PGHS librarian. She relayed:
I think he [embraced] the cultural stereotype of the librarian… the classic ‘mean, old
lady librarian’ who wants to keep things neat and tidy. And I feel like that does play
some role in his idea of what a library is for and his emotional reaction to it. I even
brought it up [to Mr. York]. I wondered how he was treated by the school librarian
when he was in high school, because he seemed to have a real aversion to that role,
and the [physical] space [of the library] to be used in that particular way. I wondered,
‘Has something happened to you? What has happened to you?’ (November 20, 2012)
Perhaps, as Izzie suggested, Mr. York experienced a damaging exchange with a librarian, and it
weakened his willingness to acknowledge the value of a certified school librarian. He certainly could
not conceive of the shift in school librarianship – from clerical priorities to directly impacting student
achievement.
Even though Mr. York’s principal preparation program educated him on many of the roles and
functions of school personnel, it almost certainly did not educate him on the role of the school
librarian (Church, 2008). The state’s Department of Education did not advocate for school librarians,
nor did it educate administrators on their role. The state principal association did not prioritize
educating administrators on the role of school librarians at its yearly conference. Furthermore, the
two state universities that offered school librarianship courses did not have a promotional campaign to
endorse school librarians. In short, Mr. York’s education and professional development did not cue him
to ponder the value of a high-performing school librarian. Perhaps that is why when he hired the music
teacher replacement for the library clerk position, Mr. York assigned Izzie only four hours to train her.
Izzie responded to him with contempt.
‘Do you understand there’s no way I can do this in four hours?’ I asked Mr. York. And he
said, ‘Really?’ I wondered, ‘Are you kidding me? That’s what you think I can do?’
He absolutely thought that I could train someone to replace me in four hours. Just like a
whole career in four hours!” (November 20, 2012)

134

	  

After her interaction with Mr. York, Izzie dutifully trained her replacement. She remembered giving a
general orientation to the large library space and covering some basics about how to check in and out
books. Afterwards, she felt angry that Mr. York would be so insensitive to suggest that she could train
her replacement in a mere four hours.
In some ways, however, Izzie appreciated the lack of attention her principal gave to her role.
If Mr. York considered Izzie a member of the teaching faculty and contributor to student achievement,
she would have been under the same spotlight as other new teachers with formal observations and
evaluations. Because clerical roles were not Mr. York’s priorities, Izzie enjoyed the autonomy to
experiment in her role as school librarian with very little accountability and very low stakes. Izzie
reported,
Mr. York didn’t know what I was doing, and that was freedom! That sounds messed up,
but most principals wonder, ‘What’s going on over there? What books are you buying?
And what’s happening?’ And he didn’t care, so I was like, ‘Sweet! I can do anything… I’m
going to rock it out and do anything I feel.’ I thrive in an independent, hands-off
environment, when my boss lets me do what I want. (November 20, 2012; November 29,
2012)
Although Mr. York’s lack of respect for Izzie’s role eventually affected her desire to work for him, it
initially was a great draw to the position. Izzie claimed that the clerical status was “perfect” for her
to practice school librarianship without the pressure or responsibility of certified status. Originally,
the lack of status and significance Mr. York placed on the manager of the library was very alluring to
Izzie.
A second assumption played out in Izzie’s narrative related to school leadership: superiors take
advantage of subordinates in schools. Mr. York did not demand that Izzie perform responsibilities
outside of her job description; thus, he did not overtly take advantage of her as a worker. However,
he did exploit her loyalty and naiveté. For example, Izzie believed Mr. York purposefully instilled a
sense of allegiance in her by “grooming” her for the position for an entire year while she was a library
volunteer (November 29, 2012). Izzie was possibly even more persuaded by his attention and interest,
since a number of other positions to which she had applied had rejected her, including an unpaid
library internship. She admitted that a strange feeling of providence influenced her greatly:
I got a weird sense that this was fated. I came in here as a volunteer, and it was going to
work out! And that’s why I think I refused to see that he was a liar. I thought, ‘This will work
135

	  

out, because there were so many things that had to happen to get to this point.
There’s no way this can’t work out…. Oh my God! I’m going to be the only person who
graduates from this program who can land [a job] in Perry Grove. In retrospect, I think
this [feeling] was purposeful on his part. I don’t think he ever had any real intention of
reinstating the librarian position, but wanted me to like him and feel loyal towards him.
(October 23, 2012; November 29, 2012)
Izzie regarded his interest and attention as a way for her to get her professional life “going,” and this
established her sense of deference to him (November 29, 2012).
Mr. York also exploited Izzie’s naiveté as his novice subordinate. According to Izzie, he baited
her by intimating he could reinstate the school librarian position from her initial interview until her
final face-to-face interaction with him. From pulling her into his office to initiate conversations about
the library, to meeting with her after school to strategize ways around his obstacles to reinstate the
position, Izzie experienced the full court press from this former basketball star. Consequently, Izzie
took the bait. It was not just what Mr. York said that convinced her that he would reinstate the
position; she was also moved by the ambience he created during their strategy sessions. Izzie
remembered,
He’s got couches in his office, and he comes in and sits down right next to you and
wants to communicate. So it’s... seductive is not the right word, because I don’t mean
that in a sexual way. But he [started these] intense conversations. He’d say, ‘Hey now.
We’re on the same team…’ Which feels, in retrospect, very creepy and manipulative,
but that’s the way he is. And I’m embarrassed that I was seduced by him to an extent…
that I believed him. Because there was a lot of evidence that I should not have. And
there were a lot of warnings that people gave me, like ‘Don’t listen to him. He’s a liar.’
(November 20, 2012)
While his critics secretly warned Izzie about Mr. York’s method of operation, she could not imagine
anyone being so deliberately manipulative on a regular basis. If he was not going to reinstate the
position, Izzie wondered, why would he try so hard to make her believe that he was? Despite the many
miles she traveled, the many institutions of higher education she attended, the degrees she earned,
and the many positions of employment she held, Izzie had never encountered a persona built upon
deceit.
Izzie’s narrative revealed a third, particularly broad cultural assumption: education is valued.
While the library clerk position only required a high school diploma, Izzie brought to the school library
an undergraduate degree in history and a master’s degree in library science. Yet her principal only
offered her $8.35 per hour for the position – the starting wage for clerical staff at PGHS. He paid her
136

	  

as if her degrees did not matter. Whether or not Mr. York believed that a certified librarian had more
to offer than a clerk was unclear, but his actions made it obvious that he did not value a certified
school librarian at PGHS enough to pay Izzie wages commensurate with her training. Two years later, a
clerk continued to manage his library—a clerk who also happened to be one of the school’s basketball
coaches.
Nevertheless, her principal was not the only person who ignored her education. Izzie found
initially that teachers judged her by her position classification and not by any other criteria. Even
though they were in the education business together, teachers did not value Izzie’s experience or
education. In fact, Izzie strove to climb out of the “box” the teachers put her in; she earnestly
endeavored to prove that she could offer more than checking out their books (November 20, 2012).
According to one participant in Izzie’s focus group the evening of her performance, the
devaluing of Izzie’s education was the most powerful component of her narrative. He claimed,
You came out of school with your master’s, and you had to start from scratch and prove
yourself again. You got this degree, and you just proved yourself. And then, ‘Oh my God! I’m
back to square one again, and I have to prove myself. And I’ve got to have
lower pay to even get my foot in the door. And go in the back door!’ (November 29, 2012)
While Izzie demonstrated her intellectual ability as an undergraduate and graduate student, she came
to realize that being a novice librarian required a great deal more. Even though Izzie embraced this
cultural assumption that education is valued, she came to realize that everyone did not.
Significance of Participation in Study
Izzie agreed to participate in the study because she wanted to gain closure and move forward
from her painful critical event. In addition, she wanted to contribute to research on school librarians
in order to transcend her frustration with current school librarians, school library preparation
programs, public school systems, and principals. Izzie believed the more people talk about the
profession, the greater chance it can be saved as an American vocation. Thus, she agreed to write a
narrative and do a considerable amount of talking despite her historical avoidance of being the center
of attention.
Before performing her narrative, Izzie did not view her story as interesting or noteworthy. She
had shared her critical event with a number of people in her professional and personal life; the

137

	  

majority replied with silent shock or vague murmurs of sympathy. Thus, she had a low standard of
what strangers in a focus group could offer her. At the performance, the focus group members stayed
longer than she expected and analyzed the story with what Izzie defined as intensity. After the
performance, Izzie began to see her story differently:
I thought this kind of event happened all the time, and I was a little embarrassed that I
took up the audience’s evening discussing my very small story of a very small job at a
school in a small town. It just felt very inconsequential, so I was touched that the
audience seemed to take it so seriously and give me such thoughtful feedback. I was
surprised that most people could relate to my experience and how that created a sense
of solidarity among the group. I didn’t feel alone or silly for caring about it. The fact
that the audience heard these bigger social issues in my small story again reinforced the
idea that this was a story worth telling. The discussion made me feel like maybe my
story wasn’t so small after all, and that I wasn’t a fool to discuss it. I had felt like I was
making a huge deal out of nothing, and I think the fact that other people took it
seriously changed my perspective about it. It validated my experience, which I think is
probably the goal of the whole thing. If so, then mission accomplished. (February 10,
2013)
With this validation from other professionals, the conversation opened the door for Izzie to rethink her
beliefs about her critical event. Instead of vague sympathy, the audience provided “comfort” to Izzie
(February 10, 2013).
While the audience reassured Izzie, it was the process of writing that helped to alter Izzie’s
perspective about her principal, Mr. York. Izzie chose to represent a number of voices in her critical
event narrative, including her own, those of the district librarians, and her principal. In the process of
giving voice to her principal and trying to convey his perspective through the written word, her feelings
about him transformed. She reported:
I actually liked being able to speak for the principal because it made me more
sympathetic towards him, weirdly enough. I think it allowed me to forgive him and let
[my] issue [with him] rest. (February 10, 2013)
Thus, her participation in the study provided another unexpected result for Izzie: forgiveness. She was
not hoping for or looking for that kind of result, but exploring the principal’s voice and the reasons
behind his actions had stimulated unexpected empathy.
Before the performance, Izzie articulated that the principal’s decision not to reinstate the
position was her failure. Writing her critical event and performing it front of an audience began to
nullify Izzie’s self-blame.

138

	  

[Before the performance,] I very clearly saw my experience at the high school as a
failure and the audience was much more forgiving about that aspect of it. While I have
a hard time fully believing this, it did at least force me to acknowledge the possibility
that the outcome of my story was not entirely due to my personal failure. I think I’ve
realized that I’m comfortable teaching and if that comes as a librarian that’s great. But
if not, that’s okay too. [My critical event] doesn’t make me a failure, and it doesn’t mean
that library school was necessarily a waste of time. I think it was just [one part in] my
long and winding path into education. (February 10, 2013)
For Jonah, the Hebrew man, the long and winding path to his life’s calling involved a number
of critical events. His narrative described his fate when he avoided his destiny: he was thrown
overboard into a “wild” and “raging” sea in the middle of the night; swallowed by a great fish;
“tangled in seaweed” for three nights in the fish’s belly; and finally the fish vomited him onto dry land
(Jonah 1:15, Message Version). In contrast, the closure of Izzie’s critical event provided her with a
peace Jonah never experienced on dry land or in Nineveh, according to his story. Izzie noted,
I definitely gained closure. Writing about my experience and reflecting on it gave me
peace of mind that I certainly didn’t have before. I really haven’t thought about it since
the reading, and I think that’s great. I think there’s something about making yourself
vulnerable in front of a group that’s liberating, and it felt softly cathartic. I feel like I’m
ready to move on with my professional life, and I can look back at my time at the high
school in a mostly positive way. (February 10, 2013)
Izzie wanted to participate in the study to gain closure and move forward from her painful critical
event. She achieved both. In fact, during our final interview for this study, she confessed that she was
working on her resume for teaching and school librarian positions. Like the majority of people, Izzie
was no longer haunted by the actions of and her response to her “seventh grade boyfriend” (October
23, 2012).

139

	  

CHAPTER SEVEN: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Drawing on the three case studies, this chapter reveals the final assessments from an
examination of novice school librarians’ critical event narratives. The chapter is divided into four main
parts. It begins with summaries of the participants’ critical event narratives. The second section
provides a discussion of the participants’ occupational socialization during each of the four stages:
observing teachers as a student; attending a preparation program; participating in student teaching or
teaching internship; and teaching as a novice (Britzman, 2003). Third, the paper examines how critical
events create professional identities of school librarians. The chapter concludes with implications for
theory, future research, and practice.
Summary of Participants’ Critical Events
Ginger: School Librarian, Not the Kinko’s Copy Girl
Administrators hired Ginger as a school librarian at Red Rock High School (RRHS) on the Navajo
reservation. After feeling openly devalued for her Anglo identity, she attempted to change the reading
and research culture of RRHS. The school had never before employed a school librarian; thus, they
expected Ginger to perform the clerical duties of others who previously monitored the library. For two
years, Ginger placed significant emphasis on her work as an instructional leader, a technology-based
instructional design consultant, and a curriculum collaborator. Reluctantly, she also performed the
clerical duties that school administrators expected of her. However, when the technology staff
decided that she would manage the large format printer but receive no training on how to use it,
Ginger addressed her concerns with her administrator. After being silenced and ultimately ignored by
her administrator, Ginger resigned from her position. She believed she was a school librarian, not the
Kinko’s Copy girl.
Lucy: School Librarian, Not Interior Decorator
Lucy was hired as a school librarian at Prescott High School on the East Coast, because the
school was seeking reaccreditation and needed a school librarian in place before the accreditation
review. In spite of Lucy’s desire to teach information literacy skills and promote recreational reading,
the state of the print collection was in disrepair. Furthermore, the school had allocated no budget to

140

	  

improve it. A school board meeting took place in the library, amongst a few piles of books that Lucy
had created while in mid-project organization, in order to improve book access for students. After the
meeting, Lucy was summoned to her superintendent’s office. There, the superintendent directed Lucy
to remove the piles of books from the library and redecorate the library before every school board
meeting in the future. The rest of the year, before every school board meeting, the superintendent’s
secretary and her principal reminded Lucy to redecorate. Lucy felt obligated to invest her own funds
to decorate the library, and she took take time away from her professional goals to complete clerical
tasks. Ultimately, Lucy resigned from her position. She believed she was a school librarian, not an
interior decorator.
Izzie: School Librarian, Not Seventh Grade Girlfriend
The administrators at Perry Grove High School hired Izzie as its sole librarian. For an entire
year her title was library clerk, but she performed the work of the school librarian. She worked under
the assumption that her principal would reinstate the school librarian position by the next year, and
she would be first in line for the job. Izzie regularly advocated for the library and the school librarian
position with the administrator, and she collaborated with teachers on research lessons. While
believing that the principal would reinstate the school librarian position at the end of the year, she
forced her principal to make a decision about the upcoming school year: keep her or get rid of her.
When he avoided answering her and continued to string her along, she realized that her administrator
intended for her to remain in a clerical role receiving clerical pay. Immediately, Izzie packed her
belongings. She believed she was a school librarian, not a seventh grade girlfriend.
Occupational Socialization
Apprenticeship of Observation
The literature indicates that the apprenticeship of observation can benefit novices in a number
of ways. First, it gives novices mental models of what successful (and unsuccessful) teaching looks
like; second, it shapes the teaching actions and practices of novices; and third, it transmits cultural
beliefs from master teachers to novices (Lortie, 1975). Sandford (2013) extends Lortie’s (1975)
definition about this stage of occupational socialization. She recommends that the apprenticeship of
observation should also include pre-service school librarians’ observations of school librarian
141

	  

practitioners. Sandford (2013) claims that observations conducted as adults have a greater influence
on shaping the identities of novice school librarians.
This important stage of occupational socialization was largely absent for the participants in this
study. Neither Lucy nor Izzie could point to a previous school, public, or academic librarian that she
remembered – let alone fashioned teaching or librarianship practices after. Ginger remembered that
she had a librarian, but she compared her to a shadow. Ginger knew that her high school employed a
librarian, but Ginger was not aware of what she did. Even when applying Sandford’s (2013) broader
view of the apprenticeship of observation, participants of the present study did not experience a
delayed version of this stage in their occupational socialization. Although Ginger benefitted from a
teaching colleague who inspired her with ideas about actions and practices regarding librarianship, the
colleague was not a school librarian and Ginger did not have the opportunity to observe her. Lucy
volunteered as an archivist for a historical society, but the work isolated her from peers, and she was
not trained by nor did she work with a librarian archivist. Even though Izzie had a librarian colleague
who suggested that she go to library school, Izzie never observed her either. Instead, they briefly
discussed why people who majored in history as undergraduates made good librarians. Izzie was also
assured by her colleague that she could find a position after graduation. These conversations between
Izzie and her colleague never illuminated school librarianship as a potential career track within library
science; thus, Izzie did not enter graduate school with a plan to pursue school librarianship.
As discussed in the literature review, Goodin (2011) claims that the apprenticeship of
observation involves not just observing professionals at work; it also includes the physical space of
libraries. Participants in this study recalled what the physical spaces of their adolescent libraries
looked and felt like, and they appeared to be influenced by their memories. From her experiences as a
student in K-12 schools, Ginger seemed to form ideas about what should take place in the library.
Alternatively, Lucy’s beliefs about how the library should feel appeared to be based on her frequent
visits to her public library as an adolescent. Perhaps Ginger’s memories of her high school librarian as
“a shadow” led her to assume that school librarians held less responsibility while also enjoying more
autonomy than teachers. From her observation of her “shadow” high school librarian, Ginger appeared
to form the following beliefs about a career in school librarianship: (1) someone other than the
142

	  

librarian is responsible to correct or (re)direct students; (2) the librarian has emotional distance from
students; (3) school librarians began and terminated interactions with students and adults as desired;
(4) school librarians had the freedom and flexibility to hand back over the teaching reigns to the
teacher. School librarianship, according to her observation of her “shadow” librarian, provides brief,
superficial interactions with students; however, they return to the classrooms/physical spaces to which
they belonged. Years after her apprenticeship of observation, Ginger seemed to think that working in
the library would provide her with the convenience to do the library work she wanted to do. Ginger’s
high school librarian “shadow,” and perhaps her clerical work at the Philadelphia Friends School
library—without a certified school librarian to direct and manage Ginger’s duties—misinformed Ginger’s
apprenticeship of observation. Lucy’s childhood and adolescent experiences in her pleasant public
library appeared to shape her notions of how a library should feel. Recollecting her desire to spend
time at the public library and the associated freedom it offered her, Lucy believed that students should
and would regularly visit their libraries. These visits, based on her apprenticeship of observation as
defined by Goodin (2011), should be edifying and unrestricted. Even when given autonomy, Lucy
believed that the students would be self-directed and well-behaved in the library.
While none of the participants had to overcome negative roles or damaging practices
associated with their apprenticeships of observation as students in K-12 schools, the almost complete
absence of this stage in occupational socialization, as defined by Lortie (1975) and Sandford (2013),
presented serious obstacles to all three participants as they entered the profession. None of the
participants fully or even partially understood what the roles of school librarians were before their
professional training. They did not have clear mental models of what successful or unsuccessful school
librarianship looked like; they did not recognize the actions or practices of effective school librarians;
and they did not experience any dissemination of cultural beliefs from school librarian practitioners.
Perhaps this contributed to their unrealistic expectations for their work as school librarians and their
assumptions about the role of administration. Also, because they did not grow up hearing school
librarians advocate for their work or the physical space of the library, neither Ginger nor Lucy
considered advocacy a requirement of their positions.
The undernourished apprenticeship of observation, as described by Goodin (2011), appeared to
143

	  

provide Ginger with an inaccurate and largely detrimental view of the responsibilities required of
school librarians in the physical space of the library. Lucy’s apprenticeship of observation may have
successfully contributed to her strong beliefs about how the library should feel, but she had unrealistic
notions that positive energy automatically existed in libraries. In Lucy’s mind, no indifference toward
libraries or scholarship existed. It seemed that thought-provoking and colorful bulletin boards would
just materialize on their own accord for Lucy. Because her apprenticeship of observation did not
provide the full view, Lucy often failed to recognize that vibrant displays were dependent on budgets,
student work, and the careful attention of the school librarian. In addition, Lucy seemed to
romanticize about how students would respond to freedom and autonomy when they were incorporated
into school library spaces.
Preparation Program
The curriculum of the participants’ preparation program implicitly provided the majority of
preparation for school librarianship through the School of Library and Information Science; the school
required 39 credit hours to complete their Master’s degree program. In addition, participants were
required to take between twelve and fifteen credit hours from the School of Education. Ultimately, all
participants claimed that their graduate programs in library science or their classes in the School of
Education did not prepare them for their work as school librarians, and two of the participants believed
that the useful curriculum from their 39 credit hours could be rolled in to one three credit hour course.
Two of the participants expressed the desire to have more vocational support to teach the practical
skills needed to manage school libraries.
Lucy and Izzie did not feel like their graduate programs developed their identities as teachers
or school librarians. Ginger, on the other hand, believed she figuratively became a teacher when she
learned the behind the scenes work of teachers in her Information Inquiry for School Teachers course,
specifically incorporating standards into lesson plans. Lucy also mentioned Information Inquiry for
School Teachers as being the best course in her library science coursework, but she noted that none of
her graduate coursework pushed her to perceive school librarians as teachers. Instead, graduate school
furthered Lucy’s idea that her professors, due to their superior education and experience, had the
answers to questions about school librarianship. Likewise, learning about the construction and design
144

	  

of lesson plans was a valuable aspect of Izzie’s experience in Information Inquiry for School Teachers.
But it was not entirely a positive learning experience. Because the professor made it clear that there
was only one way to be a school librarian – and there was not room for negotiation (if Izzie wanted to
pass the course) – Izzie believed her professor intimidated her to the point that she lost her confidence
to create her own professional identity. Instead, she felt forced to adopt, or at least pay lip service,
to the professional identity that her professor espoused. Based on their description of their classes, it
appears that all the Library and Information Science courses operated within the Academic Paradigm of
Preparation Programs, except for Information Inquiry for School Teachers. This course appeared to
embrace a more Behavioristic Paradigm, despite it being a class on inquiry.
While all participants pointed to Information Inquiry for School Teachers as providing a
foundation for their understanding of the collaborative role school librarians played in schools, none
expressed that library school provided them with vital components that preparation programs often
give to their students. First, none of them expressed the ability to teach their content knowledge.
Two participants seemed unclear about what the content knowledge of school librarians should be.
Second, no participants mentioned their preparation programs providing them with the skills to
develop, stretch, or revise their educational philosophies at this stage in their occupational
socialization. Third, no participants claimed that library school aided their vision of a model school
library program; all pointed out that their coursework did not socialize them to understand how to
create model library programs from scratch. Two participants were unprepared for the advocacy work
of school librarians; they believed that they should not have to explain the benefits of a certified
school librarian or a healthy library program. Fourth, none of them claimed to observe expert school
librarians in action or students learning in action. Fifth, neither the School of Library and Information
Science or the School of Education fostered the participants’ understanding of the culture of schools or
how to negotiate conflict with their peers or administrators within that culture. Consequently, these
perceived missing components limited the novices in developing their own healthy, professional
dispositions to help them relate to others in the school milieu. The disposition they all seemed to
adopt (or, in Lucy’s case, already had) was silent allegiance to superiors during disagreements.
According to the participants, just one course provided them with the idea that school
145

	  

librarians needed to collaborate with other teachers, write lesson plans based on standards, and
develop and manage collections. Outside of this single course, the participants expressed some role
confusion related to school librarianship. Where should they place their efforts? What were the
obligations of their work? The school setting appeared to offer very few opportunities for them to
make sense of their academic, theoretical training.
Student Teaching
Despite the symbolic transition from student to teacher that student teaching signals, only two
participants completed their student teaching experiences before their critical events as novice school
librarians. Ginger’s student teaching experience was a six-week placement in an elementary school.
Ginger arrived at student teaching having already answered the question, “Is there a place for me as a
school librarian?”, with a resounding yes (Danielewicz, 2001). Even though she felt confident that
there was a place for her in the profession, Ginger’s student teaching experience was still full of
questions about her role and whether she was doing it correctly (Danielewicz, 2001).
Lucy’s student teaching experience consisted of two placements, each six weeks. Her first
placement was in a middle school setting, and the second was in one of the elementary schools in the
same corporation. Lucy went through the traditional stages of questioning defined by Danielewicz
(2001) in regards to her student teaching placements.
For both novices, student teaching went beyond surviving to actually extending outward forms
of their teaching practices, much more than the inward forms of teaching. This prevented these
participants from having the opportunity to develop the internal habits of mind that student teaching
could have afforded. Ginger and Lucy claimed to accept specific responsibilities during their student
teaching. These are summarized in table fifteen. The “P” stands for partial understanding and the “F”
stands for fully grasping the concept.

146

	  

Table 15
Responsibilities Realized by Student Teachers
Student teacher
“Learn to hear, formulate and
articulate…own questions
about…experience of teaching”
(Grumet, 1978, p. 26)
“…accept the authority of mentor
teachers” (Danielewicz, 2001, p. 37)
“…develop authority in order to be
teachers in placements (Danielewicz,
2001, p. 37).
“…negotiate…, construct…, and
consent… to identity as teacher”
(Britzman, 2003, p. 221).
“…develop… productive working
relationship[s] with cooperating
teachers” (Knowles & Cole, 1996. p.
659)
“… act upon intellectual initiative”
(Dewey, 1904, p. 27)
Critically discuss teaching…and “the
educational results obtained”
(Dewey, 1904, p. 27)
“…judge [teaching] critically, to find
out… in what respects [she] has
succeeded and in what failed, and to
find the probable reasons for both
failure and success…”(Dewey, 1904,
p. 27)

Ginger
F

Lucy
F

F

F

F

F

F

P

F

F

F

F

P

P

P

P

While both Ginger and Lucy were able to discuss their teaching practices critically with their
first librarian mentor and university supervisor, Lucy’s second placement did not appear to provide her
with a mentor who thought critically about her own practice, let alone Lucy’s. During student
teaching, both Ginger and Lucy could articulate when teaching successes and failures occurred;
however, they were less successful in identifying the reasons behind the successes and failures.
Neither Ginger nor Lucy felt comfortable assessing the educational results of their teaching or
other aspects of their librarianship. Perhaps this was because their librarian mentors were not involved
in assessing student work and did not provide sufficient opportunities for them to practice evaluating.
Both Ginger and Lucy were comfortable with informal assessments to gauge if students were paying
attention; however, they were not confident in considering multiple ways to assess student acquisition
of information literacy skills. Furthermore, they were unsure of which assessment would be most
appropriate to the teaching method or end result desired.
Ginger never complained about her student teaching placement. Instead, she valued the
opportunity to see a fully functioning, fully collaborative school library. Lucy also never complained,
147

	  

but she did ask to meet with her university supervisor about her elementary school librarian mentor’s
actions. Lucy’s high standards for professional maturity brought about some discomfort when she
overheard her mentor bad-mouthing certain teachers to other teachers regularly during their lunch
hour. During an off-campus meeting with her university supervisor, Lucy explained her discomfort and
asked for advice about how to take the high road when her mentor was not. Lucy was successful in
keeping her professional dignity throughout a few difficult moments with her mentor; she never
participated in the gossip. At the same time, she managed to avoid any conflict with her mentor in
regards to the lunchtime behavior.
Even when asked directly during interviews for this study, neither Ginger nor Lucy paid much
attention to the role or impact of their university supervisor. For both, their university supervisor was
also the researcher posing the questions during the interviews. The dual role could have affected their
willingness to provide critical feedback about the university supervisor’s work. Or, perhaps because
the university supervisor only met with them formally three times (once before their placements and at
two instructional observations), the university supervisor provided very few, if any, contributions to
the participants’ practice.
Ginger completed her student teaching experience with a clear, separate identity from her
mentor as teaching librarian. She incorporated her interests in dance, and taught by incorporating
movement throughout her body that complemented her oral teaching. Ginger embodied the transition
from student to teacher during this stage of her occupational socialization. Lucy’s teaching identity
was less clear. In fact, she claimed that she did not identify or classify herself as teacher or a librarian
after her completion of her student teaching placements.
First Year
Carter and Doyle (1996) describe the process of becoming a teacher in three steps. First the
novice transforms her identity to teacher; second, she adapts her personal ideals of her work to what is
realistic within the constraints of the school; and third, she develops a confidence in her selfexpression during teaching. Ginger was the only participant who did not struggle with her identity as
teacher. Lucy mentioned only two factors that spoke to her teaching-librarian identity. The first was
her name on the library’s door, and the second was her biweekly paycheck. Lucy claimed that if her
148

	  

first year and a half in the profession were her only experiences, she would never have “become” a
teacher or a librarian. Even though Izzie knew that she had the credentials and the abilities, she
allowed her role as “library clerk” to interfere with her identity as teacher and librarian.
All participants adapted their personal ideals to the perceived reality they encountered in their
schools. Ginger recognized her non-Navajo status but attempted to build common ground with her
Navajo students. She shared her interests in traditional dances with them. When they talked about
Navajo magic, Ginger assured them she experienced traditional magic while living on the Polynesian
Islands. She did not adapt, however, to embrace the clerical role that the school demanded she fill.
Instead, she tried to perform the roles the school wanted her to perform as clerk while simultaneously
performing her work as teacher. Lucy came to understand that she was a token school librarian to help
the school maintain its accreditation. Nonetheless, she also used the accreditation process to try to
advocate for a strong school library program. Lucy recognized there was no budget for materials or
supplies; thus, she raised funds for books through grant writing or provided funds from her own
resources. Perhaps at great cost to her personally, Lucy also accepted the institutional reality that her
role as an interior decorator was the priority in her particular school above all other responsibilities of
school librarianship. Conversely, Izzie did not appear to adapt to the institutional realities. Instead,
she constantly worked as a change agent. She was successful at changing teachers’ notions of
collaboration and the role of a librarian. She attempted to change the institutional realities of her
constraints in a clerical role by communicating with and educating her administrator about the reasons
why he should reinstate the school librarian position.
While Ginger remained self-conscious about her abilities, she had developed an effective way
to express herself as a school librarian. She adapted her form of self-expression as a librarian from her
identity as dancer and dance teacher. Both Lucy and Izzie found effective ways to express themselves
to students during one-on-one interactions; however, during their first year as school librarians, neither
resolved the discomfort they felt with expressing themselves during large-group teaching. One word
captures how the participants’ first years in school libraries influenced their impressions of teaching as
a life vocation: “struggle”. Table sixteen summarizes the numerous struggles that each of the
participants experienced.
149

	  

Table 16
Struggles Participants Experienced During First Year of Teaching
Ginger
Struggled to get faculty at Red Rock
to embrace her role as a teaching
librarian;
Struggled to convince faculty to
collaborate with her;
Struggled to balance her clerical and
teaching responsibilities;
Struggled with her identity as
devalued, non-Navajo, outsider; and

Struggled to communicate her needs
with school personnel.

Lucy
Struggled to develop a strong
collection that she could proudly
encourage students and teachers to
use;
Struggled to create an appealing
environment in the library without a
supply budget;
Struggled to communicate to her
administrators that her role as school
librarian offered more important
functions than they envisioned;
Struggled to change the scheduling
process established by clerical staff
to creative a collaborative
environment; and
Struggled with her professional
identity and whether she belonged in
the profession.

Izzie
Struggled to teach information
literacy using exciting methods;
Struggled to be seen as an equal to
teachers instead of how the job
description defined her;
Struggled to redefine the
stereotypical role of school librarians
that teachers and administrators
projected onto her;
Struggled to convince district school
librarians of her strategic belief that
her performance in a clerical role
would be instrumental in the
restatement of the librarian position;
and
Struggled to convince the principal to
reinstate her position.

At the end of this research study, it was difficult to know if the aftermath of the “struggle” impression
would continue to plague the lives of these school librarians (Gold, 1996). Because all participants
moved to different schools or positions after their critical events, it appears more likely that their own
initiative to leave their professional circumstances helped to lessen/lift their negative impressions over
time. Perhaps the study also served as an intervention.
Lucy was the only participant who had a formal teaching mentor in her first year as a school
librarian. Her mentor was an English teacher who was passionate about the role of libraries in schools
and communities. Her enthusiasm and confident advocacy appeared to make Lucy uncomfortable
because Lucy struggled with both. No participants had formal school librarian mentors to provide
support for their work or emotions. Administrators did not play a positive role in the socialization of
any of the participants.
Counselors or group support systems could have benefited all of the participants, but they were
not integrated into any of the participants’ first year induction experiences. All participants remained
focused on themselves during their critical events, and they only rarely moved their thinking to
teaching practices and student learning. Ginger, during the trauma of her critical event, felt
something akin to a psychotic episode. There was no professional or group available to talk through
her feelings. Lucy occasionally referred to her university supervisor as her professional counselor, and
150

	  

once formally introduced her to others in that way. It was as if Lucy recognized she needed a
counselor, but substituted her university supervisor in that role. Perhaps Izzie could have benefited
from a professional counselor or group to recover from the harsh criticism of her university supervisor,
and to recognize her positive contributions to the school library. In addition, after her critical event,
Izzie plunged into a depression related to her failure to convince her principal to reinstate her position.
Izzie needed a counselor or a group support system to help her move forward in the profession, instead
of believing that she was a failure.
Creation of Professional Identities
Gold (1996) articulates the importance of the first year of teaching in shaping the identities of
educators. The critical events of novice teachers – and the ways in which the novices feel about and
respond to them – leave an imprint in their hearts and minds. Later, during similar moments, novice
teachers call upon previous memories and apply similar feelings, actions, and ways of thinking. If the
imprinting is negative in the first year, it is difficult for educators to ever break the cycle of negative
thinking and negative (re)actions.
Both Lucy’s and Izzie’s critical events occurred during their first year in the profession;
Ginger’s critical event occurred at the end of her first year as a certified school librarian – two years
into her professional career as a school librarian. Because these critical events took place early in the
participants’ careers, it was important to understand how the participants defined their professional
identities in relationship to them. This study scrutinizes Ginger’s, Lucy’s, and Izzie’s identity claims to
find similarities and differences in the novice school librarians’ formation of identity based upon their
critical events. While their narratives were markedly different, four related identity claims existed in
two or more cases: (1) identity claims related to professional impact; (2) identity claims related to
professional respect; (3) identity claims related to leadership; (4) identity claims related to
professional confidence.
First, identity claims related to professional impact appeared in both Ginger’s and Izzie’s
critical event narratives. In Ginger’s narrative, she presented herself as someone of worth who was
equipped to make a difference in her school. She named the people she could affect: students,
teachers, and all the people in the world. Her narrative also pointed to places and ways she
151

	  

ambitiously made a difference in her work. After the critical event, Ginger continued to believe that
she could and would make a difference in her professional life – just in a different school. Before
Izzie’s critical event, she too believed she could make a difference in schools as a visionary school
librarian. But Izzie quickly altered this identity claim, when, after her critical event, Izzie lost
confidence in her ability to impact others. When novices experience critical events that affect their
identities as capable contributors to the educational environment, according to Gold (1996), it is
possible that for the remainder of their careers they no longer have the drive to attempt to educate or
stimulate others. This could have detrimental affects on a library program, student learning, and other
educators’ beliefs about the value of school librarians. Consequently, it could severely affect the
emotional state of the school librarians, especially if they have a difficult time separating themselves
from their work.
Second, Ginger and Lucy both expressed identity claims related to respect in their critical
events narratives. In her narrative, Ginger emerged as someone who recognized that she deserved
professional respect; this identity claim occurred frequently throughout her narrative. However, in
spite of her own recognition for what she deserved, her narrative describes how, on multiple occasions,
she did not receive the professional respect she was due from teachers, technology staff,
administration, or community members. In contrast, Lucy never had an identity claim that she
deserved professional respect. However, Lucy’s narrative also often recognized the lack of respect
that clerical staff, some teachers, and administration had for her work. They clearly did not value it.
Without the belief that one deserves respect, it is difficult to ever receive it. For a school librarian
who (re)defines herself as others see her, a social, psychological concept called the looking-glass self,
she may never feel professionally respected or deserving of it. Thus, it would be difficult to demand
professional status; it would also be difficult to defend the work of librarians or the value of libraries.
In an educational era that greatly needs school librarian advocacy, this nullification of respect could
have severe consequences for school librarians and their students. This could include replacing
librarians with clerks or eliminating positions.
Third, all three participants’ narratives discussed their beliefs about administrators as leader
after their critical events. For both Ginger and Lucy, their critical events taught them that they should
152

	  

question authority privately. Izzie’s narrative takes that idea a little further by claiming that as a
school librarian, she could no longer trust people in leadership. Because school librarians need strong
relationships with their principals, these beliefs could harm the ability of school librarians to emerge as
educational partners. Because people tend to avoid those who cannot be trusted, this distrust toward
administrators might prevent school librarians from ever even approaching principals to discuss
instruction, programs, or program needs.
Fourth, after their critical events, Lucy and Izzie expressed numerous times throughout their
narratives that they were not confident. While Lucy experienced some confidence development during
student teaching, she was rarely afforded confidence-building opportunities in her first year as a school
librarian. She needed instructional feedback; she needed encouragement and professional mentoring.
Furthermore, she continued to struggle with confidence as a novice school librarian more than a year
after her critical event. Izzie, on the other hand, identified as a confident professional before her
critical event. Even though she experienced a great deal of professional uncertainty related to her
professor’s harsh and personal criticism, she had volunteered in her school enough that she believed
she knew how to operate the school library. Actually, she believed she could operate it a great deal
better than the previous school librarian. After her critical event, Izzie lost and struggled to regain her
professional confidence, which could affect every aspect of a novice school librarian’s professional life.
Without confidence, it is difficult to experiment with new technologies or teaching styles. Lessons can
grow stale; duties can go undone. A lack of confidence can accelerate negative self-fulfilling
prophecies and damage a school librarian’s outlook and, ultimately, career.
Implications for Theory
The Vulnerability Thesis
In a number of ways Callahan’s (1962) historical account of “the extreme weakness and
vulnerability” of American administrators during the first three decades of the 20th century mirrors
that of modern day American public school librarians (p. ii). This is especially true for the participants
in this study. This section first explores a number of Callahan’s (1962) characteristics of
administrators’ vulnerability that the participants in this study embody. Then, I follow by discussing

153

	  

ways in which the participants reveal vulnerability beyond Callahan’s (1962) definition. To conclude
this section, I point out how Callahan’s (1962) vulnerability thesis should be expanded.
Callahan (1962) described the characteristics that made school administrators vulnerable in the
first three decades of the 20th century. First, administrators were responsible for managing school
budgets, and they were often criticized about how they spent school funds. Second, external sources
defined and evaluated the work of administrators. Third, when superiors did not support the
administrators’ work, they fired them. These factors created a great amount of turnover in these
positions; ultimately, it created a culture of professional fear. Administrators’ vulnerability, Callahan
theorized, forced them to make decisions in their personal best interests, for the sake of job security,
instead of the best interests of students.
The novice school librarian participants in this study articulated a number of similarities with
these administrators of the past. First, the school librarians were responsible, although on a smaller
scale, for managing library book and supply budgets (Ginger and Izzie). Second, their work was defined
and evaluated by external sources. Third, these school librarians reported feeling little, if any, job
security.
In addition to these similarities, this study reveals that other conditions surrounding the work
of the participants created a greater level of occupational vulnerability than that of Callahan’s (1962)
administrators. Callahan believed that because administrators’ roles were defined and evaluated by
superintendents, parents, community members, and ultimately school boards that they experienced
high levels of vulnerability. However, these multiple sources often agreed on what the role of the
administrator should be: the management of a productive, efficient schoolhouse. If administrators
wanted good evaluations, they yielded to the pressure of these sources.
As discussed in chapter one of this study, the role of school librarians is also defined externally.
These external sources include their professional organization (AASL), professors in their preparation
programs, their school administrators, teachers, and writers of public policy. Unlike Callahan’s (1962)
administrators, the participants of this study did not have the luxury of their external sources agreeing
on what their work should entail, nor could their job description be summarized by two simple
adjectives. Even members from these external groups (i.e. writers of public policy) cannot agree
154

	  

whether school librarians are support for instruction or actual teachers.
Unlike the administrators in Callahan’s (1962) study, the school librarians in this study only had
administrators as their evaluators. If they were not fulfilling their administrators’ expectations, the
administrators could eliminate the school librarians’ positions. This promotes a greater vulnerability
for school librarians than that of the 20th century administrators because only one voice determines the
fate of school librarians. In contrast, the administrators had a system of checks and balances. For
example, if the school board hated the administrator, a supportive community could still save his job
and advocate on his behalf. In this way, what Callahan (1962) defined as a contributor to vulnerability
actually could strengthen the stability of the positions of administrators. Callahan (1962) reported that
professional conflicts resulted in considerable job instability for school administrators. Indeed, it was
rare for school administrators to spend their careers in one location. Yet, while Callahan (1962)
discussed the high turnover, the school boards were replacing administrators rather than eliminating
the positions from the schools altogether.
While the school librarians in this study expressed their exasperation caused by a lack of job
security, their vulnerability was due to more than just professional conflicts. For Ginger, part of her
lack of job security was tied to not being Navajo. Without that cultural/national identity, Ginger could
never feel secure. In addition, the school never budgeted for a school librarian before, so it was not an
expected or prioritized position. Lucy realized soon after her hire that her position was only added to
the faculty for school’s accreditation review. Before her hire, the school librarian position had
remained empty after a librarian’s retirement. Consequently, Lucy’s position was not considered a
priority. Based on the conditions of her hire, it was difficult to imagine that the school would continue
her employment once the accreditation review was over. Izzie’s job security was based upon her
administrator’s hints that he might reinstate the school librarian position. While hopeful, Izzie learned
from the beginning that he was not known for his straightforward, honest communication. In addition,
the principal did not create a formally established librarian position during her term. As such, she
knew that the absence of a formally established position for Izzie meant that no one would ever give
her a sense of job security.

155

	  

Even with conditions I reveal in the study that exacerbated the school librarians’ instability,
there was more to what contributed to the participants’ sense of instability in their work. The school
librarians held their positions during an economic recession. School librarian positions across the
United States were being eliminated or retirees were not being replaced. This influenced the
participants’ perspectives of their job security.
Another factor that created vulnerability for the school librarians is the predominately female
nature of the employees in the profession. Librarianship was built on a foundation of service, which is
often attributed to the female gender (Harris, 1992). Service defines the very nature of their work:
students approach school librarians when they have an information need. However, school librarians
rarely hand over answers. Instead, they serve as information guides. Once school librarians ascertain
students’ information needs, they teach students critical thinking, searching, and analysis skills. These
skills enable students to find answers to their questions in that moment and into the future.
In contrast, school administration had a male-gendered orientation, which averted further
vulnerability during the first three decades of the 20th century. Instead of an orientation toward
service, the foundation of school administration was leadership. The role was paternalistic in nature
because students and teachers expected the administration to know what was best for the schoolhouse
and to make decisions accordingly. School administrators were expected to know the answers, and
they did not often reveal their thinking, planning, or decision-making process. Their subordinates
rarely learned how to make decisions on their own. Instead, because of the ways in which
administrators’ work was structured, schools remained dependent on administrators to lead.
Callahan’s (1962) scholarship as an educational historian explains how school administrators in
the first three decades of the 20th century responded to their occupational vulnerability: by acting
against their students’ best interests. Administrators prioritized external opinion as a starting place
for professional decisions, instead of student learning. Ultimately, administrators choose to
compromise their professional ethics in order to keep their jobs. When the school boards told them to
do something, the majority of them did it to save their positions. This phenomenon became known as
Callahan’s (1962) vulnerability thesis.
This study suggests, however, that it is imprudent to apply Callahan’s (1962) vulnerability
156

	  

thesis in its original form for all professions that experience the conditions he articulated. Not all
types of professions succumb to external pressure by acting outside of their professional values,
despite what some scholars have claimed. For example, Ginger and Izzie experienced a greater sense
of occupational vulnerability than Callahan’s administrators. Yet when pressured by their
administrators, both novice school librarians refused to adopt values that would negatively impact their
students or the status of their work. In the beginning of Ginger’s professional work, she attempted to
adopt the roles and responsibilities that were expected of her, while also completing the tasks and
participating in the activities she believed contributed to student learning. When ultimately she felt
forced to choose between what appeared to her as conflicting interests, she resigned from her
position. Izzie experienced a different type of pressure from her administrator. After being groomed
for the school librarian position, Izzie agreed to a temporary clerk position until the school librarian
position could be reinstated. The moment she realized that her administrator’s intentions were to
have a professional librarian work for clerical pay and status, Izzie resigned to maintain her
professional integrity and the status of certified school librarians. Even though her response was
delayed, Lucy also ultimately refused to continue adopting the practices and values demanded by her
administrators that negatively impacted her students. While some may question Lucy’s delayed
response, it is perhaps her decision that evidenced the greatest bravery. Lucy was the only school
librarian in the study who did not have a partner with a secure position that could support her
unemployment. Lucy packed her bags at the end of the school year and moved back to the Midwest.
She had no leads for employment and no partner with stable employment. Eventually, Lucy
determined that a paycheck was not worth abandoning her professional ethics.
This study suggests that Callahan’s (1962) vulnerability thesis, in its original state, cannot apply
to all professionals who experience vulnerability, even extreme vulnerability well beyond what
Callahan’s administrators experienced. Based on the findings of this study, I recommend the expansion
of the study of occupational vulnerability to also consider gender, national identity, role models,
academic preparation, economic conditions, and the nature of the occupation.
As is, the thesis best applies to occupations centered on the expectations of decisive leadership
and power that ultimately fall prey to external pressures instead of occupations whose missions are to
157

	  

serve the public. This study indicates that novice school librarians, with a strong professional service
orientation, displayed great strength in spite of their critical events. They exhibited this strength
further when they refused to adopt the practices and values demanded by their superiors.
Cultural Myths
Britzman (1986) argues that cultural myths found in the narratives of teachers provide “order,
control, and certainty” in school environments that feel quite the opposite (p. 448). Novices adopt
these cultural myths about teaching, and they shape their actions and beliefs about the nature of their
work. The myths elevate teachers as experts or heroes who are independent and self-sufficient.
However, when novices adopt these myths, the adoption inadvertently serves to protect the interests
of those in power — those who benefit from the order, control, and certainty.
The participants and their audiences/focus groups identified a number of cultural myths and
assumptions that the critical event narratives reproduced. The common myths and assumptions,
shared among the participants, related to (1) the status of school librarians and the (2) qualifications
and authority of administrators. First, in all three critical event narratives, the participants indicated
that their administrators, including principals and superintendents, operated under the assumption
that school librarians were clerical, support staff. At the time of their hire, all of the school librarians
operated under an opposite assumption: that their role was professional and that they should be
considered a valued member of the teaching faculty. While all participants could admit some aspects
of their work would be clerical, they believed that their professional work was of greater importance.
The conflicting assumptions about the nature of school librarians’ work mirror how Apple
(1986) defines the work of educators. The clerical, support staff role that administrators assigned to
them situated the participants with a working class identity. This identity was in direct conflict with
the professional identity that resided in the petty bourgeoisie class for which their preparation
programs and student teaching experiences prepared them. According to Apple (1986), their
contradictory statuses caused them to produce contradictory actions. Apple’s (1992) theory contends
that when educators are embracing working class identities, they consequently reproduce the cultural
myths or assumptions that guide their labor practices.
In the cases of Ginger and Izzie, both worked to balance their petty bourgeoisie status with
158

	  

their working class status. Both experienced a great deal of autonomy in their positions; thus, they
were able to silently prioritize the professional work identified with petty bourgeoisie status.
However, when both of their administrators made it clear that the future of their work and status
would necessarily be clerical with working class status, both Ginger and Izzie immediately resigned
from their positions. Both refused to reproduce the cultural assumption that school librarian work is
clerical, even though their administrators demanded that the assumption should guide their labor
processes (Apple, 1982).
These moments, in which their administrators made these demands, became the critical events
about which Ginger and Izzie wrote their narratives. This commonality between their critical events
was not by chance. Their occupational socialization before their critical events had strongly ensconced
them in the petty bourgeoisie. They refused work that formally placed them in any other class, even if
they needed a paycheck.
Ginger and Izzie also shared a strong desire to change the minds of others about the work and
value of school librarians, which could explain their refusals to be typecast as clerical workers.
Perhaps when their administrators demanded that they each adopt a clerical role within the school,
they realized their incapacity to change their present workplace. Instead, their administrators’
demands became a symbol for a dead-end job. Both Ginger and Izzie quickly terminated their
employment at their respective schools, then immediately looked for and found different work.
In contrast to Ginger and Izzie, Lucy adopted the cultural assumption that administrators’
demands should guide her labor processes. When they conveyed their expectations that her duties
would include answering phones, rearranging posters, and printing and posting informational signage,
she embraced them. She replaced the important work she desired or felt called to do (i.e. collection
management and teaching), with only internal protests. It was easier for Lucy to inhabit a working
class occupational role instead of insisting that her administrator recognize her professional
background. Lucy worked another full year after her administrators demanded that she prioritize the
tasks accorded to a clerical and thus more working-class position, because she needed a paycheck.
The second cultural assumption present in all three critical event narratives was related to
their superiors. Ginger’s narrative conveyed that superiors do not care for their subordinates; Lucy’s
159

	  

narrative furthered the idea that people in power are terrible leaders; and Izzie’s narrative claimed
that superiors take advantage of their subordinates. At first glance, these cultural assumptions appear
to contradict Britzman’s (1986) format for cultural myths and assumptions because the myths she
articulated serve to create a master narrative with teacher as the lone hero. Upon further analysis,
two of Britzman’s (1986) myths about teaching are implicitly reflected in the participants’ cultural
assumptions related to their superiors including (1) “everything depends upon the teacher”; and (2)
“teachers are self-made” (p. 448). These myths steer the attention away from the administrators and
instead onto how the assumptions affected the school librarians. For example, when superiors are
terrible leaders who do not care for their subordinates, school librarians are often left to make
themselves. Also, when people in power take advantage of subordinates, everything seems to depend
upon the school librarian.
One of the cultural assumptions that Ginger’s narrative expressed was in direct conflict,
however, to Britzman’s myths (1986). Ginger’s narrative furthered the idea that once a superior makes
a decision, the conversation is over. Unlike Britzman’s (1986) cultural myth that “teachers are selfmade,” Ginger’s narrative reinforces that those in power define the practice of educators. While
Britzman claims that master narratives secure the ideological interests of those in power, the one
Ginger defined better illustrates a greater sense of protection for those in power by minimizing the
status of school librarians.
While the critical event narratives of the school librarians capture the essence of Britzman’s
(1986) cultural assumptions, the results are not as Britzman (2003) predicts. She believes that
dominant cultural myths created a master narrative of teacher as hero. However, the teaching stories
of school librarians have never developed a dominant (albeit fictionalized) narrative about the value or
heroic nature of their work. Accordingly, not one of the participants’ critical event narratives
furthered the idea that school librarians were heroes. In contrast, their narratives revealed that school
librarians were often pawns in the hands of administrators. Not one of their narratives ended happily.
Not one school librarian overcame all of the obstacles to become a successful, respected teaching
librarian. However, it is important to note that at the time of this study the participants’ professional
narratives were still unfolding. All of them ended their employment where their critical events took
160

	  

place, and each reported taking the opportunity to make alterations to her practice and/or
professional identity in her new place of employment.
Implications for Further Research
This study recontextualizes occupational vulnerability through contemporary case studies that,
in turn, calls into question some previously held theories about the mythologizing of long-standing
cultural notions regarding teachers and librarians. However, this study suggests only a small part of
what scholars need to know to understand the occupational vulnerability that exists for school
librarians. While this study reveals that the school librarians with a service orientation did not neatly
fit within the confines of the vulnerability thesis, other trained school librarians have adopted a strong,
professional identity as a leader. How do their practices relate to the vulnerability thesis? How do
they respond to external pressures?
While this study included the analysis of professional identities related to school librarians’
critical events, an analysis that explores the relationships between professional identities and
occupational vulnerability during occupational socialization would help provide a more robust
trajectory for understanding when and how students of library science begin to acquire an unconscious
persona of leader or servant—or perhaps an unorthodox hybrid. Which professional identities and
practices reduce occupational vulnerability on a local level? Which professional identities and
practices magnify occupational vulnerability?
Britzman (1986) criticizes teachers’ adoption of cultural myths, and she provides an
explanation for how cultural myths negatively impact novice and expert teachers. Britzman also
concludes that cultural myths inappropriately elevate teachers as experts with specialized knowledge
or, even more, as heroes. While a culture suffers obvious drawbacks when it adopt myths that secure
the patriarchal configuration of schools, these same myths might simultaneously elevate or protect the
work of teachers - at least in the minds of those outside of public schools. Ultimately, is it possible
that because these cultural myths exist in America, teaching positions are more secure? After all, it is
difficult for politicians, Departments of Education, and even school boards to eliminate traditional
teaching positions that the general public believes has specialized knowledge or heroic qualities. An

161

	  

intensive scholarly understanding of the interplay of cultural myths and novice librarians may elucidate
the benefits of these myths in mitigating or eliminating occupational vulnerability.
Implications for Practice
As discussed in chapter one, AASL has recently placed a greater emphasis on advocacy on
behalf of school librarians. School librarian lobbyists work to gain support from local and national
politicians. AASL has promoted the profession’s new job title, and slowly professionals are embracing
the old name of school librarian. AASL is also working toward consistent expectations for the job
description of school librarians. However, this study reveals that the status of a school librarian’s
position and his or her ensuing job security remain persistently threatened.
Rethinking School Librarian Certification
The novice school librarians in this study claimed that they were not prepared for their roles as
school librarians. While this is a common complaint educators have about their preparation program,
the typical school librarian will attend a preparation program after receiving a degree in education and
having a teaching career. This potentially makes novices more prepared for their work as teaching
librarians. However, the participants in this study did not have typical educational backgrounds.
Instead, they had no previous teaching experience or academic background in education. It is difficult
to imagine that 12-15 credit hours in education followed by student teaching could ever create
prepared teacher-librarians – let alone instructional leaders or instructional designers. Is this highlyranked School of Library and Information Science’s model - to earn a teaching credential while also
completing a degree in library science - one that sets novice school librarians up for failure? What does
this fast-track to certification say to pre-service school librarians about teaching?
Using Autobiographical Narratives
This study revealed the importance of writing autobiographical narratives not only to reflect
upon one’s professional practice and philosophy, but to assess and achieve closure after a critical
event. Participants expressed feelings of freedom from the tether of regret and reproach that their
critical events imposed. Their writing and sharing of their stories legitimized their feelings and even
legitimized one participant’s job. Librarian preparation and professional development programs should
incorporate autobiographical writing into their curricula. Not only can reading biographies help pre162

	  

service librarians learn about the nature of their future work, writing narratives provide librarians of
all levels of experience an opportunity to establish professional identities and practice reflexivity.
Preventing Isolation
The isolation of novice school librarians prevents their growth, development, and occupational
socialization. I believe that the present configurations of online communities and professional
conferences do not provide the intimate, reciprocal relationships that librarians greatly need during
the most influential year of their professional careers in school librarianship. Preparation programs
could enable future school librarians the selection of a practitioner sponsor early in the plan of study.
The relationship could extend through student teaching and into the first few years of practice. This
system could use Alcoholics Anonymous’ practice of Sponsorship as its guide. In short, school librarians
would have ready access to a sponsor in times of professional crisis.
In addition, school librarian preparation programs could extend academic coursework through
online, face to face, or hybrid programs into the first year of practice. This approach would keep
school librarians connected to university mentors and other school librarians during the most influential
year of their professional careers in school librarianship. It would also stimulate the knowledge of
professors working in the professional programs. Instead of having a distant and outdated relationship
with librarianship as a practice, this extension could help professors keep their preparation program
curriculum relevant by forcing them to correlate it directly to their students’ experiences in a
professional position.
Another concern is the isolation of school librarians during their preparation programs. This
isolation may not be detrimental for pre-service school librarians who have experience as teachers
working alongside administrators. But those librarians who lack this experience must gain confidence
within the hierarchy of authority in a school. Likewise, it is important for school administrators to
understand the work and social setting of school librarians during their preparation programs. More
collaboration between school librarian preparation programs and school leader preparation programs
should exist to build a better relationship between the two professions.

163

	  

Conclusion
Just last week, I received a call from Ginger. She had summer travel plans that took her back
through Red Rock, and she decided to make an appointment with her former supervisor. Two years
after Ginger’s critical event, they met again for the first time since Ginger’s resignation. Ginger
bravely told her supervisor what she experienced as the high school librarian, and Ginger posed
thoughtful questions about her principal’s choices. After an hour, Ginger walked away from the school,
this time with dignity. Ginger reminded me that we rarely forget our critical events. The bravest
among us still address our feelings related to our critical events in positive and productive ways.
Ginger believes that because of this study, her most vulnerable moments as a school librarian will not
define her professional life.
At the end of my coursework, I have personally witnessed portions of and heard a great deal
about the occupational socialization of three novice school librarians. What their socialization
experiences have taught me was that in spite of extreme vulnerability, they did not do what the
majority of school administrators did in the early decades of the 20th century: succumb to external
pressure. Instead, when they realized that they could do no more to alter their work conditions, they
resigned from their positions. If endangered species are dependent at all upon the strength or
character of the species to survive in spite of great vulnerability, perhaps there is a future for school
librarians in public schools in the United States.

164

	  

REFERENCES
(2002). An Act to Close the Achievement Gap with Accountability, Flexibility, and Choice,
So That No Child Is Left Behind. [Washington, D.C.]: U.S. G.P.O.
Abilock, D. (2007). Choosing assessments that matter. Knowledge Quest, 35(5), 8-12.
Adams, H. (2002). Evolution—past to present to future. Knowledge Quest, 30(5), 4-5.
American Association of School Librarians (AASL). (2009). Empowering learners: Guidelines for
school library media programs. Chicago, Ill.
American Association of School Librarians (AASL). (2010a). ALA/AASL standards for initial
preparation of school librarians. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/Sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/
schoollibrary/2010_standards_ with_ rubrics_and_statements_1-31-11.pdf
American Association of School Librarians (AASL). (2010b). ALA and AASL: Assuring quality in
school librarianship education programs. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/aasleducation/schoollibrary/schoollibrary
American Association of School Librarians (AASL). AASL. (2010c). Position statement of
instructional classification. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/advocacy/resources/position-statements/classification
Association for Indiana Media Educators (AIME). (2010). Education cuts hit librarians.
Inside [State] Business, Retrieved from
http://www.insideindianabusiness.com/newsitem.asp?ID=42381
American Library Association (ALA). (2010). AASL votes to adopt the professional title school
librarian. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/news/news/pressreleases2010/
january2010/adopt_aasl
American Library Association (ALA). (n.d.). ALA accredited programs. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/accreditedprograms/home
Ansel, C. (2009). [State] slashes education funding in the middle of school year. PSLweb.org.
Retrieved from http://www2.pslweb.org/site/News2?page= NewsArticle&id=13413&

165

	  

id=13413&news_iv_ctrl=1221
Apple, M. (1982). Education and power. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Apple, M. (1986). Teachers and texts: A political economy of class and gender relations in
education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Avi, A. (1990). The true confessions of Charlotte Doyle. New York: Orchard Books.
Beauchamp, C. and Thomas, L. (2009). Understanding teacher identity: An overview of issues
in the literature and implications for teacher education. Cambridge Journal of
Education, 39(2), 175-189.
Beauvoir, S. (1976). The ethics of ambiguity. New York: Kensington.
Bloom, L. (1998). Under the sign of hope: Feminist methodology and narrative interpretation.
New York: State University of New York.
Britzman, D. (1986). Cultural myths in the making of a teacher: Biography and social structure
in teacher education. Harvard Educational Review, 56(4), 442-456.
Britzman, D. P. (2003). Practice makes practice: a critical study of learning to teach. Rev. ed.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Bronstein, J. (2009). Current trends in library and information studies curricula. Libri. 59(2),
78-87.
Bullough, R. V. (1989). First-year teacher: A case study. New York: Teachers College Press.
Callahan, R. (1962). Education and the cult of efficiency: A study of the social forces that
have shaped the administration of the public schools. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Callison, D. (1998). History of the research issues related to school library media programs
and services 1925-1995. In K. H. Latrobe (Ed.), The emerging school library media
center: Historical issues and perspectives (pp. 91-136). Englewood,
CO: Libraries Unlimited.
Carr, D. (1986). Time, narrative and history. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Carter, K. and Doyle, W. (1996). Personal narrative and life history in learning to teach. In J.
Sikula (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Teacher Education (pp. 120-141). New York:
166

	  

Macmillan.
Case, R. N., & Lowrey, A. Mary. (1973). Behavioral requirements analysis checklist: a
compilation of competency-based job functions and task statements for school
library media personnel. [Chicago: American Library Association].
Certain, C. Carl. (1920). Standard library organization and equipment for secondary schools of
different sizes: Report of the Committee on Library Organization and Equipment of
the National Education Association and of the North Central Association of Colleges
and Secondary Schools, C. C. Certain, chairman. Chicago: American Library
Association.
Chapman, D. W. & Green, M.S. (1986). Teacher retention: A further examination. Journal of
Educational Research, 79(5), 273-279.
Cherry, W. (2011). Working independently. Knowledge Quest, 40(2), 60-64.
Church, A. P. (2008). The instructional role of the library media specialist as perceived by
elementary school principals. School Library Media Research, 11.
Church, A. P., Dickinson, G. K., Everhart, N., & Howard, J. K. (2012). Competing standards in
the education of school librarians. Journal of Education for Library and Information
Studies, 53(3), 208-217.
Clark, S. & Corcoran, M. (1986). Perspectives on the professional socialization of women
faculty: A case of accumulative disadvantage? The Journal of Higher Education, 57(1),
20-43.
Cochran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. (1999). Relationship of knowledge and practice: Teacher
learning in communities. In A. Iran-Nejad & C. Pearson (Eds.), Review of research in
education (pp. 249-306). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Connelly, F. & Clandinin, D. (1990). Stories of experience and narrative inquiry. Educational
Researcher, 19(5), 2–14.
Council of the American Library Association (2008). Standards, process, policies, and
procedures (AP3). Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/accreditedprograms/standards
Craver, K. W. (1986). The changing instructional role of the high school library media
167

	  

specialist: 1950-84; a survey of professional literature, standards, and research
studies. School Library Media Quarterly, 14, 183-191.
Cravey, P. (1989). The occupational role identity and occupational role image of female
librarians in four traditional subspecialties of librarianship (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from Proquest. (303714059)
Danielewicz, J. (2001). Teaching selves: Identity, pedagogy, and teacher education. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Day, C. W., Kington, A., Stobart, G., & Sammons, P. (2006). The personal and professional
selves of teachers: Stable and unstable identities. British Educational Research
Journal, 32(4), 601-616.
Dennis, B. (2009). Re: dialogic performance analysis [Online lecture]. Retrieved from
https://oncourse.iu.edu/access/content/group/FA09-BL-EDUC-Y63011833/Class%20Notes/Class%20Session%2010%20dialogic%20performance%20
analysis.docx
Denzin, N. K. (2003). Performance ethnography: Critical pedagogy and the politics of culture.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dewey, J. (1904). The relation of theory to practice in education. In C.A. McMurry (Ed.), The
relation of theory to practice in the education of teachers (Third Yearbook of the
National Society for the Scientific Study of Education, Part I) (pp. 9-30). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Dilevko, J. (2009). The politics of professionalism: A retro-progressive proposal for
librarianship. Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press.
Elford, G. W. (2002). Beyond standardized testing: better information for school
accountability and management. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press.
Fagelson, W. (2001). Fighting films: The everyday tactics of world war II soldiers. Cinema
Journal, 40(3), 94-112.
Fedora, A. P. (1993). An exploration of the scheduling patterns of two exemplary elementary
school media centers [microform] / by Arabella P. Fedora. 1993.
168

	  

Feiman-Nemser, S. & Buchmann, M. (1987). When is student teaching teacher education?
Teaching and Teacher Education, 3(4), 255–73.
Flynn, T. (2006). Existentialism: A very short introduction. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Fuller, F. F. (1969). Concerns of teachers: A developmental conceptualization. American
Educational Research Journal, 6(2), 207-226.
Gann, L. (1998). School library media standards and guidelines: A review of their significance
and impact. In K. H. Latrobe (Ed.), The emerging school library media center:
Historical issues and perspectives (pp. 153-194). Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited,
Inc.
Gold, Y. (1996). Beginning teacher support: Attrition, mentoring, and induction. In G. A.
Griffin (Ed.), The education of teachers: Ninety-eight yearbook of the national society
for the study of education, part 1. (pp. 548-594). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gold, Y. & Roth, R. A. (1993). Teachers managing stress and preventing burnout: The
professional health (ph) solution. London: Falmer Press.
Gomez, M. L., Black, R. W., & Allen, Anna-Ruth. (2007). ‘Becoming’ a teacher. Teachers
College Record, 109(9), 2107-2135.
Goodin, M. C. (2011). Room to read: Tracking the evolution of a new secondary school library.
(Order No. 3498970, University of California, Berkeley). ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses, 144. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.indiana.edu/login?url=http://search.
proquest.com/docview/928451788?accountid=11620. (928451788).
Gough, N. (1991). Narrative and nature: Unsustainable fictions in environmental education.
Australian Journal of Environmental Education, 7, 31-42.
Greene, M. (1967). Existential encounters for teachers. New York: Random House.
Griffin, G., Barnes, S., Hughes, R., O'Neal, S., Edwards, S., & Hukill, H. (1983). Clinical preservice
teacher education: Final report of a descriptive study. Austin: The University of Texas
Research and Development Center for Teacher Education.
Grumet, M. R. (1978). Supervision and situation: A methodology of self-report for teacher
169

	  

education. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, Toronto.
Gye, L. (2003). Halflives, a mystory: Writing hypertext to learn. Fibreculture Journal, 2.
Hammerness, K. Darling-Hammond, L. & Bransford, J. (2005). How teachers learn and develop.
In L. Darling-Hammond & J. Bransford (Eds.), Preparing teachers for a changing world:
What teachers should learn and be able to do. (pp. 358 – 389). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Hansen, D. T. (2008). Introduction: Why educate teachers? In M. Cochran-Smith, S. Feiman
Nemser, & J. D. McIntyre (Eds.), Handbook of research on teacher education: Enduring
questions in changing contexts. (pp. 5-9). New York: Routledge.
Harada, V. (1996). School library media preparation programs in ALA-Accredited Schools.
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 37(3), 210-228.
Harris, R. M. (1992). Librarianship: The erosion of a woman's profession. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex
Pub. Corp.
Hartzell, G. (2002). The principal’s perceptions of school libraries and teacher-librarians.
School Libraries Worldwide, 8(1), 92-110.
Harvey II, C. (2011). What you can do to support school libraries in crisis. Huffington Post.
Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/carl-harvey-ii/post_2725_b_1136618.html
Harvey II, C. (2012). Collaboration -- It's not just a library thing. Knowledge Quest, 40(4), 4-5.
Intrator, S. M. (2006). Beginning teachers and the emotional drama of the classroom. Journal
of Teacher Education, 57(3), 232-239.
Johnston, M. P. (2012). School librarians as technology integration leaders: Enablers and
barriers to leadership enactment. School Library Research, 15.
Kelchtermans, G. (1996). Teacher vulnerability: Understanding its moral and political roots.
Cambridge Journal of Education, 26(3), 307-23. Retrieved from ERIC database.
Kinghorn, M. R. (2011). [State]'s ongoing foreclosure crisis. [State] Business Review, 86(2), 1-5.
Knowles, G. J. & Cole, A. L. (1996). Developing practice through field experiences. In F. B.
170

	  

Murray (Ed.), The teacher educator’s handbook: Building a knowledge base for the
preparation of teachers. (pp. 648-688). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Kotarba, J. A, & Johnson, J. M. (2002). Postmodern existential sociology. Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press.
Kramer, P. K., & Diekman, L. (2010). Evidence = assessment = advocacy. Teacher Librarian,
37(3), 27-30.
Lacy, M. & Copeland, A. (2013). The role of mentorship programs in LIS education and in
professional development. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science,
54(2), 135-146.
Langellier, K. M. (1999). Personal narrative, performance, performativity: Two or three things I
know for sure. Text & Performance Quarterly, 19(2), 125-144.
Lutz, F. (1996). Vulnerability of the vulnerability thesis. Peabody Journal of Education, 71(2),
24-40.
Lortie, D. C. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lyons, N., & LaBoskey, V. (2002). Narrative inquiry in practice: Advancing the knowledge of
teaching. New York: Teachers College Press.
Matthews, V. (1998). School library media standards and guidelines: A review of their
significance and impact. In K. H. Latrobe (Ed.), The emerging school library media
center: Historical issues and perspectives (pp. 75-90). Englewood, CO: Libraries
Unlimited, Inc.
McCracken, A. (2001). School library media specialists' perceptions of practice and importance
of roles described in Information Power. School Library Media Research, 4.
Measor, L. (1985). Critical incidents in the classroom: Identities, choices and careers. In S.
Ball & I. Goodson (Eds.), Teachers’ lives and careers (pp. 61-77). London, Falmer
Press.
Miles, M. B, & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook. 2nd
ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Moreillon, J. (2013). Educating for school library leadership: Developing the instructional
171

	  

partnership role. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 54(1), 55-66.
Nelson, B. (1980). The chimera of professionalism. Library Journal. 105(17), 2029-2033.

New

England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC). (2011). School Resources for
Learning. Retrieved from http://cpss.neasc.org/getting_started/2011_standards
/school_resources_for_learning/
Nias, J. (1996). Thinking about feeling: The emotions in teaching. Cambridge Journal of
Education, 26(3), 293.
O'Brien, T. (1998). The things they carried: A work of fiction. New York: Broadway Books.
Odell, S. J. (1989). Developing support programs for beginning teachers. In L. Huling-Austin
(Ed.), Assisting the beginning teacher (pp. 19-38). Reston, Va.: Association of Teacher
Educators.
Palmer, P. (2007). The courage to teach: Exploring the inner landscape of a teacher’s life. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Parkyn, E. A. (1897). The law of master and servant: With a chapter on apprenticeship.
London: Butterworth.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Plato. (1888). Dialogues of Plato: Containing the apology of Socrates, Crito, Phaedo, and
Protagoras. London: George Bell & Sons.
Powell, M., & Davey, M. (2011, June 23). The [State] exception? Yes, but… New York Times. p.
12.
Putnam, E. (1996). The instructional consultant role of the elementary-school library media
specialist and the effects of program scheduling on its practice. School Library Media
Quarterly, 25, 43-49.
Reynolds, A. (1992). Charting the changes in junior faculty: Relationships among socialization,
acculturation, and gender. The Journal of Higher Education. 63(6), 637-652.
Richardson, V. (1996). The role of attitudes and beliefs in learning to teach. In Handbook of
Research on Teacher Education, ed. J. Sikula, 102-119. New York: Macmillan.
172

	  

Riessman, C. K. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Los Angeles: Sage
Publications.
Rossetti, C. Georgina, & Crump, R. W. (1979). The complete poems of Christina Rossetti. A
variorum ed. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
Rutsky, R. L, & Macdonald, B. J. (2003). Strategies for theory: from Marx to Madonna. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Sandford, D. W. (2013). Construction of professional identity in novice library media
Specialists. Atlanta, Ga.: Georgia State University.
Shannon, D. (2002). The Education and competencies of school library media specialists: A
Review of the literature. School Library Media Research, 5.
Shannon, D. M. (2008). School librarianship: Career choice and recruitment. Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, 49(3), 210-229.
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard
Educational Review, 57(1), 1-21.
Slick, S. K. (1997). Assessing versus assisting: The supervisor’s roles in the complex dynamics
of the student teaching triad. Teaching and Teacher Education, 13(7), 713-726.
Smith, A. P. (2013). The leadership potential of school librarians. (Order No. 3557505, The
George Washington University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 191. Retrieved
from http://ezproxy.lib.indiana.edu/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/
1346230376?accountid=11620. (prod.academic_MSTAR_1346230376).
Solomon, R. (2005). Existentialism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stephens, M. (2011). The role of mentoring. Library Journal. 136(15), 38.
Sullivan, M. (2013). State of America’s school libraries. Huffington Post. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/maureen- sullivan/ state-of-americas-school-_
b_3063055.html
Sumara, D. J. and Luce-Kapler, R. (1996). (Un)Becoming a teacher: Negotiating identities
while learning to teach. Canadian Journal of Education, 21(1), 65-83.
Tilley, C. & Callison, D. (2001). Preparing school library media specialists for the new century:
173

	  

Results of a survey. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 42(3),
220-227.
Ulmer, G. (1989). Teletheory: Grammatology in the age of video. New York: Routledge.
Ulmer, G. (1994). Heuretics: The logic of invention. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Van Horn, C. E., & Schaffner, H. A. (2003). Work in America: An encyclopedia of history,
policy, and society. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO.
Vickerstaff, S. (2007). 'I was just the boy around the place': What made apprenticeships
successful? Journal of Vocational Education &Training, 59(3), 331-347.
Webster, L., & Mertova, P. (2007). Using narrative inquiry as a research method: An
introduction to using critical events narrative analysis in research on learning and
teaching. London: Routledge.
Wilson, S. M., & Youngs, P. (2005). Research on accountability processes in teacher education.
In M. Cochran-Smith & K. M. Zeichner (Eds.), Studying teacher education: The report of
the AERA Panel on Research and Teacher Education (pp. 591–643). Washington, DC:
American Education Research Association.
Wisener, B. (1996). Influence of Callahan’s vulnerability thesis on thought and practice in
educational administration, 1962-1992, Peabody Journal of Education, 71(2), 41-63.
Wolcott, H. F. (1991). Propriospect and the Acquisition of Culture. Anthropology & Education
Quarterly, 22(3), 251-273.
Woodruff, L. C. (1994). Assessments by selected school library media specialists of required
job competencies as compared to learned competencies. (Order No. 9519978, Wayne
State University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.lib.indiana.edu/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/
304148345?accountid=11620. (304148345).
Woods, P. (1993). Critical events in teaching and learning. Basingstoke, UK: Falmer Press.
World Wildlife Fund. (2013). Protecting species. Retrieved from
http://worldwildlife.org/initiatives/protecting-species
174

	  

Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. 4th ed. Los Angeles, Calif.:
Sage Publications.
Zeichner, K. (1980). Myths and realities: Field-based experiences in pre-service teacher
education. Journal of Teacher Education, 31(6), 45-55.
Zeichner, K. (1983). Alternative paradigms of teacher education. Journal of Teacher
Education, 34(3), 3-9.

175

	  

APPENDIX A: List of Tables
Table 1: Zeichner’s (1983) Conceptualization of Teacher Education Programs

pp. 21-22

Table 2: Responsibilities for the Members of the Student Teaching Triad

p. 26

Table 3: Abbreviated Analysis of Criticality

p. 44

Table 4: Types of Experiences Based on Modified Content Analysis

p. 46

Table 5: Conditions of Events Based on Modified Content Analysis

p. 46

Table 6: Effect of the Event Based on Modified Content Analysis

p. 47

Table 7: Ginger’s Identity Claims in Critical Events Narrative

p. 71

Table 8: Ginger’s Post-Performance Identity Claims

p. 72

Table 9: Lucy’s Identity Claims in Critical Events Narrative

pp. 100-101

Table 10: Lucy’s Post-Performance Identity Claims

p. 101

Table 11: Izzie’s Identity Claims Before her Critical Event

p. 131

Table 12: Izzie’s Identity Claims After Critical Event

p. 131

Table 13: Izzie’s Post-Performance Identity Claims

p. 132

Table 14: Izzie’s Change in Identity

p. 133

Table 15: Responsibilities Realized by Student Teachers

p. 147

Table 16: Struggles Participants Experienced During First Year of Teaching

p. 150

176

	  

APPENDIX B: List of Figures

Figure 1: Role Expectations

p. 3

Figure 2: The Structure of Dewey’s Pre-Service Education Program

p. 22

Figure 3: Woods’ Narrative Phases

p. 45

177

	  

JULIE MARIE FRYE
writejmf@gmail.com

ACADEMIC PREPARATION

	  

Doctor of Philosophy in Curriculum and Instruction
Master of Library Science
Bachelor of Science in Secondary English Education

Indiana University, Bloomington
Indiana University, Indianapolis
Indiana University, Indianapolis

(2014)
(2002)
(2000)

SELECTED WORK EXPERIENCE
International Baccalaureate Coordinator in Metropolitan School District of Washington Township
Indianapolis, IN (2013 - 2014)

▪ Designed and evaluated global inquiry curricula
▪ Taught information and data literacy skills to grades 1-5 and 9-12
▪ Served as instructional coach to faculty members
▪ Developed partnerships with international schools and organizations
▪ Hosted author Sharon Robinson
Information Literacy Scholar at IUPUI’s University Library
Indianapolis, IN (2013)

▪ Assessed information literacy skills of Indianapolis high school students
▪ Evaluated Tool for Real-time Assessment of Information Literacy Skills (TRAILS)
▪ Evaluated information literacy curriculum
Site Visitor at the Center for Evaluation & Education Policy
Bloomington, IN (2013)

▪ Examined professional practices and student engagement in public school and library environments
▪ Interviewed Site Coordinators and Educators using a structured interview protocol
▪ Authored reports based on observations, interviews, and document analysis
School Librarian in Franklin Township Community School Corporation
Indianapolis, IN (2004 - 2008)

▪ Collaborated with faculty members to integrate diverse media center resources across the curriculum
▪ Challenged and encouraged recreational readers and researching students
▪ Selected, used, and promoted instructional media and educational technology
▪ Designed and coordinated School to World Program events
▪ Author Ben Mikaelsen (author) 2004
▪ Author Gordon Korman (author) 2008
▪ Author Charles R. Smith (author) 2007
▪ Author Christopher Paul Curtis (author) 2007
▪ Author Hunter Scott (inspirational speaker) and the U.S.S. Indianapolis traveling exhibit 2006
▪ Author Deborah Ellis (author) 2006
Visiting Academic Librarian at IUPUI’s University Library
Indianapolis, IN (2002 - 2003)

▪ Designed and managed library’s freshmen online information literacy tutorial
▪ Instructed faculty, students, and public on the utilization of traditional and electronic research resources
▪ Served as an instructional team member for online First Year Experience courses
▪ Provided reference consultations to undergraduate and graduate students
▪ Wrote and produced IUPUI University Library Video for First Year Experience courses

	  

UNIVERSITY TEACHING EXPERIENCE
Adjunct Instructor at IUPUI
Indianapolis, IN (2000 – 2012)

University College ~ Educational Foundations
▪ Summer Bridge Writing Coordinator
Summer 2003 – 2012
▪ Summer Bridge Writing Instructor for the School of Education and the School of Liberal Arts
Summer 2003 – 2011
▪ U112 ~ Critical Inquiry for the Humanities
Fall 2002, Spring 2003, & Fall 2003
▪ U110 ~ Learning Community First Year Seminar
Fall 2000, Spring 2001, Fall 2003, Fall 2005, Fall 2006, Spring 2007, & Fall 2008
School of Liberal Arts; English Department ~ Writing Program
▪ W132 ~ Elementary Composition II / Research and Argumentation
Summer 2002 & Summer 2003
▪ W131 ~ Elementary Composition I / Introduction to Academic Writing
Fall 2000, Spring 2001, Fall 2002, Spring 2003, Fall 2003, Fall 2005, & Summer 2006
Instructor at Indiana State University
Terre Haute, IN (2008 – 2009; 2011 – 2012)

College of Education
▪ CIMT 512 ~ Literature for Young People
Fall 2011
▪ CIMT 631 ~ Reference Sources and Services
Fall 2008, Fall 2009, Summer 2009, Fall 2011, & Spring 2012
▪ CIMT 656 ~ School Library Media Management
Fall 2008, Fall 2009, & Summer 2009
▪ CIMT 659 ~ Student Teaching University Mentor / Practicum Course
Spring 2012 & Summer 2012
Visiting Lecturer at IUPUI
Indianapolis, IN (2009 - 2011)

School of Education
▪ Student Teaching University Mentor / Practicum Course
Fall 2009, Spring 2010, Summer 2010, Fall 2010, & Spring 2011
Visiting Lecturer at IUPUI
Indianapolis, IN (2009 - 2011)

School of Library & Information Science
▪ S502 ~ Collection Development & Management
Spring 2010, Fall 2010, & Spring 2011
▪ S533 ~ Online Searching
Fall 2009
▪ S603 ~ Grant Writing
Summer 2009, Summer 2010, & Summer 2011

	  

SPECIAL RECOGNITION
2011
2009
2007
2007

Indiana University’s Wells Graduate Fellowship for Visionary Leadership, Academic Excellence,
Character, Social Consciousness, & Generosity of Spirit
Indiana University’s Won-Joon Yoon Memorial Scholarship Recipient for Commitment to
Diversity
National Writing Project Teacher-Consultant
Indianapolis Power and Light Golden Apple Award Nominee

AWARDED GRANTS
2014
2014
2014
2014
2013
2012
2011
2007
2007
2006
2006
2006
2005
2003
2001
2001

Technology Grant for Info. Literacy Skills
Library Services & Technology Act ($10,000)
Project Grant for Intergenerational Writing
M.S.D.W.T. Education Foundation ($2,000)
Project Grant for Carbon Footprint Research
M.S.D.W.T. Education Foundation ($1,658)
Project Grant for Recreational Reading
M.S.D.W.T. Education Foundation ($1,500)
Project Grant for Recreational Reading
M.S.D.W.T. Education Foundation ($2,500)
Project Grant for Recreational Reading
Center for Community Engagement ($1,082)
Action Research Grant for Art & Literacy
Decatur Township Educ. Foundation ($750)
Action Research Grant for Habitats Project
Indianapolis Power & Light
($11,414)
Action Research Grant for MP3s & Audiobooks Library Services & Technology Act ($7,952)
Technology Grant for Audiobooks
Franklin Township Educ. Foundation ($1,385)
Project Grant for Author Visit and Book Club Henry & Nellie Pence Trust
($5,640)
Project Grant for Author Visit and Book Club Franklin Township Educ. Foundation ($2,500)
Action Research Grant for Tech. Integration
Library Services & Technology Act ($4,230)
Professional Development Grant
Lumina Foundation
($1,000)
Project Grant for Recreational Reading
Shelby County Grant
($1,500)
Curriculum Enhancement Grant
Lilly Endowment
($4,000)

SELECTED PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
2014
2013
2012
2011
2011
2011
2011
2010
2010
2010
2009
2008
2008
2008
2008
2007
2007
2007
2007
2006
2006
2006

American Association of School Librarians Research Summit Participant, Chicago, IL
Trainer for Indiana University’s South Sudan Partnership, Bloomington, IN
American Association of School Librarians’ Program Review Committee , Chicago, IL
American Association of School Librarians’ Program Review Committee , Chicago, IL
College of Education’s Diversity Committee, Terre Haute, IN
Indiana State University’s Teacher Education Committee, Terre Haute, IN
Library Collection Development Consultant for Oak Hill Elementary School, Evansville, IN
Curriculum & Instruction Research & Creative Activity Symposium Committee, Bloomington, IN
Library Collection Development Consultant for River Birch Elementary School, Avon, IN
Library Collection Management Consultant for Eagle Creek’s Discovery Center, Indianapolis, IN
Indiana State University’s College of Education Honors Day Committee, Terre Haute, IN
Assistant Editor for Indiana Libraries Journal, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Recreational Reading Program, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Distance Education Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Kitley Intermediate Public Law 221 School Improvement Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Assistant Editor for Indiana Libraries Journal, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Recreational Reading Program, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Distance Education Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Kitley Intermediate Public Law 221 School Improvement Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Assistant Editor for Indiana Libraries Journal, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Recreational Reading Program, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Distance Education Committee, Indianapolis, IN

	  

SELECTED PROFESSIONAL SERVICE (CONT.)
2006
2005
2005
2005
2005
2004
2004
2004
2003

Kitley Intermediate Public Law 221 School Improvement Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Assistant Editor for Indiana Libraries Journal, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Recreational Reading Program, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Distance Education Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Kitley Intermediate Public Law 221 School Improvement Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Recreational Reading Program, Indianapolis, IN
Chairperson of Kitley Intermediate’s Distance Education Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Kitley Intermediate Public Law 221 School Improvement Committee, Indianapolis, IN
Lumina Faculty Learning Community for Multicultural Course Transformation, Indianapolis, IN

PEER REVIEWED PUBLICATION
▪ Weber, C., Frye, J. M., Ables, C., & Goodman, J. (2010). Curriculum and the 1970s culture wars: Man a
course of study. Curriculum History.

PUBLICATIONS
▪ Frye, J. M. (2007). Librarians, put on your boxing gloves: Some things are worth fighting for. Indiana
Libraries Journal, 26(3), pp. 70-75.
▪ Jayne, E., Frye, J. M., & Farley, K. (2005). Online information literacy tutorials: Why reinvent the
wheel? In D.B. Thomas, R. Baier, E. Owen, & T. Valko (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd National LOEX
Conference, (pp. 95-98). Ann Arbor: Pierian Press.

INVITED PRESENTATIONS
▪ Frye, J. M. & Smith, A.E. (2011). Changing children’s minds: Using audiobooks to alter perceptions of
the library. Paper presented at the Indiana Library Federation’s Children and Young People’s Division
Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. & Smith, A.E. (2011). Pump up the volume: MP3 books and reluctant readers. Paper
presented at the Indianapolis Youth Literature Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. & Smith, A.E. (2009). When boy meets book: Action required. Presented at the Indianapolis
Youth Literature Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2003). Inflite: A customized online learning environment. Presented at the Indiana Online
Users Group Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.

NATIONAL & INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS
▪ Frye, J. M. (2014). Occupational vulnerability: A study of four novice school librarians. Juried paper
presented at the annual conference of the American Library Association: Las Vegas, Nevada.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2014). Making ‘gains’ in social justice: An approach to program revision. Juried paper
presented at the annual conference of the Association for Library and Information Science Education:
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2013). Crisis in librarian preparation: An abandonment of social justice. Paper presented at
the annual conference on Curriculum Theory and Classroom Practice: Dayton, Ohio.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2013). Restoring dignity: Using photovoice to introduce feminism. Paper presented at the
annual conference of the Society for Educating Women: St. Louis, Missouri.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2011). Using performance mystory to sustain early career faculty members. Paper
presented at the National Learning Communities Conference: Bay City, Michigan.

	  

NATIONAL & INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS (CONT.)
▪ Frye, J. M. (2011). Using performance mystory to unpack cultural assumptions about teaching. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Curriculum Studies:
New Orleans, Louisiana.
▪ Asher, K. & Frye, J. M. (2011). MyStory: Adapting a narrative inquiry tool for teacher professional
development. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association:
New Orleans, Louisiana.
▪ Miller, L., Sabol, D., Keller, D., Harrell, S., & Frye, J. M. (2010). Transforming perceptions. Presented
at the National Learning Communities Conference: Bay City, Michigan.
▪ Goodman, J. & Frye, J. M. (2010). Curriculum and the 1970s culture wars: Man a course of study. Paper
presented at the Bergamo Conference on Curriculum Theory and Classroom Practice: Dayton, Ohio.
▪ Frye, J. M., Weber, C., & Ables, C. (2010). Putting hard pressure on the soft sciences: A textual and
image analysis of man a course of study. Paper presented at the Society for the Study of Curriculum
History: Denver, Colorado.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2009). Adjusting the straight and narrow: The school librarians’ role in the post-war life
adjustment curricula. Paper presented at the Society for the Study of Curriculum History: San Diego,
California.
▪ Frye, J. M. & Miller, L. (2006). Dispelling the myths of college writing: Preparing summer bridge
students for their composition experience. Presented at the National Learning Communities Conference:
Bay City, Michigan.

STATE CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS
▪ Frye, J. M. (2008). Travel back in time: Teaching social studies with historical fiction. Presented at the
Indiana Council for the Social Studies Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M., Smith, R., & Leonardo, C. (2006). How digital cameras can complement biography
research. Presented at the Association for Indiana Media Educators Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2006). Breaking the code for successful student book clubs. Presented at the Association
for Indiana Media Educators Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Sabol, D., Frye, J. M., & Miller, L. (2006). “You thought I’d be teaching you what?” Challenging
students’ preconceptions of college writing. Presented at the Indiana Teachers of Writing: Indianapolis,
Indiana.
▪ Sabol, D. & Frye, J. M. (2005). Moving students toward critical reading, writing, and thinking through
the critical inquiry method. Presented at the Indiana Teachers of Writing Conference: Indianapolis,
Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M., Reabe, L., & Steele, M. (2005). Lights, camera, action: How library resources connect
diverse students. Presented at the Association for Indiana Media Educators Conference: Indianapolis,
Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2005). Creating a new generation of online information literacy tutorials: Strategies for nontechies. Presented at the Indiana Library Federation Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. & Gall, C. (2004). Overseas opportunities for Indiana libraries. Presented at the Indiana
Library Federation Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Burkett, R. & Frye, J. M. (2004). Go to the library in your pajamas: Project reflection. Presented at the
Indiana Leading Edge Conference: Indianapolis, Indiana.

COMMUNITY PRESENTATIONS
▪ Weber, C., Frye, J. M., Ables, C., & Goodman, J. (2011). Deconstructing the curriculum and
controversy of man a course of study. Paper presented at the Curriculum and Instruction Research and
Creative Activity Symposium: Bloomington, Indiana.

	  

COMMUNITY PRESENTATIONS (CONT.)
▪ Frye, J. M. (2011). Deconstructing vulnerable teaching experiences for growth using performance
mystory. Poster presented at the Curriculum and Instruction Research and Creative Activity Symposium:
Bloomington, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2007). Snap the picture: How to use digital cameras to ensure fabulous photographs.
Presented at the E.B. Carver Community Education and Technology Center: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2006). Using united video streaming in your classroom. Presented at the E. B. Carver
Community Education and Technology Center: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2006). Online research: Using the INSPIRE databases in your classroom. Presented at the
E. B. Carver Community Education and Technology Center: Indianapolis, Indiana.
▪ Frye, J. M. (2004). Go to the library in your pajamas: Learning to use library resources from home.
Presented at Kitley Intermediate School: Indianapolis, Indiana.

