FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE OF COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION

A LESS THAN PERFECT WORLD: REPRESENTATION
OF DEATH IN AWARD-WINNING PICTURE BOOKS

By
KATHRYN R. COMELLAS

A Thesis submitted to the
School of Information
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Master of Science

Degree Awarded:
Fall Semester, 2014

© 2014 Kathryn R. Comellas

UMI Number: 1583445

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1583445
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Kathryn R. Comellas defended this thesis on November 4, 2014.
The members of the supervisory committee were:

Don L. Latham
Professor Directing Thesis

Melissa Gross
Committee Member

Nancy Everhart
Committee Member

The Graduate School has verified and approved the above-named committee member, and
certifies that the treatise has been approved in accordance with university requirements.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... iv
INTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................................................1
METHODOLOGY ..........................................................................................................................2
AWARDS ........................................................................................................................................4
BENEFITS OF LITERARY AWARDS ..........................................................................................8
IMPORTANCE OF DEATH EDUCATION FOR CHILDREN...................................................13
IMPORTANCE OF DEATH IN AWARD WINNERS ................................................................22
BOOK ANALYSIS .......................................................................................................................23
Death of a Pet .....................................................................................................................24
Death of a Grandparent ......................................................................................................26
Death of an Adult Friend ...................................................................................................28
Death of a Parent ................................................................................................................30
Death of a Sibling ..............................................................................................................32
Death in the Family due to War/Civil Unrest ....................................................................33
Death of a Child Main Character .......................................................................................36
USING BOOKS ON DEATH WITH CHILDREN .......................................................................38
SUMMARY ...................................................................................................................................46
References ......................................................................................................................................50
Appendix ........................................................................................................................................54
Biographical Sketch .......................................................................................................................55

iii

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the presence of death in contemporary, 1990 to 2013, awardwinning picture books in the United States, Canada, England, and Australia. Literary awards
nationally, and globally, recognize titles that are considered to be exemplary in their genre.
These awards—the Caldecott from the United States, the Governor General’s Award for
English-Language Illustration, the Kate Greenaway Medal from the United Kingdom, and the
Children’s Book Council of Australia’s Best Picture Book of the Year Award—are the most
prestigious in their country of origin and greatly impact the economic value and visibility of each
title, the global children’s book market, and the careers of the winning author and illustrators.
Although death education for young children is hotly debated, its importance cannot be
understated. Given the continuing trend of research showing the benefits of death education for
children there has been a remarkable lack of award-winning literature that depicts death, dying,
and learning how to cope with the extreme feelings these events create. A larger presence of
death in award-winning children’s literature would provide an easy-to-find, and reference, guide
of excellent books parents or other adults could give to children to teach them about death,
healthy coping methods, and empathy.

iv

INTRODUCTION
Picture books are among the resources available to introduce children to the world they
live in. It is not always a pleasant reality, but it is important to prepare them for the things they
may experience and to help them learn about the experiences of others. Rather than shielding
children from the harsher truths, especially in regards to death, and setting them up for a lifetime
of fear, parents and other adults can introduce children to books that cover the many different
realities of being human. In turn, these books can be used to guide children and to prepare them
for facing the less than pleasant aspects of life as we know it. Award-winning picture books are
an especially useful group of books to consider because they are aimed at young children
(usually ages 4-7 years) and represent what award committees consider to be the highest quality
literature for children during a given year.

1

METHODOLOGY
This study focuses on the representation of death in award winning picture books across
multiple, primarily English-speaking, countries-the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom,
and Australia. For a topic that is an integral part of life, it is remarkably hard to find nationally
recognized picture books that dare to broach this subject with their young audience. My primary
objective was to see if any variation occurred in the representation of death in award-winning
picture books between societies that are so closely related and that share a common language as
is the case with Australia, England, Canada, and the United States. I was also interested in who
died during each book, if the death was shown or not, and how the main character responded to
the death event. For this project I focused on the period 1990 to 2013, as a means of addressing
the contemporary representations of death and the current attitudes surrounding the presence of
death in award-winning children’s literature. I examined one literary award for picture books
from each country, looking for the presence of death in award winners and honor books for each
award. The awards selected were the Caldecott Award from the United States, the Governor
General’s Award for English-Language Children’s Illustration from Canada, the Kate
Greenaway Award from the United Kingdom, and the Children’s Book Council of Australia
(CBCA) Best Picture Book of the Year Award from Australia. In the case of the Kate
Greenaway and the Governor General’s, honor books (or runner-ups) are not listed past the
current year and so could not be included in this study. The CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year
includes two honor books. The Caldecott Award has a varying number of honor books ranging
from two to five titles in any given year. A total of 221 titles were examined — 72 titles from
Australia, 24 titles from England, 24 titles from Canada, and 101 titles from the United States
(see Appendix). While the number of titles varies from each country, the awards chosen for

2

study are considered to be the most well-known and prestigious of the literary awards (in their
country of origin) designed for children’s picture books.
After selecting the awards to be studied the next step was to locate all of the titles dating
back to 1990 to see if death, dying, loss, or bereavement was addressed and those books that did
not address at least one of these topics were eliminated. There were several logistical problems
that had to be dealt with during this process and these were primarily related to the difficulty of
obtaining most of the Australian titles in the United States, an issue that became magnified the
older the publication date. It was eventually through creative purchasing and the large ILL
network available in north Texas that each title was located. Additionally, the CBCA Best
Picture Book of the Year award is the only award not specifically awarded to children’s titles
although it is traditionally awarded to children’s titles. It evaluates all picture books, and includes
comics and graphic novels in this category, regardless of the maturity of the intended audience.
Keeping this in mind, the CBCA titles had to be further analyzed to determine if they met the
classification of a children’s book.

3

AWARDS
This paper examines literary awards for picture books from four different countries—The
Children's Book Council of Australia Best Picture Book of the Year from Australia, the Kate
Greenaway Medal from the United Kingdom, the Governor General’s Award for EnglishLanguage Children’s Illustration from Canada, and the Randolph Caldecott Medal from the
United States.
The Children's Book Council of Australia was established in 1945 to promote Australian
children's literature and its creators and to engage the community in their passion for children's
and young adult literature. It is a not-for profit and volunteer-run organization. The CBCA has
multiple categories of awards—the Older Readers Books of the Year, the Younger Readers Book
of the Year, the Early Childhood Book of the Year, the Eve Pownall Book of the Year, and, of
course, the Best Picture Book of the Year. The CBCA also awards numerous other awards that
tend to be more specific and smaller in scope—the Nan Chauncy Award, the CBCA Citation for
Outstanding Service, the Crichton Award for New Illustrators, the Muriel Barwell Award, the
Dame Annabelle Rankin Award, the Lelia St John Award, the Lady Cutler Award, and finally
the Children's Choice Awards. The publishers are the ones that choose which books to submit for
the various awards. In order to be considered for any of the awards granted by the CBCA the
book must be published during the calendar year prior to the award (for example, the 2002 award
would be granted to a book published in 2001) and the books must be available in Australia for
purchase by the general population. Additionally, they must be in English or a dual text where
one language is English. They must also be one of the following: original publication, new
picture book version of a previously published book, a retelling of traditional materials, an
anthology or collection where the bulk of the work has not been published previously, or a
substantially revised edition where the publishers are required to provide the extent of the
4

revisions to ensure that the work meets this criteria. The creators must be Australian citizens, a
person who has resided in Australia for at least two years prior to the end of the year of
publication, or be a person who has a permanent residency status in Australia. Specifically for
the Best Picture Book of the Year, the CBCA is looking for artistic and literary unity or, in the
case of textless books, the unity of the story, theme, and concept through the illustrations. Some
of the specific elements they look for are artistic style and graphic excellence including the
typography, effective use of technique and media, and the relationship between the text and
illustrations (The Children’s Book Council of Australia [CBCA], 2014).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was established in 1955 to recognize distinguished
illustrations in children's books within the United Kingdom. It was named after the popular 19th
century artist most well-known for her children's illustrations and designs. The medal is awarded
by the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP). The CILIP is also
responsible for awarding the Carnegie Medal to the writer of an outstanding children's book. The
Kate Greenaway is awarded annually. In order for a book to be considered for the Kate
Greenaway it must have been originally published for children or young people and must have
received its first publication in the United Kingdom or have been co-published elsewhere within
a three month time period. If there is text it must be in English or in a dual language of which
one is English. The Kate Greenaway's primary goal is to find a book of outstanding artistic
quality that provides pleasure from a stimulating and satisfying visual experience which leaves a
lasting impression. CILIP examines the artistic style, format, synergy of text and illustration, and
the visual experience when determining the annual winner. The library professionals that make
up CILIP are responsible for nominating the titles to be considered and a panel of independent

5

judges makes the final decisions (The CILIP Carnegie & Kate Greenaway Children’s Book
Awards, n.d.).
The Governor General’s Literary Awards were established in 1936 by the Canadian
Author’s Association and originally included a juvenile literature category. However, in 1959 the
Canada Council began administering the literary awards and suspended the juvenile category. In
1987, the Governor General Literary Awards once again began recognizing children’s literature
when they took over the Canada Council’s Children’s Literature Prizes and renamed the
children’s awards. The Governor General’s Literary Award for English-Language Children’s
Illustration is part of the larger body of the Governor General’s Literary Awards which contains
categories for nearly every genre of literature. Within the children’s specific awards they
separately recognize an English-language writer, a French-language writer, an illustrator of an
English-language book, and an illustrator of a French-language book. Each book must have been
written by a Canadian citizen in the year preceding the award. Interestingly, the Governor
General’s does not have a requirement on publishing location making no distinction between
titles published in Canada or abroad; rather they focus solely on the citizen status of the author or
illustrator (Governor General’s Literary Awards, n.d.).
Last but certainly not least, the Randolph Caldecott Medal was conceived in 1937 and
awarded its first medal in 1938 after the American Library Association (ALA) determined that
the artists creating picture books were being overlooked in the run for the Newbery Medal. The
medal is named after the English illustrator Randolph Caldecott, a contemporary of Kate
Greenaway. To be considered for the Caldecott Medal, the book and its illustrations must be
original work, never have been previously published, and not formed by compiling or reprinting
illustrations from any other sources. It must have been published in the United States, a U.S.

6

territory, U.S. commonwealth, or have been published simultaneously in the United States and
another country. The book, when it has text, must be written in English although words and
phrases in other languages are acceptable where appropriate in the context of the story. Finally,
the author and illustrator are required to be citizens or individuals with an established residency
in the U.S. or any of its territories or commonwealths. The committee awarding the Caldecott is
specifically looking for picture books that demonstrate excellence in execution of the artistic
technique used; of the pictorial interpretation of story, theme, or concept; the appropriateness of
the style of illustration; the delineation of plot, theme, setting, mood, or information through the
pictures; and presentation for a child audience. It must also be a self-contained entity and not
dependent on other media, like audio or film, for its enjoyment. (The American Library
Association [ALA], 2014).

7

BENEFITS OF LITERARY AWARDS
While some teachers, librarians, and parents may not place much value in literary awards
they do serve many purposes. As Erica Hateley states “The book award seems to grant out wish
of someone, somewhere, somehow having read all the books, and worked out which one is
best…Book award medals then…are also librarians: knowing eyes have read, sorted, selected,
and have identified this book as serving a particular community’s needs or interests” (2013, p.
190). Literary awards can serve as a marker for what values and ideas a society holds at a
particular moment in time. By looking at the history of award winners, one can see more clearly
how children’s literature has evolved over time. Outside of literary trends, award winners are
frequently presented in an art style that is popular or gaining momentum-for example the soft
brush strokes and realism frequently seen in picture books published during the 1990s to the
graphic, cartoonish styles popular in picture books and cartoons of today. Literary awards are
important for a variety of reasons and, perhaps as a result, many publishers, authors, illustrators,
and award committees may be reluctant to tackle controversial subjects for children like death,
dying, grief, and loss.
Unlike many other literary awards, children's awards result in increased sales for the
winners and honor books selected every year. Libraries and schools will order thousands of
copies and the medals placed on the books frequently impress parents at bookstores and other
retail outlets (Just, 2008). For example, A Ball for Daisy, the 2012 Caldecott winner, was ranked
#22,059 on the Amazon sales rankings leading up to the award. It rose to #304 two hours after
being announced as the Caldecott winner and within two days of the announcement had risen to
#9 (Early Word, 2012). As the Canadian author Victoria Miles stated, regarding the impact of
awards on distribution and sales, “It doesn’t matter if you win, you win if you get on the list
because that gets librarians choosing your book, giving your book as an option for kids to read”
8

(Givens, 2009, p. 27). Publishers recognize that awards can easily catapult a previously poor
performing book into selling 100,000 to 200,000 and above copies in the year following winning
the award. “Award winners” is also frequently used as a listing category by many library
suppliers and is also used to inform marketing, reviewing, and standing orders lists (Hateley,
2013). Additionally, winning a children's literary award ensures a longer print run which helps
those books pull in more sales in the long run (Maughan, 2011). Another very prestigious
children’s literature award, the Newberry, keeps titles in circulation for decades in an industry
where the typical shelf life of a children’s book is eighteen months. Winners of the largest
national awards, and other awards to lesser extents, essentially become instant classics (Kidd as
cited in Hateley, 2013, p. 192). In terms of economic significance, literary awards for children's
books like the Caldecott far out-perform any other literary award including the Pulitzer, National
Book Award and the Man Booker Prize (Just, 2008; Maughan, 2011). Furthermore, literary
awards benefit their publishing houses giving them new life and increasing their clout in the
market. Roaring Brook Press is one of these stories; after winning back-to-back Caldecotts a
mere two years after opening, it was transformed into a major player in the publishing world
almost instantly (Maughan, 2011).
Another benefit of literary awards is the increased exposure to foreign markets. Award
winners are typically able to secure faster and more extensive distribution in foreign markets
even where translations become a factor (Wilkins, 2011). These awards serve as a marker of
excellence and of increased sales which makes foreign distributors more likely to pay attention to
these specific titles in the sea of children's literature and therefore more likely to take the risk
associated with publishing a foreign title. Each year, winners of internationally renowned awards
such as the Caldecott, Kate Greenaway, Governor General’s, and CBCA Best Picture Book,

9

among others, are translated and sold in large markets such as China. The 2013 Kate Greenaway
winner, Black Dog by Levi Pinkett, was translated and available in China within a month of its
winning announcement (Qianwen, 2014). Likewise, Australian authors have been able to break
into American and British markets. Australian authors and illustrators including Margaret Wild
and Freya Blackwood have claimed literary prizes outside of Australia by winning the U.K.'s
Kate Greenaway Medal (Wilkins, 2011).
While the discussion on the merits of literary awards has been focused on the economic
impact of the awards there are other, more personal, benefits for the authors themselves. Many
awards grant cash prizes to the yearly winners. The CILIP Kate Greenaway Medal awards its
winners with £500 worth of books to donate to a library of their choice, a gold medal, and, since
2000, the winner has also been awarded the £5000 Colin Mears Award (The CILIP Carnegie &
Kate Greenaway Children’s Books Awards, n.d.). The CBCA Book of the Year authors and
illustrators of the winning and honor books are awarded a significant monetary prize of up to
AUD$10,000 per category although the original prize was a camellia if the winner was female
and a handshake if the winner was male (The CBCA, 2014). The Governor General’s Literary
Award winners receive a CAD$ 25,000 prize (this was increased from CAD$15,000 in 2007 in
honor of the Canada Council’s 50th anniversary) and non-award winning finalists are awarded
CAD$1,000. Interestingly, the publishers of the award-winning titles receive CAD$3,000 for the
promotion of the winning title which increases the visibility and distribution of each title making
their market presence stronger (Governor General’s Literary Awards, n.d.). The only award
mentioned in detail here that does not award a cash prize is the American Caldecott Medal which
instead presents its winners with a gold medal (The ALA, 2014).

10

Another, and perhaps more significant, benefit of these awards to their authors and
illustrators is the lasting notoriety of winning. Their names are almost permanently attached to
the awards they have won. It is almost guaranteed that they are introduced as a "Caldecott
illustrator" or a "Kate Greenaway illustrator" (for example) from that point onwards (Neary,
2013). Additionally, literary awards provide visual markers for the books themselves, generally
in the form of gold or silver seals that are placed on the cover, identifying those books as winners
and bestowing a certain amount of honor upon the author or illustrator (Just, 2008). Winning a
literary award like the Caldecott, the CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year, a Governor
General’s Award or the Kate Greenaway, to name only a few, places those authors on a national,
and sometimes, world stage. They are frequently the catalyst that completely changes the careers
of those who win (Maughan, 2011).
Lastly, literary awards, particularly for children given their large economic influence, act
as a method by which the cultural memes of the author are transferred into different societies and
cultures. In this specific case, the perception and representation of death is transferred through
the increased visibility of award winners in foreign markets. The awards themselves are the
agents of intercultural transfer. Furthermore, these literary awards can change the perception of
societies outside of our own. For example, Australian children's literature is showing the world,
through the young readers of its literature, that there is an incredibly diverse, multicultural, and
urban society “down under” rather than just kangaroos, koalas and caricatures of Steve Erwin
and Crocodile Dundee (Wilkins, 2011). Essentially, the judges are choosing not just books but
national ideologies aimed at socializing children in the beliefs and practices of their societies
(Hateley, 2013). These two aspects point to the way in which literary awards affect children's

11

publishing and literature on a global scale making them far more important than they are
frequently perceived to be in their country of origin.

12

IMPORTANCE OF DEATH EDUCATION FOR CHILDREN
We live in a world that is full of death; it is an unavoidable part of being human and of
life itself. However, as we have moved into a youth-adoring, death-denying society the
discussion of death, particularly to children, has become taboo (Auten, 1982; Homedes &
Ahmed, 1987; Oaks & Bibeau, 1987). In fact, as Oaks and Bibeau (1987) pointed out, the
language surrounding death is cloaked in denial—people do not die, rather they “pass away,”
“are at rest,” or have “gone to a better place.” Many children in developed countries today are
not exposed to death the way that they were for the bulk of human history. Infant mortality rates
are vastly lower and the average life expectancy is vastly higher thanks to increases in modern
medicine. Multi-generational families lived together and the dying process took place within the
family circle as did the actual death and the funeral processes in a way that is not frequently seen
now (Crase & Crase, 1975). Today, more deaths occur in hospitals, hospices, and nursing homes
than in the home, so children have little experience of the process of aging and dying (KublerRoss, 1972; Oaks & Bibeau, 1987). Modern children do not typically have the experience they
would have had in the past of caring for and seeing dying people and, therefore, do not learn
about death as a matter of fact and, as a result, have little firsthand experience on how to cope
with death when confronted (Homedes & Ahmed, 1987). By the age of 16, an average of only
one-fourth of American children will experience an extreme stressor which includes the death of
a family member or classmate. Four percent of American children and adolescents will
experience the death of one or both parents and that is one of the most painful death experiences
for children (Heath & Cole, 2011). Death has become an event that a child may experience rather
than an event they will most certainly experience (Gibson & Zaidman, 1991). Death, much like
sex, a normal function of any species, has become a taboo topic for discussion especially with
children (Ulin, 1980).
13

This wasn’t always the case. Children’s literature has always been a mirror of our
societies and what we face. Most people are able to recall the Grimm fairy tales where nearly
everyone and everything dies in the end. These dark fairy tales and folktales make sense when
considering the high death-rates in the past. For example, half of the children born in London
prior to 1770 died before their second birthday and these rates of death in children were not
particularly unusual or abnormally high for that time period. In this context, it makes sense that
parents and teachers would use whatever means available to them to increase the chances of their
children listening to them and decreasing their likelihood of dying young (Gibson & Zaidman,
1991). Death in literature was used as a method to scare children into behaving-e.g., the naughty
child or the villain of the story were the ones who died (Clement, 2013). Later death became a
plot device, meant to free children from the shackles of society so that they could be free to
pursue their own wild literary adventures (Clement, 2013). Now, while many adults believe that
we ought to be teaching our young about this final fact of life, that belief hasn’t translated into a
consistent number of children’s books that realistically portray death and it wasn’t until very
recently, within the last 20 to 30 years, that death began to make the shift into a legitimate
subject itself rather than a plot device or ultimate punishment (Clement, 2013; Gibson &
Zaidman, 1991).
So what exactly is it about death that makes it so hard of a subject to approach children
with? Many adults still have issues facing their own mortality and it is a subject that makes many
uncomfortable to think about. A study published in 2014 done in a town named Centerville
reported that the majority of parents, 75% of them, shield their children from movies, cartoons,
and television programs that depict death. Of these parents, 32% felt that media representations
of death were not age appropriate and an additional 32% wanted to shield their children from

14

strong emotions such as fear. Books and print material presented a more complicated challenge
but 35% of the parents indicated that they tried to shield their children from literary portrayals of
death. Of those parents, 24% thought that it was not appropriate for children to encounter death
in books. Some of the parents avoided books with death because of their own discomfort with
death. Within this same study, the majority of mothers polled reported that they themselves had
trouble coping with death and were overwhelmed in the face of death. These mothers also
reported that the majority of their language and approach to death with their children was
indirect, avoidant, and vague. They glossed over the details, saying that the person or animal in
question had “gone to a happy place” for example, or simply changing the subject without
answering their child’s questions about death (Miller, Gutierrez, Chow, & Schein, 2014). Sixtyeight percent of Americans face an abnormal fear of death. It is the second most common phobia,
ranking only below the fear of public speaking (of which 74% of people report) (Statistic Brain,
2012). Many more people will freely admit that they fear a painful death if not death itself and
still more people assume that a fear of death is perfectly natural and healthy. Americans spend an
average of 15% of their national income on medicine even though a full third of that has been
proven to be useless (on average use) in an effort to escape death (Hanson, 2005). Outside of the
biological certainty of death, it is also a social construct and as a result it is bound by
sociological and religious practices that many people view as being deeply private. Many people
feel that discussing their personal views on death and what happens to an individual after death is
extremely personal and not fit to discuss with children (Gibson & Zaidman, 1991). This feeling
of an invasion of privacy coupled with the majority of adults feeling at least some level of
discomfort in confronting their own notions of the finality of death has led to the marking of

15

death as a taboo subject, particularly for children. However, as Richard Ulin (1980) states, to be
death-free is to be essentially life-free.
There are a multitude of benefits to be gained by talking to children about death. At the
core is the lesson of learning to cope with death and loss and to appreciate the wonder that is life.
“The dying instruct the living about true priorities and the worth of each individual’s life”
(Gibson & Zaidman, 1991, p. 233). It is the goal of parents and teachers to prepare children for
stressful events by teaching them how to cope. It is the same with death and dying. After all,
death is a major stressor and is easily traumatic (Oaks & Bibeau, 1987). Simply understanding
how to cope with emotional trauma is an important lesson for children to learn (Gibson &
Zaidman, 1991). Children are better equipped when they confront death and other challenges if
they have a foundation of prior preparations gained through informal death education when
learning about death during normal daily living experiences or through formal death education.
This is vastly healthier when compared to having to learn how to cope with grief or trauma in the
face of an immediate crisis (Adams et al., 1999). Children find it easier to cope with a death in
their social circle (e.g. family or friends) if they have some form of death education or death
awareness. It is easier for them to deal with the emotional trauma of losing a person or a pet
close to them if they already know how to talk about death. Children are exposed to violence and
death on a daily basis, even without the event of someone close to them dying, whether or not the
child’s parents intend for them to see it (Homedes & Ahmed, 1987). They hear about it on the
radio, they see it on the news programs and television programs their parents or older family
member watch, and they see it in a variety of games. Additionally, outside of the benefits that
children gain from death education, or death awareness- the broadest term to categorize teaching
about death and the process of dying- adults benefit from talking to their children as well.

16

Parents that share their grief with their children and welcome their questions about death
diminish their own bewilderment and distress as well as that of their children and are able to
become role models for their children on how to manage and express grief (Adams et al., 1999;
Fiefel, 1986; Grollman as cited in Homedes & Ahmed, 1987).
Understanding death begins in childhood and evolves as a person grows and reaches new
developmental stages. Without setting the stage for children to learn about death the natural fear
of death can develop into a pervasive dread or phobia of death (Homedes & Ahmed, 1987). The
research into determining a child’s concepts of death began in the 1930s with the work of Sylvia
Anthony who, along with more recent researchers, determined that a child’s understanding and
awareness of death can be divided into stages that generally coincide with the different
developmental levels children go through (Romero, 1976). From infancy to age two, a child is
not able to process concepts. However, they are able to register loss and separation (Romero,
1976). The beginnings of a true understanding and awareness of death does not typically begin
until about age three. From the ages of three to five, children are able to demonstrate a growing
awareness of death. However, they see it as a temporary state much like a trip that can be
returned from or a nap which they can wake up from. It is also seen as a reversible state, a person
may be dead but at some point they will begin living again—like a sickness that can be cured.
They also lack the understanding of the universality of death—some people may die (like older
individuals) while others never will (like themselves or their parents). Children at this age
believe that if they are good then they will not die and, conversely, that bad people will die
(Clement, 2013; Mercurio & McNamee, 2006; Mills, 1979; Morris, 1974; Oaks & Bibeau, 1987;
Romero, 1976; Speece & Brent, 1984). There has been some research done that suggests that
children in this age group may not be able to sufficiently differentiate between the states of being

17

alive or dead as had been assumed in earlier studies. Rather than believing that death is
reversible children up to the age of five may believe that it is possible to be alive and dead
simultaneously. So rather than returning from the death, an individual never ceased to be alive
(Speece & Brent, 1984). Between the ages of five and nine, children are better able to
comprehend the concept of death. They understand the universality and finality of death. At this
age death is frequently personified (as a skeleton, clown, or another scary figure) and many
children believe that if they can avoid or hide from it then they will not die. Death remains
remote rather than being inevitable (Clement, 2013; Kubler-Ross, 1972; Speece & Brent, 1984;
Romero, 1976). It is during this age that children develop an interest in the physical aspect of
death and dying. They want to know what happens to the body after death and want to know
about the burial rites. Death can be explained by the cessation of bodily functions—e.g., the
heart stops beating, the eyes stop seeing, and the brain stops thinking or knowing (Mills, 1979;
Morris, 1974). This is also the time that children develop a more conscious form of empathy
resulting from the awareness that others have a history, an identity, and a life different from their
own (Clement, 2013). Beginning at age nine and generally complete by age eleven, children
fully understand death. They can see it as a biological process that everyone will go through and
this includes their family members, pets, and themselves. At this point in their lives, children can
understand the three components of death—irreversibility, non-functionality, and universality—
and they can comprehend that all three components happen simultaneously (Clement, 2013;
Kubler-Ross, 1972; Mercurio & McNamee, 2006; Oaks & Bibeau, 1987; Speece & Brent, 1984).
They can realistically comprehend death at this point and most children will have an
understanding of the concepts of death that is roughly approximate to that of adults. Their

18

philosophical beliefs on death will continue to develop and mature with them through
adolescence (Romero, 1976).
Regardless of the developmental stage, it is always better to be candid when talking to a
child about death rather than trying to spare them emotional stress by using gentle euphemisms
or evading their questions. This only confuses them and complicates their grasp on the reality of
death which has the potential for greater damage to their adjustment and acceptance of death.
One particularly damaging way of explaining death is to equate death to sleeping. This can result
in a pathological disturbance and cause an unhealthy amount of fear of sleeping or bedtimes
(Mills, 1979; Romero, 1976).
Children experience death in many different ways. Death has a huge impact on children
and they typically display “grief reactions” which are the ways they respond to death. These grief
reactions are dependent on the child’s sociocultural situation and their stage of individual
development. Children, like adults, have to navigate a set of complex emotions and feelings tied
to their own identities, cultural background, and their relationship with the deceased individual
when they encounter grief and loss (Wiseman, 2012). The typical grief response follows three
stages—in stage one they feel denial, shock, and disbelief; in stage two they feel despair and deal
with mental images; and during stage three they recover and find resolution (Oaks & Bibeau,
1987). More recent approaches to grief have focused on tasks or challenges of grief that may not
appear in an orderly and linear fashion like the stages of grief. These tasks require continual
reconsideration as the child’s needs and perspectives change as they mature. Wolfelt (as quoted
in Heath & Cole) identified six different tasks for a child who is grieving: (1) acknowledging that
death is a reality; (2) facing painful feelings of loss with the emotional support of others; (3)
integrating memories of the deceased person in current and future thinking; (4) redefining

19

oneself and relationships after death; (5) defining new meaning in one’s life by coming to terms
and making sense of the death; and (6) developing new relationships while strengthening
ongoing supportive relationships (2011, p. 248). There is no time frame for accomplishing these
tasks as grief is unique to the individual experiencing it and no child is expected to fully master
each task. During this process of recovery and resolution children may experience feelings of
sadness, anxiety, and may display physical signs of distress like headaches or stomachaches
(Wiseman, 2012). Children tend to immerse themselves in everyday activities as a response to
the sometimes overwhelming feelings of grief. Some people can interpret this to mean that the
child has moved on when in reality children need more time to process the death event and their
feelings related to it; children mourn for longer periods of time than this behavior might suggest.
Furthermore, many children have a delayed reaction to their loss that can span the duration of
their lifetime. They grieve at different points in their life for what the deceased could not
experience with them (Wiseman, 2012). An example of this is a daughter losing her father as a
child and grieving again when he is not there to walk her down the aisle at her wedding.
Occasionally, children can experience an atypical or morbid grief reaction where it
becomes prolonged and more intense than is considered normal and morphs into a mental illness.
These atypical grief reactions are usually a failure to grieve or a distorted grief and may result in
physical or mental health problems in the future. Some factors that may cause a morbid grief
reaction include sudden death, suicide, or a feeling of guilt for having caused the death (e.g., a
child telling the person that they “hated them and wished they were dead” before they died)
(Oaks & Bibeau, 1987). Intense feelings of anger and helplessness in the face of death,
particularly from violent events such as wars and violence, can prolong a child’s grief, holding
them in a seemingly powerless victim’s role. When a child harbors feelings of anger and/blame

20

over a death there is a significantly greater likelihood that they will suffer from depression and/or
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (Heath & Cole, 2011). Some of the psychological reactions—
such as fear of their death or anxiety about their future—to death can distort the maturation of
personality and make a child too tired or insecure to focus on learning (Grossman, 1983;
Nicholson & Pearson, 2003). It is because of these potential negative effects on a child’s
physical and mental well-being that they should be able to freely express grief and to be educated
on the process of death and dying. After all, grief is an intensely personal process but also an
experience whose impact can be lessened by sharing and expressing feelings and fears (Mercurio
& McNamee, 2006).

21

IMPORTANTANCE OF DEATH IN AWARD WINNERS
There are few guidelines that are available to the average person looking to find picture
books to help a child cope with death, and there is a lot of information to remember and sift
through. One thing that would assist parents and adults in finding material that meets as much of
this criteria as possible would be through a better representation of death in award-winning
picture books. As established in the previous sections, literary awards for children’s books have a
wide spread influence on sales, availability in both commercial and library settings, and in
notoriety. In recent years, the number of children’s books published about death has drastically
increased and yet we see almost no evidence of this in the selection of winning and honor books.
The great majority of commonly read books—award winners and children’s favorite books—do
not address death. Those parents that wish to discuss death with their children need to make an
extra effort to find age-appropriate books about death (Gutierrez, Miller, Rosengren, & Schein,
2014). Literary awards are designed to reflect the world that we live in but we cannot have life
without death.

22

BOOK ANALYSIS
For the book analysis, I will be looking at the winners and honor books for each award
that depicts death and is designed to be read by a young audience. For this reason, two recent
awardees involving death will be excluded: the 2012 Kate Greenaway winner A Monster Calls
by Patrick Ness and the 2008 CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year winner Requiem for a Beast
by Matt Ottley. Both of these titles focus quite heavily on death but each is aimed at an older
audience. A Monster Calls is more of a chapter book with a few illustrations than a picture book
although it does very poignantly show how a young boy comes to terms with his mother’s death.
Requiem for a Beast is a graphic novel designed for a decidedly mature audience although it is
technically categorized as a children’s book. For the remaining titles I will be examining how
they depict death, the grief response of the characters, the healing process where there is one, and
the situation surrounding the death. Finally, I will be examining what aspect of death awareness
each book presents to its readers or, in other words, what purpose the book may serve in
introducing different concepts surrounding death and loss. Overall, 221 titles were examined—
72 from Australia, 24 from England, 24 from Canada, and 101 from the United States. Of these
titles, only ten picture books addressed death for their child audience—seven from Australia, two
from England, one from Canada, and zero from the United States.
Within these titles there were multiple types of death depicted: the death of a pet (1), the
death of a grandparent (2), the death of an adult friend (1), the death of a parent (2), the death of
a sibling (1), death in the family due to war/civil unrest (2), and death of a main child character
(1). In three titles, the death event was fully illustrated while in the remaining seven titles the
death event largely took place “off-stage” even as events preceding and following the death were
fully shown (see Appendix). The main characters displayed a range of emotions in response to
the death event(s) within each title ranging from sadness (10), fear (4), anger (3), denial (2),
23

regret (1), relief (1), and finally acceptance or peace (7). Seven of the titles represent the variety
of healing processes that children can go through when grieving while the remaining three titles
cover far more dramatic situations—like war and starvation—where a child may experience
death and grief.
Of the literary awards discussed here, Australia’s CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year
has the highest number (7) of books that portray death. It also has the most varied portrayals of
death ranging from a natural death in the family to war to starvation. The Kate Greenaway Medal
had not recognized a contemporary picture book on death until very recently. Since 2010, the
United Kingdom has had a brief wave (2) of winning books that have addressed death and loss
for a young audience. The Canadian Governor General’s Literary Award has recognized only
one English-language title depicting death. Unfortunately, since 1990 the United States has not
had any books on death be awarded the Caldecott. Though there have been ample picture books
on death published few of them have been recognized in literary awards. There are, of course,
myriad reasons why these books were deemed unfit but it seems to be a poor reflection of the
issues that children face that in the past twenty-three years, and out of one hundred and one titles,
not a single picture book on death has been selected for one of the most influential of American
children’s literary awards.

Death of a Pet
Harry & Hopper by Margaret Wild
The first Kate Greenaway Medal winner that approached death is the 2010 book Harry &
Hopper written by Margaret Wild and illustrated by Freya Blackwood. When Harry was
younger, a small excitable dog, Hopper, came to live with him. Harry and Hopper were best

24

friends—they played together, learned together, outwitted Harry’s dad together, and slept
together. One day, Harry comes home from school and Hopper is not outside waiting for him at
the gate like he always is. Instead, his dad is waiting for him and tells him that he is very sorry
but that there was an accident and Hopper is dead. Harry does not want to believe it and refuses
to see Hopper before he is buried. That night he cannot sleep in alone in his bed and the next day
at school he does not tell any of his friends what happened to Hopper. The next night, Harry
sleeps on the sofa again and this time he wakes up in the middle to see Hopper jumping at the
window. Harry is elated to see Hopper again and the two of them play all night under the
moonlight. Hopper continues to visit Harry every night growing fainter and a little less solid each
time. Finally, the night comes where Hopper is almost transparent, wispy and cold as the winter
air. Harry takes him inside and into his bedroom where they lay together until Harry can finally
say goodbye to Hopper.
The type of death, that of a pet, Harry & Hopper portrays is the most common way that
children are introduced to death and the process of grieving. Harry & Hopper fully realizes the
special bond that many children, and adults, feel with their pets. These animals can mean as
much to us as our human friends do and feeling grief over their death is entirely normal. Harry &
Hopper plays through a full range of emotions that a child may deal with when faced with the
loss of their pet. Harry feels denial, anger, sadness, and finally acceptance. The adult in this
book never shies away from discussing death with their child; rather, he was honest and spoke
simply but allowed his child enough time and space to grieve. Harry & Hopper is also an
illustration of the fact that even though a person or animal may be dead they are never entirely
gone, rather they can live on in memories and in dreams. When Hopper dies, he is never shown
as being dead rather he becomes fainter and fainter as time goes on and Harry begins to heal.

25

Harry & Hopper would be an excellent, and gentle, book to give to children who are grieving
over the death of a pet.

Death of a Grandparent
Waiting for the Whales by Sheryl McFarlane
Written by Sheryl MacFarlane and illustrated by Ron Lightburn, Waiting for the Whales
is the 1992 Governor General’s Literary Award winner for English language illustration and the
only Canadian award winner analyzed here. An old man lives alone in a cottage on a bluff by the
sea. He sees all manner of wildlife but particularly loves watching the orcas that frolic close to
the shore every summer. For a brief while the orcas made the old man feel less lonely until they
departed again in the fall. He keeps himself busy with gardening, harvesting oysters and clams,
and walking through the nearby woods. He had children but they had long ago left to build their
own lives and so the old man waited for the orcas to return. One spring day, the old man’s
daughter returns unexpectedly carrying only her bags and a baby girl. That summer when the
orcas returned the old man carries his granddaughter out to the shore and tells her all about the
orcas he has watched since he was a little boy. Eventually the baby grows into a little girl who
sticks to her grandfather like glue. They go everywhere together and garden, harvest oysters and
clams, and take long walks but mostly they waited for the orcas to return. Eventually, the old
man grew frail and begins to take longer and longer rests. The day the orcas come back the old
man died and the little girl wept as her mother told her not to be sad, that her grandfather’s spirit
had gone to swim with the orcas. The next summer the little girl sees the orcas again but
something was different, a small group of orcas are hanging back—a calf swimming between its

26

mother and an old bull and the little girl knew that her grandfather was right there with her and
the orcas.
Waiting for the Whales is a very gentle book; it is sweet, heartfelt, and presents death as
gently as possible for children. It particularly focuses on the continuation and cycle of life. The
little girl, who along with the grandfather is never named, is sad for a little bit in the story but
focuses on the orcas that her grandfather loved so much. She watches for them after his death as
he and she did for her entire life and feels safe and secure to know that her own family is
represented in the last pod of orcas she sees. She takes comfort after his death in doing the things
that remind her of the good times with her grandfather. This is a good lesson for children to
learn, that sometimes great healing can come through continuing traditions they shared with the
deceased to keep their memories of the person they lost stay alive.
Grandpa by Lilith Norman
Grandpa written by Lilith Norman and illustrated by Noela Young is a 1999 Honor Book
for the CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year. Blake’s grandfather moves in with his family and
Blake is not fond of the idea. His grandpa is loud, tells long boring stories, occasionally snaps at
Blake’s mother, and has taken over Blake’s room forcing him to move into the sunroom. But his
grandfather is good at fixing things and making little figurines out of horseshoe nails. After his
grandfather dies, Blake’s family experiences a mixture of relief and sadness. Blake is glad that
things will go back to normal but he misses his grandfather. He realizes that even though his
grandfather was cranky and boring that he was his grandfather and that makes him the best in the
world. Blake decides to take his horseshoe nail figures to school and show them to his class to let
everyone know what a great grandpa he had.

27

Grandpa shows another facet of the grieving process and that is the feeling of relief that
death has happened. At one point Blake’s mother says that she is glad it is over and then
promptly bursts into tears. Blake’s grandfather had been ailing for a long time and his death
brought an end to his pain. While the feeling of relief may be present, it does not take away from
the sadness or make it any less real. This is an important realization for children to have—that
you can have two opposing emotions where neither one takes away from the other. Children and
adults will experience a huge range of emotions when faced with loss and Grandpa emphasizes
that it is normal to feel that way
Death of an Adult Friend
The Very Best of Friends by Margaret Wild
The Very Best of Friends written by Margaret Wild and illustrated by Julie Vivas is the
1990 CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year. This book features beautiful and simple watercolor
illustrations. The scenes are never busy or overcrowded; in fact, the illustrations wonderfully
reflect the peace that comes from living out in the country. In The Very Best of Friends, Jesse
and her husband James live on a large farm with many animals and one cat named William.
James loved cats and loved William while Jesse was less than fond of cats. James and William
were the very best of friends. One Sunday morning, James dies suddenly. As Jesse mourns she
shuts William out of her life and he is left to fend for himself and live in the barn. It is not until
much later than Jesse begins to rise out of her sadness that she realizes what she has done to
William. She moves him back into the house, nurses him back to health, and eventually the two
of them become the very best of friends.
The occurrence of death in this book is gentle, especially when compared to some of the
later winners, and James’ death is depicted only in an image showing an ambulance driving away

28

from the gate of the farm. Wild does not get into any specifics of how James dies other than to
say that it was a sudden death. What The Very Best of Friends really describes is the mourning
process. Jesse shuts down after James dies—she cries a lot when she thinks no one is watching,
stops doing the things that she loves like writing letters, and she becomes very forgetful. As
many people who have experienced grief can relate to, she is in the “fog of grief”. The fog
slowly lifts over the course of the book and eventually Jesse is able to continue living. Her
mourning process is mirrored by how she treats William. At its worst, she kicks him out of her
life; James’ cat is simply too much for her to deal with at that point. However, as she heals she is
able to bring him back into her life and eventually the two of them are able to reclaim the things
that made them each happy before James’ death. By linking the process of grief to a tangible
relationship, that of Jesse and William, Wild is able to discuss how that grieving process may
look to people on the outside. By making William a cat, Wild is also giving young children a
character they can more easily identify with than a grown woman. Children who have a grieving
adult in their life may be confused and scared by how that adult is acting. In this respect, William
fulfills the same role that child would have in real life. He is confused and scared by Jesse’s
actions and feels like she does not love him but The Very Best of Friends is careful to explain
that that is not the case. Jesse’s actions are not at all William’s fault and this is a very valuable
lesson for children who may feel that an adult’s grief is their fault. The Very Best of Friends
would be especially effective to help a child understand how their parents or other adult figures
are handling a death as well, to let them see that they will eventually heal, and can continue
onwards.

29

Death of a Parent
The Sound of the Sea by Jacqueline Harvey
The Sound of the Sea, written by Jacqueline Harvey and illustrated by Warren Crossett, is
a 2006 Honor Book for the CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year. Sam goes to the beach to
remember. He and his mother loved to go to the beach. They would fish, catch crabs, and race
along the sand. But everything changes when his mother gets sick—she is tired all the time, has
headaches, and cries a lot. After she dies, Sam goes to live with his grandparents where he cries
himself to sleep every night. He wants her back and he is so mad at her for leaving him that he
tries to forget all about his mother. He yells at his grandparents when they try to talk about her
and makes them put away all of her pictures. Then one afternoon, after she had been gone for a
long time, his grandfather tricks him into going to the beach. He does not want to go but the sea
calls to him and eventually he goes to his grandfather standing in the surf, he can feel his
mother’s presence. They start going to the beach every day, at first they are silent, just
remembering his mother but eventually they start talking just a little bit at first. Slowly, Sam
stops being mad at his mother for dying and he is able to remember her voice and love her.
The Sound of the Sea is wonderful example of the different emotions children feel when
someone close to them dies. Anger is a very common emotion that people have to deal with
when faced with loss. In The Sound of the Sea, Sam has to navigate his anger at his mother for
dying; he is not mad at the illness that took her, he is mad at her for not trying harder to live and
overcome it. The Sounds of the Sea shows how he processes those emotions surrounding his
mother’s death and how the healing process happened for him. This book can teach children
feeling anger and grief that those emotions are normal and that they will eventually pass. It is
also a good reminder that while doings things that they would have done with a parent or loved

30

one many hurt after they die eventually they will be able to find pleasure, and healing, in
carrying on with those traditions.
FArTHER by Graham Baker-Smith
Immediately following Harry & Hopper, FArTHER by Graham Baker-Smith, was
awarded the Kate Greenaway Medal in 2011. In FArTHER, the narrator’s father dreams of
flying. It is an all-consuming dream, one that keeps him from eating, sleeping, and sometimes
recognizing his son. But another call claims his father and he went off to war, framed against a
field of poppies, and never returns. It is many years before his father’s dream speaks to him. He
takes up his father’s old wings, makes a few adjustments, and finally flies and he can feel his
father with his in the vast blue sky. Now he has a son of his own and he wonders what his son
will do if his father’s dream visits him too.
FArTHER is the most ethereal of these books. The illustrations are light and hazy and
there is a sense of magic during the book. The one exception to this is when his father is called to
war-the illustration turns dark, moody, and hints at a danger that hasn’t been explained. In this
scene his father is shown in a khaki uniform in a field of poppies. This image is highly symbolic
in the United Kingdom. Poppies are worn in honor of Remembrance Day on November 11th.
Remembrance Day is meant to honor members of the armed forces who died in World War I. By
providing these visual cues, most children in the United Kingdom would understand that his
father died at war. In this way, FArTHER never directly talks about death or any of the aspects of
grief but death is ever present in the story. The reader knows from the beginning that the father is
gone and that what is being shown are the memories of the narrator. FArTHER shows the
continuation of the family, family traditions, and of the father’s dreams that live on in his son
and grandson. The final image shows the narrator’s infant son reaching towards the moon where

31

he can see the face of his grandfather looking down at him. With this one image Baker-Smith
illustrates the cycle of life, how death and birth are all tied together.

Death of a Sibling
Jenny Angel by Margaret Wild
Jenny Angel, written by Margaret Wild and illustrated by Anne Spudvilas, is the CBCA
Best Picture Book of the Year in 2000. Jenny Angel is beautifully illustrated and alternates
between boldly colored spreads and spare, minimalistic illustrations on other pages. In Jenny
Angel, Jenny’s younger brother Davy is dying and she believes that she is his guardian angel and
that if she keeps watch over him during the night that he will live, that the doctors will be wrong
about her brother. At night, Jenny sits on the roof wrapped in her mother’s raincoat and watches.
Every morning she tells Davy where she flew the night before and the things that she saw, her
raincoat hiding her angel’s wings. She wears the raincoat everywhere, even to school. Every day
when she gets home she curls up next to her brother and tells him all about her day—who was
sitting next to whom in each class, school drama—until her voice is hoarse. Eventually, Davy
grows too weak to listen or to care, he stops asking about her days at school or her adventures as
an angel at night and he finally stops asking to touch her wings. After Davy dies, she finally
takes her raincoat off and goes up to the roof one more time. This time her mother, who is
terrified of heights, follows her up, wraps them both up in the raincoat and the two of them sit
among the clouds and moon and stars.
Margaret Wild has stated that the inspiration for Jenny Angel came after her brother died
at the age of seven (Penguin Books Australia, 2014). Her first-hand experience with this type of
death and grief is evident in the gentle and compassionate way she tells her story. Jenny, the big

32

sister, feels the need to protect her brother—a feeling that is shared by siblings all over the
world. During the course of the book, Jenny is slowly coming to terms with her brother’s
inevitable death and her mother is there to support her and to help her understand what is
happening. At one point in the story Jenny’s mother tells her “He is going to die. No one can
keep him alive. Not even you” (p. 20). Her mother is not hiding anything from her or trying to
shield her from the realities of an impending death, rather she is preparing her for will eventually
happen. Jenny Angel points emphasizes the three mature concepts of death—irreversibility,
nonfunctionality, and universality (Speece & Brent, 1984)—to help children understand that
everyone will die and this includes other children, family members, and themselves.

Death in the Family due to War/Civil Unrest
My Dog by John Heffernan
My Dog was written by John Heffernan and illustrated by Andrew McLean and is a 2002
CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year Honor book. My Dog follows the story of Alija, a young
boy who lives in Liztar- a quiet village until the army comes. With the army comes a flood of
refugees- people which who have “fear stuck all over them like the mud that comes when the
snow melts” (p. 4). One of these refugees is a very old man with a small dog and Alija tries to
give him some bread but the old man seems to not even see him, ignores him, and keeps moving
away. Later, Alija attempts to give the old man bread again only now the old man was dead
sitting on a bench in the middle of town. Alija attends the burial and the man’s small dog follows
him home. Night after night, the sky to the east lights up with bombs and slowly they move
closer to Alija’s village as the civil war spreads. It becomes too dangerous for Alija and his
family to stay so his father sends him, his mother, and his dog off to stay with an aunt in a city

33

far away from the fighting. While they are on the road, Alija’s vehicle is ambushed and they are
forced out onto the road and an old woman is beaten. Alija’s mother tries to stop the beating and
is taken from the group—she is the only woman and the most beautiful in the village—that is
taken by the group of armed men that ambushed them. After three days of walking, Alija and his
dog make it to the coast where they are taken in by an old man who takes Alija and his dog to his
daughter’s house. As the story ends, they are trying to find Alija’s aunt but he is only one of
many refugees and no one knows of his aunt. So he waits at the end of the road, with his dog, for
his family to be found so they can be together again.
My Dog was the first of the contemporary winners to depict not only death but war as
well. It is a dramatic shift away from the gentle depictions of death seen in the earlier award
winners. As a whole, it is a much more dramatic story and one that can be seen as a scary. It is
also the first award winner or honor book that illustrates a dead person. My At one point, Alija’s
father says that the war will not come to Liztar, that they all live together whether they are
Bosnian, Serb, Croat, Muslim, or Christian. As the war spreads the people of Liztar stop living
together and neighbors begin to turn against each other. Heffernan manages to imbue the book
with a sense of dread, a certain kind of fear of what will happen next, that makes this story of
civil strife seem more real. The illustrations are simple and frequently seem just a little blurry or
out of focus which allows the readers imagination to take off throughout the book. When the old
man dies at the beginning of the book he is shown slumped over on a bench, his mouth open, his
eyes wide and unseeing, and his skin a deathly shade of a whitish grey. With this scene, My Dog
achieved another first among the contemporary books by showing part of the biological process
of what happens at death. My Dog covers loss as Alija loses everyone close to him but leaves the
end of story open enough to where a young reader could imagine that the family is reunited with

34

everyone happy and healthy. While war could be considered to be far outside the realm of topics
that are appropriate for children others argue that since warfare conflicts with the deepest level of
humanity it is the best teacher of empathy (De Waal as cited in Clement, 2013, p. 8).
Home and Away by John Marsden
The most recent book involving death to land on the CBCA Best Picture Book of the
Year list is the 2009 Honor book Home and Away written by John Marsden and illustrated by
Matt Ottley. In Home and Away the narrator describes a normal day for their family as everyone
bundles off to work or school. The next day, on April 27, the war begins. The book continues as
journal entries describing what the family is going through and how the city is changing as the
war progresses. The city is in ruins, food is hard to find, a sister has ceased to speak, a brother
has jaundice, the flu, and pain in his kidneys, and Grandma Reynor looks like the next puff of
wind will blow her away. Eventually the father hears of a boat that can take them away from the
madness and it takes everything they have to secure a place on it. Before they can board the ship
Grandma Reynor dies and they are forced to leave her behind without a burial. They are heading
for a place called Hollania but the ship is in such terrible condition that they may not make it.
The father is stabbed to death over a dispute on how to divide the fish that some men caught.
They eventually reach their destination and find themselves unwelcome and they are all marched
into a detention camp. Eight months pass and the mother has died, the sister is in a psychiatric
unit and the brother is heavily medicated to prevent him from harming himself. The narrator ends
the story wishing the siblings could be together again, they could face anything if they were
together.
Home and Away is another book that tackles a difficult situation—that of the refugee
experience in a time of war. It is something we hope our children never have to experience but

35

Home and Away brings an often neglected side of the story to light. By allowing the narrator to
remain unidentified—we do not know if the narrator is male or female, the youngest, oldest, or
middle child—Marsden makes it easier for young readers to put themselves in the place of the
narrator and to begin to understand what that experience is like for children. The book alternates
between realistic illustrations and drawings that a child would have made to describe the story.
The use of the child-like illustrations further emphasizes the childlike understanding and
experience that a young reader would experience in a similar situation. When the grandmother
dies, it is shown as a hand resting on the sand but otherwise her death is not depicted. However,
when the father is killed there is a childlike drawing showing the father on his back bleeding
giant red drops of blood while a man stands over him with a bloody knife raised above his head.
It is a simple but very graphic illustration of how a child could perceive that event. Again, this is
not a book that helps children cope with death so much as it introduces some of the horrific
events that have happened, and continue, to happen in our world and teaches children empathy
towards those in miserable situations.

Death of a Child Main Character
Dust by Colin Thompson
The 2008 Honor book for the CBCA Best Picture Book of the Year manages to be both
extremely graphic and designed for a young audience. Dust was written by Colin Thompson and
illustrated by Thompson and thirteen other illustrators. Dust tells the story of a young African
boy that dies of starvation. He dies in the middle of the night, seventy years too young. He is
never able to fall in love, to laugh, to learn. It did not hurt because pain needs something to feed
off of and they had no food. He sat under a tree wrapped in his mother’s arms and when the night

36

came it was so cold it made them transparent. The next morning his mother was dead but he was
too weak to move from her lifeless arms. Vultures are waiting for him but the rest of the world
has moved on and forgotten him. Tomorrow, he and the people he knew will be back in the dust.
Out of all of the books, the narrative in Dust is the smallest and the simplest but it tells an
extremely powerful story. Dust heavily relies on its illustrations to portray this harsh world and
reality. The story never escapes death; things never get better for the characters described within.
In one scene, he is seen wrapped in a burial shroud, another shows the gaunt and emaciated
figures of those starving with him, and yet another shows a group of women sitting with their
children and one child is dead while the mother mourns over him. Each image in Dust is
powerful. When his mother dies and he cannot move from her arms, she is shown with her eyes
fogged over, rolling into the back of her head, her skin a greyish brown, while he stares sadly out
at the reader. The world moving on and forgetting about him is depicted as man scraping his
leftovers into the trash covering a newspaper with a headlining article on famine. Dust does not
simply teach children about death it teaches them about the horrific conditions that people are
living in all over the world. It teaches them empathy and shows them that the way they live their
lives is not the way that other children are fortunate enough to live theirs. If there is any book
that can set the stage for a desire to help in the world and to be charitable, Dust is certainly one
of them. In that aspect, it would be accomplishing exactly what it set out to do. Dust was written
and illustrated for Save the Children and all royalties from the sale of the book went to the
charity making it the only honor book (or winner) in any of the four countries discussed in this
paper that directly benefitted a cause.

37

USING BOOKS ON DEATH WITH CHILDREN
While there are many ways to address death with children, one method that is particularly
useful—especially with younger children—is bibliotherapy. Bibliotherapy is especially effective
because the stories tap into children’s natural creativity and their ability to suspend disbelief.
Children reading or listening to a story are able to comprehend it on two separate levels; on a
conscious level they are actively focused on the content of the story, while on an unconscious
level they are searching for an experience in their own lives that mirrors what they are reading.
By doing this and identifying with the main character children are learning lessons for how to
deal with their own real-life problems and how to develop coping mechanisms (Mercurio &
McNamee, 2006; Nicholson & Pearson, 2003). Books that discuss death can help a child cope
with their own reactions to the death of a loved one, including pets (Grossman, 1983). Books can
help children recognize that both happy and sad emotions are normal and that they can be
expressed (Mills, 1979). Children will seek information, ask questions, and develop
interpretations concerning death and dying that is appropriate to their level of understanding and
they come in contact with depictions of death on a daily basis through television, film, games,
stories, and music regardless of how much a parent tries to shield their child from death (Adams
et al., 1999). When children are uninformed or misinformed about the changes surrounding
them, they are left to draw their own conclusion based on what little information they can obtain
or events they observe (Lowe, 2009). Media literacy and a discussion of natural death, among
other methods, can correct the distorted images that a child receives about death and the process
of dying (Wass, 2005). The study done on European Americans in Centerville reported that 45%
of parents had children who had misconceptions about death. Some children misunderstood the
causes of death, for example assuming that it only happened to the elderly. Others had
misconceptions of the finality of death and 21% of the parents surveyed reported that their child
38

thought that death was not permanent. Many parents reported that their children were equating
death with sleeping or hibernation and that the dead could be woken up, and in one case that
“Snow White kisses” could wake a dead person up (Miller et al., 2014).
Within bibliotherapy, picture book therapy is extremely powerful for young children and
it helps them identify external and internal sources that can help them to cope with death
(Mercurio & McNamee, 2006). Some of the external sources include potential “allies”—people
or things that are capable of supporting and comforting—such as family member, peers, teachers,
or inanimate objects like stuffed animals or blankets. Some of the internal sources they can
utilize include a positive self-concept, feelings of independence, the ability to problem solve, and
a sense of control over some aspect of their fear (Nicholson & Pearson, 2003). They are able to
identify with the main character’s needs, frustrations, and wishes. They are often able to
experience emotional release through abreaction (reliving an experience to purge it of its
emotional excesses) and catharsis. This allows them to gain insights into solutions for their own
problems by identifying the coping strategies presented within the books (Mercurio &
McNamee, 2006; Nicholson & Pearson, 2003). Bibliotherapy has been shown to successfully
reduce children’s fears even when using books considered scary. Scary books, rather than
frightening a child, capture their attention and provide a vicarious opportunity for exploring and
mastering their fears. These books or stories that provide a resolution to the threat (in our case
death) instill confidence rather than fear in children (Trousdale as cited in Nicholson & Pearson,
2003). Children who read and enjoy a variety of literature are better equipped to interpret their
own experiences and to measure them against other experiences they have read about allowing
them to develop a frame of reference into which they can fit their new experiences and
knowledge (Hambleton, 2001). Literature also allows children to gain some insights into human

39

behavior, emotions (and this is particularly important when grieving), and moral dilemmas. In
this sense, books act as “dress rehearsals” for different life experiences (Roberts & Crawford,
2008). Stories help to facilitate communication about death that reduces feelings of isolation and
models desired behaviors (Heath & Cole, 2011). Picture books allow children to engage with
ideas and experiences that are significant to them (Sipe as cited in Wiseman, 2012, p. 2). This
can, of course, apply to topics other than death and dying.
Picture books stimulate curiosity (after which learning occurs) by the images that draw
on feeling, abstract memories, and metaphoric associations while the narrative sparks the
reader’s imagination allowing them to weave together an explanation and meaning (Manifold,
2007). Visual images are important because they provide significant clues that affect the overall
meaning of the book and what children gather from them. Additionally, the meaning conveyed in
the illustrations of a book may be more significant to children for understanding the overall
message of a picture book than the narrative (Wiseman, 2012). Children can also talk about
death through pictures rather than through words. Elisabeth Kubler-Ross (1972) shares one
particular story about a little boy coming to terms with his own death and his journey through the
pictures he drewA little boy tried to draw what he felt like. He drew a huge tank and in front of the
barrel was a tiny, little figure with a stop sign in his hand. This to me represents the fear
of death, the fear of the catastrophic, destructive force that comes upon you and you
cannot do anything about it….The next picture he drew was a beautiful bird flying up
into the sky. A little bit of its upper wing was painted gold. When he was asked what this
was, the boy said that it was the peace bird flying up into the sky with a little bit of

40

sunshine on its wing. It was the last picture he painted before he died. I think these are
picture expressions of a stage of anger and the final stage of acceptance. (p. 178)

Picture books present an aesthetic experience that is similar to the natural reaction of many
people to use visual rhythm and metaphoric synesthesia to regain a sense of control and harmony
after a traumatic event. They do this through image, visual and linguistic rhythm, metaphor, and
narrative that allow children to create places of safety in the midst of the traumatic event which
allows for deeper understanding and learning (Manifold, 2007). Literature, especially picture
books, is an important part of the process of the guidance by which children learn how to
navigate with their feelings when faced with loss.
Arguably, the most important aspect of bibliotherapy or death education is the selection
of excellent books. Gillespie and Connor’s (as cited in Mercurio & McNamee, 2006; as cited in
Nicholson & Pearson, 2003) suggestions include selecting books with attractive illustrations,
useful information, board humor, surprise elements, appealing refrains, and the use of animal
characters which are neutral in terms of age, race, religion, and gender which allows children of
different backgrounds to more easily identify with the story. Along with animal characters,
inanimate objects as main characters appeal to younger children and make identifying with that
character easier. The cat character William from The Very Best of Friends is an excellent
example of a character that children from a variety of different backgrounds can relate to and
identify with. Another set of guidelines considers problems and situations relevant to young
children, characters that are developed enough to allow for identification, a story deep enough to
enrich the meaning of life, opportunities for children to propose alternative solutions, and
freedom from sexist language and racial bias (Schrank as cited in Mercuiro & McNamee, 2006).

41

Each of the books discussed earlier were broken down into categories based on who has died
within the story. This allows for specific situations to be pinpointed and for those books to be
utilized. Harry & Hopper depicts the sudden death of a lifelong animal companion and the death
of a pet is the death event children are the most likely to face with the United States, Canada,
England, and Australia. Grandpa and Waiting for the Whales would be appropriate for a child
dealing with the death of a grandparent or older adult they were close to. Along the same vein,
The Very Best of Friends, although it is never specified, can be used when discussing the death
of a grandparent as James is an old man and presented in a decidedly grandfatherly manner.
Although statistically less likely, Jenny Angel, The Sound of the Sea, and FArTHER depict death
within the main character’s immediate family through a sibling and a parent respectively. These
deaths are often the most traumatic death events a child could face and create fear, anger,
anxiety, and feelings of guilt in the surviving child and so choosing an appropriate book becomes
all the more necessary. The Sound of the Sea is particularly good example of the next set of
criteria to keep in mind when selecting a book about death. The fears depicted needs to be those
that children can identify with, the fears must be successfully resolved or addressed, and coping
skills and internal and external resources must be readily identifiable so that children can relate
those strategies to their own situations (Nicholson & Pearson, 2003). The most noteworthy
aspect of The Sound of the Sea is how it displays external and internal resources. Samuel, the
main character, loses his mother and has a massive external resource in his grandfather. His
grandparents create as safe and comforting an environment as they can by letting him take down
his mother’s pictures while it is too painful for him to see images of her. His grandfather also
recognizes that the sea is a connection Samuel shared with his mother and begins taking him
there every day so that they can be in the place that Samuel feels the safest and closest to his

42

mother. Their trips to sea become a therapeutic ritual for Samuel where he is able to continue the
tradition his mother started and where he feels comfortable talking to his grandfather about his
feelings surrounding her death which helps him cope with her death in a healthy manner. While
not immediately useful for bibliotherapy some of the more ‘extreme’ titles discussed earlier can
be used for death education. My Dog, Home and Away, and Dust could be used as tools to begin
teaching about war and violence in an effort to develop empathy or to begin to build a charitable
foundation in a child. It is unlikely that a child from these four countries will experience war
firsthand and so they may present ideas too foreign for children to identify with in terms of
therapeutic use.
While it is not advisable for librarians to take on the role of a child psychologist, we can
be aware of what books are available to recommend for teachers, parents, and therapists who are
looking to discuss and teach death education or to help a child navigate their own grief
responses. This can be done by providing annotated bibliographies of appropriate books on a
variety of topics to support families and children through difficult times and/or to help them
identify which books might fit their needs. Another method librarians and teachers may utilize is
the development of family literacy bags that contain titles relating to specific types of death
education—e.g., death of a grandparent or pet (Roberts & Crawford, 2008).
For those who wish to discuss death with their children, children should never be forced
to talk about death or to discuss their feelings associated with death. Opportunities for discussion
should be provided and a child’s questions about death should be answered truthfully rather than
being brushed aside or ignored (Heath & Cole, 2011). Children should be introduced to the
books’ content so that they are not taken by surprise or caught off guard by sensitive issues or
heavy material (Roberts & Crawford, 2008). Short book talks and reading aloud are two methods

43

to introduce books on death to children. Reading aloud makes the book a shared experience and
lets children of all reading levels understand what is happening. When reading aloud, the picture
book should have illustrations that are large enough to be seen by an audience although this only
becomes an issue in a classroom setting. Once the story is over, questions could be asked to help
foster discussions that emphasize the major ideas and brings the story into real life allowing
children to draw from the coping methods presented when developing their own (Heath & Cole,
2003). Some examples of questions that could be asked, especially in a death-centric setting, are:
Do you ever feel (or wish) you were like that? If you were that character, what would you
do/think/wish for? What do you do when you feel that way? Do you wish you could act like that
when you are sad? Have you ever been that sad? Tell me about a time you were that sad. (Disque
& Langenbrunner as cited in Nicholson & Pearson, 2003). Other questions that may be
appropriate could focus on the growth of the main character—e.g., how did the characters grow
and change? Or how did they did with their problems? Outside of questions and discussions,
there are numerous activities that could be done with teaching a child about death including art
activities like constructing collages, dramatization, puppetry, role playing, and written responses
like letter writing to a character or person. Activities can help children engage with a story on a
more personal level (Nicholson & Pearson, 2003).
Finally, it is also important to remember that many of the problems in a child’s life are
too big to be solved with a book. They may give the appearance of helping without actually
giving any comfort or cure (Feeney & Moravcik, 2005). Using books to help when talking about
death to children can be a good starting point, an excellent supplement to a discussion, and an
effective method of helping children cope with death but it is also important to recognize that

44

children and grief are unique and will require different methods that suit the child and their
situation.

45

SUMMARY
If the committees for the existing and most influential literary awards for picture books,
and very specifically the Caldecott, refused to shy away from death as the Children’s Book
Council of Australia has done, it would provide parents and adults with a list of books that cover
the many different realities of being human. In turn, these books could be used to guide children
and to prepare them for facing the less than pleasant aspects of life as we know it.
In the United States, there have been no books (winners or honor books) that have
addressed death from 1990 to 2013. In fact, over the entire time the Caldecott Medal has been
given, only two titles have been about death: the 1967 winner Sam, Bangs, and Moonshine by
Evaline Ness, and the 1981 winner, Fables by Arnold Lobel (Gutierrez et al., 2014). They have
occasionally gotten close to discussing death but there is almost always a happy ending. For
example, sickness may be present but the person makes a full recovery, a parent might go
missing and just when all hope is lost they return home to their families, or a beloved toy is
missing and the child is devastated but eventually they find their toy again and all is well. Within
the same period, only one book in Canada has focused directly on death. The United Kingdom
only has a recent set of three award winners that focus on death from 2010 to 2012. In direct
contrast, the Australian CBCA Picture Book of the Year Award has eight winners and honor
books from 1990 to 2013 that focus on death. This indicates that Australians perhaps provide a
more balanced view of what life is like in their country and the world for their children.
Additionally, the Australia CBCA selections cover a much broader range of subjects relating to
death like war, murder, and starvation as well as the more typical subjects of death from natural
causes and disease giving children an early foundation upon which their understanding of death
can grow and mature.

46

Beyond literary awards, it may prove useful to examine the number of picture books
published in each country to do address death. The lack of award-winning picture books about
death may reflect a larger dearth of excellent literature being published for children that does
cover the final act of life, the beliefs of the award committee members on the validity or
appropriateness of death as its own subject, or the hesitation of authors, illustrators, and
publishers in taking a risk of producing a title on a subject that receives little to no recognition in
awards that significantly impact the economic performance of picture books and the professional
reputations of those involved in producing a winning title.
The United States has long been considered a death-adverse society. We try valiantly to
live longer and to keep our youthful appearances. Americans spend 15% of our gross domestic
product (GDP) on medicine in an effort to live longer. Yet a full third of what we spend our
money on has no scientific value and no proven effect on our lifespans or quality of life (Hanson,
2005). Comparatively, Australia and the United Kingdom spend an average of only 8.75% of
their GDPs on medicine (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2010). Not only do
Australia and the United Kingdom spend less on medicine than the United States, their citizens
are also living longer. Of the four countries, Australia has an average life expectancy of 83 years,
Canada’s average is 82.5 years, England follows with 81 years, and the United States 79.8 years.
It seems reasonable to suggest that the country with the highest proportion of children’s books
that address death spends less on medicine, especially that that has no scientific value, because
the fear of death is not as strong in a nation where they are not afraid to discuss death with their
children. To supplement this idea, within the United States there are 6.3 million people with a
diagnosed phobia. Of those 6.3 million people, 68% of them fear death to an extent where it
interferes with their daily lives. Four million, two hundred eighty-four thousand Americans have
47

a crippling fear of death. It is the second most common phobia with only a fear of public
speaking outnumbering it (Statistic Brain, 2012). Meanwhile, only 11% of Australians have a
specific diagnosed phobia. The total number of Australians with a phobia is less than the number
of Americans with only a phobia of death. Of the 2,494,800 Australians with a diagnosed phobia,
the fear of death does not break the top five most common phobias which are comprised of
PTSD, OCD, and social phobias (BeyondBlue, 2014).
Picture books are among the resources that are available to introduce children to the
world they live in. It is not always a pleasant reality, but it is important to prepare them for the
things they may experience and to help them learn about the experiences of others. Rather than
shielding children from the harsher truths, especially in regards to death, and setting them up for
a lifetime of fear, other countries should learn from the example the CBCA is setting with their
Best Picture Book of the Year award. They are more open with the topics they address with
children and, based on the statistics surrounding fears and health, it seems to be working to
produce a more balanced and healthy society. Perhaps the CBCA says it best when addressing
concerns that some of their selected titles are not appropriate for young audiences:
We live in a less than perfect world, and authors, illustrators and publishers are
perhaps reflecting our society. Children are bombarded with news and information, not to
mention advertising and TV programs. Books provide a means of generating thoughtful
discussions about issues and fears. They can be shared with a trusted adult, read at the
child’s own pace, and disturbing pages can be skipped. Reading is a very different
experience to that of being exposed to images and information over which one can have
little or no control. Books can be put aside or reread whenever the reader chooses to do
so… Life can be confronting, even for young children, but well-written and age48

appropriate fiction can provide a means of increasing their awareness and understanding.
When a child questions something, this ideally leads to an informed discussion with an
adult who has read the book and is able to suggest why the author may have used the
particular word(s) or written about the specific subject. Most books intended for primary
school children are far less 'questionable' than much that is so accessible on TV and
DVD (The CBCA Awards FAQ, n.d.).

49

REFERENCES
Picture Books:
Baker-Smith, G. (2010). FArTHER. London, England: Walker Books.
Heffernan, J. & McLean, A. (2001). My dog. New South Wales, Australia: Margaret Hamilton
Books.
Marsden, J. & Ottley, M. (2008). Home and away. Sydney, Australia: Hachette Australia Pty
Ltd.
McFarlane, S. (1991). Waiting for the whales. Victoria, Canada: Orca Book Publishers.
Ness, P. (2011). A monster calls. Somerville, MA: Candlewick Press.
Norman, L. & Young, N. (1998). Grandpa. New South Wales, Australia: Margaret Hamilton
Books.
Ottley, M. (2007). Requiem for a beast. Sydney, Australia: Hachette Livre Australia Pty Ltd.
Thompson, C. (2007). Dust. Sydney, Australia: ABC Books.
Wild, M. (1989). The very best of friends. New South Wales, Australia: Margaret Hamilton
Books Pty Ltd.
Wild, M. & Blackwood, F. (2009). Harry & Hopper. London, England: Scholastic.
Wild, M. & Spudvilas, A. (1999). Jenny angel. Victoria, Australia: Penguin Books Australia Ltd.
Articles:
Adams, D.W., Corr, C.A., Davies, B., Deveau, E., de Veber, L.L., Martinson, I.M., …, …, …,
…, Stevenson, R.G. (1999). Children, adolescents, and death: Myths, realities, and
challenges. Death Studies, 23, 443-463.
Auten, A. (1982). Why teach death education? Journal of Reading, 25(6), 602-605.
Clement, L. (2013). Death and the empathic embrace in four contemporary picture books.
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature, 51(4), 1-10.
Crase, D.R. & Crase, D. (1975). Death and the young child: Some practical suggestions on
support and counseling. Clinical Pediatrics, 14(8), 747-750.
Feeney, S. & Moravcik, E. (2005). Children’s literature: A window to understanding self and
others. YC Young Children, 60(5), 20-24, 26-28.
Gibson, L.R. & Zaidman, L.M. (1991). Death in children’s literature: Taboo or not taboo?
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly, 16(4), 232-234.
Givens, C.L. (2009). Hidden forms of censorship and their impact. Bookbird: A Journal of
International Children’s Literature, 47(3), 22-28.
50

Grossman, C.S. (1983). Children’s books: A child’s view of death. Clinical Pediatrics, 22, 7071.
Gutierrez, I.T., Miller, P.J., Rosengren, K.S., & Schein, S.S. (2014). Affective dimensions of
death: Children’s books, questions, and understandings. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 79(1), 43-61.
Hambleton, A. (2001). Children and the power of literature. School Libraries in Canada, 21(1),
3-8.
Hateley, E. (2013). And the winner is…?: Thinking about Australian book awards in the library.
The Australian Library Journal, 61(3), 189-199.
Heath, M.A. & Cole, B.V. (2011). Strengthening classroom emotional support for children
following a family member’s death. School Psychology International, 33(3), 243-262.
Homedes, N. & Ahmed, S.M. (1987). In my opinion…Death education for children. CHC, 16(1),
34-36.
Kubler-Ross, E. (1972). On death and dying. Journal of the American Medical Association,
221(2), 174-179.
Lowe, D.F. (2009). Helping children cope through literature. Forum on Public Policy: A Journal
of the Oxford Round Table.
Manifold, M.C. (2007). The healing picture book: An aesthetic of sorrow. Teacher Librarian,
34(3), 20-26.
Mercurio, M.L. & McNamee, A. (2006). Healing words, healing hearts: Using children’s
literature to cope with the loss of a pet. Childhood Education, Spring, 153-160.
Miller, P.J., Gutierrez, I.T., Chow, P.I., & Schein, S.S. (2014). European Americans in
Centerville: Community and family contexts. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 79(1), 19-42.
Mills, G.C. (1979). Books to help children understand death. The American Journal of Nursing,
79(2), 291-295.
Morris, B. (1974). Young children and books on death. Elementary English, 51(3), 395-398.
Nicholson, J.I., & Pearson, Q.M. (2003). Helping children cope with fears: Using children’s
literature in classroom guidance. Professional School Counseling, 7(1), 15-19.
Oaks, J. & Bibeau, D.L. (1987). Death education: Educating children for living. The Clearing
House, 60(9), 420-422.
Poling, D.A. & Hupp, J.M. (2008). Death sentences: A content analysis of children’s death
literature. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 169(2), 165-176.
Roberts, S.K. & Crawford, P.A. (2008). Real life calls for real books: Literature to help children
cope with family stressors. YC Young Children, 63(5), 12-17.
51

Romero, C. (1976). Children, death, and literature. Language Arts, 53(6), 674-678.
Sipe, L.R. (2012). Revisiting the relationships between text and pictures. Children’s Literature in
Education, 2012(43), 4-21.
Speece, M.W. & Brent, S.B. (1984). Children’s understanding of death: A review of three
components of a death concept. Child Development, 55(5), 1671-1686.
Ulin, R.O. (1980). A treatment of death in the classroom. English Education, 11(3), 162-168.
Wass, H. (2004). A perspective on the current state of death education. Death Studies, 28, 289308.
Wiseman, A.M. (2012). Summer’s end and sad goodbyes: Children’s picturebooks about death
and dying. Children’s Literature in Education, (2013)44, 1-14.
Articles (Web):
Early Word. (2012, January 23). Newbery/Caldecott/Printz winners equal sales. Retrieved from
http://www.earlyword.com/2012/01/23/newberycaldecottprintz-winners-equal-sales/
Hanson, R. (2005). Death and muddled thinking — It is so much worse than you think. Retrieved
from http://hanson.gmu.edu/feardie.pdf
Just, J. (2008, January 14). Eyes on the prizes. Retrieved from
http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/14/eyes-on-the-prizes/
Maughan, S. (2011, December 2). And the winner is…. Retrieved from
http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/childrens/childrens-booknews/article/49729-and-the-winner-is.html
Neary, L. (2013, January 28). A colorful anniversary: The Caldecott medal turns 75. Retrieved
from http://www.npr.org/2013/01/28/170200109/a-colorful-anniversary-the-caldecottmedal-turns-75
Penguin Books Australia. (2014). Margaret Wild (author). Retrieved from
http://www.penguin.com.au/contributors/1927/margaret-wild
Qianwen, L. (2014, January 15). Kid’s books boom. Retrieved from
http://www.globaltimes.cn/DesktopModules/DnnForge%20%20NewsArticles/Print.aspx?tabid=99&tabmoduleid=94&articleId=837672&moduleId=
405&PortalID=0
Wilkins, A. (2011, October 13). Australian children’s books achieve strong sales and
international recognition. Retrieved from
http://publishingperspectives.com/2011/10/australian-childrens-books-achieve-strongsales-and-international-recognition/
Websites:

52

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. (2010). Australia’s health 2010. Retrieved from
http://www.aihw.gov.au/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=6442452962
BeyondBlue. (2014). Specific phobias. Retrieved from http://www.beyondblue.org.au/thefacts/anxiety/types-of-anxiety/specific-phobias
Statistics Brain. (2012). Fear/phobia statistics. Retrieved from
http://www.statisticbrain.com/fear-phobia-statistics/
Award Websites:
The American Library Association. (2014). Awards, grants, and scholarships. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/alsc/awardsgrants
The Children’s Book Council of Australia. (2014). Retrieved from http://cbca.org.au/index.htm
The CILIP Carnegie & Kate Greenaway Children’s Book Awards. (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.carnegiegreenaway.org.uk/carnegie/
The Governor General’s Literary Awards. (n.d). Retrieved from
http://www.bookcentre.ca/awards/governor_generals_literary_awards

53

APPENDIX
Country

Australia

England

Canada

United States

Award

CBCA Best
Picture Book
of the Year

Kate
Greenaway
Medal

Randolph
Caldecott
Medal

Number of
Titles
Examined
Number of
Titles About
Death
Death of a Pet
Death of a
Grandparent
Death of an
Adult Friend
Death of a
Parent
Death of a
Sibling
Death in the
Family due to
War/Civil
Unrest
Death of a
Main Child
Character

72

24

Governor
General’s
Award for
EnglishLanguage
Illustration
24

101

221

7

2

1

0

10

0
1

1
0

0
1

0
0

1
2

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

2

1

0

0

0

1

2

0

0

0

2

1

0

0

0

1

54

Totals
Examined
4

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Education:
Florida State University, Currently Enrolled, Expected Graduation – December 2014
M.S. Degree, Library and Information Science – GPA 3.7/4.0
Awarded H.W. Wilson Scholarship, August 2013
University of Central Florida, May 2012
B.A. Degree, Anthropology – GPA 3.6/4.0

Additional Education:
University of South Florida, Summer 2013
Seminar, Origins and Evolutions of Princess Stories

Professional Experience:
Librarian, 10/2014 – Present
Employer: Seminole County Public Library
215 North Oxford Road, Casselberry, FL 32707
Supervisor: Barbara Piel
Intern, 01/2014 – 05/2014
Employer: Arlington Public Library
101 East Abram Street, Arlington, TX 76010
Supervisor: Linda Evans

55

