	  
Great Expectations: Researching Usability of Online Museum Collections

Carly Wickell

A thesis

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts

University of Washington

2014

Committee:
Wilson O'Donnell
Rachael Faust
Jessica Luke

Program Authorized to Offer Degree:
Museology

UMI Number: 1563141

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1563141
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  
©Copyright 2014
Carly Wickell

	  
University of Washington

Abstract

Great Expectations: Researching Usability of Online Museum Collections

Carly Wickell

Chair of the Supervisory Committee:
Associate Director Wilson O’Donnell
Museology

This evaluative study examined what museum visitors expect to find when they access a
museum’s online collection, how they are using online collections, and how successful their
searches are. Increased reliance on the Internet in today’s culture means the museum website is
quickly becoming the face for the institution and, for some visitors, their first impression. If a
museum’s online collection is not useful or usable, then time spent making data available online
will be wasted. This study focused on stakeholders of The Henry Art Gallery, located in Seattle,
Washington, and provided a model comprised of Usability Testing and Follow-Up Interviews to
create a comprehensive view of the user experience as it relates to online collections access. The
findings of this evaluation revealed trends in usability and user experience. For example, users
voiced the ability to share collections objects via social media and data suggested a desire for
relationship-based search functionality.

	  

i	  

Table of Contents
LIST OF FIGURES

II

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
PURPOSE OF EVALUATION STUDY

III
1
1
2

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
PUBLISHED RESEARCH FROM THE FIELD
Results and Data from the Field
USABILITY AND EVALUATION RESEARCH
IMPLICATIONS OF THE LITERATURE

3
4
9
13

3

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
EVALUATION STUDY
Key Terminology
PARTICIPANTS
USABILITY TESTING
STRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS

14
14
15
19
21

14

CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS
25
WHAT DO MUSEUM VISITORS EXPECT TO FIND WHEN THEY ACCESS A MUSEUM’S ONLINE COLLECTION?
25
HOW ARE MUSEUM VISITORS USING AND ACCESSING ONLINE COLLECTIONS?
29
HOW SUCCESSFUL ARE SEARCHES PERFORMED BY MUSEUM VISITORS ON THE ONLINE COLLECTIONS?31
Structured Interviews
32
Usability Tests
32
LIMITATIONS
38
CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION AND RESULTS
40
WHAT DO MUSEUM VISITORS EXPECT TO FIND WHEN THEY ACCESS A MUSEUM’S ONLINE COLLECTION?
40
HOW ARE MUSEUM VISITORS USING AND ACCESSING ONLINE COLLECTIONS?
40
HOW SUCCESSFUL ARE SEARCHES PERFORMED BY MUSEUM VISITORS ON THE ONLINE COLLECTIONS?41
CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
CONCLUSIONS
How successful are searches performed by museum visitors on the online collections?
What do museum visitors expect to find when they access a museum’s online collection?
How are museum visitors using and accessing online collections?
RECOMMENDATIONS

42
42
42
43
43
43

BIBLIOGRAPHY

45

APPENDIX A - CHARTS
INTERVIEW CHARTS
USABILITY TESTING CHARTS

48
48
49

	  

ii	  

List of Figures
	  
FIGURE 1. HENRY ART GALLERY STAFF CALL-TO-PARTICIPATE EMAIL
FIGURE 2. UW RESEARCHERS/ACADEMIC STAFF AND MUSEUM MEMBERS CALL-TO-PARTICIPATE
FIGURE 3. CONSENT AND RECORDING RELEASE FORM
FIGURE 4. USABILITY TEST TASK SCENARIOS
FIGURE 5. STRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS.
FIGURE 6. INTERVIEW QUESTION 1BI: IF YES, HOW MANY TIMES DO YOU THINK YOU’VE
ACCESSED IT IN THE LAST 12 MONTHS?
FIGURE 7. INTERVIEW QUESTION 2BI: IF YES, HOW MANY TIMES DO YOU THINK YOU’VE
ACCESSED IT IN THE LAST 12 MONTHS?
FIGURE 8. INTERVIEW QUESTION 3AI: IF YES, WHICH MUSEUM WEBSITES DID YOU VISIT?
FIGURE 9. AVERAGE TIME SPENT PER TASK

16
17
18
21
23
26
27
28
34

	  

iii	  

Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my committee members, Wilson O’Donnell,
Rachael Faust, and Jessica Luke for the guidance I have received during this process. I am
proud of what I have accomplished and a great deal of that is due to the three of you.
I would also like to thank my family and friends for being there for me through this amazing
journey. In particular, I would like to thank Janet and Dale Wickell, who have raised me to
be the amazing, sometimes stubborn, individual I have become. You have both done so much
to make this goal possible, and word cannot express how grateful I am to have such
supportive parentals.
Samantha Mittleman, Dani Hastings, and Amanda Dearolph, thank you for being my best
friends and keeping me from taking things too seriously. I love you awesome nerds.
Finally, a huge thank you to all the staff at the Henry Art Gallery for allowing me to perform
this study. Particularly, Judy Sourakli and (again) Rachael Faust, my thesis would not have
been possible without the two of you in my corner.

INTRODUCTION	  

Wickell	  1	  
Chapter 1
Introduction

Background Information
The Henry Art Gallery (Henry) is the contemporary art museum at the University of Washington
(UW). Opened in 1926, the museum is the first public art museum in the state of WA. The Henry
has a collection of over 25,000 objects and is committed to championing internationally
recognized and emerging artists. In 2007, the Henry underwent a massive overhaul to their
Collections Management System (CMS). Prior to this shift, the CMS used, SNAP! was solely
accessible by the Collections staff, and objects were not available for viewing online. The
Collections staff pushed for a system upgrade, citing difficulties utilizing it and a strong need for
an updated system that would also enable the future transfer of object images to the online arena.
Upon receiving grant funding, Henry staff enlisted the help of a project manager to assist in a
working timeline for the implementation of the data transfer from the old CMS to the newly
acquired Multi Mimsy XG (Mimsy). The software developers who create Mimsy also offer a
platform called Mobius, which allows the transfer of objects and associated data in the collection
to the web1.
During the first implementation of Mobius, it was only accessible to staff via authorized login
credentials. The goal, however, was to publish the objects in the collection to the web with 100%
of permanent collections photographed and accessible from that web portal. The collection
became accessible to the public during the launch of the new Henry website in 2008, designed by

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

Weible, Erin. “No Longer an Island: A New Collections Management System Transforms the Henry Art Gallery”
(Seattle, WA: The Henry Art Gallery, 2008).

INTRODUCTION	  

Wickell	  2	  

a local firm IF/THEN. IF/THEN also created a new “face” for Mobius, as it was considered by
museum staff to be unattractive and did not fit in with the look of the website2.
The museum is currently undergoing the process of a website redesign that will impact the
collections access. The Henry has been presented with the unique opportunity to make changes
to the look and usability of the collection site. Information on current usability of the collections
access as well as overall user experience with the current iteration of the collections sites is
needed prior to making any changes or implementing new features.
Purpose of Evaluation Study
The purpose of this study was to evaluate what museum visitors expect to experience when
accessing online collections. In order to answer this question, three specific questions were
developed to guide the study:
1. What do museum visitors expect to find when they access an online collection?
2. How are they using the online collections?
3. How successful are their searches?

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2

Faust, Rachael, interview by Carly Wickell. Interview (June 6, 2013).

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  3	  

Chapter 2
Literature Review
“Digital technologies have the potential to rewrite the meaning and significance of collections.”
– Fiona Cameron3

This literature review examined two general areas of interest relating to evaluations of museum
online collections. The first section of the literature review described published research from the
field on online collections access. This section synthesized the main findings that museums seem
to be taking a closer look at their web presence, inclusive of online collections, and that further
research should be completed to determine what users expect from online access. The second
section looked at usability testing research, and its place in evaluative studies of online museum
collections.
Published Research from the Field
The J. Paul Getty Foundation asked nine institutions to participate in a study aimed at moving
museum collections online. Institutions involved consisted of: Art Institute of Chicago, Freer
Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles County
Museum of Art, National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., San Francisco Museum of Art,
Seattle Art Museum, Tate: London, and the Walker Art Center. The published reports by the
Getty Foundation that followed the initiative, titled Moving Museum Collections Online: An
Interim Report from the Getty Foundation and L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty’s
Electronic Cataloguing Initiative, offer data from each institution that represents a culmination
of a “six-year initiative … launched in 1997, at a time when museums were just beginning to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

Cameron, Fiona. “Digital Futures I: Museum Collections, Digital Technologies, and the Cultural Construction of
Knowledge” (Curator 46, no. 3, July 2003), p327.

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  4	  

develop Web sites”4 This research initiative addressed what offering access to collections
through the website meant for the visitor and the museum5.
In the Getty Foundation’s report, Moving Museum Collections Online: An interim report from
the Getty Foundation, the nine participating institutions gave feedback on their online collections
process. A problem noted in the research was a common obstacle surrounding technology used
for museum collections. Multiple databases are often used in museums to store information about
its collections, and it can often take another form of software to make that information web-ready.
“Moreover, these systems do not “talk” to one another, often necessitating yet another layer of
technology – middleware – to integrate them for online publishing. Developing the middleware
is more difficult than many institutions initially imagined.”6
Results and Data from the Field
Dr. Paul F. Marty is the former Director of Information Technology at the Spurlock Museum,
and currently an Associate Professor for the School of Information within the College of
Communication and Information at Florida State University. In 2008, Marty conducted a visitor
study “administered to more than 1200 visitors at nine different online museums that addressed
questions about the role of museum websites in the lives of museum visitors. The results provide
details about the use of digital museum resources on museum websites, and indicate that the
majority of online museum visitors have clear expectations for the interactions that take place
between museums and museum websites.”7 Marty’s exploratory study received a large 69.4%
response rate when asked, "From your perspective, how important is it for a museum to have a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4

J. Paul Getty Foundation. “L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty's Electronic Cataloguing Initiative” (Los
Angeles, CA: The Getty Foundation, 2007).
5
Ibid.
6
J. Paul Getty Foundation. “Museum Catalogues Online” (Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Foundation, 2012).
7
Marty, Paul F. "Digital Museum Resources and Their Use, Museum Management and Curatorship." (Museum
Websites and Museum Visitors 23, no. 1, 2008), p81.

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  5	  

museum website?"8 This coincides with a statement from the Getty Foundation’s L.A. Art
Online report, “a Web-savvy public expects immediate user-friendly access to visual arts
collections.”9 The respondents of Marty’s study also expressed a desire for activities and content
on the website that was exclusive to that arena – to “take advantage of the online environment to
present unique experiences that cannot be duplicated in museums”.10
In his exploratory study, Marty went on to ask more questions on visitor views of online access,
including how often they went to the museum’s website. The answers to this query revealed that
“14.9% (179) [visited a museum website] Quarterly, 28.4% (341) Monthly, 30.5% (366) Weekly,
and 9.2% (110) Daily.” These results show an increase by 4% in the daily visit category than
when Dr.’s Victoria Kravchyna and Sam Hastings completed their survey in 2002.
Dr. Victoria Kravchyna conducted this study during her term at Arius3D, Inc., where she focused
on the research and evaluation of 3D technologies and the digitization of cultural heritage objects.
Dr. Sam Hastings collaborated on this study, and is the Director and Professor of the School of
Library and Information Sciences at the University of South Carolina. Kravchyna and Hastings
focused on a more specific demographic than Marty, with much of their research revolving
around museum professionals and academics.11 The questions that framed their study were “what
kind of information are Web users looking for? What quality and quantity of images would they
like to see on a page? What are their purposes for using images from the museum's collections?
[and] is the information adequate?”12 Through their research, they were able to conclude that:
“virtual visitors (63%) particularly value a capability to browse collection databases, to locate
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8

Marty, Paul F. "Digital Museum Resources and Their Use, Museum Management and Curatorship,” p88.
J. Paul Getty Foundation. “L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty's Electronic Cataloguing Initiative.”
10
Marty, Paul F. "Digital Museum Resources and Their Use, Museum Management and Curatorship," p90.
11	  Kravchyna, Victoria, and Sam Hastings. "Informational Value of Museum Web Sites." (First Monday 7, no. 2,
February 2002).
12
Ibid.
9

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  6	  

supplementary descriptive information. There is a need for contextual information, vivid
descriptive narratives, and theory drawn from narratives.”13 Kravchyna and Hastings state in
their research, “one definition of a "good" museum Web site is one that combines well-produced
general interest information with full access to the whole collection. This survey found that 63%
percent of virtual visitors look forward to searching museum collections.”14 Their study
concluded, “Virtual visitors (63%) particularly value a capability to browse collection databases,
to locate supplementary descriptive information. There is a need for contextual information,
vivid descriptive narratives, and theory drawn from narratives.”15
Dr. Fiona Cameron is, at publication, a Senior Research Fellow for the Institute of Culture and
Society at the University of Western: Sydney. Cameron is widely published and one area of
research focus is on digital technologies as they relate to cultural heritage. Her 2003 article,
Digital Futures I: Museum Collections, Digital Technologies, and the Cultural Construction of
Knowledge, “considers the synergy between theoretical ideas in the academy and the computer
ontologies that have been brought to bear on collections information.”16 Her research
emphasized relinquishing some control of content interpretation to the user, rather than having a
fully curated online experience. She also identified several emerging trends, including the fact
that “user group proﬁles expressed a desire to engage with collections information as dispersed
narratives” while still needing a balance of information from the museum. Cameron stressed this
balance was important to keeping the museum as an authoritative, trustworthy source.17

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13

Kravchyna, Victoria, and Sam Hastings. "Informational Value of Museum Web Sites."
Ibid.
15
Ibid.
16
Cameron, Fiona. "Digital Futures I: Museum Collections, Digital Technologies, and the Cultural Construction of
Knowledge" (Curator 46, no. 3, July 2003), p325.
17
Ibid, p336.
14

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  7	  

Nate Solas is, at publication, the Board Director for the Museum Computer Network and former
Senior New Media Developer and Head Technologist for the Walker Art Center. Solas’ 2010
publication, Hiding Our Collections in Plain Site: Interface Strategies for Findability, draws
similar conclusions to Cameron’s research. Solas found that users looking to access online
collections are seeking a type of free-form learning experience, where they can discover on their
own and at their own pace with the sense that the information gained was correct/true since it
was coming from a museum website.18 Visitors also want museum websites to offer some type of
customization – meaning that visitors with varying degrees of online proficiency would be able
to find information easily.19
A statement from Irene Hirano, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Japanese American
National Museum in Los Angeles, in the Getty Foundations report, L.A. Art Online,
acknowledges the difficulties of moving collections online, especially for museums of varying
sizes. Hirano goes on to suggest it is the duty of the museum to find a way to provide access to
its visitors in order to “remain more relevant and beneficial to the public we serve.”20 Michael
Govan, Chief Executive Officer and Wallis Annenberg Director of the Los Angeles County
Museum of Art (LACMA) is also quoted in L.A. Art Online, stating: “Our mission is all about
collections access and preservation—and in today’s world, online collections information is
central to both. LACMA’s Collections Online program is vital to so much that we do— from
scholarship and exhibitions to education and development. It’s central to our mission, and a
priority for our museum.”21
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18

Solas, Nate. "Hiding Our Collections in Plain Site: Interface Strategies for "Findability"" (Museums and the Web
2010: Preceedings: Archives & Museum Informatices, March 2010).
19
Ibid.
20
J. Paul Getty Foundation. “L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty's Electronic Cataloguing Initiative.”
21
J. Paul Getty Foundation. “L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty's Electronic Cataloguing Initiative.”

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  8	  

Anne Gilliland-Swetland, Professor and Director of the Center for Information at the University
of California Los Angeles, and Layna White, Head of Collections Information and Access at San
Francisco Museum of Modern Art, collaborated on the study, Museum Information Professionals
As Providers And Users Of Online Resources. Gilliland-Swetland and White found that many
websites are written to appease the academic and research audience rather than the average user.
They state that “descriptions of museum objects… may be written for curators and scholars, and
the words preferred by experts might not jibe with words used and understood by others seeking
information and images. There may be a disconnect between what information professionals do
as content providers and what many other people know or are familiar with.22
Jeff Doyle, Director of Communications at the Open Museum and lead designer and developer
of that museum’s website, and Maureen Ward Doyle, Director of Heritance, a not-for-profit that
offers free services for training, consulting, and websites, collaborated on the article, Mixing
Social Glue with Brick and Mortar: Experiments Using the Mobile Web to Connect People,
Objects, and Museums. This report stated that a museum should “capture visitors as friends and
inspire them to champion the museum’s content via their social networks.” This notion illustrates
another benefit for the museum to make its collections accessible to the average individual; that
“the primary design goal of a content delivery system should be transparency: to get the users
engaged with the content, not with the delivery process or the technology.”23

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
22

Gilliland-Swetland, Anne and Layna White. "Museum Information Professionals as Providers and Users of Online
Resources" (ASIS&T Bulletin 30, no. 5, June/July 2004).
23
Doyle, Jeff, and Maureen Ward Doyle. "Mixing Social Glue with Brick and Mortar: Experiments Using the
Mobile Web to Connect People, Objects, and Museums." (Museums and the Web 2010. Toronto: Archives &
Museum Informatics, 2010).

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  9	  

Usability and Evaluation Research
One source that proved informative for this study was an article written in 2006 by Hong (Iris)
Xie, PhD, Doctoral Program Director and Professor at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. In
her study Evaluation of digital libraries: Criteria and problems from users’ perspectives, Xie
outlines a process to analyze digital libraries from a user standpoint. Her study’s purpose was to
expand on current evaluation methods of digital libraries. While this study is focused on digital
libraries, common themes that correlate with online museum collections became apparent, such
as the need for easy navigation, options for searching including basic and advanced, and having
clear help features in place.24 For instance, one of the participants in her study stated, “I think the
most important criterion…is usability. Users need to be able to navigate…with a certain sense of
ease, or else they may become frustrated and decide to go elsewhere.”25
A similar view emerged among museums that participated in case studies for the Getty’s
Electronic Cataloguing Initiative. Their report, L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty’s
Electronic Cataloguing Initiative, revealed inside processes of the nine museums, located in the
United States and Europe, that were in the process of moving their collections online. One
participating organization acknowledged that their museum was so focused on the overall idea of
the project that they forgot about user design, forcing them to put the project on hold for further
evaluation.26 The report goes on to give an example of possible user searches that can go wrong
if the exact terminology in the catalogue is not used. “An online visitor searches for “painting”
on a museum’s web site, but comes up with no records although the museum has hundreds of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24

Xie, Hong (Iris). "Evaluation of digital libraries: Criteria and problems from users' perspectives." (Library &
Information Science Research 28, 2006), p443.
25
Xie, Hong (Iris). "Evaluation of digital libraries: Criteria and problems from users' perspectives," p439.
26
J. Paul Getty Foundation. “L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty's Electronic Cataloguing Initiative.”

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  10	  

paintings. The museum failed to include the standard term painting in their cataloguing
system.”27 This type of error correlates with Xie’s previously mentioned need for clear and
useful help features.
The report section, “Why do it at all?” explains that the main goals of the evaluation process
were to: “1) Increase Access, 2) Expand Audiences, 3) Support Teaching and Learning, 4)
Improve Documentation, 5) Preserve Collections, and 6) Streamline Workflow.”28 An example
case study given in the report representative of an institution that used the project to streamline
their workflow was the Southwest Museum. This institution was going through a site renovation
that vastly decreased the amount of collection on view to “less than 2%.”29 The institution was
able to streamline their object relocation process by implementing the ability to catalogue and do
other reporting via online tools.30
Giannis Tsakonas, Deputy Director for the Library & Information Center at the University of
Patras, in Greece, and Christos Papatheodorou, Associate Professor for the Department of
Archives and Library Science at the Ionian University in Greece, collaborated on a study in 2008
titled Exploring usefulness and usability in the evaluation of open access digital libraries,
touches on similar themes when addressing evaluation techniques. This report has a slightly
different focus, aimed at evaluation of an e-print archive through the ideas of usefulness and
usability. Their study outlines the differences between the two concepts, defining usefulness as
“whether the digital libraries constitute valuable tools for the completion of users’ tasks” and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27

J. Paul Getty Foundation. “L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty's Electronic Cataloguing Initiative.”
Ibid.
29
Ibid.
30
Ibid.
28

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  11	  

whether the digital libraries support the needs of those using them.31 These concepts were then
aligned in a framework alongside another measurable used in their study, overall system
performance. According to Tsakonas and Papatheodorou, “the results show that usefulness and
usability are two related concepts that jointly affect user satisfaction.”32 This research supports
the need to evaluate digital collections.
The United States Government runs a website, Usability.gov, which provides core
documentation on usability testing and evaluative research methods. Guides and templates are
available on this site for conducting usability studies.33 Documents available include, but are not
limited to: Planning a Usability Test, Running a Usability Test, and Reporting a Usability Test.
Preparation tools and needed elements for conducting usability testing appear in the article,
Planning a Usability Test. For example, it defines and identifies key facets to include in a
usability test plan that includes: scope, purpose, schedule and location, sessions, equipment,
participants, scenarios, metrics, quantitative metrics, and roles of staff or involved team
members.34 This document also includes metrics to use in testing, examples of test metrics
include: successful task completion, identification of critical and non-critical errors, error-free
rate, time on task, subjective measures, and participant likes, dislikes and recommendations.35
The Usability.gov document, Running a Usability Test, outlined proper conduct and techniques
that can be employed in a usability test. It offers definitions and examples of moderating
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
31

Papatheodorou, Christos, and Giannis Tsakonas. "Exploring usefulness and usability in the evaluation of open
access digital libraries" (Information Processing and Management 44, 2008), p1237.
32
Ibid., p1235.
33
Usability.gov. What & Why of Usability. (Usability.gov, http://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/index.html,
accessed February 2014).
34
Usability.gov. "Planning a Usability Test." (Usability.gov. http://www.usability.gov/how-to-andtools/methods/planning-usability-testing.html, accessed February 2014).
35
Ibid.

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  12	  

techniques, including: concurrent think aloud, retrospective think aloud, concurrent probing, and
retrospective probing. For example, for the concurrent think aloud section, the document states
that it is used to “understand participants’ thoughts as they occur and as they attempt to work
through issues they encounter. [This method] elicits real-time feedback and emotional responses,
[but] can interfere with usability metrics, such as accuracy and time on task.”36 This document
also provided information related to pilot testing and best practices for a successful usability
testing session, as identified through the previously listed elements combined with test metrics
that should be employed. Important best practices within this document include, but were not
limited to, staying neutral as a moderator and ensuring test participants understand that the test is
on the website and not on them.37
The final core document from Usability.gov, Reporting Usability Test Results, was used to
inform methodology and understanding of data collection and coding for usability testing.
According to Usability.gov, data analysis for usability testing is split between two categories:
quantitative and qualitative data. Quantitative data is information that can be used to “make
calculations such as: success rates, task time, error rates, satisfaction questionnaire ratings.”38
Qualitative data is information that is “related to: observations about pathways participants took,
problems experienced, comments/recommendations, [and] answers to open-ended questions.”39

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
36

Usability.gov. "Running a Usability Test." (Usability.gov, http://www.usability.gov/how-to-andtools/methods/running-usability-tests.html, accessed February 2014).
37
Ibid.
38
Usability.gov. "Reporting Usability Test Results." (Usability.gov, http://www.usability.gov/how-to-andtools/methods/reporting-usability-test-results.html, accessed February 2014).
39
Ibid.

LITERATURE	  REVIEW	  

Wickell	  13	  

It is recommended to “make sure your problem statements are exact and concise” and clarifies
the difference between a good problem statement and a poor one.40
Implications of the Literature
Diana Folsom, Manager, Art and Education System in the Collections Management and
Information department at LACMA, stated in the L.A. Art Online report, “Online users want
more of everything. With technology you can have more.... How far should we go?” According
to the literature, most museum professionals seem to recognize the need to create an online space
for their collections. According to The Getty Foundation’s research, those museums that put a
focus on their online presence generally saw an increase not only in online traffic, but in
visitation to the physical site as well. Museums seem to be taking a closer look at their web
presence, inclusive of online collections, and it would appear further research should be
completed to determine what users expect from online access.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
40

Usability.gov. "Reporting Usability Test Results."

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  14	  
Chapter 3
Methodology

Evaluation Study
The purpose of this evaluation study was to explore what museum visitors expect to experience
when accessing online collections? In order to answer this question, three specific questions were
developed to guide the study:
1. What do museum visitors expect to find when they access an online collection?
2. How are they using the online collections?
3. How successful are their searches?

Two methods were used in this evaluative study: usability testing and structured interviews.
Key Terminology
Definitions obtained from Usability.gov were used for the purpose of this study. According to
Usability.gov, Usability refers to “How effectively, efficiently and satisfactorily a user can
interact with a user interface.”41 Usability testing is defined as “include[ing] a range of test and
evaluation methods such as automated evaluations, inspection evaluations, operational
evaluations and human performance testing. In a typical performance test, users perform a
variety of tasks with a prototype (or an operational system) while observers note what each user
does and says and performance data are recorded. One of the main purposes of usability testing
is to identify issues that keep users from meeting the usability goals of a Web site.”42 The
usability study documented how visitors used the sites with commentary throughout the study
explaining their motivation behind each action.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
41	  Usability.gov. What & Why of Usability.	  
42	  Ibid.

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  15	  

Structured interviews, as defined by Michael Quinn Patton, are those in which “the exact
wording and sequence of questions are determined in advance. All interviewees are asked the
same basic questions in the same order.”43 Structured interviews followed each usability test of
the study to serve as a means to identify visitor expectations versus actual experience of the
online collection sites.
Combining usability testing with follow-up structured interviews in this study at the Henry Art
Gallery was designed to provide a broad understanding of the online visitor experience.
Participants
Twenty subjects were selected to participate in this study based on their invested interest in the
Henry Art Gallery. The subjects were drawn from internal distribution lists that included
researchers and academic staff of the University of Washington (UW), museum members, and
staff of the Henry Art Gallery. This study did not advertise the call-to-participate to subjects
under the age of 18. Subjects fitting one or more of these groups were called to participate via
email. Email scripting templates from Usability.gov were used in the creation for the call-toparticipate email, with changes made to personalize the content to the Henry. Two emails were
drafted: one specific to UW researchers/academics and museum members, another directed
toward museum staff. Refer to Figures 1 and 2 below for the call-to-participate email templates.
A call-to-participate allowed subjects within the desired groups to volunteer for the study, and
information about the nature of the study was given prior to consent. Twenty-three participants
responded, and due to scheduling conflicts, timing, and availability, only 20 of those individuals
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
43	  Patton,	   Michael	   Quinn.	   Qualitative	  Research	  and	  Evaluation	  Methods.	  (Thousand	   Oaks,	   CA:	   Sage	   Publications,	  

2002)	  p349.	  	  

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  16	  

became participants. Of those, 11 were Henry staff, five were members of the Henry, and four
were UW researchers/academics. Between the dates of March 26, 2014 and April 25, 2014,
usability testing and structured follow-up interviews were performed on all 20 participants.
Dear%Henry%Staff,%
%%
I%am%currently%working%with%Carly%Wickell,%a%UW%Museology%Graduate%student,%in%support%of%her%thesis%
work%on%visitor%use%and%expectations%for%museum%collections%online.%
%%
In%addition%to%a%broad%study%about%how%other%museums%present%their%collections%online,%Carly%will%be%
evaluating%the%Henry’s%online%collection%sites%(online%collection%
database;%http://collections.henryart.org/main.php?module=objectsand%Digital%Interactive%
Galleries;%http://dig.henryart.org/).%
%%
One%component%of%her%thesis%involves%a%usability%study.%Would&you&be&willing&to&use&the&Henry’s&online&
collection&sites&and&give&feedback?%
%%
Usability%tests%will%be%conducted%at%the%museum.%You%will%be%asked%to%complete%several%short%tasks%using%
the%collections%sites.%You%will%also%be%asked%questions%about%your%experience%and%perceptions%of%the%
online%collections%sites.%During%this%process,%the%computer%screen%you%use%will%be%filmed%and%your%voice%
recorded%through%the%camera%microphone.%The%follow%up%questions%asked%will%be%recorded%on%a%digital%
recording%device.%
%%
The%study%will%be%held%through%April%17%on%Tuesdays,%Wednesdays,%and%Thursdays%between%9am%and%
5pm,%by%appointment.%The%usability%test%and%follow%up%interview%should%take%about%30%minutes.%
&%
If&you&are&available&to&participate&please&reply&directly&to&Carly&at&crw1013@gmail.com&with&your&
contact&information&and&preferred&dates&and&times.&Carly%will%respond%promptly%to%confirm%your%
appointment%and%finalize%any%details%for%your%visit.%
%%
Please%feel%free%to%contact%me%with%questions.%
%%
This%is%a%great%opportunity%to%learn%more%about%the%Henry’s%current%online%collection%resources%as%well%as%
help%us%improve.%
%%
Best,%
Rachael%
%%
%%
Rachael Faust
Assistant Curator of Collections & Academic Programs%
Henry Art Gallery
206.616.9630
HENRYART.ORG
University of Washington / 15th Ave NE & NE 41st St / Box 351410 / Seattle, WA 98195-1410%

%

Explore the HENRY’s collection!
Search the collection through the ONLINE DATABASE or browse the DIG MODULES

Figure 1

Figure 1. Henry Art Gallery staff call-to-participate email
	  

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  17	  

Subject: Help the Henry improve our online collections

!
Thanks!for!using!the!Henry!Art!Gallery’s!online!collection!sites!(online!collection!
database;!http://collections.henryart.org/main.php?module=objects!and!Digital!Interactive!
Galleries;!http://dig.henryart.org/)!or!viewing!objects!in!the!museum’s!Study!Center!over!the!past!
couple!of!years.!
!!
The!Henry!is!dedicated!to!preserving!the!25,000!objects!in!the!permanent!collection!while!also!providing!
access!to!these!objects!to!ensure!collection!objects!are!relevant!and!useful!to!the!community.!Thanks!
for!putting!our!collection!to!use!!
!!
The!Henry!is!currently!working!with!Carly!Wickell,!a!UW!Museology!Graduate!student,!in!support!of!her!
thesis!work!on!visitor!use!and!expectations!for!museum!online!collections.!Carly’s!thesis!will!not!only!
help!the!Henry!improve!our!online!collections!sites!but!will!also!contribute!to!the!museum!field.!One!
component!of!her!thesis!involves!a!usability!study.!Would&you&be&willing&to&use&the&Henry’s&online&
collection&sites&and&give&feedback?&!
For!the!usability!test,!you!would!need!to!come!to!the!museum!and!complete!several!short!tasks!using!
the!collections!sites.!You!will!be!asked!questions!about!your!experience!and!perceptions!of!the!online!
collections!sites.!During!this!process,!the!computer!screen!you!use!will!be!filmed!and!your!voice!
recorded!through!the!camera!microphone.!The!follow!up!questions!asked!will!be!recorded!on!a!digital!
recording!device.!
!!
The!study!will!be!held!March!18!–!April!17!on!Tuesdays,!Wednesdays,!and!Thursdays!between!9am!and!
5pm.!The!usability!test!and!follow!up!interview!should!take!about!30!minutes.!
&!
If&you&are&available&to&participate&please&reply&directly&to&Carly&at&crw1013@gmail.com&with&your&
contact&information&and&preferred&dates&and&times.&Carly!will!respond!promptly!to!confirm!your!
appointment!and!finalize!any!details!for!your!visit.!
!!
Please!feel!free!to!contact!me!with!any!questions.!
!!
Thanks!for!supporting!the!Henry!and!helping!us!improve!!
!!
Rachael!
!!
!!
Rachael Faust
Assistant Curator of Collections & Academic Programs!
Henry Art Gallery
206.616.9630
HENRYART.ORG
University of Washington / 15th Ave NE & NE 41st St / Box 351410 / Seattle, WA 98195-1410!

!

Explore the HENRY’s collection!
Search the collection through the ONLINE DATABASE or browse the DIG MODULES!

Figure 2

Figure 2. UW researchers/academic staff and museum members call-to-participate
Of the 11 Henry staff, five participants were UW Museology Graduate students who held workstudy roles at the museum. The five members of the Henry held varying occupations, and most
of the UW researchers/academics were Doctoral or Masters candidates, with only one of the five
a faculty member. All participants were asked to sign a digital video and audio recording consent
form, with clear communication of the recording parameters. See Figure 3 below for the
Consent and Recording Release Form.

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  18	  

!
!

Consent & Recording Release Form - Adult
I agree to participate in the study conducted and recorded by Carly Wickell and The Henry Art
Gallery.
I understand and consent to the use and release of the recording by Carly Wickell and The Henry
Art Gallery. I understand that the information and recording is for research purposes only and that
my name and image will not be used for any other purpose. I relinquish any rights to the
recording and understand the recording may be copied and used by Carly Wickell and The Henry
Art Gallery without further permission.
I understand that participation in this usability study is voluntary and I agree to immediately raise
any concerns or areas of discomfort during the session with the study administrator.
Please sign below to indicate that you have read and you understand the information on this form
and that any questions you might have about the session have been answered.

Date:_________

Please print your name: ____________________________________________________

Please sign your name: ____________________________________________________

Thank you!
We appreciate your participation.

!

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services - 200 Independence Avenue, S.W. - Washington, D.C. 20201!

!

Figure 3. Consent and Recording Release Form
	  

!

!!!!

1!

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  19	  

Usability Testing
The usability tests utilized two different test metrics: a task-based approach and concurrent think
aloud. This combination of testing techniques is designed to produce rich data for this study.
“Task-based” refers to giving a participant a list of tasks to complete.44 These tasks test different
areas of the collections site and address real-world applications of online collections use.
“Concurrent Think Aloud” involves the participant narrating their actions, giving insight into
why they choose to click on certain links or follow a certain path to accomplish their task.45 This
also reveals if they encounter emotional events during the testing such as excitement, frustration,
trepidation, etc. Concurrent think aloud can affect timing tasks and offer information about the
user thought process. To measure reactions, the participants’ computer screen and voice were
recorded.
First click and successful search success rates will also be recorded. Computer Psychology, Inc.,
a company focused on usability, performed usability testing for the Center for Disease Control’s
website in 2006. It was during this time that they first introduced the concept of first click testing,
and their results from 12 different usability tests showed that if the user clicked on the correct
link as their first click, then their overall task completion was successful 87% of the time. To
measure the first click success rate, tasks were designed with the quickest paths for task
completion identified. Search and task completion success rates focus on the amount of times the
participant successfully completes each task.46

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
44

Usability.gov. "Scenarios." (Usability.gov. http://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/scenarious.html, accessed
March 2014).
45
Ibid.
46
Bailey, Robert W, and Cari Wolfson. "FirstClick Usability Testing." (Web Usability. October 08, 2013.
http://webusability.com/firstclick-usability-testing, accessed March 2014).

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  20	  

The task-based, concurrent think aloud usability test is comprised of eight steps for the
participant to complete. Each participant began on the Henry home page, and would follow the
tasks in order. The tasks were broken down into sections that define different areas of the site
that the subject would be navigating. Task direction reads as follows: 1) Navigate to the online
collections search, 2) Search for Photographs, 3) Search for photographs made by German
photographers in the 1980’s, 4) Return to main Collections page, 5) Navigate to the Digital
Interactive Galleries, 6) Locate a video about a Northwest artist. Return to Digital Interactive
Gallery home, 7) Find information about Textile Structures. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery
home, 8) Locate a page on FSA photography. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery home. Due to
the nature of the two parts of tasks six through eight, these tasks receive notation of “6a” and “6b”
and so on during test analysis and reporting. The subject interaction was initially recorded with a
camera focused on the computer screen. Screen recording allowed for further analysis of mouse
movements and clicks that the subject neglected to voice during the usability test. After pilot
testing, it was revealed the Screen Recording software offered voice recording as well. This
streamlined the process and made it easier to code and analyze. It also seemed to help
participants feel more at ease without a camera behind them. Finalized task scenarios can be seen
in Figure 4.

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  21	  

PART ONE
1. Navigate to the online collections search.

PART TWO
2. Search for Photographs.
3. Search for photography made by German photographers during the 1980’s.
4. Return to main Collections page.

PART THREE
5. Navigate to the Digital Interactive Galleries.
6. Locate a video about a Northwest artist. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery home.
7. Find information about Textile Structures. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery
home.
8. Locate a page on FSA Photography. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery home.
!
Figure 4

Figure 4. Usability test task scenarios
Structured Interview Questions
After each usability test, participants were invited to participate in a short follow-up structured
interview to discuss their use of the museum’s online collection sites and speak about other
museum sites they frequent. Having the structured interview follow usability testing afforded
participants the ability to reflect on their usability testing experience. Interview questions were
developed using feedback from stakeholders at the Henry combined with usability testing
resources, such as published theses and articles on user testing and intuitive design.
Jared Spool, the founder of User Interface Engineering, is a software developer and programmer
who has spent over a decade developing tools and best practices for usability evaluation. Spool
developed a clear way of defining what intuitive design looks like. In his 2005 article, What

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  22	  

Makes a Design Seem 'Intuitive'?, he states that for a website to be considered intuitive, it should
have two qualities:
•

“Condition #1: Both the current knowledge point and the target knowledge point are
identical. When the user walks up to the design, they know everything they need to
operate it and complete their objective.

•

Condition #2: The current knowledge point and the target knowledge point are
separate, but the user is completely unaware the design is helping them bridge the
gap. The user is being trained, but in a way that seems natural”47

The interviews addressed a range of questions designed to inform the Henry Art Gallery of the
usefulness, usability, and overall user experience in relation to the current online collection sites,
while exhibiting applicability to the museum field as a whole. The complete list of interview
questions can be found below in Figure 5.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
47	  Spool, Jared M. "What Makes a Design Seem 'Intuitive'?" User Interface Engineering. January 10, 2005.
http://www.uie.com/articles/design_intuitive/ (accessed November 1, 2013).	  

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  23	  

1. Before you came in today, were you aware that the Henry has an online collections database that you
can access at home?
a. no - move to DIG questions
b. yes – Have you used it before today?
i. Yes - How many times do you think you’ve accessed in it the last 12 months?
1. Do you remember why you last went to the online collections database?
2. Do you remember having any problems finding what you wanted?
ii. No – move to DIG questions
2. Before you came in today, were you aware that the Henry has digital interactive galleries that you can
access at home?
a. no - move to next question
b. yes – Have you used it before today?
i. Yes - How many times do you think you’ve accessed in it the last 12 months?
1. Do you remember why you last went to the digital interactive galleries?
2. Do you remember having any problems finding what you wanted?
3. Have you used any other museum’s online databases in the past?
a. Yes
i. Which museum website did you visit?
ii. Why did you go there?
iii. Were there similarities or differences that stood out when compared to the Henry?
b. No
i. What did you think?
ii. Is this how you thought an online collection would work?
4. In the next 6 months, could you imagine yourself using one of these two online resources?
5. I am going to show you three sheets, each with a screen shot of one of the digital interactive galleries on
it. The Henry wants to know how they compare to each other.
a. Which gallery was easiest for you to use?
i. Why?
6. The Henry Art Gallery has implemented the ability to create an online account with the ability to log in
and create your own digital galleries using objects from the collections database.
a. Did you know about this feature?
i. Yes
1. Have you used it?
a. Yes
i. Do you remember encountering any problems in the creation or
managing of your gallery?
ii. No
1. Could you imaging this being useful to you?
b. On scale 1-5 how likely do you think you would be to use this option the next time you are on
the site, where 1 is highly unlikely and 5 is highly likely?
Figure 5

Figure 5. Structured interview questions.

METHODOLOGY	  

Wickell	  24	  

Data Coding and Analysis
Computer monitor screen captures and audio were coded for: time spent per area, number of
mouse clicks, amount of times the user had to use the back button or became lost, and overall
speed at which user arrived at the information they were seeking. Interview responses were
coded based on positive or negative response, and further divided into themes that arose during
testing.

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  25	  
Chapter 4
Findings and Analysis

The purpose of this evaluation study was to explore what museum visitors expect to experience
when accessing online collections. In order to answer this question, three specific questions were
developed to guide the study:
1. What do museum visitors expect to find when they access an online collection?
2. How are they using the online collections?
3. How successful are their searches?
These three questions emerged from the literature review and responded to areas of information
about stakeholder use of the Henry Art Gallery website identified by museum staff. These
questions were used to guide the findings and analysis in the current chapter, along with results
and discussions found in the Chapter 5.

What do museum visitors expect to find when they access a museum’s online collection?
This question sought to determine visitor expectations of online museum collections, and was
addressed through many of the structured interview questions that focus on participants’
interaction with the Henry collections site as well as other museum websites.
Of the 20 participants interviewed, 20 (or 100%) stated that they were aware that the Henry Art
Gallery had an online collections database that is accessible at home. When asked if they had
used it prior to the usability testing, 14 (or 70%) stated that they had used it before that day. The
14 respondents who answered yes were asked how many times in the past 12 months they
thought they had used it. As depicted below in Figure 6, three participants responded that they
had not used the site in the past year, four participants stated they had used it one to two times in

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  26	  

the last year, three participants had accessed the site between three and five times in the last year,
two participants had used the collections site six to ten times in the last year, and two participants
stated a large frequency of visits in the 20 or more range over the last year.

Figure 6. Interview question 1bi: If yes, how many times do you think you’ve accessed it in the
last 12 months?
Participants were asked a similar line of questions based on their use of the Henry Art Gallery
Digital Interactive Galleries (DIG). Of the 20 participants interviewed, 16 (or 80%) were aware
that the Henry offered these specialized digital galleries that are accessible at home. Of the 16
participants who responded that they were aware of DIG, 11 (or 69%) stated that they had used it
before the usability testing. As depicted below in Figure 7, two participants responded that they
had not used the site in the past year, seven participants stated they had used it one to two times
in the last year, one participant had accessed the site between three and six times in the last year,
and one participant stated a large frequency of visits in the 20 or more range in the last year.

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  27	  

Figure 7. Interview question 2bi: If yes, how many times do you think you’ve accessed it in the
last 12 months?
Participants were also asked about their past use of other museum online collections. When
asked if they had used any other museum’s online databases in the past, 13 of the 20 participants
(or 65%) responded in the affirmative. Those 13 respondents were then asked which museum
collections sites they had visited in the past, and were allowed to give multiple responses. The
Metropolitan Museum of Art (MET) received the most mentions with five participants stating
they had visited it in the past, Seattle Art Museum (SAM) received three mentions, Victoria and
Albert museum (V&A) was mentioned by two participants, and the British Museum also
received two mentions. Other museums noted as being visited by participants can be seen below
in Figure 8.

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  28	  

Figure 8. Interview question 3ai: If yes, which museum websites did you visit?
Participants were asked to speak to which DIG site was easiest for them to use, and were allowed
to give multiple answers. The Costume and Textiles site received the highest number of positive
mentions at 17, Photography and New Media at 10,and Northwest Artists at five. Representative
quotes include the following:
“Costumes and Textiles is very straightforward, Northwest Artists is very blog-like and
not as easy for me, Photography is easy because of the timeline. Didn't like having all the
text in the middle.”
“[On Photography and New Media] Timeline was nice. [On Northwest Artists] Layout is
confusing - do artists relate to the links across from them? You shouldn't have a category
about UW Faculty and not include everyone. [On Costumes and Textiles] The layout is
nice and appealing, someone obviously put a lot of time into this.”
“[On Photography and New Media] Timeline is an interesting way of organizing all the
data. The Costume and Textiles looks very, very, very detailed. I don’t know if I will ever

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  29	  

need it or wander through it, but the more you get into it the more you want to look for
things, so it kind of promotes to go further.”
“[On Costume and Textiles] I really like the images, they are very inviting. I’m a visual
person and am drawn to that. The page for Northwest artists seems just too much in your
face all of a sudden, there is a whole lot of reading to do there. It would be greater if I
could see the images of the artists next to their names. It’s black and white and not very
enticing.”
The appeal for browsing visually is corroborated with data from the usability tests. The Costume
and Textiles DIG site offers a choice between text links and links with a title and representative
photo beneath them. Out of 18 successful tasks completed for Costume and Textiles, 13 (or 72%)
of participants chose to click on the visual link.
How are museum visitors using and accessing online collections?
This question seeks to identify visitor motivation for using online collections as well as future
intent for use. This section is addressed through many of the structured interview questions that
focus on participants’ interaction with the Henry collections site as well as other museum
websites.
Fourteen participants had used the Henry’s collections database in the past 12 months. Of those,
five (or 36%) stated they visited the site for research or academic purposes – such as to prepare
for a class, object information for a project, etc. Five more of the participants stated that they
used the collections search for a specific query, such as searching for a specific artist, type of
object, objects in a certain date range, etc. Three participants (or 21%) stated that they went to
the collections search just to browse, with no specific purpose or query, and one participant
stated that they could not recall why they last visited the collections database.
A similar line of questioning was asked of the nine participants who had used the DIG sites in
the past 12 months. Four participants (or 44%) stated they went to the DIG sites for a specific

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  30	  

query, three participants (or 33%) could not recall why they went to the DIG sites, one
participant (or 11%) stated they last used the DIG sites to browse, and the ninth participant cited
visiting DIG for research and academic purposes.
The 12 participants who had used other museum online collections sites were also asked if they
could remember why they last went. Eight participants (or 67%) stated they used the other
institution’s collections site for research and academic purposes, three participants (or 25%) cited
visiting the other museum site for a specific query, and one participant (or 8%) stated they could
not recall the reason for their last visit. Browsing the other museum collection was not given as a
motivating factor in this instance.
To gauge the level of interest in future visitation to the online collections database and DIG sites,
participants were asked if they could imagine themselves using one of the two resources in the
next six months. Of the 20 participants, 17 (or 85%) stated that yes, they could see themselves
using either the collections database or the DIG.
The Henry has launched a personal gallery option in the past year that allows users to create a
login and account on the museum website, save and store favorite objects or collect images and
information on objects for research purposes. Of the 20 participants, only three (or 15%) knew
that this feature existed. Those three participants were asked if they had used it, and all
responded that they had not. After explanation of the purpose and potential uses of the personal
gallery, all 20 participants were asked if they could imagine it being useful to them. Fifteen (or
75%) stated yes, they could see the personal gallery being useful. One participant further
clarified that it would depend on a need, as they saw using it for research purposes more than
personal purposes. Participants also stated that they would rather be able to share objects from

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  31	  

the collection on their Pinterest board, rather than have it solely on the museum website.
Representative quotes include the following:
“[Yes, I can see it being useful] with the caveat of doing research and not just for the fun
of it.”
“The personal gallery doesn't make sense to me because I would want to share my
gallery or have it public, I'd be more likely to grab the thumbnail and put it on my
desktop or Tumblr. I don't see the point of having something closed off.”
“When I do something online, I would copy the information online into a word
document with a link back to it, including saving a screen capture or copy of the image. I
just don't want to have to create an account to track down information that I can save in a
place that is easily more accessible for me.”
These data are further corroborated in a rating scale for future use. All 20 participants were asked,
on a scale of 1-5 where 1 is highly unlikely and 5 is highly likely, how likely they thought they
would be to use the personal gallery option the next time they visited the Henry collections sites.
One participant did not give a specific answer, stating that it would be dependent on need. Seven
of the 19 remaining participants (or 37%) selected 1: highly unlikely, three participants (or 16%)
selected 2: unlikely, two participants (or 11%) selected 3: neutral, one participant (or 5%)
selected 4: likely, and six participants (or 32%) selected 5:highly likely.
How successful are searches performed by museum visitors on the online collections?
This question seeks to address visitor success rate for searches and ease of navigation of online
museum collections. This section is addressed through structured interviews and usability testing
that focused on participants’ interaction with the Henry collections database and the Digital
Interactive Galleries (DIG).

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  32	  

Structured Interviews
Of the 13 participants who had used the online collections database in the past 12 months, eight
(or 62%) recalled having problems finding what they wanted. Representative quotes include the
following:
“Search was limited, no way to conceptually search. Ninety percent of what [my students
and I] searched for that had any conceptual content was unsuccessful.”
“[There are] certain search fields that are intuitive and give you the results you want, like
artist names. Dates, and I've used this website many times, I can never find the right way
to format the date. That is usually where I hit the wall.”
“It's not familiar terminology for me, so I had to think out what I was looking for.”
Of the six participants who had used the DIG sites in the past 12 months, four (or 67%) stated
that they did not experience problems finding what they needed. One participant (or 17%)
remembered having trouble, and described feeling intimidated by the layout of the Photography
and New Media site. One participant could not recall whether or not he/she had problems during
their last use. For the DIG sites, several participants noted that the last time they were there, they
were browsing and not looking for something specific.
Usability Tests
All 20 participants were asked to complete a series of scenarios. First click success rate, overall
task completion success rate, and time spent on task were recorded for each task.
For Task 1 each participant began at the Henry home page and was prompted to navigate to the
online collections search. This task would demonstrate whether the collections search location is
clear and easy to find. The pre-identified best path for participants involved a first click on the
Collection link on the Henry main page header. All 20 participants had successful first clicks.
Fifteen participants (or 75%) successfully completed the task, with the remaining five
participants stopping on the Collections main page – rather than continuing on to the Collections

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  33	  

Search – believing they had completed the task. The average time spent completing this task was
18.7 seconds, with a range of 5.9 seconds to 34 seconds.
Participants began the second task where the first ended, at the Henry Collections search page.
This task directed participants to search for Photograph and was designed to have participants
utilize a basic search, and investigate whether those searches are successful and intuitive. The
successful first click identified was to click inside the basic search box. Three participants did
not perform this task, moving to task three. Of the 17 participants who completed the task, 15 (or
88%) had successful first clicks, one participant clicked on the advanced search box, and one
participant typed the search phrase in the search box located on the Henry top navigation panel.
Sixteen participants (or 94%) successfully completed the task. The participant who chose to use
top navigational search did not produce the correct results and gave up on the task. The average
time spent completing this task was 25.9 seconds, with a range of 9.4 seconds to 1 minute 30.1
seconds.
Task 3 or The third task asked participants to search for photography made by German
photographers during the 1980’s. This task requires the use of the advanced search and seeks to
investigate whether those searches are successful and intuitive. If done correctly, this query was
to produce 13 results. The pre-identified correct first click was for the user to click on the
advanced search option. Ten of the 20 participants (or 50%) had successful first clicks. Nine
participants (or 45%) initially clicked the basic search box, and one participant scrolled through
the collections search page, clicked the link to return to the Collections Main page, went back to
collections search and saw the basic search box. Twelve participants (or 60%) were unable to
successfully complete the task. In order to complete the task, participants were intended to use
the advanced search and input the following criteria: Class: Photographs, Origin: Germany,

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  34	  

Earliest Year: Greater than or equal to 1980, Latest Year: Less Than or Equal to 1989. Many of
the advanced searches were unsuccessful due to participants not selecting the right qualifier for
the date range, selecting “equal to” rather than using “greater than or equal to” or “less than or
equal to.” Participants also voiced confusion over the term “Class” and most initially chose to list
Photography under “Medium.” Participants spent the longest amount of time on this task, as
illustrated below in Figure 9, with an average time of 2 minutes 43.2 seconds, with a range from
28.2 seconds to one participant spending 5 minutes 28 seconds.

Figure 9. Average time spent per task
Task 4 or the fourth task directed participants to return to the main Collections page. This task
would demonstrate whether the collections search location is clear and easy to find. The preidentified best path for participants involved a first click on the Collection link on the Henry
main page header. It should be noted that this is the primary first click option because it is the
only option aside from participants clicking the back button on their browser multiple times.
Seventeen participants (or 85%) had successful first clicks, one participant (or 5%) used the
back button and then chose the correct Collections link from the top navigation, and two

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  35	  

participants (or 10%) clicked the back button until they arrived at the Collection Search home
and stopped, believing they were at the correct page. The same ratio of successful first clicks
applied to successful searches, with 17 participants (or 85%) successfully returning to the main
Collections page, and three participants (or 15%) not completing the task successfully. This task
took an average of 5.8 seconds to complete, with a range from 1.3 seconds to 11.8 seconds.
Task 5 directed participants to navigate to the DIG sites. This task would demonstrate whether
the DIG location is clear and easy to find. The pre-identified best path for participants involved a
first click on the DIG link on either the left side bar or the link located below the introductory
text. Both links take visitors to the same location in roughly the same amount of time; therefore
they were given equal weight for the purpose of this study. Nineteen participants (or 95%)
successfully clicked on the correct link. One participant did not see the link in the left side
column, and instead chose to click on the Exhibitions link in the top navigation, this was a
thought echoed by other participants as they completed the task. Representative quotes are as
follows:
“Went to Exhibitions because that is where I would think that galleries would be.”
“If coming from collections search, it is not immediately apparent where the digital
interactive gallery is located.”
All 20 participants were able to successfully complete the task with an average time of 15.8
seconds, with a range from 2.1 seconds to 1 minute 37.2 seconds.
Tasks 1-5 aid to address visitor success rate for searches and ease of navigation of online
museum collections through the collections database search. The final three tasks address visitor
success rate for searches and ease of navigation of online museum collections through the DIG
sites. Each of the following tasks have two parts, a search query and a prompt to return to DIG

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  36	  

homepage. Due to the similar nature participants behaved and comparative time spent on all
three return prompts, the statistics for all three return prompts will be reported together at the
end.
Task 6a asked participants to located a video about a Northwest artist. This task would
demonstrate whether the Northwest Artist DIG location is clear and easy to find, and how
intuitive it is in terms of locating desired information. The pre-identified best path for
participants involved a first click on the Northwest Artists link on the DIG home page. All 20
participants (or 100%) had successful first clicks, however only 17 participants (or 85%)
successfully completed the task. The three participants (or 15%) that did not complete the task
arrived at the Northwest Artist home page and stopped, believing they had reached the correct
task end point. The average time spent on this task was 23.1 seconds, with a range from 9.7
seconds to 1 minute 1.3 seconds.
Task 7a asked participants to locate information about textile structures. This task would
demonstrate whether the Costume and Textiles DIG location is clear and easy to find, and how
intuitive it is in terms of locating desired information. The pre-identified best path for
participants involved a first click on the Northwest Artists link on the DIG home page. Eighteen
participants (or 90%) had successful first clicks, with both participants who were not successful
going back to the Collections search page. The same 18 participants completed the task
successfully, with the two participants with incorrect first clicks not completing the task. Both of
the participants who were unsuccessful chose to go to the Collections search page and do a
search for textile structures. The average time spent completing this task was 32.3 seconds, with
a range from 11.2 seconds to 1 minute 31.9 seconds.

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  37	  

Task 8a asked participants to located a page on FSA Photography. This task would demonstrate
whether the Photography and New Media DIG location is clear and easy to find, and how
intuitive it is in terms of locating desired information. The pre-identified best path for
participants involved a first click on the Photography and New Media link on the DIG home
page. All 20 participants (or 100%) were both successful with their first clicks and successfully
completed the task. The average time spent on this task was 25.1 seconds, with a range from 8.9
seconds to 1 minute 16.9 seconds. It should be noted that the longest time was due to the page
taking longer to load.
Participants were asked to return to the DIG home page after each of the above three tasks. This
was to illustrate how participants were finding their way back, as there is not a link on any of the
individual DIG sites that will return them to the DIG home or Collections main page. Because of
this, there is not a first click measurable for these tasks. Successful task completion rates and
time spent on task were calculated.
For task 6b, return to DIG home page, 18 participants (or 90%) were successfull. Of the two
participants who did not complete the task, one participant clicked on the Henry H on the top
right corner and was returned to the Henry Art Gallery main page, where they stayed. The other
participant clicked the back button and passed DIG home page, landing on the Collections main
page and remaining there. This first attempt to return to DIG home page took participants an
average time of 14.5 seconds, with a range from 1.7 seconds to 1 minute 15.8 seconds.
Task 7b showed improvements, with 19 participants (or 95%) successfully completing the
prompt. One participant had been incorrectly using the Collections search for Task 7a, clicked
the back button to the main Collections search page and stayed there. The second attempt to

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  38	  

return home from a DIG site resulted in an average time of 15.4 seconds, with a range from 4.6
seconds to 30.5 seconds.
Three participants did not complete Task 8b, believing they were done with the usability test and
staying on the FSA Photography page. Of the 17 participants who did attempt to return to the
DIG home page, 16 (or 94%) were successful. The participant who did attempt to return and did
not complete clicked on the Introduction link in the top navigation of the Photography and New
Media site. They stayed on that home page and did not continue to DIG home page. The average
time spent to complete this task was 16.5 seconds, with a range from 3.6 seconds to 41 seconds.
The lack of a proper return option on the individual DIG sites became frustrating for participants,
as representative in the comments made during those tasks as follows:
“Not an obvious way to get back, so I’m just going to click the back button until I get
there, which is annoying”
“Not intuitive”
“UGH” [After trying to find a back button on the final task]
Limitations
Sample: This sample size was larger than what the literature points to needing, with 20
participants rather than five.48 However, this sample was limited to stakeholders of the Henry Art
Gallery, and did not seek data from participants with no affiliation with the museum. This makes
this data set an important view of how these participants use the online collection sites, but can
not be generalized to how all typical users navigate the site.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
48
Usability.gov. "Running a Usability Test."
	  

RESULTS	  

Wickell	  39	  

Interview Sample Demographics: This information was not recorded; therefore comparisons
cannot be drawn between age, gender, or computer proficiency and the data collected. This data
did not appeal to the staff of the Henry when this instrument was initially designed, and the
information about the sample and how age or computer proficiency relates to timing and success
rates of tasks is not available.
Coding Subjectivity: There is a level of subjectivity that is inherent to analysis of any qualitative
data, such as commentary during usability testing and answers to open-ended questions during
the structured interviews. Data coding and analysis was limited to one individual, which allowed
for consistency while still being subjective to that individual.
Amount of Data: The large amount of data collected could provide further results and undergo
further analysis. For the purpose of this study, certain elements of this evaluative study were not
relevant and were not included in reporting.

DISCUSSION	  

Wickell	  40	  
Chapter 5
Discussion and Results

What do museum visitors expect to find when they access a museum’s online collection?
Based on the analysis of the findings in Chapter 4, users expect to encounter difficulty when
navigating museum collections online, emphasizing a need for clearer search options and a wider
variety of ways to obtain object information. Structured interview questions established that
stakeholders are generally aware that the Henry offers online collections access and has Digital
Interactive Galleries available for use at home, but most users are not accessing these areas on a
regular basis. Some participants seemed to feel overwhelmed by the online search mechanisms
and the text that accompanies them. This question addressed the concept of usefulness discussed
in Chapter 2, and identified ways the site could become more useful to online visitors. The
complications identified in the findings were similar to those voiced in the research performed by
Hong (Iris) Xie, with participants stating that they sometimes feel overwhelmed by the process
of using online collections and the need for the design to be more intuitive. Currently, the visitors
are finding the collections search useful and some participants who used it or the DIG sites for
the first time during testing noted potential future use.
How are museum visitors using and accessing online collections?
Based on the analysis of the findings in Chapter 4, users are accessing the online collections sites
for research and academic purposes, specific queries, and to browse. Visitors stated they wanted
to see more relationships between exhibitions and collections, and to be able to browse the
objects that are linked to past or present exhibitions. This question further identified the concept
of usefulness, discussed in Chapter 2, of the online collection sites from a visitor perspective. For

DISCUSSION	  

Wickell	  41	  

instance, many participants did not find the idea of the personal gallery useful unless they had a
specific reason, such as research purposes, to create one. Many of these participants stated that
they would rather be able to share the images on social media. Since the sharing of object
pictures and information is not facilitated by the Henry site, many are taking screen captures of
them to place on their personal computers or to then post to their social media accounts such as
Tumblr, Pinterest, and Facebook.
How successful are searches performed by museum visitors on the online collections?
Based on the analysis of the findings in Chapter 4, searches seem to be only as successful as the
subject was perseverant. When faced with the specific search query regarding German
Photographers, many participants gave up due to frustration; a handful powered through
stubbornly and relentlessly until they were successful, and only one participant accomplished the
task on the first try. Even though a large amount of participants entered the correct information
in the advanced search or basic search boxes, the constrained search parameters meant that they
received a “no matching records” message for small mistakes.

CONCLUSIONS	  AND	  RECOMMENDATIONS	  

Wickell	  42	  

Chapter 6
Conclusions and Recommendations
	  
Conclusions
This evaluation study resulted in three main conclusions. The first and most significant
conclusion was that the advanced search mechanism is not usable to most participants. The
second conclusion was that participants see object relationships and contextual information as
useful. The final conclusion was that participants want to be able to share favorite objects from
the collection, and that offering this would heighten their user experience. These conclusions are
framed within the guiding research questions: What do museum visitors expect to find when they
access an online collection, how are they using the online collections, and how successful are
their searches?
How successful are searches performed by museum visitors on the online collections?
Further analysis of the advanced search features needs to be performed. Key issues noted during
the advanced search was, as stated in Chapter 5, the strict search parameters in place which do
not allow room for error as well as terminology boundaries. This is supported by Anne GillilandSwetland and Layna White’s research discussed in Chapter 2, which revealed how museum
professionals and their visitors may not have the same ideas of terminology. There is a
disconnect between what the museum feels is understandable and what the user felt they
understood, particularly when it comes to the term “Class” which encompasses what most users
considered to be “Medium.” In most cases, once the participant figured out they could select
from the value listing, they tried to select “Photographs” or “Photography” under medium but
could only find specific types of photography.

CONCLUSIONS	  AND	  RECOMMENDATIONS	  

Wickell	  43	  

What do museum visitors expect to find when they access a museum’s online collection?
coincides with Kravchyna and Hastings’ results around the necessity of easy navigation and
search tools in Chapter 2, users valued the ability to view collections through relationships. Once
they find an object, artist, medium, etc. they are interested in, there is a link to similar objects
within reach.
How are museum visitors using and accessing online collections?
Participants value the ability to share an object to social media such as Tumblr, Pinterest, or
Facebook is something that is important to these users. An area mentioned in Chapter 2, Michael
Govan of LACMA told the Getty Foundation Initiative that it was critical to his institution to
remain relevant to the public. This mindset is one to embrace, because addressing what visitors
want from an online experience will produce more return visits and will positively impact the
reach of the museum. Participants want to give credit to artists, and show their favorite styles of
art, and concepts. One participant, and artist, voiced that they would also like to incorporate this
feature. Participants have an idea of the complexities of obtaining copyright, but they do not
understand why they are unable to share objects that have the tombstone information embedded
within the image. Participants recognize the usability of a personal gallery for research purposes,
but do not want to keep a personal, “for fun” gallery contained within one museum website.
Recommendations
This study resulted in eight key recommendations for the Henry Art Gallery. The first
recommendation is to merge the collection search and the Digital Interactive Galleries, ensuring
there is a clear path to and from each area so visitors do not become lost. The second
recommendation is to incorporate more visual search elements into the collections search –
visual learners need a search option that appeals to them. The third recommendation is to connect

CONCLUSIONS	  AND	  RECOMMENDATIONS	  

Wickell	  44	  

objects in the collection to exhibitions, allow users to see which objects are a part of the
exhibition within the main exhibit page. The fourth recommendation is to connect similar objects,
artists, or themes so that when a user performs a search or views an object; they can also see
what is similar rather than having to do multiple searches. The fifth recommendation is to create
a clearer advanced search box - if participants do not notice it then they will not use it. The sixth
recommendation is to address terminology used on the collections site, for example: “Medium”
should be changed to “Type” and the category of “Class” should be renamed as “Medium.”
Adding general terms to the search function, as well as concepts or themes will expand the
usability of the database. The seventh recommendation is to keep the personal gallery option, but
advertise it on the site to researchers who are interested in using the study center – participants
saw value in this tool from a research standpoint so target this tool to that audience. The eigth
and final recommendation is to create a Pinterest page for the museum.
The Henry Art Gallery is poised in the perfect position to make some of these needed changes in
order to improve the usefulness and usability of their online collections sites while undergoing
the next phase of a website redesign. By improving usefulness and usability, visitor experience
has the potential to increase and, as seen through the Getty Foundation Initiative discussed in
Chapter 2, visitation could also increase. It is strongly recommended for the Henry to perform
small batches of user testing at each key stage of implementation of these recommendations in
order to gauge how the changes affect the end users and to identify any other areas of
improvement. This sounds time consuming, but it will produce the best results.
Future research into the characteristics of general users is recommended as well as looking at
further combined efforts of multiple institutions to address the evaluation questions outlined in
this study.

BIBLIOGRAPHY	  

Wickell	  45	  
Bibliography

Allen,	  J.	  Ryan	  et	  al.	  "Museum	  Collections	  Data	  and	  Online	  Mapping	  Applications."	  Mountain	  
Research	  and	  Development	  (International	  Mountain	  Society)	  23,	  no.	  4	  (2003):	  334-­‐337.	  
Allinson,	  Julie.	  "OpenART:	  Open	  Metadata	  for	  Art	  Research	  at	  the	  Tate."	  ASIS&T	  Bulletin	  38,	  
no.	  3	  (February/March	  2012):	  43-­‐48.	  
American	  Society	  for	  Information	  Science	  and	  Technology.	  http://www.asis.org	  (accessed	  
April	  2013).	  
Bailey,	  Robert	  W,	  and	  Cari	  Wolfson.	  "FirstClick	  Usability	  Testing."	  Web	  Usability.	  October	  08,	  
2013.	  http://webusability.com/firstclick-­‐usability-­‐testing/	  (accessed	  March	  2014).	  
Cameron,	  Fiona.	  "Digital	  Futures	  I:	  Museum	  Collections,	  Digital	  Technologies,	  and	  the	  
Cultural	  Construction	  of	  Knowledge."	  Curator	  46,	  no.	  3	  (July	  2003):	  325-­‐340.	  
Doyle,	  Jeff,	  and	  Maureen	  Ward	  Doyle.	  "Mixing	  Social	  Glue	  with	  Brick	  and	  Mortar:	  
Experiments	  Using	  the	  Mobile	  Web	  to	  Connect	  People,	  Objects,	  and	  Museums."	  Museums	  
and	  the	  Web	  2010.	  Toronto:	  Archives	  &	  Museum	  Informatics,	  2010.	  
Dyson,	  Mary	  C,	  and	  Kevin	  Moran.	  "Informing	  the	  Design	  of	  Web	  Interfaces	  to	  Museum	  
Collections."	  Museum	  Management	  and	  Curatorship	  18,	  no.	  4	  (December	  2000):	  391-­‐406.	  
Fabrikant,	  Geraldine.	  "The	  Good	  Stuff	  in	  the	  Back	  Room."	  The	  New	  York	  Times:	  Arts.	  March	  
12,	  2009.	  
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/19/arts/artsspecial/19TROVE.html?pagewanted=all&
_r=0	  (accessed	  November	  25,	  2013).	  
Faust,	  Rachael,	  interview	  by	  Carly	  Wickell.	  Interview	  (June	  6,	  2013).	  
Forbes,	  Megan.	  "CollectionSpace:	  A	  Story	  of	  Open-­‐Source	  Software	  Development	  and	  User-­‐
Centered	  Design."	  ASIS&T	  Bulletin	  38,	  no.	  3	  (February/March	  2012):	  22-­‐26.	  
Gilliland-­‐Swetland,	  Anne	  and	  Layna	  White.	  "Museum	  Information	  Professionals	  as	  
Providers	  and	  Users	  of	  Online	  Resources."	  ASIS&T	  Bulletin	  30,	  no.	  5	  (June/July	  2004).	  
Grebenstein,	  Emily,	  and	  Linda	  St.	  Thomas.	  "Fact	  Sheet:	  Smithsonian	  Collections."	  Newsdesk:	  
Newsroom	  of	  the	  Smithsonian.	  September	  1,	  2013.	  http://newsdesk.si.edu/factsheets/fact-­‐
sheet-­‐smithsonian-­‐collections	  (accessed	  November	  25,	  2013).	  
Hamma,	  Ken.	  "Becoming	  Digital."	  ASIS&T	  Bulletin	  30,	  no.	  5	  (June/July	  2004).	  
Institute	  of	  Museum	  and	  Library	  Services.	  2012	  National	  Medal	  for	  Museum	  and	  Library	  
Service	  brochure.	  http://www.imls.gov/assets/1/AssetManager/2012MedalsBrochure.pdf	  
(accessed	  April	  2013).	  
—.	  Building	  Digital	  Communities:	  A	  Framework	  for	  Action.	  
http://www.imls.gov/assets/1/workflow_staging/AssetManager/2140.PDF	  (accessed	  
April	  2013).	  

BIBLIOGRAPHY	  

Wickell	  46	  

Institute	  of	  Museum	  of	  Library	  Services.	  2013	  National	  Medal	  for	  Museum	  and	  Library	  
Service	  brochure.	  http://www.imls.gov/assets/1/AssetManager/Medals13.pdf	  (accessed	  
May	  2013).	  
J.	  Paul	  Getty	  Foundation.	  L.A.	  Art	  Online:	  Learning	  from	  the	  Getty's	  Electronic	  Cataloguing	  
Initiative.	  Los	  Angeles,	  CA:	  The	  Getty	  Foundation,	  2007.	  
J.	  Paul	  Getty	  Foundation.	  Museum	  Catalogues	  Online.	  Los	  Angeles:	  J.	  Paul	  Getty	  Foundation,	  
2012.	  
Kravchyna,	  Victoria,	  and	  Sam	  Hastings.	  "Informational	  Value	  of	  Museum	  Web	  Sites."	  First	  
Monday	  7,	  no.	  2	  (February	  2002).	  
Krug,	  Steve.	  Don't	  make	  me	  think!:	  A	  common	  sense	  approach	  to	  Web	  usability.	  Berkeley,	  CA:	  
New	  Riders	  Publishers,	  2006.	  
Los	  Angeles	  County	  Museum	  of	  Art.	  Strategic	  Plan	  October	  2009.	  
http://www.archive.org/stream/LacmaStrategicPlan102009/lacma-­‐strategic-­‐
plan#page/n0/mode/2up	  (accessed	  April	  2013).	  
Marty,	  Paul	  F.	  "Digital	  Museum	  Resources	  and	  Their	  Use,	  Museum	  Management	  and	  
Curatorship."	  Museum	  Websites	  and	  Museum	  Visitors	  23,	  no.	  1	  (2008):	  81-­‐99.	  
Museum	  Computer	  Network.	  http://www.mcn.edu/	  (accessed	  April	  2013).	  
Museums	  and	  the	  Web.	  http://www.museumsandtheweb.com	  (accessed	  April	  2013).	  
—.	  Best	  of	  the	  Web	  Awards.	  http://www.museumsandtheweb.com/best	  (accessed	  April	  
2013).	  
Papatheodorou,	  Christos,	  and	  Giannis	  Tsakonas.	  "Exploring	  usefulness	  and	  usability	  in	  the	  
evaluation	  of	  open	  access	  digital	  libraries."	  Information	  Processing	  and	  Management	  44	  
(2008):	  1234-­‐1250.	  
Patton,	  Michael	  Quinn.	  Qualitative	  Research	  and	  Evaluation	  Methods.	  Thousand	  Oaks,	  CA:	  
Sage	  Publications,	  2002.	  
Smithsonian.	  Fact	  Sheets:	  Smithsonian	  Collections.	  http://newsdesk.si.edu/factsheets/fact-­‐
sheet-­‐smithsonian-­‐collections	  (accessed	  April	  2013).	  
Sociology.org.uk.	  "Sociological	  Research	  Skills:	  Research	  Methods."	  Sociology.org.uk.	  
http://www.sociology.org.uk/methsi.pdf	  (accessed	  March	  2014).	  
Solas,	  Nate.	  "Hiding	  Our	  Collections	  in	  Plain	  Site:	  Interface	  Strategies	  for	  "Findability"."	  
Museums	  and	  the	  Web	  2010:	  Preceedings	  (Archives	  &	  Museum	  Informatices),	  March	  2010.	  
Spool,	  Jared	  M.	  "What	  Makes	  a	  Design	  Seem	  'Intuitive'?"	  User	  Interface	  Engineering.	  January	  
10,	  2005.	  http://www.uie.com/articles/design_intuitive/	  (accessed	  November	  1,	  2013).	  

BIBLIOGRAPHY	  

Wickell	  47	  

The	  British	  Museum.	  About	  the	  Collection	  database	  online.	  
http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/search_the_collection_database/about_the_data
base.aspx	  (accessed	  April	  2013).	  
Usability.gov.	  "Planning	  a	  Usability	  Test."	  Usability.gov.	  http://www.usability.gov/how-­‐to-­‐
and-­‐tools/methods/planning-­‐usability-­‐testing.html	  (accessed	  February	  2014).	  
—.	  "Reporting	  Usability	  Test	  Results."	  Usability.gov.	  http://www.usability.gov/how-­‐to-­‐and-­‐
tools/methods/reporting-­‐usability-­‐test-­‐results.html	  (accessed	  February	  2014).	  
—.	  "Running	  a	  Usability	  Test."	  Usability.gov.	  http://www.usability.gov/how-­‐to-­‐and-­‐
tools/methods/running-­‐usability-­‐tests.html	  (accessed	  February	  2014).	  
—.	  "Scenarios."	  Usability.gov.	  http://www.usability.gov/how-­‐to-­‐and-­‐tools/scenarious.html	  
(accessed	  March	  2014).	  
—.	  What	  &	  Why	  of	  Usability.	  http://www.usability.gov/what-­‐and-­‐why/index.html	  
(accessed	  February	  2014).	  
Weible,	  Erin.	  "No	  Longer	  an	  Island:	  A	  New	  Collections	  Management	  System	  Transforms	  the	  
Henry	  Art	  Gallery."	  The	  Henry	  Art	  Gallery,	  Seattle,	  2008.	  
White,	  Layna.	  "Museum	  Informatics:	  Collections,	  People,	  Access,	  Use."	  ASIS&T	  Bulletin	  30,	  
no.	  5	  (June/July	  2004).	  
Xie,	  Hong	  (Iris).	  "Evaluation	  of	  digital	  libraries:	  Criteria	  and	  problems	  from	  users'	  
perspectives."	  Library	  &	  Information	  Science	  Research	  28	  (2006):	  433-­‐452.	  
	  

APPENDICES	  

Wickell	  48	  
Appendix A - Charts

40
3-5

Worksho Certain search fields that are intuitive and give you the results you
Looking I found what I wanted, there just weren't pictures so I wasn't sure if I

2bi2

Right
I don't remember being pleased with it and felt that it probably needed
Research I went to look for a photograph and I entered the title and artist and it

No, browsing
Not everything was digital, so that was disappointing. Was able to get a
Search was limited, no way to conceptually search. 90% of what they
I don't think so, it wasn't hard enough that I gave up
No, because I can search for the acc #
I first tried with Johnson, then tried photography and used the advanced

2bi1

0
50

y
y
Y

2bi

No
No

2a

1bi2

To set up
Explore.
No
Costume
Costumes
Class
Searching
Looking
I wanted

2b

1bi1

10
1-2
0
1-2
6
0
1
1-2
4-5

2

1bi

y
N
N

2

No

Y
y
y
y
y
y
N

1
0
1
0
1
2

Cost No

N
y
y
y
y
y
y
y

Can't
I
No, but it was
Jeffre No

N
Y
y
y
y

N
N
y
y

40+ Cost No, but it's
1
Just Since I was

Y

1

Y

4-6 No

N

Thou

N

*See

N

Indivi

N

It

I have
Whitney,

Rese Whitne

MoMA

No I Biggest

Brooklyn
Dallas
I can't
Crocker Art
MET, Victoria

Whe
MH
Rese
Obje
Rese

I find
Basic
I went
Some
When I

N

Well

N

N

N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

5
5
3
Depend
5
5
4
1
5
2
1
1
5
1
2
1
3
1
2
1

Comments/Quotes

6ai1ai

6ai1a

6ai1

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
Y

6ai

Timelin
"Tree"
C/T
Possibl
Timelin
PNM:
Very
PNM:
Timelin
Photogr
I didn't
Becaus
I
NW
Photogr
I like
My
I liked
Timelin
I like

6b

Most Haven't

Photo
Costu
Costu
Photo
Costu
Costu
Costu
Photo
Photo
North
Photo
Photo
Costu
Costu
Photo
Costu
Costu
Photo
Photo
Costu

Y

Rese Yes, the

6aii1

Rese Feel all

6a

MET, VNA,
I can't
National

Stylis

y
y
y
y
y
N
y
I
y
y
Yes, I N
I
N
y
y
I had y
y
y
y
y
y
y

5ai

N

4

Rese Henry
Miro Spoke
Rese SAM

5a

Met
SAM
SAM

3bii

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
y
y
y
y
Y
N

3bi

It's not familiar terminology for me, so I had to think out what I was

3b

Trying

3aii

5

N

6aii

N
Y

3aiii

1a

y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
N
N
y
y
N
y
y
N
N
N
Y

3ai

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
y

3a

ID
P1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
S15
S16
S17
S18
S19

1b

Interview Charts

Onli
Disa
Onli
If I
I
High
I can
I use
It is

Gell
I

APPENDICES	  

Wickell	  49	  

Usability Testing Charts

Task

1. [Beginning at the HAG Home Page] Navigate to the online
collections search.

2. Search for Photographs.

Fi
rst
Successful
Time
Y Y 00:33.3
Y Y 00:20.7
Y Y 00:17.9
Y Y 00:18.2
Y N 00:13.2
Y N 00:12.0
Y Y 00:08.5
Y Y 00:08.5
Y Y 00:26.0
Y Y 00:20.5
Y Y 00:14.7
Y N 00:30.8
Y Y 00:16.5
Y N 00:05.9
Y Y 00:10.3
Y Y 00:12.5
Y Y 00:34.0
Y Y 00:24.0
Y Y 00:23.4
Y N 00:22.4

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
NA
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA

00:09.6
00:32.9
00:11.7
00:13.5
00:21.4
00:50.5
00:04.6
00:15.0
NA
NA
00:12.2
01:30.1
00:13.8
00:42.2
00:08.8
00:55.6
00:09.4
00:18.5
00:30.2
NA

Nature/Steps
Comments
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, stopped on main collections page
Direct route, saw link at top nav, stopped on main collections page
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav, scrolled page and c
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav, scrolled page and c
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, stopped on main collections page
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, stopped on main collections page
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, saw second link on side nav
Direct route, saw link at top nav, stopped on main collections page

	  

Went straight to basic search box
Scrolled>Checked for Photos in drop box>Searched "Photos" and go
Went straight to basic search box
Scrolled page, then went to basic search box
Went straight to basic search box, checked and left "all words" in d
Read collections search information first>Basic box
Went straight to basic search box
Went straight to basic search box
Did not perform search.
Did not perform search.
Went straight to basic search box, checked and left "all words" in d
Scrolled page, then went to basic search box
Went straight to basic search box
Search box at top of Henry Nav>Did not produce correct results>Ga
lot ofsearch
photographs.
lot
Went straight to Abasic
box, A
checked
and left "all words" in d
of text
on welcome page,
Went to Advanced
Search>Checked
for Photograph under medium v
of abox
brief
Went straight to maybe
basic more
search
Thought
Went straight to summary.
basic search
boxfront
search
page
is more
Scrolled page, read
text
in intro>Basic
search
Did not perform search.
daunting than needs to be.

	  

APPENDICES	  

3. Search for photography made by German photographers during
the 1980’s.

4. Return to main Collections page.

Wickell	  50	  

Went to choose value after
2 failed attempts at
advanced search. Dating set
to "equal to" rather than
"greater than/equal." Had to
use values for all search
areas in order to attain
results. Stated did not know
what class means, German
in culture? Wound up using
list view, used date order
(eventually), "found" using
list view. Advanced search
is very small. Concern with
advanced search, not sure
how specific it is to terms
in catalogue. Date made is
confusing. German >culture vs origin. "Class"

N
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y

N
Y
N
N
Y
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
Y

04:41.7
03:36.3
03:40.9
00:28.2
02:31.9
02:27.3
01:27.9
02:35.8
02:44.0
03:07.2
01:51.5
02:04.8
05:28.0
01:47.7
01:13.4
01:20.4
04:36.2
04:35.4
02:29.9
01:35.1

Basic search
Basic search
Basic search
Basic search
Advanced
Basic search box
Advanced
Advanced
Advanced
Advanced
Basic search>Did
Scrolled>Back to
Advanced
Basic
Advanced
Advanced
Basic search with
Advanced
Basic search
Advanced

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

00:04.4
00:06.7
00:04.5
00:05.3
00:11.8
00:10.8
00:04.0
00:04.5
00:02.0
00:05.8
00:08.5
00:07.0
00:08.8
00:03.8
00:05.5
00:03.5
00:10.9
00:04.4
00:02.8
00:01.3

Clicked collections search button, believed at right position
Scrolled page>Collections top nav clicked
Collections top nav clicked
Collections top nav clicked
Collections top nav clicked
Clicked collections search button, believed at right position
Collections top nav clicked
Collections top nav clicked
Collections top nav clicked
Collections top nav clicked
Collections Search>Collections top nav
Collections top nav clicked
Collections search, remained on main search page rather than con
Collections
Collections top nav
clicked search link
clicked, returned
to search top Nav
Clicked back button>Clicked
Collections
home
rather
than
Collections top nav clicked
collections
Collections top nav
clickedhome. Like that
Collections
Collections top nav
clicked in top nav
remains
highlighted pink to
Collections top nav
clicked
Collections top nav
clicked
guide
how to get back.

	  

	  

APPENDICES	  

5. Navigate to the Digital Interactive Galleries.

6a. Locate a video about a Northwest artist.

Wickell	  51	  

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

00:19.4
00:05.0
00:02.8
00:14.9
00:32.8
00:22.8
00:03.0
00:06.4
00:07.6
00:02.2
00:03.2
00:10.5
00:40.6
00:20.0
00:02.1
00:07.2
01:37.2
00:04.4
00:11.2
00:03.5

Went straight to DIG
Went straight to DIG
Went straight to DIG
Almost went to "Exhibitions" then saw DIG link
Scrolled page>Saw link to left in side bar and a link at bottom of
Scrolled page>clicked link at bottom
Went straight to DIG
Went straight to DIG
Scrolled page>clicked link at bottom
Went straight to DIG at bottom of page
Went straight to DIG
Went straight to DIG
From collections search>Clicked collections top nav>DIG side bar
Wenttop
to Exhibitions
First looked through
Nav, then saw DIG link on side bar
that is where I
Went straight to because
DIG
Went straight to would
DIG think that galleries
would be. If coming from & Events>Scrolled>Educ
Went to Exhibitions>Scrolled>Programs
collections
is not
Scrolled page>Saw
link to search,
left in itside
bar and clicked it
immediately
apparent
Scrolled page>Clicked
DIG link
on left side nav
Went straight to where
DIG DIG is located.

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

00:15.4
00:22.2
00:19.3
00:39.9
00:25.2
00:17.0
00:30.9
00:13.2
00:36.1
00:10.8
00:09.7
00:17.1
00:21.0
00:29.8
00:12.8
00:22.3
00:29.7
00:17.9
01:01.3
00:09.7

NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled
NW link>scrolled

	  

	  

APPENDICES	  

6b. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery home.

7a. Find information about Textile Structures.

Wickell	  52	  

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

00:09.2
00:03.7
00:14.0
00:02.2
00:18.7
00:05.0
00:11.6
00:26.8
00:06.5
00:04.3
00:01.7
01:15.8
00:17.2
00:19.8
00:04.9
00:18.9
00:18.3
00:04.0
00:04.2
00:23.7

Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG home
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG home
Scrolled page>Clicked Northwest top link>clicked H>Back to Collections h
Clicked back button until at DIG home
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG home
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG home
Scrolled page>Changed url (took off everything after first /)
Scrolled page>Clicked Northwest top link>Changed url (took off everything
Clicked back button until at DIG home
Changed url (took off everything after the first /)
Clicked back button until at DIG home
"Clicking the Henry H to
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked Henry H>Remained on Henry Main p
see where that takes me"
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked Northwest Artists title link>clicked b
and
when all
thebutton until return to DIG home
Scrolled page, did not seesurprise
link>clicked
back
way
to Henry back
mainbutton until return to DIG home
Scrolled page, did not
seeback
link>clicked
page.
"Not an top
obvious
way
Scrolled page>Clicked
Northwest
link>clicked
H>Back to Collections h
to see
get link>clicked
back, so I'm just
Scrolled page, did not
back button>Scrolled NW Artist Hom
going
to click the back
Scrolled page, did not
see link>clicked
back button to DIG home
get there,
Clicked back button button
until atuntil
DIGI home
Scrolled page, did not
see link>clicked
which
is annoying"Henry H>Collections Search Main pa

Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

00:16.9
01:31.9
00:18.2
00:12.4
00:57.2
00:46.2
00:25.2
00:14.7
00:28.8
00:11.2
00:16.2
01:08.7
00:27.1
00:46.8
00:12.1
00:27.2
00:36.7
00:26.9
00:46.3
00:15.4

Assuming
photo textile link
DIG>CostText>Photo
Text>TextStruct
upper textile
link take
Went all the way and
to main
collections>Collections
search>list vie
to same
place. Curious as to
DIG>CostText>Photo
Text>TextStruct
DIG>CostText>Upper
Text
link>TextStruct
whether
"Resources"
would
DIG>CostText>Photo
Text>TextStruct
have textile
structures or if
DIG>CostText>Upper
Text
link>TextStruct
go under
Textiles
for
DIG>CostText>Photo
Text>TextStruct
best/quickest.
Not sure
DIG>CostText>Photo
Text>TextStruct
what "Structures"
meant so
DIG>CostText>Photo
almostText>TextStruct
did not continue
DIG>CostText>Photo Text>TextStruct
deeper into CT page. Not
DIG>CostText>Upper Text link>TextStruct
sure what Structures meant,
Collections Main>Collections search>Basic search>Textile struct
but figured they may be
DIG>CostText>Photo Text>TextStruct
locatedText
underlink>TextStruct
Textiles
DIG>CostText>Upper
(from Text
home).link>TextStruct
"A lot of text"
DIG>CostText>Upper
in reference
to main page.
DIG>CostText>Photo
Text>TextStruct
WouldText>TextStruct
have preferred the
DIG>CostText>Photo
information
textlooking
at the top
DIG>CostText>Scrolled
Page
for information>Photo Tex
of the page,
to explain
DIG>CostText>Scrolled
Page
lookingwhat
for information>Photo Tex
DIG>CostText>Photo
textileText>TextStruct
structures were

	  

	  

APPENDICES	  

7b. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery home.

Wickell	  53	  

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

00:07.2
00:06.7
00:17.4
00:22.8
00:27.2
00:27.8
00:08.9
00:16.9
00:17.9
00:04.6
00:13.3
00:30.5
00:12.4
00:20.1
00:03.6
00:14.6
00:12.7
00:17.5
00:11.6
00:13.5

Hit back button until back to DIG
Hit back button to Collections main>DIG link
Hit back button>scrolled each page looking for another link>Back button
Hit back button until back to DIG
Scrolled page>Hit back button until back to DIG
Scrolled each page as hit back button to see if a link existed
Scrolled page>Changed url (took off everything after first /)
Tried to click CT Title(not link)>clicked introduction tab>scrolled>chang
Clicked back button until at DIG home
Changed url (took off everything after the first /)
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG h
From collections search>Clicked back button>Collections Search main p
Hit back button until back to DIG
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG h
Hit back button until back to DIG
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked Henry H>Collections Search Mai
Not
how else to
get button until return to DIG h
Scrolled page, did not
seesure
link>clicked
back
back except
back button,
Clicked Henry H>Collections
Main>DIG
Home
"Not
Clicked back button seems
until ateasiest.
DIG home
Clicked back button intuitive"
until at DIG home

	  

8a. Locate a page on FSA Photography.

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

00:10.4
00:23.3
01:16.9
00:08.9
00:48.0
00:21.3
00:19.3
00:16.9
00:15.0
00:21.6
00:11.2
00:18.6
00:24.1
00:44.4
00:21.8
00:24.7
00:22.1
00:20.7
00:35.5
00:16.5

DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
*took longer to load* DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Saw timeline but scrolled through page to be sure that was th
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Saw timeline but scrolled through page to be sure that was th
DIG>Photo>Scrolled>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Scrolled>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Scrolled>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Scrolled>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
Seemed
daunting
a lot times until realized was ju
DIG>Photo>Timeline
top link
clickedand
a couple
of information at first.
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
Would like a search box
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
available. "Oh, god" DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
daunting until noticed link
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
DIG>Photo>Timeline>FSA
on timeline.

	  

APPENDICES	  

8b. Return to Digital Interactive Gallery home.

	  

Wickell	  54	  

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

NA
NA
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

NA
NA
00:12.1
00:15.3
00:22.2
00:41.0
NA
00:17.2
00:28.1
00:06.6
00:11.4
00:35.6
00:11.5
00:03.6
00:09.8
00:11.1
00:11.6
00:17.8
00:05.5
00:20.7

Did not return to DIG home.
Did not return to DIG home.
Hit back button until back to DIG
Hit back button until back to DIG, looked to see if a different way
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG
Did not return to DIG home.
Clicked Intro>clicked PhotoNM Title>Clicked H>Clicked Collections
Clicked Intro>Believed completed
Changed url (took off everything after the first /)
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG
Scrolled page, did not see link>clicked back button until return to DIG
Clicked PhotoNM title>clicked back button until back to DIG
Hit back button until back to DIG
Back
button
sometimes will
Hit back button>Page
became
stuck>Changed
URL
not work properly
to allow
Clicked Henry H>Collections
Main>DIG
Home
Clicked back button leaving
until at site
DIG(click
homeback and
it keeps trapped
on same
Clicked Henry H>Collections
Main>DIG
Home
page).
"UGH"
after trying
Selected DIG page from
web
history
Scrolled page, did not
PhotoNM Title link, scrolled>c
to see
findlink>Clicked
a back button.

	  

