SCHOOL LIBRARIANS AND THE COMMON CORE:
HOW THEY CAN HELP TEACHERS AND STUDENTS THROUGH THE NEW
STANDARDS
by
ENITO MOCK

A master’s thesis submitted to the Graduate Faculty in Liberal Studies in partial fulfillment of
the requirement for the Master’s Degree, The City University of New York
2014

UMI Number: 1553013

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1553013
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

This manuscript has been read and accepted for the
Graduate Faculty in Liberal Studies in satisfaction of the
dissertation requirement for the degree of Master of Arts.

Dr. Shifra Sharlin_______________
______________________
Date

_____________________________
Thesis Advisor

Dr. Matthew Gold______________
______________________
Date

_____________________________
Executive Officer

The City University of New York

ii

ABSTRACT
SCHOOL LIBRARIANS AND THE COMMON CORE:
HOW THEY CAN HELP TEACHERS AND STUDENTS THROUGH THE NEW
STANDARDS
By
Enito Mock
Advisor: Professor Shifra Sharlin
The author addresses the critical role school libraries play in student academic
achievement. He also addresses the role school librarians could play in successfully
implementing the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Historically being left out of
education reforms such as No Child Left Behind in 2001, school media specialists now have the
opportunity to shine and show off their unique skill set in curriculum design, information
literacy, and research. In collaborating with teachers to carry out lesson plans focused on the
CCSS, school librarians can teach students essential skills such as critical thinking,
brainstorming, and writing/reading techniques. In discussing why school librarians are needed to
complete the success puzzle, the author looks into various course curricula established at Masters
of Library Science programs in the United States to trace the development of their skill set,
trainings in literacy and research, and the impact these professionals make on a daily basis. The
author also shows how school media specialists make a difference in promoting and teaching
literacy in inner city schools, which are highly under resourced. Issues of socioeconomic context,
inequality, and illiteracy among inner city students are addressed.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost, I would like to thank my thesis advisor, Dr. Shifra Sharlin for her guidance,
mentorship, and advice on the research, writing, and editing process. Without her help, I wouldn’t have
made it so far in my graduate career. It was her teachings and lessons during my first semester at the
Graduate Center that made me believe I could make it in graduate school. Thank you for “pushing me to
my limits”. I would also like to thank Dr. Terrie Epstein, Dr. David Connor, Dr. Judith Kafka, Dr.
Bethany Rogers, and Professor David Bloomfield for instilling me with their knowledge in urban
education. It was through their teachings and knowledge that I was able to start and develop my argument
in this thesis. I must also thank my family for their support. To my mother, Lilia, Julia, and Samantha:
without all of your help every waking day, I wouldn’t have been able to do this. Thank you for everything
and your support.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………………... iii
Acknowledgments……………………………………………………………………………….. iv
Table of Contents…………………………………………………….……………………………v
I.

Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………...p. 1

II.

School Library Budget Cuts Across the United States…………………………………….........p. 5

III.

The Common Core State Standards……………………………………………………………..p. 7

IV.

School Media Programs: What School Librarians Bring to the Table………………………...p. 16

V.

School Media Specialist and Teacher Collaboration………………………………………......p. 23

VI.

The Reformers Get It Wrong Again: Forgetting Social Context and
Socioeconomic Status in the Development of Common Core State Standards………………..p. 27

VII.

School Media Specialist Role in Inner City Schools………………………………………......p. 40

VIII.

MyLibraryNYC: A Model for Public and School Library Collaboration……………………..p. 42

IX.

Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………………..p. 44
References……………………………………………………………………………………...p. 46

v

"Very often after school I would make my way to the library and while away a few hours of browsing
through the shelves. This was my introduction to opinions about history, science, the arts, and humanities
that my school or parents never taught me. I've had a library card for as long as I can remember and I
continue to use my card for much of the research I do for the roles I play."
Jane Alexander
Actress, A History of Us (2003)
“Libraries have always been my favorite place for quiet time, for study, for writing and reflection. I can’t
imagine a world without libraries: that would be a sad and dreary world, one without creativity or
imagination.”
Laura Valeri
Author, Safe in Your Head (2013)
“As a young person growing up in Hot Springs, Arkansas, I have many fond memories of the time I spent
in the Garland County library. As a student in high school and college, my love for learning was fostered
and enhanced by all the resources I made use of in the libraries where I studied. Today the library is not
only a special place for me but for my family as well.”
Bill Clinton
U.S. President, 1993-2001

I. Introduction
Libraries hold a special place not only in the hearts of those I have quoted above, but also
in mine. I remember a time when Ms. Tepper, my first grade teacher at Public School 115 in
Canarsie, Brooklyn, would take her class to the school library down the hall. We would form two
lines, one for boys and another for girls, and walk quietly down the second floor hallway to the
library. When we arrived at the library, the class would wait in the hallway until the school
librarian was ready. When she signaled the class that it was okay to enter, I remember the first
thing I saw were shelves of books against the wall and the colorful decorations. The students
were asked to sit on a rug and we were given an introduction on how the library worked and
proper etiquette while in the room.
After the introduction, I remember the school librarian asked the class to find two books
that interested us from the shelves. I had a hard time finding a book, pulling books out at random
1

that seemed small and had an interesting title. Because English is not my primary language, I had
to rely on colors and the words I did know to help me find a book. Still I was unable to find a
book that caught my interest.
Ms. Tepper walked over to me and asked if I had found a book yet. I told her in a strong
Cantonese-Chinese accent that I was unable to and didn’t see anything I liked. Ms. Tepper
smiled at me and said, “finding a book is easy but finding a book you’ll like is difficult.” The
school librarian showed me around her wonderful collection of books. She stopped me at a shelf
and asked me if I saw anything I liked. I looked through the collection and pulled out a long
paperback book entitled Sayonara, Mrs. Kackleman by Maira Kalman. The cover of the book
with its yellow, greens, and reds were not only exciting to look at but what interested me the
most were the Asian woman and man on the cover. They looked somewhat like me. Racially
relevant, I took the book and the librarian helped me read it at the table in the room. With each
page, I was anxious to know what happened next, asking questions such as what was going to
happen next to the kids on their adventures and will they stay in Japan with Mrs. Kackleman. At
the end of the story and our return back to our classroom, I could not and would not forget about
this wonderful story. I have since purchased the title for my own home library.
The school librarians of my past have helped me greatly through enriching my life with
knowledge and intellectual growth. They embedded in me the love for books, an opportunity to
gain knowledge and use your imagination to become a part of the story. They taught me how to
conduct research using the contents and index sections of a book to find what I needed. In using
the Internet, they taught me how to use Boolean search terms such as AND, NOT, and BUT on
search engines (Yahoo, AltaVista) to specifically narrow my searches. They also taught me basic
computer skills on applications such as Microsoft Word and Excel, essential programs we should

2

know in writing papers and creating spreadsheets. The school librarians taught me skills that are
extremely useful today as a graduate student conducting scholarly research, as a tutor helping
students gain literacy skills through reading, and as technology specialist at a library, teaching
adults and senior citizens how to use the computer and their applications.
School librarians do much more than provide research, literacy, and technology training.
They teach students how to evaluate information through inspection, looking for the source of
the document to determine its reliability. School librarians may refer students to use sources
from an academic database such as EbscoHost and ProQuest, rather than websites such as
Wikipedia, which are written by multiple people and lack reliability. School librarians also
support teachers with their curricula by providing additional resources to complement their
lesson plan. School librarians gather books, multimedia such as DVDs and videos, and online
resources for teachers to show their students as part of a lesson plan. School librarians empower
students to become critical thinkers, enthusiastic readers, skillful researchers, and ethical users of
information (American Association of School Librarians, 2009). So why haven’t school
librarians been included in the guidelines of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS)? These
learning guidelines for teachers to teach and students to learn at each grade level from
Kindergarten to the end of high school can be realized more successfully with the participation
of school librarians.
The purpose of this thesis is to understand the role of school media specialists (school
librarian) in the implementation of the CCSS. By looking at academic journals, school library
magazines, and online resources for school media specialists, I aim to show the positive impact
school media specialists make in schools and their contributions to student and teacher success.
With added pressure on teachers, who are already accountable for student success on

3

standardized tests under No Child Left Behind (2001), and administrators who are counting on
their teachers to raise student test scores in order to improve their schools reputation and ranking,
schools can use an extra hand on alleviating pressure for all educators in the school. As long as
educators have an interest in teaching the skills and content knowledge of the CCSS, they can
ultimately be successfully in providing their students with a first class education.
This thesis is composed of 9 sections including the introduction and conclusion. Section
II discusses school library cuts across the nation and its impact on students and teachers. Section
III discusses the history and language arts standards of the CCSS. I specifically focus on those
two areas because they address two important questions: how did the CCSS come about and how
can school media specialists lend their expertise in teaching literacy, writing, and critical
thinking skills designated in the CCSS. Section IV addresses the skill set and knowledge base of
school media specialists developed during library school. School media specialists bring their
expertise in collection development, technology and information instruction, and research, to
help implement the CCSS into the school’s curriculum, including the details of which tools are
necessary to successfully carry out the lesson plans associated with the coursework in English
Language Arts. By examining four school library media curriculums from universities across the
country, we will be able to see where their skills and knowledge came from and how they are
connected to the CCSS. Section V discusses the collaborations between teachers and school
media specialists and benefits for student learning and professional development. Teachers who
are able to develop close networks with school media specialists not only have an opportunity to
learn from one another through brainstorming for lesson plans and viewing each other’s
classroom instruction, but also to develop professionally and instructionally through creative
feedback and use of technology. Section VI and VII addresses the need for school librarians in

4

inner city schools and their positive impact on students. School media specialist can provide a
number of services to students and teachers such as teaching classes, mentoring students and
teaching literacy and research skills. School media specialists can make a significant difference
in inner city schools, raising student achievement and standardized test scores, as well as
teaching students new skills and content knowledge that will prepare them for college and the
workforce. Section VIII addresses public and school library collaborations such as the
MyLibraryNYC initiative and its impact on providing students and teachers with important
resources such as books and online databases.
II. School Library Budgets Cut Across the United States
School library budgets have been cut all around the United States. According to the
American Library Association’s yearly State of America’s Libraries Report 2013, the number of
school librarians declined more than any other school staff between 2007 and 2011. During the
2006-2007 school years, there were 54,445 school librarians. With each school year after, there
was a downward trend of school librarians. The sharpest decrease occurred during the 2010-2011
school years, dropping to 50,300 school librarians from 52,541. The number of school librarians
has continued to decrease since then. This trend will continue unless the U.S. Department of
Education and state education agencies recognize the impact of school library closures on
administrators, teachers, and students. To demonstrate the need for school libraries and the
impact it has on the school community, I use two recent online news articles highlighting the
impact of school library closures.
Susan Snyder (2013), a staff writer at the Inquirer, shows the emotional cost of school
library closures at two schools in Philadelphia, PA: Central High School and Masterman. Budget
cuts forced both principals to cut their staff including school librarians, teachers, and assistant

5

principals. According to Masterman’s principal Marjorie Neff, who was “about to tear up”, was
uncertain about how the loss of their school library would impact the instructional program at her
school. The school librarian, Bernadette Kearney, not only helped students find books and online
resources, but also taught them valuable research techniques as well. Ms. Kearney may have
worked closely with administrators and teachers to help carry out the Common Core State
Standards (CCSS) at Masterman. Timothy Mckenna, Central’s principal, also shared similar
feelings about the loss of his school media specialist Loretta Burton. According to Mckenna, it
was “beyond his control” to keep his librarian due to the limited power he had over the school’s
budget.
The loss of the school media specialists at both schools affected not only principals, but
students and teachers as well. Louis Borda, a Social Studies teacher at Masterman stated “we
can't be expected to have a school without a library. I would have reconsidered keeping my kids
in the school if I knew it was going to be this bad." This statement highlights the importance of
having a school library not only at his school, but at all schools. The school library cannot open
without a school media specialist or school staff member present. Since the school library is
closed off to students, students will need to find other places during or after school to study or
have group discussions. Students will not have a place to go where they feel safe, especially in
inner city neighborhoods. Keeping the school library open will make the lives of students and
teachers much easier and will continue to provide a service for the school community.
Without school libraries, students will not have access to the books and resources they
need to be successful in school. In an article written by Neal J. Riley in the September 10, 2012
edition of the SFGate, he discussed the impact of budget cuts to school libraries in Union City,
California. Carla Colburn, a school librarian for 8 years before she went back to teaching English

6

at James Logan High School, only visits her old library once a day to retrieve books for English
Language learners and students who are working on history projects. When she was in the
library, she would see about 600 to 1,000 students walking in and out of the library each day.
Now that the room is dark and the computers are unused, it has become nothing more than a
room in the school.
Blaming much of what happened to the school library on budget cuts, Riley discussed the
impact this had on student’s loss of essential skills needed to succeed in their first year of
college. Pam Oehlman, president of the California School Library Association, said that K-12
school libraries are needed more than ever and that students will be at a “disadvantage their first
years of college if they aren’t good searchers or database users” (Riley, 2012). Without the
school library, students will need to find alternative places to study and do research for projects
and group assignments. Students also wouldn’t be able to get the same attention they would from
school librarians, who could walk them through the research or writing process.
III. The Common Core State Standards
The Common Core State Standards (CCSS) are K-12 educational standards in the English
language arts and mathematics, developed to provide students in the United States with the skills
and knowledge necessary for success in college and the workforce. The CCSS are “meant to
provide a consistent, clear understanding of what students are expected to learn, so teachers and
parents know what they need to help them” (National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices & Council of Chief State Officers, 2010). The purpose of having such standards are not
only to give teachers and parents a clear understanding of what students need to know, but also
to create a unified curriculum. The National Governors Association (NGA) and the Council of
Chief State Officers (2010) claim that a national curriculum will ensure that all students,

7

regardless of where they live, receive a high quality education in preparation for post-secondary
school and the workforce. The authors also believe that the implementation of CCSS across the
nation will open a national conversation for teachers, administrators, and other education
stakeholders regarding their experiences with implementing the standards and how best to
improve them to better serve our students.
The CCSS in English language arts and the standards laid out in The Standards for the
21st Century Learner (2007), a publication by the American Association of School Librarians,
share similar ideas on the skills students ought to develop in school. The Standards for the 21st
Century Learner (2007) focuses on four major areas: a) critical thinking to gain new knowledge,
b) the ability to draw conclusions, make informed decisions, and applying knowledge to different
situations, c) sharing knowledge with others as part of a democracy, and d) pursue personal and
aesthetic growth. Under each area, there are standards focusing on what are called “skills”,
disposition to action, responsibilities, and self-assessment strategies. Because the CCSS in
English languages arts focuses on the skills highlighted in this publication, it is only logical to
involve school media specialists in the implementation, instruction, and curriculum design
processes at their schools.
The History of the Common Core State Standards
The CCSS was not developed the same year it was implemented in 2010. The planning
stage of the CCSS began in 1996 at the National Education Summit during a meeting between a
group of governors and business leaders around the country. In an effort to lead reforms across
the country in order to create a national education curriculum, the governors and business leaders
developed an organization called Achieve, an independent, bipartisan, non-profit education

8

reform organization (Tennessee Department of Education, 2010). Governor Bill Haslam of
Tennessee and former governor Phil Bredesen served on the board of directors at Achieve.
The development of the CCSS started with a report entitled “Ready or Not: Creating a
High School Diploma that Counts” in 2004. Written by the American Diploma Project (ADP),
the researchers of this study found that with 70% of high school students entering college, at
least 28% of those students take a remedial math or English class as freshman. A majority of
those students in remedial courses were minorities and came from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds. In addition, the researchers found that most college students never attain their
degrees, especially those who began with remedial classes as freshmen. As coursework became
more difficult and readings more complex, it began to strain students, especially those who did
not acquire the necessary skills needed in reading, math, and writing from high school. Other
noteworthy findings in this report included the lack of basic skills employers look for in the work
force, with 60% of students having poor or fair knowledge of reading and writing skills and the
lack of opportunities for students to take Advanced Placement courses, college level classes that
can be taken in a variety of subjects in high school.
In July 2008, Achieve began to document the work of multiple school systems around the
nation that were preparing their students for college and job readiness. Sixteen early adaptor
states, including New Jersey and Tennessee, were examined for their work on developing a
career and job readiness curriculum for their states. At the end of 2008, Achieve, NGA, and the
Council of Chief State Officers urged states to adopt their education reform standards. In July
2009, the NGA and the Council of Chief State Officers released a draft of the college and career
readiness standards for public comment by educators, administrators, and other education

9

stakeholders. The writing and drafting process continued until June 2010 when the final draft
was written for publishing.
President Barack Obama’s Race to the Top (RTTT) legislation has the CCSS at the center
of its initiative (Boser, 2012). The Race to the Top Fund, a $4.35 billion grant developed in
February 2009, was created to encourage and reward states for innovating and reforming their
education programs to raise student achievement and close the achievement gap (U.S.
Department of Education, 2009). Delaware and Tennessee were among the first two states to win
RTTT funding for their states. In 2010, ten more states received RTTT funding including New
York and Washington D.C. Although not every state received funding, to date, forty-five states,
Washington D.C., four territories, and the Department of Defense Education Activity have
adapted to the Common Core State Standards (National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices & Council of Chief State Officers, 2010).
Common Core State Standards in English Language Arts
The CCSS in English language arts and mathematics were developed with certain criteria
in mind (National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State
Officers, 2010). The eight points of the criteria are:









The standards are aligned with expectations for college and career readiness
The standards have to be clear enough for everyone to follow along
Schools teaching with the standards must be consistent across the border
The standards must include both the content and the application of knowledge through
high order skills
The need for building upon strengths and lessons of the current state standards in the U.S
and internationally
The standards must be realistic and could be carried out in the classroom
The standards are updated accordingly to compete with other standards at the
internationally level
The standards must be evidence and research based

10

In using these criteria, the National Governors Association and the Council of Chief State
Officers (2010) were able to “develop K-12 grade specific standards that define student end of
the year expectations and a cumulative progression designed to enable students to meet college
and career readiness no later than the end of high school.”
The CCSS in English language arts focuses on four main areas: reading, writing,
speaking and listening, and language. Reading is one of the most important skills people develop
in their lifetime. It is an important way of communicating thoughts, findings, and stories with
others. It is also a way of developing knowledge of the world. As students develop their reading
skills, first by starting with simple texts and then working their way up to more complex
narratives, they will develop new skills such as critical thinking, making connections, and
constructing arguments. All of these skills are emphasized in the CCSS in English language arts
and The Standards for the 21st Century Learner (2007).
The CCSS in English language arts also focuses on the development of writing skills.
The ability to write well not only takes time, but practice as well. Students can work on their
writing by plotting their thoughts in a journal or composing sentences to jot down ideas. The
ability to plan, revise, edit, and publish texts is emphasized in the standards. Also, in order for
students to write coherent and well-developed term papers in college, “research standards are
prominently included in this strand, though skills important to research are infused throughout
the document” (National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief
State Officers, 2010). School media specialists certainly fit in this area as well, able to help
students develop research and good writing skills. They can show students how to use research
databases, find online resources through search engines like Google, narrow searches by using
Boolean terms, and how to read abstracts analytically to determine whether the source will be

11

useful for their paper. School media specialists can also sit down with students and look over
their work, point out grammatical and stylistic issues, and explain how to improve on their
writing.
The standards for speaking and listening are aimed to help students acquire adequate oral
communication and interpersonal skills. According to those standards, teachers are supposed to
provide students with a literary text as a classroom or homework assignment and ask questions
about the work the same or following day. Students would respond to questions depending on
what the teacher asks for. For example, if a 11th grade teacher asks her students about Voltaire’s
Candide (1984) and their responses to Pangloss’s philosophy on why everything happens out of
absolute necessity, students can recall what they have read, along with their own personal
experiences to develop a meaningful and coherent argument. Questions such as these could also
start class conversations in which students not only listen to their classmates, but also have
respond to them as well in support or against their statements.
Finally, the CCSS for language arts focuses on the development of written and verbal
skills in English. Students are supposed to learn the conventions of English grammar,
capitalization, punctuation, spelling, in written work. Students should also learn how to develop
proper sentences through the use of subject verb object construction and active-passive voice.
The language standards also include the growth of vocabulary, in which students “focus on
understanding words and phrases, their relationships, and their nuances and on acquiring new
vocabulary, particularly general academic and domain-specific words and phrases” (National
Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State Officers, 2010).
Members of the National Governor’s Association and Council of Chief State Officers
believe that if students were able to gain the skills highlighted in the four areas above, they

12

would be college and career ready. According to the authors of the CCSS, students with these
skills demonstrate their own independence in learning; able to accept and/or reject ideas through
asking questions related to texts and lectures he/she believes are irrelevant, inconsistent, or
wrong. They also believe that students will gain sufficient content knowledge in an array of
subjects (social studies, science, and technical subjects) as well as become skilled in the use of
technology and digital media. Though the idea of success for all students is of course the main
goal and the skills highlighted in the English language arts CCSS are important, I believe that the
task of getting every child prepared for college and careers is difficult. In addressing what’s good
and bad about the CCSS, I will point out where the standards are strong, as well as where
improvement is needed to make it work.
Pros for the Common Core
Below are the reasons, most often given, for why the Common Core Standards are good and
should remain in the education curriculum:


Advocates of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) like that they are internationally
benchmarked (National Governor’s Association & the Council of Chief State School
Officers, 2010). This means that the standards set for our students are comparable to
other high-ranking countries doing well in educational attainment. With these standards
set for students, graduates will have the skills and knowledge necessary to compete in the
global economy for good, high paying positions around the world.



The adoption of the Common Core State Standards will save states money. Before the
standards were implemented across the United States, each state had their own standards
they used to develop test and teach students (Parents for Public Schools, 2013).
Departments of Education across the country can split the cost of standardized test,
13

allowing for the allocation of funds to other educational needs such as technology and
books.


The Common Core State Standards will also provide teachers with a way to assess their
student’s performance on test subjects in comparison to other students. Just as New York
City has Progress Reports to see how students are doing at each school and how they
performed on standardized tests, the Common Core State Standards also compares
students from schools similar to others with the same student population in regard to
socioeconomic status and race.



The Common Core State Standards do not dictate what teachers need to teach. The CCSS
are just standards that dictate what skills students need to know by the end of the school
year. Teachers are free to use their own pedagogies to educate their students. Teachers
are also able to use their own resources to complement their lesson plans. Most
importantly, teachers will no longer have to teach to the test, a practice used by educators
to boost student test scores by teaching how to use the process of elimination on multiple
choice questions and constructing short answers for text based inquiries.

Cons for the Common Core
Below are the reasons most frequently given by tea party activists and commentators like Diane
Ravitch and Glenn Beck, why the Common Core State Standards should be abandoned:


Teachers and students will need time to get adjusted to the Common Core State
Standards. Teaching the Common Core State Standards will not be an easy task. Teachers
will have to complement their current curriculum to fit the standards or the school may
need to implement a pre-made curriculum in which teachers are unfamiliar with.

14

Regardless of which curriculum is used, it will take time for teachers and students to get
used to how they have to teach and what is taught.


The Common Core State Standards may cause a decrease in teacher retention. Teachers
may get frustrated and stressed out from the work they will have to do with students to
get all students at the same reading and mathematics levels by the end of the year.
Teachers may be pressured by the principal or assistant principal to increase test scores
among their students, demonstrating that they have learned the standards and can move to
the next grade. With teachers accountable for teaching their students, meaning that they
will either benefit or suffer depending on how their students do on standardized tests,
they may not be able to handle the pressure placed upon them to get the job done.



Younger children will have to learn at a faster pace if they want to gain the skills listed in
the Common Core State Standards. The Common Core State Standards do not take into
consideration the learning differences among students. Students do not learn at the same
rate or in the same way as their peers. Some students need more help than others. If
teachers are expected to teach the skills according to a fixed schedule, students will be
left behind and may be unable to catch up on future lessons.



The Common Core State Standards are vague. The standards are not specific. For
example, in the Reading: Literature section of the English Language Arts CCSS for the 910 grades, students are expected to “cite strong and through textual evidence to support
analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as inferences drawn from the text”. The
determination of strong evidence is determined by the reader and can be any sentence or
paragraph in a text he/she feels need to be addressed.

15

In addition, I would like to include two more reasons, rarely given by the Common Core State
Standards:


Teachers should not be the only educators accountable for student achievement in
school. Including the school media specialist in the curriculum development process and
in providing instruction to students can help students succeed.



The National Governors Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers did
not take into account social factors that influence academic achievement. Social factors,
such as social context and socioeconomic status, are crucial to our understanding of
inequalities that continue to persist within our education system. Both of these factors
are positively attributed to academic achievement.

I address these two reasons in this paper. The importance of school media specialists in every
school and the role that they play is integral for the success of the Common Core State Standards
and for students to be successful in college and in the workforce.
IV. School Media Programs: What School Librarians Bring to the Table
An examination of the school media program can provide insight on the skills school
librarians know that can help implement the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). School
media specialists take courses on a variety of subjects from research to collection development.
Taking such courses give future librarians the skills and knowledge they need to be successful at
their jobs. I believe that the content knowledge learned in the school media concentration, along
with fieldwork, training, and possibly personal experiences, make school media specialists more
than qualified to assist teachers in teaching students the CCSS.
There are very few academic studies about the library science curriculum. Most studies
found in academic or professional journals focused on either improving library science programs

16

or dismantling the information science aspect of library science programs. Information science is
an interdisciplinary field concerned with a body of knowledge related to the origination,
collection, organization, storage, retrieval, interpretation, transmission, transformation, and
utilization of information (Borko, 1968). Gorman (2004) believes that information science is
peripheral to library science and needs to be detached from library schools across the country.
Gorman (2004) claims that there are problems with the current library science program,
as it is “ailing in the United States, dying in others, and dead in yet others” because of the
inclusion of information science. Gorman (2004) believes that information science is taking over
the library science curriculum due to the removal of courses such as cataloging and databases.
He also makes note that some prestigious research universities in the United States have removed
their LIS program because of the integration of information science. In an attempt to bring back
“real library science”, Gorman (2004) recommends a nationally uniform core curriculum for
library students, a faculty knowledgeable of library topics, and a national accreditation from the
American Library Association, and greater ethnic diversity in the librarian profession. Though I
agree that library science education has changed over time, I disagree with Gorman (2004) on a
number of points including the separation of information science, the future of employment for
library students, and current library science curriculum.
Twenty-first century librarians have to know how to find and use information to be
successful in their roles. Librarians are constantly being sought out in public, school, and
academic settings for help on finding resources and materials using books, multimedia, the
Internet, and microfilms. If librarians were asked questions about copyright, patent laws, or
public domains, they should know how to answer them because of their training in library
school. The librarian’s ability to answer these questions from students and patrons are based in

17

the techniques taught in information science. Without these techniques, a librarian is no longer a
librarian but rather a “behind the scenes” professional, a position Gorman advocates.
Gorman (2004) believes that it will be difficult for recently graduated LIS students to
obtain a job because perspective employers are unaware of the skills and knowledge they
obtained in school. I do not agree with Gorman for a number of reasons. First, prospective
employers look for more than what students learned in school. According to Susan Adams
(2013), a journalist for Forbes magazine, employers look for relevant skills from past work and
volunteer experience such as the ability to work on a team, to make decisions and solve
problems, and the ability to write and edit reports. Students, regardless of their major, can obtain
a job as long as they have the relevant skills to do their work. Employers also look for candidates
who will be a good fit, working with patrons or students in a customer friendly environment and
having knowledge of the librarian role. Second, if prospective employers are curious of the skills
candidates learned, they can examine their transcripts for their coursework and grades.
Employers can also ask questions as well to find how much candidates know about a particular
topic in library or information science.
In regards to library science curricula, Gorman (2004) states “many of the topics regarded
as central to a library education (cataloguing, reference, collection development, etc.) by wouldbe employers are no longer central to, or even required by, today’s LIS curricula”. This is not the
case at all. The skills learned in reference, collection development, and management courses are
still relevant today, as they were several years ago. Without reference, librarians would be unable
to find books for patrons and students, as well as answer questions. Without collection
development, librarians would not know what books to purchase for their library. Without

18

management, a library cannot be professionally maintained. I describe below current library
school curricula that demonstrate the skills school media specialist bring to their profession.
I looked at curricula from selected colleges and universities around the United States that
offer the school media library certification from the library schools ranked by the U.S. News and
World Report (www.usnews.com). In using the list, I selected these four universities: University
of Washington, Syracuse University, Drexel University, and the Florida State University. These
schools were selected not because of their curricula but because of their ranking. The four
curricula were compared for core and elective courses with course descriptions on each college
website. Course names, descriptions, the skills learned and their relevance to the CCSS are
addressed in this paper.
All four universities offer core courses in information science. Information science is an
interdisciplinary field concerned with a body of knowledge related to the origination, collection,
organization, storage, retrieval, interpretation, transmission, transformation, and utilization of
information (Borko, 1968). Students are required to take a course in information science as a
prerequisite before they are allowed to take elective courses. Course titles in information science
vary from “The Life Cycle of Information” at the University of Washington to “Research in
Information Organizations” at the University of Florida. The course descriptions provided
information about the course, as well as the skills and knowledge students are to gain after
completion of their coursework. Students learn quantitative and qualitative methods for
conducting research in a library setting, how to narrow searches using Boolean terms such as
AND, IF, and NOT, and how to organize information using both print and electronic mediums
such as databases.

19

Students in the school library media concentration take courses outside of the Masters in
Library Science track. Courses include collection development, children’s material and
evaluation, young adult materials and evaluation, instructional and training strategies for
information professionals and the management of school library programs. By taking these
courses, students gain valuable skills and content knowledge they can apply as school media
specialists. Students will also be able to apply their skills to help students and teachers learn and
teach under the CCSS.
Students taking a course in collection development will be able to select, build, and
maintain their library collections. Across all four universities, there are mentions of collection
management in the course title. Students in this course learn how to conduct community analysis,
plan collections, develop policies for library material usage, select, acquire, and evaluate
materials, as well as preserve and publicize library collections. With the skills learned in this
class, school media specialists can purchase books that are age appropriate, up to date, and useful
in supporting the educational agenda of classroom teachers. They can also develop library
circulation policies for teachers and students that would allow them to check out materials for a
specified period of time. By conducting a community analysis, school media specialists can
identify community needs such as that for resources and materials that will support literacy and
learning amongst students.
In addition to learning about collection development, students also learn how to evaluate
children’s and young adult books. Course titles pertaining to the evaluation of children’s and
young adult materials include “IST 661 Management of School Libraries” at Syracuse
University, “INFO 683 Resources for Children (or INFO 684 for Young Adults)” at Drexel
University, “LIS 5512 School Collection Development and Management” at the University of

20

Florida, and “LIS 565 Children’s Materials: Evaluation and Use (or LIS 566 for Young Adults)
at the University of Washington. Students learn how to select materials that will serve
“informational, educational, cultural, and recreational needs” (University of Washington, 2013).
Students also learn how to evaluate books and resources, ensuring that they meet the needs and
interests of the youth. School media specialists will not only learn how to evaluate materials
based on genre and age group, but also will be familiar with culturally relevant materials, which
can engage readers of urban or immigrant backgrounds.
In a study conducted by Hughes-Hassell & Pradnya (2006), the researchers found that
leisure reading increased amongst urban teenagers when there were materials that were relatable
to their lives. Magazines geared towards a specific group such as Black Beat, Latina, and Sister
to Sister successfully encourage Black and Latino young adults to read. Non-fiction materials
about celebrities, music, drawing, or video games serve the same purpose. Hughes-Hassell &
Cox (2009) found that the kind of materials that were most effective in building leisure reading
among minority students were fiction books set in urban environments. Such fiction usually has
an African American or Latino main character, a "hood" or major city setting like New York
City, and a theme involving crime, sex, drugs or gangs. Books such as Sister Soulja's Coldest
Winter Ever and Omar Tyree's Flyy Girl are examples of this type of urban fiction.
Library school students gain experience in developing programs and curricula geared
towards supporting literacy. At Syracuse University, students in the “Literacy through School
Libraries" course learn various methods and strategies that help students build their reading and
language skills. Students at the University of Washington, the University of Florida, and Drexel
University take a course on the "Instructional Role of the Information Specialist", in which they
learn how to design, develop, and evaluate information. The skills students receive in this course

21

include the ability to create technology related programs for students to learn more about the
computer, the ability to network with teachers in order to create collaborations, and an
understanding of learning theories.
The skills and content knowledge students learn from their coursework in school library
media will be useful for students and teachers. The school media specialists’ background in
research and the evaluation of information will be useful when students need to learn how to
conduct scholarly research for their projects. School media specialists can show students where
to find information from sources other than books and the Internet. They can also show students
how to analyze information, teaching them critical thinking skills. When students are able to read
critically, not only can they develop ideas on their own, but they can formulate arguments based
on what they know about the subject. Students will also become informed citizens as well, giving
students an opportunity to make good decisions based on logic and rational reasoning.
School media specialists will be able to develop a library collection with technological
resources that will support student and teacher learning. When school media specialists have
control over their library budget, they can purchase books and resources educators need to
support their lesson plans. School media specialist and teachers can work together to plan ideas
for online resources and open opportunities for collaboration. For example, if a teacher is doing a
lesson on plants, the school media specialist can provide books and online resources that can
help students learn in multiple ways.
School librarians can teach courses in literacy, computers, and research to students.
Students who are far behind in their classes in reading and writing a work with the school media
specialist to build up their skills in literacy and prepare them for ELA test. In providing
instructional training, the school librarian can show students how to use different computer

22

programs like Microsoft Word and Excel or the Internet. School media specialist can help
students excel at their own pace, ensuring their success in learning how to conduct good research
and critical thinking skills, a goal of the CCSS.
V. School Media Specialists and Teacher Collaboration
If students are expected to learn the skills outlined in the Common Core State Standards
(CCSS), teachers and school media specialists should work together to educate their students.
Because the CCSS are geared towards college and career readiness through the development of
skills and content knowledge, school media specialists should be sought out for their skills in
curriculum development, research, and teaching. School media specialists can be especially
useful because of their background in finding resources, conducting research, and using
technology, which makes them innovators of teaching and information gathering. Teachers may
lack certain skills in using online databases or classroom technology. School media specialists
can bridge that gap by educating teachers and students how to utilize these resources.
Collaborative teaching as defined by Robinson and Schaible (1995) is “any academic
experiences in which two teachers work together in designing and teaching a course that itself
uses group learning techniques”. Robinson and Schaible (1995) are right that collaboration
occurs when we work together on fulfilling the goal of teaching students effectively, but the
subjects in their definition are too narrow. Collaborations can occur among people who have the
ability to educate students. The relationship does not necessarily have to be between two teachers
but can be between other professionals such as the guidance counselor, a school nurse, and the
school media specialists. Since each of these educators bring with them unique experiences and
different perspectives, they too can collaborate with teachers to develop curricula and classroom
lessons.

23

In addition to Robinson and Schaible’s (1995) definition of collaboration, other scholars
have shown that educators should work continuously throughout the school year if students are
to reap the full benefits of their learning experience. According to Kennedy and Monty (2011),
the collaboration between faculty and school librarians must exist over an extended period of
time if students are to acquire post-secondary skills, including information literacy, writing,
research, and time management skills. Kennedy and Monty (2011) developed Dynamic
Purposeful Learning (DPL), a three-stage pedagogical technique, to enhance student learning
through the collaborative efforts of teachers and school librarians. At the first stage, the faculty
member and the school librarian meet to discuss course assignments that would best teach the
post-secondary skills. After planning the coursework, the educators attend an information
literacy session with students to discuss their roles in developing and implementing the course
assignment. The implementation of the assignment and research process are the last two stages
of the DPL. Students develop a literature review with the help of the librarian on a topic of their
interest. The school librarian shows students appropriate online databases, magazines, and books
that can aid their research. When students complete their literature review and introduction for
their project, they hand it to the faculty member for grading, corrections, and approval. When
students complete the first stage of their assignment, they move on to the participant observation
stage. Students observe what they see in their natural environment and record their findings.
During this stage, the faculty member and school librarian provide guidance to students on how
to organize and compose their findings. At the end of the semester, students hand in their
introductions, literature reviews, and observations to the faculty member for final grading,
corrections, and feedback with comments. As a result of using DPL, students were not only able

24

to enhance their learning experience through learning different skills at each stage but was also
able to recognize the role each educator played in their research project.
The use of Dynamic Purposeful Learning in a collaborative way could be implemented in
all schools teaching under the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Student independence,
critical thinking, and research skills emphasized in the CCSS can be achieved when teachers and
school media specialists work together throughout the school year. Teachers and school media
specialists can discuss the curriculum, lesson plans and assignments that would best teach the
CCSS, and the resources they can use to enhance student learning experience, such as YouTube
clips, multimedia DVDs and Videos, PowerPoint presentations, or class demonstrations. Projects
developed layered in stages such as the one use by Kennedy and Monty (2011), can also give
students the opportunity to understand each of the educators’ roles in the research process so that
they know who can help with which part of the project. Students exposed to collaborative
teaching not only enhance their learning because they are able to work with two different
educators with unique skill sets but also understand the importance of successful teamwork.
The collaboration between teachers and school media specialists over a long period of
time can benefit students in a number of ways. One major benefit is the increase of student
achievement levels on standardized tests (Robinson & Schaible, 2005; Milbury, 2005; McClure,
2008). According to Lance, Rodney, and Hamilton-Pennell (2000) in their study of school media
programs in Colorado, the researchers found that students reading test scores on the Colorado
State Assessment Program (CSAP) increased when there were changes in library media program
development, information technology, teacher/school media specialist collaboration, and student
visits to the library. Smith (2001) also found improvements on student test scores on the Texas
Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) exam. The Texas School Libraries study (2001) showed

25

that over 10 percent more students in schools with librarians did better on the TAAS than schools
without librarians. Teachers collaborating with school media specialist provide opportunities to
students to learn information literacy skills. Students’ development of information literacy
improves ability to conduct scholarly research and to take tests, evidenced by improved test
scores. When students are taught how to read critically, they can elaborate on their thoughts and
answer the questions well.
Co-teaching between teachers and school media specialists benefit students with a
variety of learning styles. Whereas some students are better visual learners and work best with
images and written information, others students are auditory learners, preferring class
discussions and lectures. Some students are tactile learners and prefer a hands-on approach. To
address this problem, teachers and school media specialists could create lesson plans with three
sections: lecture, images, and activities. For example, a teacher doing a lesson plan could create a
three part curriculum. During the first part of the class, the teacher talks about the planets and the
stars in our solar system, while writing on the chalkboard for students to copy notes. After the
lecture, the school media specialist could set up the projector and laptop to stream images and
videos of the solar system while the teacher explains each slide to students. Finally, the teacher
and school media specialists could work with students on an activity about the solar system such
as drawing the solar system or making model planets out of paper. The importance of addressing
various learning styles is important for students to understand course material.
Fenty, McDuffie-Landrum, & Fisher (2012) suggest that collaboration and co-teaching
between special education teachers and content specialists can benefit students with learning
disabilities. In the United States, about 80 percent of students with a learning disability read at an
average of 3 to 5 years behind grade level (Wagner, Newman, Cameto, Levine, & Marder,

26

2003). Students with learning disabilities will have a difficult time comprehending complex
texts, leaving them far behind from their peers in the general education classroom (Fenty,
McDuffie-Landrum, & Fisher, 2012). School media specialists could help students with learning
disabilities gain literacy skills both through workshops and one-on-one tutorials. School media
specialists can gather books and materials such as flashcards and letter cards to help the student
pronounce words and read. The school librarian can also provide online games and websites that
will teach students about grammar, sentence structure, and other topics involved with literacy.
The collaboration between the two educators will help students with learning disabilities
immensely, with their overall skills, while putting them in a position to learn the standards of the
Common Core.
Collaborative teaching between teachers and school media specialists benefits the
instructors also (Robinson & Schaible, 1995; Milbury, 2005). Teachers and school media
specialists can rely on one another to give each other advice about their teaching styles (Milbury,
2005). Like a friend we rely on for help or advice, teachers can talk to school media specialists
about how they taught a lesson in class. Teachers and school media specialists can grow as
educators by giving valuable advice and feedback about their teaching techniques (Milbury,
2005).
VI. The Reformers Getting It Wrong Again: Forgetting About Social Context and
Socioeconomic Status in the Development of Common Core State Standards
Michelle Rhee, the former Education chancellor of the Washington D.C school system
and the authors of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) have one thing in common: a
belief that all students can achieve academically regardless of where they live and their
socioeconomic background. Prior to becoming Education Chancellor, Rhee was a Teach for
America corps member at Harlem Park elementary school in Baltimore, Maryland, one of the
27

lowest performing schools in the state (Ripley, 2008). Rhee, a novice at teaching, recalled her
first year to be “the worst and in many ways definitely the toughest year of my entire life”
(Turque, 2010). Assigned to teach a second grade class, Rhee had a difficult time controlling her
classroom. Students would constantly disrupt her as she taught, speaking to one another despite
the teacher’s command to stop. Frustrated, Rhee resorted to using abusive tactics to silence her
students. She “took little pieces of masking tape and put them on her student’s lips” (Zucker,
2010). As a result, “their [the students] skin is coming off and that they are bleeding” (Zucker,
2010). Spending the majority of the school year trying to control her students rather than teach
them, the school saw a significant drop in second grade test scores. At the end of Rhee’s first
year, the average math and reading percentiles from the Certified Test for Basic Skills (CTBS)
for second graders dropped from 64% to 17% proficiency in mathematics and 37% to 21%
proficiency in reading (Brandenburg, 2011). Refusing to give up, Rhee took teaching and
education courses over the summer and received her teaching certificate. In September, she
returned to Harlem Park elementary school, where she allegedly increased student achievement
to its highest levels in years.
During Rhee’s second year of teaching at Harlem Park, she claimed that she had raised
second grade reading scores from 13 percent to 90 percent (Ravitch, 2010). Though there are no
records indicating that she accomplished such a goal, Rhee was nonetheless considered a highly
effective educator by former New York City Chancellor Joel Klein and former Washington D.C.
mayor Adrian Fenty. A few years after she left Harlem Park elementary school and became
Education Chancellor, she concluded that effective teachers could overcome poverty and other
disadvantages (Ravitch, 2010). During an interview with Newsweek magazine, Rhee said,
“Those kids, where they lived didn’t change. The violence in the parents didn’t change. Their

28

diets didn’t change. The violence in the community didn’t change. The only thing that changed
for those 70 kids was the adults who were in front of them every single day teaching them”
(Ravitch, 2010). Placing more emphasis and responsibility on the teacher as the main educator of
students, Rhee’s lack of understanding and total disregard for external factors outside of the
school shows that she is oblivious of the inner city experience.
The National Governor’s Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers also
failed to acknowledge the impact of social environment on student achievement. In the
frequently asked questions section of the CCSS website, they answer the question “Why do we
need education standards?” with “We need standards to ensure that all students, no matter where
they live, are prepared for success in postsecondary education and the workforce” (National
Governor’s Association & Council of Chief State School Officers, 2010). The answer they
provided was simply a politically motivated promise towards giving all students an equal
education because of their disregard for external factors such as social context and
socioeconomic status. The following sections address the relationship between social context and
socioeconomic status for academic achievement. I also address how the school media specialist
can make a difference in inner city schools by teaching students the practical skills they need in
college and the workforce.
Where You Live Makes a Difference: Social Context and Academic Achievement
There is a relationship between residential location and educational attainment (Sander,
2006). Wooley et al. (2008) found that school achievement was linked to higher levels of
bonding social capital and low poor neighborhood physical conditions. Wooley et al. (2008)
define bonding social capital as the social interactions between neighbors, parents, and children.
In building bonding social capital, members within the community work together to produce

29

positive outcomes within their neighborhood such as hosting bake sales, and annual holiday
parties. When members of the community can maintain their resources and physical
infrastructures within the community, they promote a sense of belonging and trust among
children who know they can call on their neighbors for help if needed.
Several ethnographies have been published highlighting the differences between
suburban and inner city neighborhoods. Elijah Anderson’s Code of the Street: Decency,
Violence, and the Moral Life of the Inner City (1999) describes about this phenomenon.
Anderson (1999) sets his ethnography on Germantown Avenue, a major street in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. He starts off at Chestnut Hill, an ethnically diverse neighborhood where the
houses are large and the lawns are green. Also known as the “suburb of the city”, there are
several small elegant boutique shops along Germantown Avenue. Some of these shops are
jewelry stores, gourmet food shops, camera shops, and clothing stores. There is also a library in
the area, as well as a regional rail station. Most of the residents who live here are middle to upper
class families who for the most part get along with one another without a problem. They are, in
other words, living in harmony amongst one another. As in any neighborhood, there is a
beginning and there is an end. As he continues down Germantown Avenue, the transition from
upper-middle class diversity begins to change not for the better, but for the worse.
Anderson (1999) discusses the neighborhood changes he observed down Germantown
Avenue. He observed the transition between racial, socioeconomic and class lines as he crossed
Broad Street into Philadelphia’s north-south artery. Anderson (1999) notes the change of scenery
compared to the more diverse and “cleaner” Chestnut Hill area. The neighborhood is
characterized as “concentrated ghetto poverty”, an area of the city that is “still shadowed by the
legacy of slavery and second class citizenship” (Anderson, 2008). The majority of residents who

30

live there are African Americans. Stores along the street sell clothing, sneakers, furniture, and
electronics. Pawnshops and check-cashing places are prevalent in the neighborhood, allowing
residents to cash in checks for money and pay bills. The streets are loud and noisy with music
blasting from cars and in front of homes. Anderson (1999) notices open-air drug deals,
prostitutes standing on the corner, boys shooting craps, and young children playing in trash filled
abandoned lots. People are able to walk with little trouble during the day. At night however,
residents feel they cannot walk outside of their homes without facing possible danger. Living in a
so-called “hyperghetto”, these residents are socially isolated from mainstream America
(Anderson, 1999). Anderson’s description of life along Germantown Avenue can be used to
understand the differences between two Brooklyn neighborhoods: East New York and Carroll
Gardens. To demonstrate how social context influences student achievement, I will compare two
neighborhoods in order to highlight the differences supported by scholarly research.
East New York and Carroll Gardens: Two Brooklyn Neighborhoods, Two Very Different
Worlds
As an employee of the Brooklyn Public Library, I have worked in different branches
across the borough. I have worked at the Jamaica Bay branch in Canarsie, the Central library at
Grand Army Plaza, the Ulmer Park branch in Bensonhurst, the Arlington branch in East New
York, the Clinton Hill branch, and the Carroll Gardens branch. In each of these neighborhoods,
there were clear and distinct differences. There were differences in racial makeup, physical
infrastructure (houses, buildings) and available resources such as markets, medical offices, and
children’s playgrounds. In comparing two of these neighborhoods, East New York and Carroll
Gardens, I will demonstrate how they differ from each other and also show how the social
context influences student achievement.

31

East New York
East New York was not always an impoverished neighborhood occupied by an African
Americans and Latinos. According to Walter Thabit in his 2004 book How East New York
Became a Ghetto, the first people to occupy the area were of Dutch descent in 1690. Originally
called the New Lotts of Flatbush, Colonel John R. Pitkin came to build a community with
businesses, factories, shops, homes, and schools in 1835. Though his plans did not succeed due
to the financial panic of 1837, his dream and vision did not go to waste, as a major street
formerly known as Broadway was named after Pitkin (modern day Pitkin Avenue). During the
last few years of the nineteenth century, German immigrants occupied East New York and
helped develop the settlement through their talents as brush makers, goldbeaters, and tailors.
With the development of the subway system, the opening of the Williamsburg Bridge, and the
building of tenements in the area, Jews, Russians, Poles, and Italians began to occupy East New
York. A majority of these groups remained in the area until the mid-1960s before they fled for
better neighborhoods, moving away from the minority groups coming to East New York.
East New York went through a social transformation in the 1960s as a result of white
flight, a phenomenon describing the migration of whites from urban cities to rural areas or
suburbs (Kantor & Brenzel, 1993). According to the 1960 County map provided by the Social
Explorer database, a substantial number of whites, specifically Italians and Jews, continued to
reside in East New York. However, in the 1970 Census Tract, there was clearly a change in the
percentage of Whites residing in the neighborhood. According to Thabit (2004), by the end of
1966, the population of Blacks and Puerto Ricans residing in East New York was at 80%. The
shift in demographics was in large part due to the growing influx of minorities moving in from
the south (Kantor & Brenzel, 1993) and Puerto Rico in hopes of finding employment and

32

opportunities. The migration of African Americans and Hispanics brought fear to White
residents as crime such as robberies, shootings, knifings, and gang terror began to increase
(Thabit, 2004). White residents, feeling threatened and unsafe, left their businesses and
synagogues, and fled south of Linden Boulevard or to the suburbs to move away from incoming
African American and Puerto Rican families (Thabit, 2004). With a depleting tax base to
maintain city services and programs in the neighborhood, East New York soon went into urban
decay, a process where a city or neighborhood falls into disrepair. The resulting impact of urban
decay left many residents in East New York unemployed and helpless, living with no essential
services such as law enforcement or trash pickup to maintain the neighborhood.
Racist government housing policies prevented African American and Puerto Rican
families from moving out of East New York (Thabit, 2004). Prior to the passing of Title VIII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1968, or the Fair Housing Act which prohibited discrimination in the sale
or rental of property based on race, sex, religion, color, or national origin (U.S. department of
Housing and Urban Development, 2007), it was difficult for Blacks and Puerto Ricans to obtain
a loan from the bank to move into more affluent neighborhoods such as Canarsie and Flatbush.
Though the Civil Rights Act of 1866 prohibited discrimination against Blacks in housing and
employment, the government did not heavily enforce the law (The Leadership Conference,
2013). When Blacks and Puerto Ricans first migrated to New York, they first found a cheap area
to live, usually a ghetto, until they were able to settle elsewhere (Thabit, 2004). Redlining, a
racially motivated practice used to prevent Blacks and Latinos from obtaining a better standard
of living, forced residents to remain in the “ghetto”, unable to leave their deplorable conditions
(Thabit, 2004). With the government, real estate, and banking industries unwilling to help the
residents of East New York, the neighborhood began to deteriorate, with a heavy concentration

33

of families in poverty and welfare (Thabit, 2004). Remnants of the ghetto continue to be seen
today in modern day East New York.
The neighborhood of East New York continues to be a highly residential area with few
businesses operating on the main streets of Pennsylvania, Pitkin, and New Lots Avenues. The
residents living in the area remain predominantly African American (50%) and Latino (39%), as
depicted in the 2000 census tract of Social Explorer. According to the New York City
Department of Health and Hygiene 2006 report on East New York and New Lots (including
Cypress Hills), as of 2000, there are 173,700 residents living in the neighborhood. Thirty-four
percent of those residents live in poverty. Most of the homes off the Shepard, Van Siclen, and
Euclid Avenue stops on the A and C subway lines are either newly built or dilapidated. There are
remnants of old Chinese food, litter, and bottles along the sidewalks and the street.
Carroll Gardens
According to the Brooklyn Collection at the Brooklyn Public Library (2005), Native
Americans once inhabited what is now Carroll Gardens before they sold the land to Dutch
farmers Adrianse Bennet and Jacques Bentyn in 1636. Named after Charles Carroll, one of the
signers of the Declaration of Independence, the neighborhood was once part of South Brooklyn
until the 1960s when it became a part of North Brooklyn. The development of warehouses and
docks in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn allowed construction workers to dredge the Gowanus
Creek and swamps nearby to form an inland waterway. It also allowed for the creation of a ferry
service between Manhattan and Greenwood cemetery in 1846. In the 1840s, Carroll Park, the
once private garden for residents to grow crops, became a public park in the 1850s.William
Bedell and John Layton constructed brownstone in the Carroll Gardens neighborhood in the
1870s and 1880s.

34

In the early 19th century, Irish Americans began residing in Carroll Gardens. By the turn
of 20th century, Italian immigrants moved into the neighborhood. Italian businesses began to
flourish across Court Street, opening restaurants and bakeries selling classic Italian dishes and
breads. There were also several churches that were built in the area to provide religious service
for residents. Some of the churches include St. Paul’s Episcopal Church, St. Mary’s Star of the
Sea Catholic Church, and South Congregational Church.
Today, Carroll Gardens continues to be a predominant Italian neighborhood. According
to the American Community Survey 2006-2010, the neighborhood is predominantly White (80%
of residents) and less than 10% of residents are African American. According to City-Data
(2013), the median household income in 2011 was $89,870. The unemployment levels are very
low for this area, with less than 4% out of work or working for cash without paying taxes. Rent
to live in the area is expensive and averages out around $1,882 or more per month. Most of the
shopping areas with brand name stores such as Starbucks, Rite-Aid, and Nutbox are located on
Court and Smith Streets.
East New York and Carroll Gardens: Implications for Schools
In conducting an analysis of two schools: Public School 345 in East New York and
Public School 58 in Carroll Gardens, I found that there were substantial differences between the
two schools in terms of racial makeup, academic achievement and resources. According to the
NYC Department of Education Progress Report 2012-2013, 92.4% of the student body was
African American or Hispanic. At P.S. 58, only 21% of students were African American or
Hispanic. This would make sense given that the racial makeup of each school reflects the
community in which students live. Latino and African American students attending P.S. 58 may

35

also come from the Red Hook section, west of Carroll Gardens. More than half of the residents
that live in Red Hook are Hispanic or African American (City-Data, 2013).
Academic achievement levels differed immensely in both reading and math test scores at
both schools. At P.S. 345, only 15.0% of students on the state English test and 15.2% of students
on the state Math exam received a reached or exceeded proficiency of level 3 or 4 (New York
City Department of Education, 2013). At P.S. 58 however, 65.3% of students on the state
English test and 64.5% on the state math test reached or exceeded proficiency at levels 3 or 4
(New York City Department of Education, 2013) These statistics are significant to our discussion
on social context because it demonstrates how the neighborhood impacts academic achievement.
If children are vulnerable to violence and crime within their neighborhoods, this adds more
obstacles in addition to poverty and simple survival. Living in impoverished neighborhoods with
little to no support from the community and lawmakers, families cannot find assistance to
maintain a healthy lifestyle for their children and themselves.
The available resources at both schools vary as well. During the 2012-2013 school years,
P.S. 345 operated with a budget of $5,740,155 while P.S. 58 operated with a budget of
$6,546,203; a difference of more than $800,000 (New York City Department of Education,
2013). The yearly school budget pays for teacher and staff salaries, after school programs, school
supplies, and textbooks. P.S. 345 have fewer teachers compared to P.S. 58 (33 classroom
teachers at P.S. 345 compared to 45 classroom teachers at P.S. 58) (New York City Department
of Education, 2013) In addition, there are more ICT (Integrated Co-Teaching) classrooms for
Kindergarten to grade 5 students at P.S. 58 than P.S. 345, in which two educators, a general
education teacher and a special education teacher, work together to ensure that students with
disabilities are educated alongside their peers in the general education classroom (New York

36

Department of Education, 2013). The integration of ICT classrooms in schools reduces the
student to teacher ratio and allows for more one-on-one interactions with teachers. There are 93
staff members including administrators, teachers, and support staff at P.S. 58, whereas at P.S.
345, there are only 62 staff members.
P.S. 58 also offer a larger variety of classes and services for their students. In addition to
physical education, science, and art classes, students at P.S. 58 can take classes in drama/theater
and music. Students can also join the school chorus and take classes on music vocals. P.S. 345
do not offer those classes. Students at P.S. 345 are only offered classes in English as a Second
Language (ESL), math, physical education, and general science. Students at P.S. 58 have access
to a number of services and programs such as before and after school, school social workers, a
full time school psychologist, and the library. Students at P.S. 345 do not offer as many programs
as P.S. 58, offering only before and after school programs and a part-time school psychologist.
The school library at P.S. 321 was only opened during class visits and was closed off to students
throughout the day.
I observed the lack of school resources at P.S. 321 during a graduate research project in
2012. The library did not have a school media specialist or any full time staff member. When I
glanced at the shelves, the books were out of place from their Dewey Decimal classification, an
organization system commonly used to shelve books by subject area. I found a number of books
that were outdated as well (books on Pluto as a planet was still on the shelf). Aside from the
books, there was also limited seating space for students. There were only 4 long tables available
with 6 chairs at each table. A separate reading section was unavailable because of the limited
space in the library. Though there were computers available for student use, the dust on the
screens and keyboard showed that they haven’t been used in a long time. Though students were

37

excited to go to the library whenever their teacher made a class visit, it was unfortunate that
students did not have access to their school library during the school day.
The differences in resources can explain why students at P.S 58 are excelling
academically on standardized test compared to students at P.S. 345. In studies conducted by
Jimenez-Castellano (2010) and Du & Hu (2008), the researchers found that student academic
performance was positively correlated to school resources. School resources include personnel
(teachers and administrators), fiscal resources, and facility resources (Jimenez-Castellano, 2010).
Students attending schools with effective leadership from principals, well qualified teachers,
larger school budgets, and a well maintained classroom, were more likely to excel academically
than students that don’t (Jimenez-Castellano, 2010). In addition, parent involvement at their
child’s school is positively correlated to student achievement (Du & Hu, 2008). Parents at P.S 58
are more involved at their child’s school. According to the Learning Environment Survey 20122013, an online survey given to teachers and parents yearly to provide feedback about their
school, 67% of parents and 100% of teachers responded. Parents also attend PTA meetings and
join the school leadership team, where they can discuss the needs of the school and how best to
meet them (Bredthauer, 2013). Parents at P.S. 345, however, are less engaged in their child’s
school as demonstrated by the low percentage (2%) of respondents who answered the Learning
Environment Survey (2013).
Social Class Differences in relation to Student Achievement
Richard Rothstein (2004) addresses the issue of social class and its impact on student
achievement in regard to the Black-White achievement gap. He found differences in health, child
rearing, and housing between Blacks and Whites from different social classes. In child rearing,
middle classes parents were more likely to be involved in reading to their children, having

38

discussions and asking questions, and were unlikely to discipline their child with physical force.
Lower-class parents, however, did not read to their children, were more demanding, and were
more likely to use physical force. Lower-class children also face disadvantages with regard to
health (Rothstein, 2004, Buckingham et al., 2013, Fiscella & Kitzman, 2009). Lower class
children were more likely to have bad vision, hearing and oral health. Compared to middle-class
children, lower-class children are more likely to have lead poising, asthma, low birth weight,
inadequate nutrition, and lack of medical care. In terms of housing, whereas middle class
families are more likely to stay in one place, lower class families are more likely to move from
place to place.
Upper and middle-class children have more opportunities to acquire new skills and
knowledge than lower class children. Lareau (2011), in discussing the various childrearing
differences among the three classes, was able to vividly show why upper and middle class
children do much better in school compared to lower class children. Whereas upper and middleclass parents engage their children in concerted cultivation, which is the fostering of a child’s
talents and skills, lower class children engage in what Lareau (2011) calls accomplished natural
growth, where children develop their skills naturally through independent play and parental
directives. Because parents from the upper and middle-classes have the finances to fund their
children to go to recreational programs such as piano lessons or soccer practice, they are able to
expose their children to a number of new experiences that will allow them to socialize with
others and gain new skills. Children also gain a sense of entitlement from these experiences and
believe that they can get what they want if desired (Lareau, 2011). Unlike upper and middleclass families, lower class families may not have the finances to pay for recreational programs
and are unable to give their children anything they may need or want. There are exceptions

39

where parents and children persevere to make it out of the lower class but this success is fragile.
Families can continue to face many obstacles.
VII. The School Media Specialist Role in Inner City Schools
If school libraries, occupied by a librarian, were opened every day for students to use, it
could make a difference in the lives of students living in the inner city. Students would have
easier access to books and technology at their library, resources that may not be easily available
in their neighborhood. Students would also have a place to study outside of their homes,
especially if they aren’t able to concentrate and get their schoolwork done. Most importantly, the
school library acts as a safe haven for children. Working in a public library, I usually see
students come after school and stay until a parent picks them up from work or until the library
closes. Since the library is free and safe, it is an alternative to roaming the unsafe city streets.
Keeping school libraries open opened after school would be ideal. Students would be able to get
help and develop new skills in literacy, writing, and research. This is where the urban school
librarian comes in.
School media specialists can provide one-on-one assistance to inner city students and
help them gain research, literacy, and writing skills emphasized by the CCSS. These
professionals can sit down with students and show them the research process from beginning to
end. They know tips and tricks for finding the information they need. As a library professional, I
have sat down with students and showed them the research process step-by-step from key term
search to Internet and library databases to evaluating sources. With this hands-on instruction, you
can not only test the student on the research process by asking them to demonstrate a task, but
also have the pleasure of knowing he/she understand a research method that will be useful into
the future.

40

The school media specialist can also help inner city students gain literacy skills.
According to a study on culturally relevant books and closing the literacy gap, Hughes-Hassell &
Rawson (2011) found that African American males who read texts relevant to their experiences
were more likely be interested in leisure reading than those who do not. Because school media
specialists have the ability to purchase culturally relevant materials and develop programs that
encourage reading, they can attract groups of students usually uninterested in reading and, in
addition, engage them in a meaningful conversation in which they can speak about their own
experiences in relation to the characters. When there is someone to engage and listen to students,
it makes all the difference both in and out of school. The school media specialist could perhaps
develop plans for advocacy in the community. Not only can school media specialists encourage
students to read self-selected materials, as opposed to what teachers require, they can also
provide students with a platform for voicing their concerns, so that they can work together to
foster change within their communities.
Students who need help with writing can ask the school media specialist for assistance.
Just as in the case of conducting research, school media specialists can work one-on-one with
students and help them understand the writing process. These professionals can provide students
with books, online resources, and pointers on how to write an effective paper. They can also find
relevant sources for students to read, and show they are relevant.
School media specialists are such an asset to teachers and students that they should not be
ignored. I believe that these professionals can be the difference maker in inner city schools
because they can provide the needed assistance for students who are having difficulties in the
classroom. School media specialists can work with students one-on-one or in small groups.
Students will also have opportunities to learn from educators with different teaching approaches.

41

In working with teachers and providing the proper guidance in implementing the standards in
English Language Arts, school media specialists can work collaboratively to help students
succeed in the CCSS curriculum.
VIII. MyLibraryNYC: A Model for Public and School Library Collaboration
Implementing a public/school library collaborative model like MyLibraryNYC across the
country will remove barriers for students and teachers who may have difficulty obtaining
information and resources from outside the classroom. MyLibraryNYC is a collaborative effort
between three New York library systems: Brooklyn Public Library, Queens Public Library, and
New York Public Library and the New York City Department of Education. The goal of the
program is to provide students and teachers access to public library materials and online
resources from their websites. The MyLibraryNYC collaborative first began in 2011 with about
50 schools across the 5 boroughs. To date, more than 100 schools are participating in the
program.
The MyLibraryNYC model allows for students and teachers to obtain information
immediately through the library website. While educators are waiting for their books to come
through their delivery system, they can utilize online databases like Ebscohost and Student
Learning Center to gather information to teach their lesson plans. Students can also use the
online databases to conduct their research and find information about careers and college
entrance exams. This will allow for students to complete their assignments on time without
running into any issues regarding access to information.
The MyLibraryNYC collaborative benefits both students and educators. Students
attending a participating school receive a special library card with unique features. Some of the
features include fine free borrowing, access to their school/public library union catalog, and

42

more borrowing privileges. Students can borrow up to 50 items at a time. The items can range
from books to multimedia such as DVDs and videocassettes. Students can also place 15 holds on
their library card, 5 more than the regular cardholder. Holds are fulfilled by branch library staff
through a generated title page and trapped once the item is found on the shelves. Holds that are
fulfilled are delivered through BookOps, a delivery system servicing the three library systems
and schools. Students can return and obtain books through BookOps when teachers place holds
for them on the school/public library union catalog. Students can renew their materials online, by
phone or in person a maximum of ten times.
Educators have the same privileges like students except for two things. Educators can
borrow teacher book sets from their local library to support the NYC curriculum in all grades and
subjects (MyLibraryNYC, 2013). Examples of teacher book sets include titles such as Harper
Lee's To Kill A Mockingbird and Ken Kesey's One Who Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest. Teachers
can reserve these and other titles through the union catalog and have them delivered through
BookOps. Teachers can also borrow up to 100 items on their library cards. In addition, teachers
can place up to 50 holds and can renew their materials only twice before they must be returned to
the library.
In order for schools to take part of the MyLibraryNYC collaborative, there must be a
school media specialist or a full time school library employee present at all times. This is
important to note because without the school media specialist, the program could not exist.
School media specialists are needed to provide MyLibraryNYC coordinators with information
pertaining to their school library and how the program will benefit them. School media
specialists are also needed to communicate updates from MyLibraryNYC coordinators to other
educators regarding any changes to the program. By working in conjunction with the

43

coordinators, they can discuss the effectiveness or ineffectiveness and provide feedback on how
to make the program better for the following year.
XI. Conclusion
Students and teachers are in dire need of help. Teachers cannot do it alone in educating
their students and helping them learn the skills listed in the Common Core State Standards.
Teachers already have a workload on their agenda. Classroom teachers have to teach students
daily for several hours a day with occasional breaks in between. Teachers also have to grade
assignments, prepare lesson plans, make photocopies of worksheets, and set up their classroom.
Teachers also work individually with students after school or during lunch. Teachers are also
mediators in the classroom, handling all problems that may arise between students and disrupt
the learning environment. Teachers cannot do it alone. They need help from other educators to
not only teach students but to also make the CCSS work. This is where the school media
specialist can come in.
School media specialists can be the difference maker in effectively teaching students the
skills listed in the CCSS. The skills and knowledge they bring with them from library school can
help students develop useful skills such as research and critical thinking skills. School media
specialists work with students in becoming independent thinkers, giving them the ability to make
their own decisions. They also give teachers the resources they need to help students succeed, to
meet their teaching goals. School media specialists are not just avid book readers or
professionals knowledgeable about searching for sources. They are also educators who can make
a difference in the classroom and at their schools, especially in the inner city.
School media specialists are needed more than ever in inner city schools. They can help
raise student achievement among African American and Hispanic students and possibly help

44

close the Black White achievement gap. This is not to say that school librarians can make a
drastic difference like saving troubled schools or boosting test scores by more than 50% within a
year. However, they can provide students of color with an opportunity to succeed through
gaining literacy, research, and writing skills. School media specialist in inner city schools can
also collaborate with public libraries to bring more resources such as books and online databases.
Without school media specialists, such collaborative efforts like MyLibraryNYC would not exist
and would not be as successful as it is today without them.
School media specialists are not just information specialist, but they are teachers,
technology instructors, and mentors. School media specialists can teach students the skills
teachers may not have much experience in such as research and information literacy. They can
work with teachers to implement technology in the classroom to create a vibrant learning
environment for all students. School media specialists are also available to work individually
with students on a variety of projects or to provide them with understanding about what they had
learned in class. The inclusion of the school media specialists in the curriculum and instructional
development in schools is vital for the success of the CCSS and students entering college and the
workforce.

45

References
Adams, S. (2013). The 10 skills employers most want in 20-something employees. Forbes.
Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2013/10/11/the-10-skills-employersmost-want-in-20-something-employees/
American Association of School Librarians (2007). Standards for the 21st-century learner.
Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/guidelinesandstandards/learningstandards/
AASL_LearningStandards.pdf
American Association of School Librarians (2009). Empowering learners: Guidelines for school
library programs. Chicago: American Library Association.
America Diploma Project (2004). Ready or not: Creating a high school diploma that counts.
Retrieved from http://www.achieve.org/files/ReadyorNot.pdf
American Association of School Librarians (2013). State of America’s libraries report 2013.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/news/state-americas-libraries-report-2013/school-libraries
Anderson, E. (1999). Code of the street: Decency, violence, and the moral life of the inner city.
New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company
Anderson, E. (2008). Against the wall: Poor, young, black, and male. Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press
Borko, H. (1968). Information science: What is it? American Documentation, 19(1), 3-5.
Boser, U. (2012). Race to the top: What have we learned so from the states so far? A state-tostate evaluation of race to the top performance. Retrieved from
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2012/03/pdf/rtt_states.pdf
Bredthauer, J. (2013). P.S. 58: The carroll school. Retrieved from
http://www.ps58.org/index.cfm
Brooklyn Collection. f(2005). Our brooklyn: Carroll gardens. Retrieved from
http://www.bklynpubliclibrary.org/ourbrooklyn/carrollgardens/
Buckingham, J., Wheldall, K., & Beaman-Wheldall, R. (2013). Why poor children are more
likely to become poor readers: The school years. Australian Journal of Education, 57(3), 190213
City-Data. (2013). Carroll gardens neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York (NY), 11231 detailed
profile. Retrieved from http://www.city-data.com/neighborhood/Carroll-Gardens-BrooklynNY.html

46

Drexel University. (2013). Drexel university catalog 2013-2014: Master of science in library
and information sciences. Retrieved from
http://catalog.drexel.edu/graduate/collegeofinformationscienceandtechnology/libraryandinformat
ionscience/#degreerequirementstext
Du, Y. & Hu, Y. (2009). Student academic performance and the allocation of school resources:
Results from a survey of junior secondary schools. Chinese Education and Society, 41(5), 8-20
Fenty, N. S., McDuffie-Landrum, K., & Fisher, G. (2012). Using collaboration, co-teaching, and
question answer relationships to enhance content area literacy. Teaching Exceptional Children,
44(6), 28-37.
Fiscella, K. & Kitzman, H. (2009). Disparities in academic achievement and health: The
intersection of child education and health policy. Pediatrics, 123(3), 1073-1080
Florida State University. (2013). Master of science in library and information studies – School
library media program. Retrieved from http://slis.fsu.edu/academics/graduate/media/
Gorman, M. (2004). What ails library education? Journal of Academic Librarianship, 30(2), 99101.
Hughes-Hassell, S. & Pradnya, R. (2006). The leisure reading habits of urban adolescents.
Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 51(2), 22-34
Hughes-Hassell, S. & Rawson, C.H. (2011). Closing the literacy gap for African American
males. School Library Monthly. 28(3), 15-17
Jimenez-Castellanos, O. (2010). Relationship between education resources and school
achievement: A mixed method intra-district analysis. Urban Review, 42, 351-371
Kantor, H. & Brenzel, B. (1992). Urban education and the ‘truly disadvantaged’: The historical
roots of the contemporary crisis. Teachers College Record, 94, 278-314
Kennedy, R., & Monty, V. (2011). Faculty-librarian collaboration and the development of
critical skills through dynamic purposeful learning. Libri: International Journal of Libraries &
Information Services, 61(2), 116-124.
Lance, K.C., Rodney, M.J., Hamilton-Pennell, C. (2000). How school librarians help kids
achieve standards: The second Colorado study. Retrieved from
http://www.lrs.org/documents/lmcstudies/CO/execsumm.pdf
Lareau, A. (2003). Unequal childhoods: Race, class, and family life. Berkeley: University of
California Press
McClure, C.T. (2008). The benefits of teacher collaboration. District Administration, 44(10), 8283
47

Milam, A., Furr-Holden, C., & Leaf, P. (2010). Perceived school and neighborhood safety,
neighborhood violence and academic achievement in urban school children. Urban Review,
42(5), 458-467.
Milbury, P. (2005). Collaboration. Knowledge Quest, 33(5), 30-32.
MyLibraryNYC. (2013) MyLibraryNYC: P.S. be a reader. Retrieved from
http://mylibrarynyc.org/
National Governor’s Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State Officers
(2010). Common core state standards: Frequently asked questions. Retrieved from
http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CoreFAQ.pdf
National Governor’s Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State Officers
(2010). Common core state standards: English language arts standards. Retrieved from
http://www.corestandards.org/ELA-Literacy
New York City Department of Education. (2013). P.S. 345 progress report 2012-2013.
Retrieved from http://schools.nyc.gov/OA/SchoolReports/201213/Progress_Report_Overview_2013_EMS_K345.pdf
New York City Department of Education. (2013). P.S. 345 learning environment survey.
Retrieved from http://schools.nyc.gov/OA/SchoolReports/2012-13/Survey_2013_K345.pdf
New York City Department of Education. (2013). P.S. 345 budget summary. Retrieved from
https://www.nycenet.edu/offices/d_chanc_oper/budget/dbor/galaxy/galaxybudgetsummaryto/dis
play2.asp?DDBSSS_INPUT=K345
New York City Department of Education. (2013). Progress report 2012-13. Retrieved from
http://schools.nyc.gov/OA/SchoolReports/201213/Progress_Report_Overview_2013_EMS_K058.pdf
New York City Department of Education. (2013). P.S. 58 learning environment survey.
Retrieved from http://schools.nyc.gov/OA/SchoolReports/2012-13/Survey_2013_K058.pdf
New York City Department of Education. (2013). P.S. 58 budget summary. Retrieved from
https://www.nycenet.edu/offices/d_chanc_oper/budget/dbor/galaxy/galaxybudgetsummaryto/dis
play2.asp?DDBSSS_INPUT=K058
Ravitch, D. (2010). The death and life of the great american school system. New York: Basic
Books
Riley, N.J. (2012). School libraries hit hard by budget cuts. SFGate. Retrieved from:
http://www.sfgate.com/education/article/School-libraries-hit-hard-by-budget-cuts-3854938.php

48

Ripley, A. (2008). Can she save our schools? Time, 172(23), 36-44
Robinson, B. & Schaible, R.M. (1995). Collaborative teaching. College teaching, 43(2) 57-60
Rothstein, R. (2004). Class and schools: Using social, economic, and educational reform to
close the black-white achievement gap. New York: Teachers College Press
Sander, W. (2006). Educational attainment and residential location. Education and Urban
Society, 38(3), 307-326
Smith, E.G. (2001). Texas school libraries: Standards, resources, services, and student’s
performance. Retrieved from
https://www.tsl.texas.gov/sites/default/files/public/tslac/ld/pubs/schlibsurvey/survey.pdf
Snyder, S. (2013). Budget crisis shutters libraries at 2 top schools. Philly.com. Retrieved from
http://articles.philly.com/2013-09-14/news/42064126_1_new-library-central-high-schoolmarjorie-neff
Syracuse University. (2013). Library and information science: School media. Retrieved from
http://coursecatalog.syr.edu/2013/programs/library_and_information_science_school_media
Tennessee Department of Education (2010). The common core state standards: History and fact
sheet. Retrieved from http://www.tn.gov/education/doc/Common_Core_Facts_History.pdf
The Leadership Conference (2013). Key supreme court cases for civil rights. Retrieved from
http://www.civilrights.org/judiciary/supreme-court/key-cases.html
Trabit, W. (2005). How east new york became a ghetto. New York, NY: NYU Press
Turque, B. (2010). Michelle rhee, first-year teacher. The Washington Post. Retrieved from
http://voices.washingtonpost.com/dcschools/2010/08/michelle_rhee_first-year_teach.html
University of Washington (2013). The information school: Library and information science.
Retrieved from http://www.washington.edu/students/crscat/lis.html
U.S. Department of Education (2001). Introduction: No child left behind. Retrieved from:
http://www2.ed.gov/nclb/overview/intro/index.html?exp=5
U.S. Department of Education (2009). Race to the top program: Executive summary. Retrieved
from http://www2.ed.gov/programs/racetothetop/executive-summary.pdf
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2007). The fair housing act. Retrieved
from
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/fair_housing_equal_opp/progdesc/tit
le8

49

Wagner, M., Newman, L., Cameto, R. Levine, P., Marder, C. (2003). Going to school:
Instructional contexts, programs, and participation of secondary school students with
disabilities. A report from the national longitudinal transition study. Retrieved from
http://www.nlts2.org/reports/2003_12/nlts2_report_2003_12_execsum.pdf
U.S. News and World Report (2013). Education graduate schools. Retrieved from http://gradschools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/search.result/program+toplibrary-information-science-programs/top-library-media-programs+y
Voltaire (1984). Candide. New York, NY: Bantam Classics.
Woolley, M. E., Grogan-Kaylor, A., Gilster, M. E., Karb, R. A., Gant, L. M., Reischl, T. M., et
al. (2008). Neighborhood social capital, poor physical conditions, and school achievement.
Children & Schools, 30(3), 133-145.
Zucker, P. (2010). Michelle rhee and the masking tape. Where is the outrage? Huff Post
Education: The Blog. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/peter-zucker/michellerhee-and-masking_b_801339.html

50

