UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SAN DIEGO
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN MARCOS

Understanding Underrepresented Minority Academic Librarians’ Motivation to Lead in
Higher Education

A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the degree Doctor
of Education
in
Educational Leadership
by
Antonia Porras Olivas

Committee in Charge:
University of California, San Diego
Carolyn Huie Hofstetter, Chair
Paula F. Levin
California State University, San Marcos
Jennifer Jeffries

2014

UMI Number: 3625184

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3625184
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

©
Antonia Porras Olivas, 2014
All rights reserved.

The Dissertation of Antonia Porras Olivas is approved, and it is acceptable in quality and
form for publication on microfilm and electronically:

________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Chair

University of California, San Diego
California State University, San Marcos
2014

iii

DEDICATION
I dedicate this dissertation to my momma, Socorro P. Martinez. You left this
world before I could finish my educational journey, but I swear I could hear you asking
me, “Aye mija! ¿Otra vez con la escuela? ¿Cuándo vas a terminar?” I promise Momma;
I am finally done getting degrees but will never stop learning. I hope I have made you
proud…
This dissertation is also dedicated to my loving and crazy family who supported
me throughout this roller coaster ride. You may not have always understood what I was
talking about when I tried explaining this thing to you, but your encouragement, prayers,
and humor lifted my spirits when I needed it most. Thank you for (literally) going
through the fire with me (luckily the house didn’t burn down)! Virginia, Ramon,
Bongo… You are the best big sister and big brothers anyone could ask for. I am blessed
because of the sacrifices you and Momma made for me. I share this doctorate with you
and hope I have also made you proud.
I also dedicate this work to my friends who have been so flexible and
understanding with my schedule. Let’s go have fun again! Finally, I dedicate this
dissertation to my nieces and nephews. I hope you each one day decide to take this
journey yourselves.

iv

EPIGRAPH

I think a lot of times it's not money that's the primary motivation factor; it's the passion
for your job and the professional and personal satisfaction that you get out of doing what
you do that motivates you.
Martin Yan

Motivation will almost always beat mere talent.
Norman Ralph Augustine

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Signature Page………………………………………………………………………..

iii

Dedication……………………………………………………………………………

iv

Epigraph……………………………………………………………………………...

v

Table of Contents…………………………………………………………………….

vi

List of Figures………………………………………………………………………..

xi

List of Tables…………………………………………………………………………

xii

Acknowledgements…………………………………………………………………..

xiii

Vita…………………………………………………………………………………...

xiv

Abstract of the Dissertation…………………………………………………………

xv

Chapter One: Introduction……………………………………………………………

1

Diversity Efforts in Libraries………………………………………………………

6

Statement of the Problem………………………………………………………….

9

Purpose of the Study……………………………………………………………….

9

Research Questions………………………………………………………………..

10

Researcher Epistemology………………………………………………………….

10

Theoretical Framework……………………………………………………………

11

Motivation…………………………………………………………………………

12

Research Methodology…………………………………………………………….

14

Significance of the Study…………………………………………………………..

15

Definition of Key Terms…………………………………………………………..

16

vi

Organization of Dissertation……………………………………………………….

18

Chapter Two: Literature Review……………………………………………………..

20

Underrepresented Minority Leadership……………………………………………

20

Underrepresented Minority Library Leaders………………………………………

22

Librarians: Recruitment and Retention……………………………………………

24

Why They Leave…………………………………………………………………..

26

Motivation to Lead Theory………………………………………………………...

29

Individual Differences in MTL……………………………………………………

31

Elements and Measurement of MTL………………………………………………

32

Antecedents of MTL……………………………………………………………….

33

Group Differences in MTL………………………………………………………...

36

MTL in the Military………………………………………………………………..

37

Summary…………………………………………………………………………..

38

Chapter Three: Methodology………………………………………………………...

39

The Case for Mixed Methods……………………………………………………...

40

Purpose of the Study and Research Questions…………………………………….

42

A Proposed Integrated Model……………………………………………………...

42

Design of the Study………………………………………………………………..

43

Research Site………………………………………………………………………

46

Phase One (Quantitative)…………………………………………………………..

49

Participant Selection…………………………………………………………….

50

vii

Measure………………………………………………………………………….

50

Scale Reliability…………………………………………………………............

51

Quantitative Data Collection……………………………………………............

52

Quantitative Data Analysis……………………………………………………...

53

Phase Two (Qualitative)…………………………………………………………...

54

Participant Selection…………………………………………………………….

55

Qualitative Data Collection………………………………………………..........

55

Qualitative Data Analysis………………………………………………………

56

Reliability and Validity of Qualitative Results…………………………………

57

Ethical Considerations……………………………………………………………..

57

Summary…………………………………………………………………………...

57

Chapter Four: Results……………..………………………………………………….

58

Organization of Chapter…………………………………………………………...

58

MTL Survey Analysis……………………………………………………………..

59

The MTL Identities………………………………………………………………...

60

MTL Comparisons by Subgroup…………………………………………………..

62

Factor Analysis……………………………………………………………….........

64

Qualitative Results…………………………………………………………………

67

Qualitative Findings………………………………………………………….........

69

Emerging Themes…………………………………………………………….........

69

Participant Biographies Based on MTL Identities………………………………...

71

Results of Interview Questions……………………………………………….........

94

viii

Summary of Findings……………………………………………………………...

110

Quantitative Analysis Summary………………………………………………...

112

Qualitative Analysis Summary……………………………………….................

115

Chapter Five: Discussion and Conclusion…………………………………………...

117

Summary of the Study……………………………………………………………..

117

Summary of the Problem…………………………………………………………

117

Review of Methodology and Research Questions…………………………............ 119
Discussion of Findings…………………………………………………………….

120

Factors that Influence Motivation to Lead……………………………………… 121
Differences of MTL Among Academic Librarians……………………………..

126

Implications for Leadership Practice……………………………………………… 129
Implications for Social Justice…………………………………………………….. 130
Limitations of the Study…………………………………………………………...

131

Areas for Future Research…………………………………………………………

132

Conclusion of the Study…………………………………………………………...

134

Appendix A: Email Invitation to Participate in Survey……………………………...

139

Appendix B: Informed Consent to Participate in Research………………………….

141

Appendix C: Survey Instrument……………………………………………………..

146

Appendix D: Interview Protocol & Questions……………………………………….

151

Appendix E: Table 4.3 Mean Identities by Gender………………………………….

155

Appendix F: Table 4.4 Mean Identities by Race/Ethnicity………………………….

156

Appendix G: Table 4.5 Race/Ethnicity ANOVA……………………………………

157

Appendix H: Table 4.6 Post Hoc Test for Current Position…………………………

158

ix

Appendix I: Table 4.7 Demographics of Interview Participants Showing Their
Original Scores on the MTL Survey…………………………………………………

161

Appendix J: Table 4.8 Factor Analysis Pattern Matrixa……………………………..

162

References……………………………………………………………………………

164

x

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1: Variables Contributing to MTL………………………….……………

14

Figure 3.1: Proposed Integrated Model Showing How Understanding MTL May
Increase URM Library Leaders………………………………………..

43

Figure 3.2: Basic Procedures in Implementing an Explanatory Design…………...

45

Figure 4.1: Factor Analysis Scree Plot…………………………………………….

66

xi

LIST OF TABLES
Table 4.1:

Demographic Profile of Academic Librarians in Study and
Nationally (in percentages)…………………………………………..

60

Table 4.2:

Mean Motivation to Lead (MTL) Identities by Subgroup…………...

62

Table 4.3:

Mean Identities by Gender…………………………………………...

155

Table 4.4:

Mean Identities by Race/Ethnicity…………………………………...

156

Table 4.5:

Race/Ethnicity ANOVA……………………………………………...

157

Table 4.6:

Post Hoc Test for Current Positions………………………………….

158

Table 4.7:

Demographics of Interview Participants Showing Their Original
Scores on the MTL Survey…………………………………………...

161

Factor Analysis Pattern Matrixa……………………………………...

162

Table 4.8:

xii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to acknowledge and thank my dissertation committee members for
their support and guidance throughout this process. Jennifer Jeffries, Paula Levin, and
Carolyn Hofstetter – I greatly appreciate your input and recommendations to help make
my study better. I would like to especially offer my thanks to my dissertation chair, Dr.
Hofstetter. You were so patient through the interpretation and analysis of the foreign
language, also known as “SPSS”. If you didn’t take the time to help me tie my shoe, I
would be flat on my face right now.
I also want to acknowledge the support I received from my colleagues at
California State University, San Marcos. Most especially I want to thank the library
administration for being so flexible and understanding. Wayne Veres, thank you for
giving me the time off I needed to complete this dissertation. Your support highlights the
value you place on learning and developing up-coming leaders.
A big thank you goes to my editor Diane Yerkes and to my friends/colleagues
Kawanna Bright and Melanie Chu for their valuable feedback on this work.
Finally, I want to give a “shout-out” to my weekend writing buddies: Dr. Nahid
Nariman, Dr. Karina Viaud, Dr. Sharifa Abukar, Dr. Pam Thompson, and the rest of the
Cohort 7 ladies who met every weekend at UCSD Biomedical Library for support.
Knowing you were all on the journey with me made it just a little bit easier to handle.
Thank you all for your friendship and encouragement.

xiii

VITA
1999

Bachelor of Arts, Secondary Education, Arizona State University
West

2003

Master of Arts, Library and Information Science, University of
Arizona

2003 – 2006

Resident Librarian, Auburn University

2006 – Present

Education Librarian, California State University San Marcos

2014

Doctor of Education, Educational Leadership, University of
California, San Diego and California State University San Marcos
PUBLICATIONS

Olivas, A.P. (2013). Natural transitions: From K-12 to U.S. academic library instructors.
New Library World, 114(7/8), 1-19. Retrieved from
http://www.emeraldinsight.com/
Olivas, A. P. & Chan, I. (2013). Beyond the reference desk: A study of the effectiveness
of low-cost distance library services at California State University San Marcos.
Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning, 7(1-2), 40-52.
doi: 10.1080/1533290x.2012.705177
Olivas, A. & Ma, R. (Winter 2009). Increasing retention rates in minority librarians
through mentoring. Electronic Journal of Academic and Special Librarianship,
10(3), Retrieved from
http://southernlibrarianship.icaap.org/content/v10n03/olivas_a01.html
Olivas, A.P. (2008). Mentoring new librarians. In G. Donovan & M. Figueroa (Eds.),
Staff Development Strategies that Work: Developing New Library Leaders and
Managers. New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers, Inc.
Olivas, A. & McCurley, H. (2006). Working across divisional lines. Library
Administration & Management, 20(2), 81-84.
Olivas, T. (2006, January/February). Breaking out of the box. Versed: Bulletin for the
Office for Diversity American Library Association. Retrieved from:
http://www.ala.org/ala/diversity/versed/versedbackissues/january2006abc/breakin
gout.htm

xiv

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Understanding Underrepresented Minority Academic Librarians’ Motivation to Lead in
Higher Education

by

Antonia Porras Olivas

Doctor of Education in Educational Leadership

University of California, San Diego, 2014
California State University San Marcos, 2014

Carolyn Huie Hofstetter, Chair

In answer to the call for diversity, the American Library Association (ALA) made
a commitment to recruit underrepresented minority individuals into the field
oflibrarianship. However, retention and promotion of underrepresented minority
librarians is still a challenge for most libraries, especially in higher education. With the

xv

increase of underrepresented minority students attending colleges and universities in the
United States, the need for more underrepresented minority academic librarians,
especially in leadership, is important. Using Motivation to Lead (MTL) theory, (which
measures three correlated factors: Affective Identity, Non-Calculative Identity, and
Social-Normative Identity), this mixed-methods study focused on understanding the
motivations that help underrepresented minority academic librarians stay in the library
profession and pursue leadership positions within the field. This study examined the
impact of minority library leader underrepresentation in academic libraries and delved
into their motivations to lead in predominately White academic library environments. A
mixed-method approach using the MTL survey and semi-structured interviews with
underrepresented minority academic librarians (specifically African American/Black and
Hispanic/Latin@ librarians) examined individuals’ motivations to lead and explored how
understanding those motivations can help increase the retention and promotion rates of
underrepresented minority academic librarians in positions of leadership. Findings
indicate that although a majority of academic librarians scored highest on a national
survey on the Non-Calculative Identity scale, Social Normative Identity and Affective
Identity do not score much lower. This means that participants in the national survey
tend to lead others without heavily considering the cost, as opposed to those who lead
based on a sense of obligation or a sense of pleasure. One-on-one interviews with
African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians reveal more in-depth
reasons behind why they chose to stay in the profession including their sense of
obligation, their feelings of reward, and their disappointment with diversity efforts in

xvi

academic libraries. Implications of the study are also discussed for academic library
settings.
Keywords: retention, promotion, motivation to lead, library leaders, minority librarians,
academic librarians

xvii

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
What motivates a person to lead others? More importantly, what motivates a
person to lead others in an environment where s/he may be “the minority”? For years
research said that underrepresented minority (URM) librarians leave the profession for
various reasons such as discrimination, burn-out, and lack of opportunity (Davis & Hall,
2007; Diaz, Tellman & Jones,1998; Epps, 2008; Hall, 2007; Winston, 2008), but what
motivates some of these URM academic librarians to stay in the profession and, more
importantly, what motivates them to want to lead?
Traditionally when one thinks of a librarian, the image of a middle-aged, White
female comes to mind. Historically and statistically speaking, that image is not too far
from the truth (American Library Association, 2012a). Libraries, specifically academic
libraries, are most often led by White women and men (Kyrillidou & Morris, 2012).
More specifically the percentage of URM academic librarians in managerial or leadership
positions is at 7.1%, or to be more specific, 8 out of 112 Association of Research
Libraries (ARL) library deans belong to one of four non-Caucasian categories, namely
American Indian/Native Alaskan, Hispanic, Black or Asian/Pacific Islander (Kyrillidou
& Morris, 2012). These numbers are fairly similar in proportion to the greater college
and university settings, with the exception being that White men outnumber White
women (NCES, 2012). In fact, a high percentage (78%) of U.S. college and university
administrators are from White backgrounds, while only 22% are from URM or “unknown”
backgrounds (NCES, 2012).

1

2
Recently the Environmental Systems Research Institute (Esri, 2012) and the U.S.
Census Bureau (2012) reported a significant increase of ethnic and racial diversity within
the United States between 2000 and 2010 (Esri, 2012). These organizations go on to say
that in fewer than 25 years, minorities, collectively, will likely be the majority in the
country. Moreover, Hispanic/Latin@ populations are growing at a much faster rate than
other minority groups (Esri, 2012; U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). For example, within one
year’s time, between 2010 and 2011, the Hispanic/Latin@ population alone increased 3.1%
and the African American/Black population has grown by 1.6% (U.S. Census Bureau,
2012). Although these numbers show a steady increase in the underrepresented minority
population, leadership numbers in both the corporate world and the academic world do
not reflect the same growth pattern. Why is this important?
It is important because the racial makeup of students attending colleges and
universities is dramatically changing and is disproportionate to the academic leadership
of their educational environments. The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES,
2011a) reports that, between 1976 and 2009, the population of Hispanic/Latin@
university students rose from three percent to 12%, and the population of African
American/Black students rose from nine percent to 14%. Interestingly, during the same
period of time, the percentage of White university students fell from 83% to 62% (NCES,
2011b). As more underrepresented minority students graduate from high school and seek
post-secondary opportunities, the numbers of underrepresented minority students in
colleges and universities continue to increase and the numbers of URM educators will

3
need to keep up in order to help these students succeed (U.S. Department of Education,
2011).
Although the number of White university students has decreased and the number
of minority students has increased over the years, university faculty are still
predominantly White, especially academic librarians and academic library leaders.
According to the U.S. Department of Education (2011), 42% of higher education faculty
is White males and 37% is White females: the remaining 21% are from underrepresented
minority backgrounds. Similarly, Academic Research Library (ARL) statistics of top-tier
research universities in North America report that over 80% of ARL deans are White,
middle-aged women and only seven percent of ARL deans are from racially
underrepresented communities (Kyrillidou & Bland, 2010). These statistics show that
although the faces of university students are changing, the faces of university leaders,
especially in academic libraries, are not reflecting the change.
This is significant because diversity in libraries, especially at library leadership
levels, is an important factor when developing library services and creating a welcoming
environment for underrepresented minority students (Hall, 2007). Students need to feel
safe and comfortable coming to the library. Although the number of URM students
entering university libraries is larger than the number of White students entering
university libraries, White students still take full advantage of library services more so
than underrepresented minority students (Davenport, 2006; Elteto, Jackson, & Lim, 2008;
Schoge, 2003; Whitmire, 2003).

4
Further, underrepresented minority students may feel more comfortable using a
university library when the library staff is more diverse. Findings from a recent case
study at Portland State University identified key factors that influence the perceptions of
underrepresented minority students regarding their library services and their library as a
“welcoming space.” Although URM students tended to use the library on a daily basis,
they did not seek research assistance or visit the reference collection as often as their
White counterparts did. Interestingly, the White students who took advantage of the
library’s resources stated they visited the library on a weekly basis. Why the discrepancy
among usage and time spent in the library? The researchers note that a majority of
library staff at Portland State are White. The study also found that underrepresented
minority students were “lukewarm about whether or not they received good customer
service at the reference desk when encountering a staff member of a different race or
ethnicity” (Elteto, Jackson, & Lim, 2008, p. 333).
University libraries have the power to provide diverse educational environments
that prepare students to succeed in diverse societies (Winston, 2001), yet studies suggest
that American educational institutions continue to replicate existing social inequalities by
shaping their settings to benefit White students and their families (Bourdieu & Passeron,
1977; Gordon & Generett, 2011; Kim & Taylor, 2008; Lareau & McNamara Horvat,
1999). Regardless of good intentions and self-perceptions of being open and welcoming
to all students, a majority of White faculty presence in schools presents a limited range of
ethnic role-models for students.
Library leaders play a critical role in students’ academic and campus experiences
because they are responsible for library policies, collections, budgets, and staffing. It is

5
therefore imperative for the library leaders to fully understand its student population and
their learning needs in order to make the right decisions regarding these policies,
collections, and staffing for their library users. Increasing diversity in academic libraries,
specifically in leadership positions, can be beneficial for communities surrounding
universities and colleges where underrepresented minorities live as well.
Underrepresented minority librarians can better reach out to diverse communities because
they better understand the cultural values, languages, and information needs of these
specific populations (Alire, 2001; Kim & Sin, 2008).
Knowing these facts, why aren’t more underrepresented minority librarians in
leadership positions? There are several factors contributing to this issue, such as high
recruitment efforts but low retention and promotion efforts, and the lack of understanding
of what motivates an underrepresented minority librarian to become a leader in the first
place. Another reason for lack of underrepresented minority academic librarians in
leadership is the lack of education to pursue a librarianship position in the first place.
Although the American Library Association (ALA) and other library associations made a
commitment to recruit more underrepresented minority librarians, the numbers show that
White females continue to dominate the profession (ALA, 2012a). Furthermore, the
demographic composition of library assistants, jobs that usually only require a high
school diploma or bachelor’s degree, to librarians is grossly divided because librarians
must earn at least one master’s degree to work as a professional in libraries (Lance,
2005). Traditionally underrepresented minorities do not pursue advanced degrees as
much as their White counterparts (Borden, 2010). According to the NCES (2009),
women and underrepresented minorities are traditionally at a disadvantage in the labor

6
market because they are generally absent from postsecondary education. Thus, diversity
in libraries, specifically academic libraries, and leadership suffer.
Diversity Efforts in Libraries
Since the early 1970’s, library schools tried to actively recruit underrepresented
minority students into the field of librarianship. Beginning with Dr. Arnulfo Trejo’s
Graduate Library Institute for Spanish-Speaking Americans (GLISSA) program at the
University of Arizona and continuing with the current University of Arizona’s
Knowledge River Program, which recruits Latin@ and American Indian students, the
number of new librarians entering the profession each year is slowly increasing.
Additionally, federal funding through the Institute of Museum and Library Services
(IMLS) programs such as the American Library Association’s Spectrum Scholarship
Program, as well as other minority recruitment programs across the nation, are leading
diversity recruitment initiatives and adding minority librarians to the profession (ALA,
2011b; ALA, 2011c).
One would think that the increase of underrepresented minority academic
librarians would increase the underrepresented minority academic library leaders;
however, current statistics show there was only a minor increase in underrepresented
minority recruitment between 1990 and 2009 (ALA, 2012b). Although these recruitment
efforts continue, they have not had a significant impact on retention and promotion of
underrepresented minority librarians into university library leadership positions.
Enrollment of underrepresented minority library school students remains significantly
lower than White library school students (Montague, 2005). Specifically looking at the

7
University of Illinois’ library school student population, Montague found that out of 189
Master’s candidates, only two were American Indian, five were Asian Americans, six
were African Americans and no Latino students were registered (2005). At the national
level, ALA demographic statistics show that the population of library school students
continues to be predominantly White females (Davis & Hall, 2007). As a result of these
low numbers, underrepresented minority library leadership is suffering. Since current
library leaders will retire soon, researchers agree that retention and promotion efforts
should not lie solely with national diversity programs. They argue that all academic
libraries should have a vested interest in recruiting, retaining, and promoting minority
librarians (ALA, 2011a; Musser, 2001; Winston, 2001; Winston, 2008).
Retention, unlike recruitment efforts, is an ongoing process that requires
sustainable effort on the part of administrators. Unfortunately, the cost for retention
programs is high so library deans often do not (or cannot) commit to such costs (Musser,
2001). As a result, many highly qualified individuals leave their institutions for other
jobs or for other professions. Some of the main reasons that underrepresented minority
librarians leave the profession are a lack of mentoring or some form of discrimination
(Alire, 2001; Bonnette, 2004; Olivas & Ma, 2009; Thornton, 2001). Those who left the
profession felt they had “no support-system” and “no one to whom they can express their
feelings of disappointment or frustration” (Thornton, 2001, p. 151). This same study also
found that 43% of the participants were dissatisfied with the lack of growth opportunities
and career advancement (Thornton, 2001, p. 156).

8
Underrepresented minority librarians often find themselves one of a very small
number of racial or ethnic minorities in their departments and encounter a number of
issues that their White colleagues may not experience. A study of African American
academic librarians at Association of Research Libraries (ARL) institutions identified
feelings of isolation and lack of support (Thornton, 2001). Similar studies in academia
have found that women faculty and faculty of color have significant feelings of isolation
and tokenism, a lack of access to social networks, a lack of mentors, a lack of support,
and negative organizational climate issues (Aguirre, 2000; Evans & Breinig Chun, 2007;
Laden & Hagedor, 2000). Due to these issues, underrepresented minority academic
librarians find themselves with missed opportunities and missed valuable resources
because they have difficulty becoming more socialized into their departments (Damasco
& Hodges, 2012).
Lack of mentoring from senior academic library faculty, unclear expectations in
regards to tenure and promotion policies, difficulties with how their research is viewed by
their White peers and superiors, and the inability to connect with other librarians can be
serious impediments to the retention and promotion of underrepresented minority
academic librarians. In a recent study on the tenure and promotion of URM tenure track
academic librarians, half of the respondents felt they received mixed messages from
senior colleagues about the requirements for earning tenure and promotion (Damasco &
Hodges, 2012, p. 286).

One participant stated s/he experienced senior librarians from

White backgrounds eagerly helping junior librarians from the same backgrounds by
providing them co-authorship opportunities but excluding, purposely or not,

9
underrepresented minority librarians from the same opportunities (Damasco & Hodges,
2012, p. 295). While some institutions put in place mentoring programs to help their new
librarians succeed, some respondents indicated the success of a mentoring program
depended on the relationship between the mentor and the mentee and whether the mentor
voluntarily entered that mentoring relationship or was assigned to the mentee without
consideration for strengths and weaknesses (Damasco & Hodges, 2012).
Statement of the Problem
Retention numbers of underrepresented minority librarians is low and as a result
there are very few underrepresented minority academic library leaders. With the increase
of underrepresented minority students entering universities, the population of
underrepresented minority academic library leaders is not proportional to their student
populations. In order to understand retention and promotion of minority academic
librarians, it is important to understand the obstacles these librarians face and what
motivates them to pursue leadership positions in predominantly White work
environments.
Leadership is one of the most researched topics in academia, business, military
and other professional environments. Much of the research looks into leadership
characteristics and how they relate to organizational success. However, there is a lack of
research that looks into the motivation to lead of minority academic librarians.
Purpose of the Study
This study examines factors behind the minority leadership achievement gap in
academic libraries and explores the motivation to lead of current underrepresented

10
minority academic librarians. This study examines underrepresented minority academic
library retention rates through understanding what motivates URM academic librarians to
stay in the profession and seek positions of leadership. Suggestions on how to narrow the
leadership achievement gap in academic libraries and increase the number of
underrepresented minority librarians in top library positions are offered. This study adds
to the body of literatures on motivation to lead and the retention and promotion of URM
minority academic librarians. Finally, this study impacts current practice of retention and
promotion of underrepresented minority academic librarians by looking at the
motivational factors of current and aspiring underrepresented minority leaders in the
profession.
Research Questions
The main research question to this study is: In what ways does understanding the
role of motivation to lead play a role in the retention and promotion of underrepresented
minority academic librarians? The following sub-research questions are also investigated:
1. What factors influence an underrepresented minority librarian’s motivation to
lead in an academic library setting?
2. Are there differences between current and aspiring academic librarians and their
motivation to lead in academic library settings? Does this vary by race/ethnicity?
Researcher Epistemology
This study identifies, documents, and analyzes the motivation to lead as well as
the lived experiences of underrepresented minority librarians in higher education,
specifically African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians. To date,

11
no research has been conducted in this area. This research contributes to existing
literature on the retention and promotion of underrepresented minority academic
librarians. The researcher constructs new knowledge on the motivation to lead of
underrepresented minority academic librarians through quantitative and qualitative data
analysis, the research process, and personal experience as a current academic librarian
from an underrepresented minority background.
Theoretical Framework
While much of the literature focuses on librarian diversity recruitment efforts and
the failures of retention and promotion efforts, there is no research investigating the
motivational factors that influenced current minority university library leaders to stay in
this predominantly White, female profession and to seek positions of leadership
themselves. Both internal and external perceptions of leadership are important to
leadership development because it could prove to help motivate underrepresented
minority academic librarians to seek positions of leadership themselves. The psychology
of leadership is a difficult one to understand, and leader motivation is an important factor
to investigate, especially within a profession where more underrepresented minority
leaders need to be developed.
The development of underrepresented minority academic library leaders is a goal
for many university libraries, but most do not know how to encourage these potential
leaders and do not know how to identify who has leadership potential (Wheeler, 2000).
Research in psychology, business, and the military show there are both internal and
external motivating factors at play, beyond just mentoring, that influence a person’s

12
decision to lead. Before addressing these motivational factors, it is important to
understand the basic human needs that must be met before leadership potential and
capacity can be developed.
Motivation
In a seminal piece by Maslow (1943), A Theory of Human Motivation¸ five
essential human necessities were identified: physiological, safety, belonging, esteem, and
self-actualization. According to Maslow (1943), if these needs are not met, a person can
suffer both physical and mental anguish; however, Maslow also states once a person
meets all of these needs, that person is driven to fulfill his/her ultimate potential in life.
Many researchers state that successful leaders have achieved all levels of Maslow’s
Hierarchy of Needs and have recognized (or are currently recognizing) their leadership
potential (Amit, Lisak, Popper and Gal, 2007; Avolio & Hannah, 2008; Chan, 1999;
Chan & Drasgo, 2001; Judge & Bono, 2000; Judge, Bono, Ilies, & Gerhardt, 2002;
McClelland, 1985; Popper, 2000).
In addition to Maslow and various other motivation scholars, Chan’s (1999)
Motivation to Lead (MTL) theory looks at factors contributing to a person’s desire to
want to lead. According to Chan (1999), the motivation to lead comes from four major
factors: personality traits, values, leadership self-efficacy, and previous leadership
experiences. These factors differ from person to person with a variety of combinations
that affect each person’s motivations differently. Investigating how these four major
factors are reflected in a person’s motivation to lead, Chan developed a model based on
several other motivational theories, including, but not limited to, Fishbein and Ajzen’s

13
(1975) Theory of Reasoned Action and Triandis’s (1977) Theory of Interpersonal
Behavior. Chan hypothesized that these theories provided a framework for understanding
the psychological nature of a person’s motivation to lead as well as discovering the
dominant factors in a person’s wish to lead. Each of these foundational theories is
explained in Chapter Two, Literature Review.
Based on the above factors, this study is predicated on Motivation to Lead Theory
(MTL) which includes three dimensions of motivation identity: Affective Identity, Social
Normative Identity, and Non-Calculative Identity. Affective-identity suggests that a
person is motivated to lead others by an innate desire that comes from the satisfaction and
pleasure of simply being a leader. Individuals who score high on Affective Identity scale
enjoy leading and see themselves as natural leaders. These individuals tend to be
charismatic, outgoing, and very sociable. They value competition and achievement, and
they tend to have more previous leadership experience than their peers. They are
confident in their own leadership abilities and seek out opportunities to display their
leadership abilities (Chan, Rounds, & Drasgow, 2000). Social-Normative Identity
suggests that a person is motivated to lead by feelings of commitment to a group or
norms that are prevalent in certain social environments. Individuals who score high on
the Social-Normative scale have a strong sense of social obligation to others, are
accepting of social hierarchies, and reject social inequality. These leaders tend to have
substantial past leadership experience and confidence in their leadership abilities. NonCalculative Identity suggests that motivation can be viewed as a running scale. The more
calculative a person’s motivation, the more likely that person will aspire to lead in order
to enjoy the benefits related to the position. The less calculative the individual’s

14
motivation, the more likely that person will not look at the costs/benefits related to the
leadership role.
The figure below illustrates the relationship among general cognitive abilities,
personality traits, values, leader self-efficacy, and past leadership experience, and how
each contribute to a person’s motivation to lead.

Figure 1.1: Variables Contributing to MTL (Chan & Drasgow, 2001)
Research Methodology
This study uses a mixed-methods design to collect data through a survey and
through semi-structured, open-ended interviews with underrepresented minority
academic librarians. The use of mixed methods provides a more comprehensive
approach by investigating both quantitative and qualitative data in order to better

15
understand issues faced by URM academic librarians as they pursue leadership positions
in academic libraries.
To measure the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic
librarians, this study was conducted in two phases. The first is the quantitative phase and
it uses the 27-item Motivation to Lead (MTL) scale (Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001).
This instrument measures three dimensions of MTL: Affective-Identity, Social-Normative
Identity, and Non-Calculative identity. The instrument was distributed online to various
underrepresented minority academic librarian listserves, the ALA listserv, the ACRL
listserv, and the ARL listserv. By conducting the first phase of quantitative data
collection and analysis, the researcher identified and purposefully selected participants
for the second phase qualitative data collection and analysis. After the online survey was
complete, the researcher interviewed a subset of 12 participants (specifically African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians) to gain more insight into
what motivates these individuals to stay in the profession and seek leadership
opportunities. Emphasis was placed on this second qualitative phase, using an
appreciative narrative inquiry approach to help better understand the lived experiences
and the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic librarians.
Significance of the Study
Diversity in the workplace is one of the greatest challenges of any organization,
but diversity in leadership positions is an even greater challenge (Yager, 2000). Thus, it
is important to understand what motivates an underrepresented minority person to pursue
a position in leadership and how to nurture the person accordingly. Although there are no

16
studies regarding the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic
librarians, this study provides feedback on URM retention issues in academic libraries. It
provides information on the perceptions of diversity retention and promotion issues by
URM academic librarians, and it gives current academic library leaders a greater
understanding of how to most effectively nurture and promote URM librarians into
positions of leadership. Ultimately current academic library leaders have the
responsibility for making sure successful change regarding retention and promotion of
URM librarians takes place.
Definition of Key Terms
The following terms are integral to the context of this research and are used
throughout the study.
Academic Libraries: A library that is affiliated with a college or university which
serves the learning and research needs of its students, faculty, and staff.
Academic Librarians: Professionally accredited librarians who have earned a
master’s degree in library science and currently work at a college or university library.
ACRL: The Association of College and Research Libraries is a professional
association dedicated to enhancing the ability of librarians to serve the needs of their
users in colleges and universities.
Affective Identity (AIMTL): One of three Motivation to Lead identity scales.
People who score high on the Affective Identity scale tend to enjoy leading others and
see themselves as natural leaders.

17
AILA: American Indian Library Association is an affiliate of ALA and a
professional library association dedicated to addressing the library-related needs of
American Indians and Alaska Natives.
APALA: The Asian Pacific American Librarians Association is an affiliate of
ALA and a professional library association dedicated to addressing the needs of Asian
Pacific American librarians and those who serve Asian Pacific American communities.
ALA: The American Library Association is the oldest and largest professional
library association in the world
ARL: Association of Research Libraries is a non-profit organization made up of
125 tier- one research institutions in North America (including Canada).
BCALA: Black Caucus of the American Library Association is a professional
organization affiliated with ALA that serves and advocates for library services and
resources for the African American/Black community.
CALA: The Chinese American Librarians Association is an affiliate of ALA and a
professional association that advances diversity and equity of library services to library
communities worldwide.
Diversity: Refers to demographic differences among groups of people (Ely &
Thomas, 2001).
Latin@: A term used to textually shorten and simplify writing both Latino/Latina
or Latino/a
Leader/Leadership: Terms used to describe people in positions, not solely
management, who inspire positive changes in their organizations in transformational
ways

18
Mixed Methods Data Analysis: A set of analytic techniques applied to both the
quantitative and the qualitative data, as well as to the mixing of the two forms of data
concurrently and sequentially in a single project or multi-phase project (Creswell & Plano
Clark, 2011).
Motivation to Lead: A theoretical construct for understanding leader development
and individual differences in leader motivations through personality, values, self-efficacy,
and past leadership experiences.
Non-Calculative Identity (NCMTL): One of three Motivation to Lead identities.
Participants who score high on this scale generally value harmony and tend to be nonconfrontational in their relationships with other people. These individuals lead only if
they are not calculative about the costs relative to the benefits of being a leader.
REFORMA: The national association to promote library and information services
to Latinos and the Spanish-speaking, affiliated with the ALA.
Social Normative Identity: One of three Motivation to Lead identities. Those
who scored high on the social-normative scale are motivated by a strong sense of social
duty, are extremely conscientious, and are highly agreeable.
Underrepresented Minority (URM): A racial group, other than White, that
includes Hispanic, African American, Native American, and Asian cultures.
Organization of the Dissertation
This dissertation includes five chapters. Chapter One is the introduction and
provides an overview of the challenges of URM librarians in predominantly White
academic library environments and the rationale for the study, as well as outlining the

19
statement of the problem and significance of the study. Chapter Two provides a deeper
review of the literature relevant to URM academic librarians, underrepresented minority
leaders in academia and other professional environments, and literature on the motivation
to lead theory. Chapter Three describes the design and methodology that was used to
accomplish this study, which includes a detailed account of the population, survey tools
used, interview questions asked, analysis techniques, and the study’s limitations. Chapter
Four reveals the study’s findings on both the quantitative and qualitative investigations.
Finally, Chapter Five discusses the study’s findings in greater detail and offers
implications for the profession regarding research in the field of recruitment and retention
of URM academic librarians and in the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority
academic librarians.

CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW
Before conducting an empirical study on the motivation to lead of
underrepresented minority (URM) academic librarians, it is important to look at the
current state of knowledge on the topic. Since there is no literature that speaks
specifically to the motivation to lead of URM academic librarians, this chapter will
provide an overview of the literature and theoretical framework surrounding diversity in
academic librarianship and the motivation to lead in various professions.
The first section discusses the library profession’s struggle to retain URM
librarians. Next, this chapter investigates the issues and obstacles underrepresented
minorities face in library leadership. Finally the last section discusses the relevance of
Motivation to Lead Theory (MTL) through literature focused on its foundational theories
and its application to academia, business, and military occupations. The final section
frames the proposed study by using MTL to understand how MTL theory relates to
academic libraries. The principles of MTL inform the assumptions, design,
methodologies, and the conceptual model chosen for this study.
Underrepresented Minority Leadership
Before looking at the representation of URM leaders in academic libraries, it is
important to delve deeper into the literature of how URM leaders are viewed in general.
Doing so will help provide a better understanding of what URM library leaders face. It
will also help set the stage for understanding the reasons for using Motivation to Lead
theory in this study.

20

21
The concept of leadership is highly influenced by organizational cultures as well
as environmental and economic situations (Lord, Brown, Harvey, & Hall, 2001). For
years the public believed that “good” leaders are ambitious, confident, and self-sufficient
(Powell, Butterfield, & Parent, 2002; V. E. Schein, 2001). Since a majority of leadership
positions are created by men, most leadership roles are identified as male-dominated
positions (Atwater, Brett, Waldman, DiMare, & Hayden, 2004; V.E.Schein, 2001). While
traditional organizational leadership roles are filled by White males, leadership in the
United States is slowly changing. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
(2009), 23% of the chief executive officers from public and private U.S. companies are
women, 5% are Latin@, 4% are African American/Black and 4% are Asian/Pacific
Islander. Although these groups remain underrepresented in leadership positions, the
numbers are slowly changing and are higher than they have ever been in previous years
(Zweigenhaft & Domhoff, 2006). Still the numbers have not increased enough to keep
up with the growing number of underrepresented minority populations. The nearly
unanimous conclusion is that discrimination against women and discrimination against
people from underrepresented minority groups is the largest contributing factor to the
lack of these populations in leadership positions (Arrow, 1998; Bertrand & Mullainathan,
2004; Blau & Kahn, 2006; Correll, Benard, & Paik, 2007; Grodsky & Pager, 2001;
Heilman & Okimoto, 2008; and Maume, 1999).
Unintentional discrimination can stem from any perceiver’s stereotype thought
about underrepresented minority leaders. These perceivers suggest that even if the
individual leader’s personality or leadership style fits their group’s stereotype, “people’s
subjective construal of the individual may lead them to believe that she or he does not

22
‘have what it takes’ for success in a leadership role” (Eagly & Chin, 2010, p. 217).
Several studies found that underrepresented groups such as women and underrepresented
minorities are viewed differently than traditional While males by their own followers.
For example, while women are perceived as kind, collectivists, and motherly (Kite,
Deaux, & Haines, 2008; Newport, 2001), underrepresented minorities are perceived as
hostile, uneducated, and incompetent (Madon et al., 2001; Niemann, Jennings, Rozelle,
Baxter, & Sullivan, 1994). Perhaps because of these discriminating factors, leaders from
underrepresented minority backgrounds often feel the need to lead differently than
leaders from White backgrounds. Due to perceived expectations of underrepresented
minority leadership styles from their followers, researchers believe underrepresented
minority leaders feel constrained in their leadership because their social identities are the
first thing people identify. These feelings may emerge as leaders from underrepresented
minority backgrounds face pressure to behave like leaders from White/Caucasian groups
(Eagly & Chin, 2010). Such pressures lead some underrepresented minority leaders to
overcompensate in their leadership styles (Ayman & Korabik, 2010; Cheung & Halpern,
2010; Kawahara, Esnil, & Hsu, 2007; Sanchez-Hucles & Davis, 2010). Further, potential
underrepresented minority leaders may refuse to take on leadership positions for fear of
judgment or “stereotype threat” (Eagly & Chin, 2010). These potential leaders become
personally anxious about leadership roles and instead relegate themselves to
follower/subordinate positions in organizations.
Underrepresented Minority Library Leaders
Regardless of the leadership training, the mentoring, or the career development
opportunities received in the past, research shows that underrepresented minority

23
librarians who are currently in leadership positions also find themselves continuing to
struggle with inequality and bias in the workplace. Several attributes have been cited that
leadership programs and mentors could use to help nurture emerging library leaders
(Hernon, Powell, &Young, 2002). Using this list of attributes, Epps (2008) identifies the
skill sets that African American women, and by extension, all minority women, must
possess in order to become successful leaders in academic libraries. The study indicates
that race, along with gender, remains a key issue in library leadership. Although these
women do not need different skill sets than other library leaders, they do need additional
characteristics in order to overcome perceived stereotypes and prejudices (Epps, 2008).
While both the 2002 and 2008 studies agreed that library leaders need to embrace change,
be energetic, be a visionary, be an educator, and motivate people; the Epps (2008, p. 262)
study also found that underrepresented minority library leaders felt they needed to “work
twice as hard” as their White counterparts, have thicker skin, and possess a strong sense
of self when expressing their points of view to dominant White culture environments.
The study reveals that because most of the workers in academic libraries are
White, underrepresented minority women in leadership positions must deal with
“stereotypes and preconceived notions of their abilities” and that generally
underrepresented minority leaders, regardless of gender, find themselves having to prove
their competencies more often (Epps, 2008, p. 268). Underrepresented minority women
in leadership positions, however, find themselves sitting at “the power tables, but their
majority peers and superiors often do not or may not treat them as equals” (Epps, 2008, p.
268). Participants in the study pointed at the male-dominated deanships on most college

24
campuses but also stated that they had to compete not only with White females for those
positions but also men of color.
Librarians: Recruitment and Retention
According to the American Library Association (ALA, 2013b), there are over
121,000 libraries in the United States. Within that number, there are well over 3,689
public and private academic libraries (colleges or universities) in the United States (Phan,
Hardesty, Hug, & Sheckells, 2011). Within those academic libraries, there are 26,706
accredited librarians with a small percentage of those librarians coming from
underrepresented minority backgrounds (ALA, 2013a). The latest Diversity Counts:
Summary of Findings reports that although White females continue to dominate the
library profession, 43 percent of the total population of non-white librarians were African
American, followed by Latinos with 25.6 percent and Asian/Pacific Islander with 22.8
percent (ALA Office for Research and Statistics, 2012). Through active recruitment and
training programs, many libraries, specifically public libraries, count on certain efforts to
increase the numbers of underrepresented minority librarians (Lynch, 1998; Winston,
1998). Public libraries have instituted “Grow Your Own” programs aimed at improving
recruitment among paraprofessional library staff from underrepresented minority
backgrounds (McConnell, 2004).
Academic libraries generally do not offer the same types of programs but instead
rely heavily on national library associations such as Association of Research Libraries
(ARL), Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), and American Library
Association (ALA) to provide financial assistance to academic libraries that offer
scholarships and residency programs to underrepresented minority individuals interested

25
in becoming academic librarians. ARL also provides resources for students and
paraprofessionals to seek fellowship/internship opportunities and residency programs
(ARL, 2006). The purpose of these residency and fellowship/internship programs is to
provide an opportunity for recent library school graduates to gain work experience. The
hope for such programs was that these new underrepresented minority library school
graduates would go on to work in other academic libraries (Brewer & Winston, 2001).
There is a plethora of literature on diversity in academia. Current literature on
minority academic deans reveals the trials of women, underrepresented minorities, and
especially female underrepresented minorities in leadership positions. Research on
increasing diversity in the workforce shows that such diversity is beneficial to
organizations because it directly contributes to increased sources of information,
creativity, and innovation (van Knippenberg, De Dreu, & Homan, 2004; Williams &
O’Reilly, 1998). Racial diversity can also increase sales, customers, market share, and
profits (Herring, 2009). Evidence focused on increasing diversity in academia shows a
direct correlation between diversity and overall success of liberal arts colleges as well as
library operational diversity (Winston & Li, 2002, 2007).
Existing research on diversity in academic libraries focuses on the challenges of
increasing recruitment, retention, and promotion of underrepresented minority librarians.
For example, a study analyzing recruitment among ARL libraries discovered that 66% of
top research institutions proactively recruit minority librarians in order to increase
representation of these groups (Diaz, Tellman, & Jones, 1998). Strategies for increasing
those numbers include granting financial aid for underrepresented minority students in

26
library school, encouraging mentors to take on protégée librarians, providing networking
opportunities for underrepresented minority librarians, and providing a welcoming work
environment to all individuals (Adkins & Hussey, 2005; Morgan, Farrar, & Owens, 2009;
Musser, 2001). Although the literature for recruiting underrepresented minority
librarians is plentiful, the literature on retention and promotion is lacking. The articles
on retention and promotion of underrepresented minority librarians mainly investigate the
obstacles underrepresented minority librarians face in libraries and discuss the
disproportion of library leadership positions. This next portion of the literature review
considers the issues underrepresented minority librarians face in the profession and the
difficulty of retention.
Why They Leave
Minorities are severely underrepresented in leadership positions in higher
education, especially in academic libraries, because most of the effort has gone into
recruiting but not in retaining and promoting these librarians (Wheeler, 2000). A study
on diversity in library leadership advocates for the need of more underrepresented
minority library leaders to better provide service to underrepresented minority
populations (Alire, 2001); however, there is an attrition of underrepresented minorities in
librarianship due to limited opportunities for professional mobility and access to positions
of leadership (Davis & Hall, 2007, p. 16). It is important for current library leaders to
develop emerging underrepresented minority leaders because these librarians have fewer
role models than their White counterparts. Most library leaders are not nurturing
librarians from underrepresented minority backgrounds; instead they rely on future
library leaders to “emerge naturally.” Unfortunately, without conscious effort on the part

27
of current library leaders, URM librarians are often not a part of the system from which
leaders tend to naturally emerge (Wheeler, 2000). The solution, researchers say, is for
libraries to create opportunities for underrepresented minority librarians to develop and
demonstrate their leadership potential (Alire, 2001; Epps, 2008; Johnson, 2007; Wheeler,
2000). Other scholars agree that libraries will not be able to effectively influence change
until libraries aggressively increase the number of underrepresented minority library
leaders (Alire, 2001; Wheeler, 2000; Winston, 2001).
A recent study on describing the demographic characteristics of graduates from
library school programs in North Carolina investigated differences in pay, job satisfaction,
and leadership roles of URM librarians. Using a pool of over 7000 graduates from five
North Carolina library schools, the researchers sent a web-based survey that collected
data on career histories. Results showed that predominantly White females still
dominated the workforce. While this study found that 60% of their participants reported
having supervisory responsibilities in their current jobs, underrepresented minorities
remain significantly less likely to hold the same positions as their White colleagues. The
study also found that underrepresented minorities, more specifically African-Americans,
value more extrinsic motivational rewards such as the availability of advancement
opportunities and leadership opportunities to stay in the field (Morgan, Farrar & Owens,
2009). These findings show that more research on URM academic librarians’ motivation
is needed.
With the lack of underrepresented minority academic librarian motivation
literature, scholars look to successful retention programs instead. The University of
Minnesota, for example, offers a training institute that aims to advance the careers of

28
underrepresented minority academic librarians. Johnson (2007) found that more than 90%
of the attendees who participated in a survey asking about leadership development stated
that they still worked in libraries. Of those participants, 59.1% were promoted or were
given more responsibility in their current places of employment. These findings indicate
that although not all study participants were promoted after attending the leadership
institute, the increase in promotion numbers of underrepresented minority librarians is
still significant and the institute should be duplicated to enhance the opportunities of
URM librarians (Johnson, 2007). Likewise, the Association of Research Libraries (ARL)
sponsors leadership and career development programs specifically designed to retain and
help promote underrepresented minority academic librarians to take on more leadership
roles (ARL, 2013). Findings show that their leadership programs also help to
significantly increase retention and promotion numbers of underrepresented minority
academic librarians.
Although the Minnesota Institute for Early Career Librarians and the leadership
development programs sponsored by ARL should be commended for their work in
helping to retain and promote URM librarians, it should also be noted that both programs
are highly competitive and are specifically tailored to serve only ARL libraries. The
Association of Research Libraries is a consortium of tier-one research libraries, not
libraries from teaching universities or community colleges. While these programs
encourage other institutions to duplicate their career development and leadership training
efforts of URM academic librarians, during the time of writing this dissertation, no other
academic libraries have put such programs in place.

29
Motivation to Lead Theory
This section looks at motivation to lead (MTL) literature. It includes the factors
that influence individual differences in MTL as well as its elements and measurement.
The literature also looks at the antecedents of MTL in order to gain a deeper
understanding of its construct and the group differences within the motivation to lead.
This chapter delves deeper into the literature on MTL that has been used in other
professions.
For years studies hoping to understand employee motivation have focused on
concepts of personal values and needs (Emmert & Taher, 1992; Gabris & Simo, 1995;
Lee, 1995; Miner, Smith, & Bracker, 1994; Thomas, Dickson, & Bliese, 2001). Many of
these studies center on military and business personnel and look at personality traits and
individuals’ innate desires for power and affiliation (Van Iddekinge, et al., 2009; Thomas
et al., 2001). Motivation to lead, however, is more complicated than that of an
extroverted person’s desire for power or popularity. Motivation to Lead Theory (MTL) is
based on various theories such as Theory of Self-Efficacy (Bandura, 1982; Bandura, 1997;
Bandura, Adams, Hardy, & Howells, 1980), Fiedler and Garcia’s (1987) Cognitive
Resource Theory, Fishbein and Ajzen’s (1975) Theory of Reasoned Action, and Triandis’
(1980) Theory of Behavior. In MTL, Chan (1999) deconstructs and studies variables
such as “personality traits,” “social-cultural values,” “general cognitive ability,” “past
leadership experience,” and “leader self-efficacy.” The main premise of MTL is that
personality and values relate to a leader’s behavior through his/her motivation, which
then affects that person’s participation in leadership roles and activities (Chan, 1999). A
person will use the experiences from those leadership roles and activities to acquire the

30
necessary social skills and knowledge needed to acquire more leadership roles in the
future (Chan, 1999; Lord & Hall, 1992; Zaccaro et al., 1991).
Prior to Chan’s Motivation to Lead Theory, most existing research on motivation
and motivation to lead focused on trait predictors such as gender and personality. For
example, Carlyle (1841) investigated the "great man" approach to leadership in which
leaders, specifically men, were thought to be “born” for greatness. Other research
assumed people have an unconscious need for achievement, power, or affiliation that
drives their motivations to lead (McClelland, 1975, 1985; Miner, 1977, 1993; Stahl,
1986). Motivation to Lead Theory began as a broad theoretical framework for
understanding the role of individual differences in the study of leadership behaviors
(Chan & Drasgow, 2001). A key component of the theory is that personality and values
relate to leader behaviors through a person’s motivation to lead that then affects the
person’s participation in leadership roles. In turn, it is through those leadership roles that
the person acquires the social skills and knowledge actually required for leading (Lord &
Hall, 1992; Zaccaro, Gilbert, Thor, & Mumford, 1991). MTL recognizes the
multidimensional nature of leadership in the prediction of leadership performance. A
significant feature of MTL is that it integrates the development process with the
performance process of a leader. It assumes that a leader brings with him/her to any
situation a set of personal characteristics such as knowledge, skills, abilities, and
personality.
Motivation to Lead Theory may be defined as a construct that affects a leader's
(or leader’s-to-be) decision to assume leadership responsibilities as well as a construct
that affects a person’s effort and persistence as a leader. This theory assumes that within

31
any group, there are individual differences that may interact with any person's interests
and abilities that will predict leadership behaviors. This approach assumes that individual
differences in MTL can change with leadership experience and training and are an
immediate outcome of one's leadership self-efficacy and accumulated leadership
experience.
Individual Differences of MTL
This section focuses on the individual components affecting MTL. The key
assumption within MTL research is that within any group of people, there are individual
differences that become stable over time, not counting major life altering events (Chan,
1999). Individual differences in MTL can interact with a person’s interests and abilities
to predict leadership behaviors in certain work environments (Chan, 1999; Chan &
Drasgow, 2001). These individual differences in MTL can also interact with group or
task characteristics that can affect a person’s decision to lead in specific situations (Chan,
1999).
Motivation to lead research assumes that individual differences in MTL can
change with the experiences and training of leaders. It also assumes that these individual
differences are a result of one’s leadership self-efficacy and past leadership experience.
Those, in turn, are affected by a leader’s cultural values and beliefs, personality,
cognitive abilities, and social abilities (Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001). Motivation
to Lead Theory does not assume people are born to lead or that people have an
unconscious desire for power and achievement (Carlyle, 1841; McClelland, 1975, 1985;
Miner, 1977, 1993; Stahl, 1986). Instead, MTL assumes that leadership skills, leadership

32
style, and the understanding of what it means to be a leader are learned (Bandura, 1986,
1997; Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001).
Elements and Measurement of MTL
Prior to MTL, research on the motivation to lead focused on predicting leader
effectiveness. It is suggested that although no assumptions are made that MTL is directly
related to predicting leader effectiveness or success, understanding MTL may help
organizations better understand leader morale, which in turn, indirectly affects leadership
effectiveness and success (Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001). While other research
on the motivation to lead previously looked at individual personality leadership traits,
Chan’s theory looked more closely at multiple psychological constructs of leader
motivation. The instrument which Chan developed to measure these psychological
constructs is borrowed from Meyer and Allen’s (1987, 1991) three-component model
which measures the affective, normative, or calculative organizational commitment.
Meyer and Allen argued that each of the three components was the result of different
antecedents. Affective commitment, for example, was a direct result of work experience
and personal characteristics. Calculative commitment was related to a person’s
investment in the job or the company. Normative commitment, on the other hand, was
thought to be affected by cultural and organizational social practices (Chan, 1999). This
model shares similarities with two major social cognitive theories which claim to predict
a person’s intentions: Fishbein and Ajzen’s (1975) Theory of Reasoned Action and
Triandis’ (1977, 1980) Theory of Interpersonal Behavior.
According to the theory of reasoned action, a person’s attitude toward performing
a specific behavior and that person’s perceived social norms related to the act determine

33
the person’s intention of enacting the actual behavior or not (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980). If
the person expects success from carrying out the act, the attitudes toward the act are
positive. Similarly, the theory of interpersonal behavior looks at the person’s analysis of
consequence of an act (cognition), the feelings associated with the act (affect),
community or cultural norms regarding the act (social determinants), and sense of
obligation to act a certain way (personal normative beliefs) (Triandis, 1977, 1980).
Chan believed that using theory of reasoned action and theory of interpersonal
behavior as theoretical frameworks was a way to identify the components underlying
individual differences within MTL:
It is possible that some people may just like to lead (i.e., affective MTL). Other
people may lead for more normative or social reasons such as a sense of duty or
responsibility (i.e., social-normative MTL). It is also possible that yet other people may
take a calculative, rational approach to leading (i.e., calculative MTL). Such people may
only

lead if they perceive the benefits of leading to be greater than the costs; this

dimension is conceptualized as bipolar, with non-calculative motivations about leading
others at the

other end of the continuum (i.e., Non-calculative MTL). (Chan, 1999, p.8)

Antecedents of MTL
This section looks more closely at the antecedents of the MTL components such
as personality traits, cognitive abilities, socio-cultural values, past leadership experiences,
and leadership self-efficacy.
Personality. Most leadership research found that personality variables are strong
predictors of leader performance (Barrick & Mount, 1991; Hough, 1992). Tupes and
Christal (1992) identified five main human personality traits: extraversion, agreeableness,

34
conscientiousness, neuroticism, and openness. Originally created in 1961, this model is
known as the Big Five-Factor Model and has since been modeled and re-modified by
several other researchers on personality (Cattell, 1965; Costa & McCrae, 1992; Goldberg,
1981). Other researchers have found that dominance, masculinity-femininity,
authoritarianism, and intelligence were also connected to leader emergence (Hunter &
Hirsh, 1987; Lord, de Vader & Alliger, 1986). Chan therefore hypothesized that
personality constructs were distal antecedents of MTL (1999, p. 11).
Cognitive abilities. One of the earliest personal characteristics to be examined
with respect to the prediction of leader emergence was intelligence, or cognitive abilities.
Bass (1990) found a strong correlation between intelligence and leadership status or
leader emergence. Since Chan suggests a relationship between MTL and leader
emergence, cognitive ability is an antecedent to MTL.
Hong, Canto, and Liao (2011) investigated the role of emotional intelligence in
relation to MTL and the prediction of leadership. Their investigation studied two sets of
students, totaling over 400 participants, and the results suggested that students who tested
high in affective identity became leaders in leaderless discussions among their peers.
Those who scored high in social-normative MTL naturally assumed leadership roles in
longer-term projects. Their studies found that emotional intelligence was closely related
to affective identity and social-normative MTL and indirectly related to leadership
emergence among these students.
Socio-cultural values. While individual differences in personality and cognitive
ability are generally acknowledged as having some genetic basis, values are usually

35
accepted as individual differences that are acquired from one’s socio-cultural
environment. Research has shown that leadership takes on different meanings in
different societies and cultures (Trandis, 1995). Finally, several leadership theories also
suggest a link between values and leadership behavior or MTL. House’s (1977) theory of
charismatic leadership, for example, theorizes that such leaders tend to possess a strong
sense of their own moral values and influence their followers by articulating ideological
goals with a strong moralistic overtone.
Further, values represent different “motivational goals” and values can be
captured by ten distinctive motivational domains: power, achievement, hedonism,
stimulation, self-direction, universalism, benevolence, tradition, conformity, and security
(Schwartz and Bilsky,1987, 1990). In 1994, Schwartz reported that the ten motivational
domains could be reduced to two dimensions that corresponded to two fundamental
dimensions of social behavior: Conformity or security vs. self-direction or hedonism, and
power or achievement versus benevolence or universalism. Noting the similarities
between Schwartz’s two dimensions of values and other frameworks for social behavior
and values, Triandis (1995, 1998) proposed that differences in social behavior at the
individual and cultural levels may be described in terms of two general dimensions:
individualism-collectivism and vertical-horizontal. Singelis, Bhawuk, Gelfand and
Triandis (1995) developed a measure of vertical individualism, vertical collectivism,
horizontal collectivism, and horizontal individualism.
Past leadership experiences. Researchers have found that the amount of past
experience has a strong, direct influence on job performance (Quiñones, Ford, &
Teachout, 1995). In their Cognitive Resource Theory of Leadership, Fiedler and Garcia

36
(1987) suggest that a leader’s past work experience plays an important role in affecting
leader and group performance, especially in stressful situations. Chan, therefore,
hypothesized that the quantity and quality of past leadership experiences is both a
proximal and distal antecedent to MTL.
Leadership self-efficacy. Bandura (1982) defines self-efficacy as a personal
judgment of “how well one can execute courses of action required to deal with
prospective problems” (p. 122), and argues that efficacy beliefs are the most central and
pervasive mechanisms of personal agency. The self-efficacy construct has been adopted
as a motivational explanation of behaviors in different settings including educational,
clinical, and organizational (Bandura, Adams, Hardy, & Howells, 1980; Schunk, 1995;
Wood & Bandura, 1989). Self-efficacy appears as one of the main cognitive mechanisms
influencing career development (Lent, Brown & Hackett, 1994). Chan therefore
hypothesizes that the previous antecedents of MTL (personality, values, cognitive ability
and past leadership experiences) are related to MTL through leadership self-efficacy.
There is little research on the link between personality traits to social-cognitive
constructs (Langston & Sykes, 1997). Personality researchers try to develop constructs
that describe behaviors while social-cognitive researchers try to develop constructs that
predict behaviors. Motivation to lead theory attempts to link the two constructs.
Group Differences in MTL
Cultural differences. Cross-cultural psychologists generally agree that one of the
most important dimensions of cultural differences is individualism-collectivism (House,
Wright, & Aditya, 1997). Research has shown that individualism is very high in North
America and in Western Europe (Hofstede, 1980). On the other hand, many Asian, Latin

37
American, and African countries are highly collectivistic. Triandis (1995) reviewed the
scientific literature on individualism-collectivism and suggested that one of the major
ways in which individualists and collectivists differ is in the different extent to which
attitudes versus norms determine behavior. Chan hypothesized that affective MTL was
higher in individualist societies (United States) than in collectivist societies (Singapore).
Chan also hypothesized that social MTL was higher in collectivist societies than
individualistic societies (Chan, 1999, p. 19).
MTL in the Military
Several studies using Motivation to Lead theory include such organizations as the
military (both U.S. and international settings), colleges, businesses, hospitals, and the
high-tech industry. To date, there is no research on the motivation to lead of academic
librarians, let alone underrepresented minority academic librarians. The most popular
MTL research setting is the military.
A recent study looked at both personal and self-enhancement values of military
participants to try and predict participants’ motivation to lead (Clemmons & Fields,
2011). Examining 231 U.S. military personnel’s spirituality, integrity, and willingness to
serve as well as examining participants’ desire for power and for achievement, the
authors found that personal values made significant contributions in explaining all three
forms of MTL, especially in explaining non-calculative MTL. Self-enhancement values
(desire for achievement and power), on the other hand, had a larger, more positive
relationship with affective-identity and social-normative MTL than did selftranscendence values (desire for universalism and benevolence). They found instead that

38
self-transcendence values had a significantly larger relationship with non-calculative
MTL dimensions.
Summary
Chapter Two looked at the literature that focused on the recruitment and retention
efforts of underrepresented minority academic librarians of which there is little. It also
looked at the challenges underrepresented minority leaders face in academia as well as in
academic libraries. Finally, chapter two delved deeper into the literature on Motivation
to Lead Theory and set the stage for the current study by looking at how the theory was
used in military settings, which is how Chan originally developed the theory.
For years research in library literature has focused on the negative reasons why
underrepresented minority academic librarians are leaving the profession, but there is no
literature that looks at the positive reasons underrepresented minority academic librarians
choose to stay and what motivates them to pursue leadership positions. The next chapter
discusses the methods used in the study for investigating the motivation to lead of
underrepresented minority academic librarians.

CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY
The literature review in Chapter Two provided evidence that retention and
promotion rates of underrepresented minority academic librarians is disproportionate to
the number of underrepresented minority college students in the United States. Although
the literature shows recruitment of underrepresented minority academic librarians is
increasing, there is a simultaneous attrition of these same librarians owing to lack of
retention and promotion. The literature review also looks at Motivation to Lead Theory
and the motivation to lead of various populations from other professions. However, there
is no research that shows the motivation to lead in higher education, specifically the
motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic librarians who decide to stay in
a predominantly White profession.
Using a mixed methods design, the purpose of this study is to examine the
motivation to lead in a large sample of underrepresented minority academic librarians and
to explore a deeper understanding of their motivations through one-on-one interviews
with African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians. Understanding
these deeper issues could lead to increasing retention and promotion rates of
underrepresented minority in the profession. Using the Motivation to Lead measure
(MTL) (Appendix C) first developed by Chan (1999) and then revised by Chan &
Drasgow (2001), this study asked respondents to identify their motivation to lead in
predominantly White cultural environments, more specifically the academic library
environment. The second part of this study involves interviewing a small sample of

39

40
underrepresented minority academic librarians, specifically African American/Black and
Hispanic/Latin@, to further understand their motivation to lead. In answering the
research questions, and understanding the underrepresented minority academic librarians’
motivation to lead, this study helps to inform retention efforts and promotion.
The Case for Mixed Methods
Certain types of studies warrant a mixed methods research approach for various
reasons. These studies are those in which one data source is insufficient enough to
explain the bigger picture, and the results need to be further explained by another data
source (Creswell, 2008; Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). This study used mixed methods
because it seeks to enhance the understanding of its quantitative data, which was acquired
through an online survey tool. The benefits of using mixed methods occurs when the
researcher is focused on qualitatively examining a phenomenon, but needs initial
quantitative results to identify and purposefully select the best participants possible
(Creswell, 2008; Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). Mixed methods research combines
elements of qualitative and quantitative approaches in order to understand and
corroborate the breadth and depth of the study at hand (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011;
Johnson, Onwuegbuzie & Turner, 2007). Traditionally quantitative data provide a basic
understanding of a problem through the examination of a large number of people, while
qualitative data provide a detailed understanding of the same problem through studying a
few individuals and exploring their perspectives in greater depth (Creswell & Plano Clark,
2011).

41
The researcher collected data using a quantitative survey instrument and then
collected qualitative data based on interviews with participants to see if the two types of
data show similar results but from different perspectives (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011).
Surveys generally best fit quantitative research studies that seek to understand the views
of participants in large populations while interviews can help better understand the
perspective of a small, select group of individuals within the larger population (Creswell
& Plano Clark, 2011).
The first phase of this study is a quantitative exploration of participant
characteristics regarding their motivation to lead and exploring the relationships among
different variables within the survey. The second goal of this type of study is to find
interviewee participants. This phase of the study is a narrative inquiry into the
experiences of underrepresented minority academic librarians with the intention of
further delving into their personal experiences in order to gain a deeper understanding of
their motivation to lead in an academic library environment.
Using a mixed method research approach provides strengths that offset the
weaknesses of single method approaches. For example, quantitative research may not
completely illustrate the context or setting in which people engage and experience certain
phenomena being studied. The individual voices of participants are not taken into
consideration. Likewise, qualitative research designs alone can be seen as insufficient
and biased because of personal interpretations made by the researcher. These
interpretations and biases can then lead to unjustified generalizability of a larger
population (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011). A mixed methods approach provides the

42
researcher with more tools to collect the data needed in order to answer questions that
single research methods alone cannot answer.
Purpose of Study and Research Questions
The main research question serving as a guide to this study follows: In what ways
does understanding the role of motivation to lead play a role in the retention and
promotion of URM academic librarians? After exploring past and current literature on
motivation to lead, the following sub-questions will also be answered.
1. What factors influence an underrepresented minority librarian’s motivation to
lead in academic library setting?
2. Are there differences between current and aspiring academic librarians and their
motivation to lead in academic library settings? Does this vary by race/ethnicity?
A Proposed Integrated Model
The figure below incorporates the research reviewed in Chapter Two and
illustrates how that literature is related in this study. The model shows how the
motivation to lead, in conjunction with supportive administrators, is essential not only to
the recruitment of underrepresented minority librarians but also to increasing
underrepresented minority librarian retention and promotion, which in turn increases
underrepresented minority academic library leaders. Following this conceptual model
will hypothetically increase underrepresented minority librarian recruitment and continue
the cycle of increasing underrepresented minority academic library leaders.

43

Recruitment

Increasing
URM Library
Leaders

URM Librarian
Retention

MTL

Administration
Support

Figure 3.1: Proposed Integrated Model Showing How Understanding MTL May Increase
URM Library Leaders.
Design of the Study
In order to fully address the various research questions, this study uses an
explanatory mixed method design which combines both qualitative and quantitative data
sets. The purpose of using an explanatory design is to explain quantitative results in
more detail by incorporating qualitative data, “especially in terms of detailed voices and
participant perspectives because little is known about the mechanisms behind the trends”
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011, p. 151). This allowed the researcher to investigate the
study through both a broad and a narrow lens in order to provide a more in-depth analysis
of the study. According to Rudestam and Newton (2007), the strength of using a mixedmethods design allows the methods to inform one another through different levels of
analysis. The quantitative portion of the study used a survey instrument on a Likert scale
designed for measuring a person’s motivation to lead. The qualitative portion of the
study included one-on-one semi-structured interviews. By first conducting the

44
quantitative survey, a smaller sampling of potential interviewees for the qualitative
portion of the study was identified (Miles & Huberman, 1994).
The intent of using this method was to illuminate and explain the types of
underrepresented minority academic librarian motivation to lead and inform retention and
promotion efforts to help increase underrepresented minority librarians in academic
library leadership. Most importantly, this study explored ways in which current academic
library leaders can help support underrepresented minority librarians’ motivations to lead,
which would then increase underrepresented minority academic library leadership.
Using explanatory sequential timing in data collection and analysis, the researcher
first implemented the quantitative method of the study and then followed up with the
qualitative method. These two distinct phases were designed to start with the collection
and analysis of the Motivation to Lead survey instrument (Chan & Drasgow, 2001). This
phase was then immediately followed by the collection and analysis of qualitative data,
which included semi-structured interviews. The qualitative phase was designed to
interpret how the qualitative results help to inform the initial quantitative results
(Creswell & Clark Plano, 2011). It also allowed for emergent approaches to the second
phase to be based on findings from the initial quantitative phase.

45

Figure 3.2: Basic Procedures in Implementing an Explanatory Design
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011, p.84)

46
Research Site
This study was conducted nationally and focused on higher education academic
librarians in colleges and universities throughout the United States. More specifically it
sought out academic librarians from underrepresented minority backgrounds, specifically
African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ librarians, who are interested in positions
of leadership in academic libraries and current academic librarians from underrepresented
minority backgrounds who currently serve as leaders in their libraries. The initial survey
was emailed to the American Library Affiliate Associations whose members are from
predominantly underrepresented communities: American Indian Library Association
(AILA), Asian/Pacific Islander American Librarians Association (APALA), Black
Caucus of ALA (BCALA), Chinese American Librarians Association (CLA), and
REFORMA (National Association to Promote Library and Information Services to
Latinos and the Spanish-speaking). The survey was also emailed to various non-minority
library communities with the understanding that not all underrepresented minority
librarians are a part of underrepresented minority library communities. In addition, since
the researcher is also an academic librarian, the survey was emailed to known colleagues
around the country who were asked to disseminate via their email connections. The
researcher also used social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter to post the survey
and solicit participation.
Quantitative
The Motivation to Lead survey was administered through an online survey tool
known as SurveyMonkey and emailed to participants. These participants responded to
the survey either from a personal computer or from their work computers. Following the

47
sequential design model described above, the survey data helped identify the motivation
to lead identities of participants. In addition, the survey data provided a sample from
which some of the interview participants for Phase Two were selected. Finally, the
answers from this survey were analyzed along with the qualitative data in phase two in
order to find connections between the data sets.
Qualitative
The second phase of the study was conducted by phone or online via Skype. The
reason for this purposeful sampling of Phase Two interview participants was to help the
researcher better understand the central themes of the research at hand. The researcher
intentionally selected individuals from African American/Black or Hispanic/Latin@
backgrounds who work at predominantly White academic library institutions, although a
small number of the participants were from Hispanic Serving Institutes (HSI) and
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU).
Interviews, done via Skype or telephone, were conducted in settings where both
the researcher and the participant felt safe, comfortable, and had the least amount of
distraction. The researcher acquired a hand-held voice recorder from the Instructional &
Information Technology Services Department (IITS) at the California State University
San Marcos (CSUSM) campus to provide the best possible sound quality for recording
each of the interviews.
Participants
Survey participants. In order to gain as many participants as possible, the
sample in this portion of the study consisted of both White and underrepresented minority

48
academic librarians. The survey specifically asked these participants what were their
current positions in academic libraries and how long they have been in the profession.
These participants were asked to voluntarily complete the online surveys and indicate if
they would be willing to be contacted at a later date for a one-on-one interview. The
researcher contacted chairs/presidents of the ALA minority affiliate association groups
directly to inform them of the study in the hopes of increasing participation. The
researcher also emailed the survey to non- minority ALA affiliate association groups,
posted the survey to Facebook and Twitter, and emailed fellow academic librarians.
In order to raise more awareness and garner more interest in the study, the
researcher presented a poster of the proposed study at the 2013 Association of College
and Research Libraries (ACRL) Conference held in Indianapolis, Indiana. This poster
session introduced the concept of MTL theory in academic libraries, and the researcher
talked about the purpose of the study in the hopes of acquiring more avenues of
contacting more participants for the study. The researcher also attended the 2013 Annual
American Library Association (ALA) Conference in Chicago, Illinois, in order to
distribute business cards and collect business cards of people who might be interested in
participating in the study. Participants remained anonymous to the researcher unless the
participant decided s/he would like to be contacted at a later date for an interview, in
which case the survey prompted the participant to volunteer his/her contact information.
Interview participants. The second set of participants was taken from the survey
participants who indicated they were willing to be contacted for one-on-one interviews.
Twelve participants were interviewed: Six self-identified as Hispanic/Latin@ academic
librarians and six self-identified as African American/Black academic librarians. These

49
participants were a mixture of current academic library leaders and aspiring academic
library leaders. The selection criteria for these individuals were as follows. Participants
were from one or more of the following ethnic/racial groups: African American/Black,
Hispanic/Latin@. Typical of the nature of the profession, the majority of participants
were women, but the researcher specifically looked for male participants in order to
provide a balanced representation and perspective. Regionally speaking, the researcher
found underrepresented minority academic librarian participation from all parts of the
country. The interviews were conducted via Skype or over the telephone. The questions
asked during the interviews focused on the participants’ lived experiences as academic
librarians from underrepresented minority backgrounds working in predominantly White
academic libraries, though a small few were from HSIs or HBCUs. The questions used
an appreciative inquiry approach in order to elicit important moments in the participants’
experiences as underrepresented minority academic librarians.
Phase One (Quantitative)
After approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of both University of
California San Diego and California State University San Marcos, the researcher
conducted the study by using the following methods.
Participant Selection
The target population for the quantitative phase of this research study is all
academic librarians, regardless of race/ethnicity. The researcher had access to ALA
affiliate listservs such as REFORMA which has “over eight hundred members”
(REFORMA, 2011), but the researcher also sent the survey to non-underrepresented
minority listservs such as the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL)

50
listserv and the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) listserv in order to increase the
possible number of URM participants who may not be members of the URM affiliate
listservs and to reduce sampling errors. When conducting survey research, “it is
important to select a large sample as possible so that the sample will exhibit similar
characteristics to the target population” (Creswell, 2002, p. 401).
Measure
The first question asked if the participant agreed to be a part of the study. The
next six questions of the survey collected demographic information including the
participants’ race/ethnicity, type of library where they were currently working, number of
years as a librarian, and gender. In addition, the survey included background questions
such as whether the participant was currently working at an HSI/ HBCU.
The MTL measure is a 27-item Likert-type scale that measures a person’s
Affective Identity, Social-Normative Identity, and Non-Calculative Identity. The MTL
scale was created by Chan in 1999 and revised by Chan and Drasgow (2001). This study
used the revised 2001 survey because several studies have found validity in the
instrument (Amit, Lisak, Popper & Gal, 2007; Bobbio & Manganelli Rattazzi, 2006;
Maurer & Lippstreu, 2010). The MTL tool uses a five-point Likert scale with responses
ranging from (1) Strongly Disagree to (5) Strongly Agree. The scale has three distinct
factors (9 items each) that measure Affective Identity, Social-Normative Identity, and
Non-Calculative Identity.
Affective Identity items asked participants to rate such statements as “I usually
want to be the leader in the groups that I work in,” and “I am definitely not a leader by
nature (reverse scored). Statements such as “It’s an honor and privilege to be asked to

51
lead” and “I feel that I have a duty to lead others if I am asked” measured SocialNormative Identity. Finally, items measuring Non-Calculative Identity included phrases
such as “I would only agree to be group leader if I know I can benefit from the role” and
“I never expect to get more privileges if I agree to lead a group” (reverse scored).
Finally, the survey included a yes/no question that asked participants if they
would be willing to be contacted at a later date for follow-up interviews. If the
respondent replied no, the survey will thank the participant for his/her time and end at
that point. If the respondent replied yes, the participant will be directed to a page where
s/he can enter contact information.
Scale Reliability
In order to measure the reliability of the items that make up the MTL, Cronbach’s
alpha coefficient indicator was used to measure the internal consistency of the scale.
According to Pallant (2010; 2013), Cronbach alpha coefficient of a scale should be above
a .7, but these values are sensitive to the number of items in the scale; there were 27 items
in the MTL scale. Since some of the scale items are negatively worded, they were
reverse coded before checking reliability. Neither Chan’s original 1999 study nor the
revised 2001 (Chan & Drasgow) study ran a Cronbach on the MTL scale itself so this
study cannot compare to those. Instead the Chan and Drasgow ran Cronbach on the
antecedent scales which helped create the MTL. The reason they did this was an attempt
to give meaning to MTL by placing it in a “nomological network of relationships” (Chan
& Drasgow, 2001, p. 495) with some of the other scales and measures they used to create
the MTL, such as the Military Attitude Scale (.85), Big Five Personality Factors
(between .67 and .90), and Leadership Self-Efficacy (the three samples measured

52
between .76 to .83). Amit, Lisak, , Popper,, and Gal (2007) ran Cronbach’s Alpha and
found the internal consistency reliability for each identity was as follows: Affective = .89;
Non-Calculative = .82; Social-Normative = .78. In this current study, the Cronbach alpha
coefficient was .84 for all three identities: Affective Identity, Non-Calculative Identity,
and Social-Normative Identity.
Quantitative Data Collection
The researcher coordinated with the American Library Association, the
Association of College and Research Libraries, the Association of Research Libraries,
and their affiliates (such as REFORMA, BCALA, CALA, APALA, and AILA) to
distribute the link to the online survey via email. Potential participants received an email
invitation to complete the survey (see Appendix A). This national, online survey targeted
all academic librarians, regardless of race/ethnicity, in positions of academic library
leadership or seeking positions of academic library leadership.
The survey tool that was used to help answer this study’s research questions was
the Motivation to Lead Measure (MTL), created by Chan in 1999 and revised by Chan
and Drasgow in 2001. The researcher chose this tool for its potential to discover the
motivation to lead of current academic library leaders and possible future academic
library leaders. Data collected from these surveys was imported to Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences (SPSS) and coded for analysis.
MTL was first used by Dr. Chan in 1999 as a new leadership predictor. It has
since been used by various other scholars including Amit, Popper, Gal, Miskal-Sinai, and
Lissak (2006), Kark and Van Dijk (2007), and Gottfried, Gottfried, Reichard, Guerin,
Oliver and Riggio (2011). The MTL is a 27-question survey designed to identify

53
personality characteristics that will predict a person’s willingness for and acceptance of
certain leadership positions.
The demographic sections of the survey includes questions that seek information
regarding age, gender, ethnicity, number of years in academic librarianship, number of
years in academic library leadership, number of years at current library, library’s
collection size, and library’s type of institution (two-year, four-year, tier-one research
institution). The final question on the survey asked participants if they want to be
contacted for a one-to-one interview.
Quantitative Data Analysis
The researcher analyzed data collected in various ways in order to both explore
possible relationships and explore any differences there might be between groups. In
order to indicate the direction and strength of the relationship between two continuous
variables, a Pearson correlation was used. Finally a factor analysis was run to identify
which variables were the most important in the survey.
Analysis of the quantitative survey results included descriptive statistics, showing
the demographics of respondents; the number of respondents who scored high on the
Affective identity scale; the number of respondents who scored high on the Social
Normative scale; and the number of respondents who scored high on the Non-Calculative
scale. Independent sample t-tests were run to analyze differences in the MTL scales
between males and females on the MTL scales. To test the individual different constructs
of MTL (Affective Identity, Social-Normative Identity, and Non-Calculative Identity),
the researcher used separate ANOVAs to examine the differences between
White/Caucasian and African American/Black & Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians,

54
and different library leaders on the MTL scales. Finally, the researcher conducted a
factor analysis to examine the relation of various factors to the motivation to lead of
URM academic librarians (Creswell, 2008; Pallant, 2010).
Phase Two (Qualitative)
Narrative inquiry is a description of individual experiences by collecting and
analyzing data from interviews. The purpose of this method is to reveal the untold story
not found in a quantitative analysis phase. The researcher conducted semi-structured
interviews with twelve participants. Semi-structured interviews are “neither an everyday
conversation nor a closed questionnaire” (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009, p. 27). Therefore,
the protocol merely provided suggested questions and the actual questions asked
sometimes differed somewhat from interview to interview. According to Kvale and
Brinkmann (2009), this type of dynamic and open-ended interviewing provides the
richest data. Questions for the interviews are based on the literature regarding motivation
to lead theory and retention of underrepresented minority academic librarians. Questions
for the interviews were also based on emergent findings from the quantitative survey
results (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2011; Greene, Caracelli, & Graham, 1989).
Participant Selection
During the quantitative (first) phase of the study, one of the questions asked if
participants would like to be contacted for an interview. The researcher contacted twelve
participants to be interviewed. These twelve participants include three self-identified
Hispanic/Latino males, three self-identified Hispanic/Latina females and six selfidentified African American/Black females. Participants in this second phase of the study
were a mixture of current academic library leaders and aspiring academic library leaders.

55
These populations were purposefully selected because the study looked at the motivation
to lead of Hispanic/Latin@ and African American/Black academic librarians.
Qualitative Data Collection
Interviews. Using narrative inquiry approach, the goal of each interview was to
spotlight the experiences of Hispanic/Latin@ and African American/Black academic
librarians who are currently academic library leaders or aspiring to be academic library
leaders. Preskill and Catsambas (2006) state that the role of narrative inquiry is to learn
more about the respondent beyond his/her likes and dislikes through building
relationships and creating opportunities for respondents to share their stories. Each
interview lasted approximately one hour and all participants were asked the same set of
basic questions. Before beginning each interview, participants were given a consent form
(Appendix B) that includes consent to participate in the interview and have the interview
recorded. In addition to recording the interviews, the researcher also took detailed notes.
Interview questions were designed to engage each participant in a trusting dialog with the
researcher: “At the root of in-depth interviewing was an interest in understanding the
lived experience of other people and the meaning they make of that experience”
(Seidman, 2006, p. 9). Open-ended questions were asked in order to gain a better
understanding of each participant’s experiences. After each interview was fully
transcribed by a paid student assistant, the researcher sent a copy of the transcript to the
participant to ensure the information was accurate and representative of what was shared
in the interview (Grbich, 2013).

56
Qualitative Data Analysis
Interview transcripts were analyzed as soon as the interviews had been transcribed
by a paid student assistant. Themes were identified through coding interview transcripts.
Initially the researcher coded interview responses based on hypothesis coding, but in
order to ensure the accurate representation of URM academic librarian voices, in vivo
coding was also used. In vivo coding is the task of assigning a word or short phrase from
parts of the interview transcript and using those words/phrases as guiding codes. The
goal in vivo coding is to ensure that concepts remain as true as possible to the
participants' own words in order to best capture key elements of what is being discussed
(Saldaña, 2013).
Reliability and Validity of Qualitative Results
In the desire to improve accuracy of the qualitative phase of this study, the
researcher asked each participant to review his/her interview transcript. The purpose of
this narrative member check was to ensure the researcher represented each participant
accurately and to allow participants to check for completeness. In addition to correcting
errors and challenging misinterpretations, member checking also gave the participant an
opportunity to elaborate on his/her answers to questions. This allowed the researcher to
delve deeper into understanding the data.
Ethical Considerations
Within the context of this study, there were several ethical issues to consider and
guard against. Minimizing risks to participants was the primary concern for the
researcher. It is possible that some participants may have experienced various levels of
distress or discomfort as they discussed their lived experiences as underrepresented

57
minority academic librarians. Some participants may have felt uncomfortable revealing
in-depth, personal information for fear of retaliation from their institutions. To address
this issue, the researcher took several steps to ensure all participants of their
confidentiality and explained how all identifiable information would be protected and
redacted from the study.
Summary
This chapter described in detail the research steps and the limitations for this
mixed methods study on the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic
librarians. Survey and interview data from one-on-one interviews of underrepresented
minority academic librarians who are currently library leaders or aspiring academic
library leaders were gathered to answer the research questions. The next chapter will
discuss, in detail, the study’s findings.

CHAPTER FOUR: RESULTS
This chapter presents quantitative and qualitative data findings related to the
motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic librarians. The study design
includes the analysis of survey data from a national sample of 245 participants (n=245)
using the Motivation to Lead (MTL) scale originated by Chan in 1999, revised by Chan
and Drasgow in 2001, and subsequently used by several other researchers. In the second
phase of the study, the researcher identified and interviewed participants then analyzed
the lived experiences of those 12 underrepresented minority academic librarians,
specifically African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@, who were in leadership
positions or who were actively seeking leadership positions at the time of data collection.
Six of the participants identified as African American/Black females; three identified as
Hispanic/Latinas, and three participants self-identified as Hispanic/Latinos. Using
Motivation to Lead as the theoretical framework, the researcher used narrative analysis to
give voice to underrepresented academic librarians in a predominantly White profession.
Organization of Chapter
The researcher begins with the quantitative results of the Motivation to Lead
(MTL) survey. First, a breakdown of the demographic profiles is done to give the reader
a basic understanding of the participants in this study and compare the study’s
participants to national population found in the ACRL statistics. Next, the researcher
provides the basic breakdown of the MTL identities (Affective Identity, Non-Calculative
Identity, and Social Normative Identity) in order to provide context for the statistical

58

59
analyses. Following the MTL identities, the researcher provides statistical analyses,
using SPSS v. 20, to examine each of the MTL identities by various subgroups. The
researcher then discusses findings and themes in the qualitative analysis portion of this
chapter by first providing background information on the twelve interview participants.
Finally, the researcher focuses deeper on the emerging themes discovered through the
interviews and finishes with a summary of results for both quantitative and qualitative
analysis.
MTL Survey Analysis
Study demographic profile. The researcher coded and entered data from the
MTL survey results into SPSS. The demographic of the survey participants (n=245)
generally reflected that of the national population of academic librarians, although the
study sample had a much higher representation of women, African-American/Black, and
Hispanic/Latin@ librarians because the researcher was trying to get more participants
from those backgrounds. In the study sample, 82 percent of the survey participants were
female, compared to 70 percent in the general population of academic librarians in the
United States. In terms of race-ethnicity, the largest racial group in the study sample was
White (52%), followed by African American/Black (20%), Hispanic/Latin@ (13%),
Asian/Pacific Islander (7%), and Other (8%) which included biracial/multi-racial
respondents and those who did not readily fit into the other racial/ethnic categories. In
terms of the national population of academic librarians, the largest racial/ethnic category
is White (86%), followed by African-American/Black (5%), Asian/Pacific Islander (5%),
Hispanic/Latin@ (3%), and Other (1%). Table 4.1 shows a demographic comparison
between the current study and the national population of academic librarians.

60
Respondents were asked to self-report the number of years they had worked in the
profession. The librarians participating in this study have been in the profession ranging
from less than one year to over 30 years. Table 4.1 shows that most of the academic
librarians participating in this study were fairly new to the profession, with the following
distributions: less than one year (2%), 1-4 years (27%), 5-9 years (20%), 10-14 years
(16%), 15-19 years (12%), 20-24 years (9%), 25-29 years (8%), and 30 or more years
(6%). About half (49%) had fewer than 10 years of experience working as academic
librarians, regardless of the actual position they held. Finally, of the 245 surveys collected
and analyzed, 21 percent came from HSI/HBCUs and 79 percent did not.
Table 4.1: Demographic Profile of Academic Librarians in Study and Nationally (in
percentages)
Study Sample
(n=245)
Gender
Race/Ethnicity

Female
Male
African
American/Black
Asian/Pacific
Islander
Hispanic/Latin@
White/Caucasian
Other

National Sample
(n=26,954)

82%
18
20

70%
30
5

7

5

13
52
8

3
86
1

Source: http://www.ala.org/offices/sites/ala.org.offices/files/content/diversity/diversitycounts/diversitycountstables2012.pdf

The MTL Identities
Motivation to Lead is a construct for understanding individual differences in
leader behavior through personality, values, self-efficacy, and past leadership experiences.
The scale is split into three major identities: Affective, Non-Calculative, and Social

61
Normative. Each identity measures the motivation to lead on its own 5-point scale.
Following are descriptions of each identity and their average (Mean, Standard Deviation)
for each.
Affective Identity. People who score high on the Affective Identity Scale tend to
enjoy leading others and see themselves as natural leaders. These people are generally
outgoing, social people who value competition and achievement. People who score high
on affective leadership generally have had more leadership experience and express more
confidence in their leadership abilities. The average for Affective Identity was the lowest
of the three motivation to lead identities (M = 3.28, SD = .71).
Non-Calculative Identity. Participants who score high in the non-calculative
motivation to lead scale generally value harmony and tend to be non-confrontational in
their relationships with other people. These individuals lead only if they are not
calculative about the costs relative to the benefits of being a leader. The participants who
scored high on Non-Calculative Identity, also scored equally high on the Social
Normative scale or the Affective Identity scale. The average for Non-Calculative
Identity was the highest of the three groups (M = 3.86, SD = .58)
Social Normative Identity. Those who scored high on the social-normative scale
generally lead out of a sense of obligation, duty, and responsibility to outside entities.
These individuals are motivated by a strong sense of social duty, are extremely
conscientious, and are highly agreeable. This average for Social Normative Identity fell
in the middle of the three groups (M = 3.33, SD = .47).

62
MTL Comparisons by Subgroup
Analyses were run to examine each of the MTL identities (Affective Identity,
Non-Calculative Identity, and Social Normative Identity) by various subgroups of the
survey respondents, namely gender, race/ethnicity, and current position to see if there
were mean differences. It was determined there was little to no statistical significance
among the means (Table 4.2).
Table 4.2: Mean Motivation to Lead (MTL) Identities by Subgroup
Type of MTL Identity
Affective
Non-Calculative Social-Normative
Gender
Female
3.28
3.86
3.33
Male
3.29
3.84
3.31
Race/Ethnicity
Afr. American/Black
3.25
3.91
3.18
Asian/Pacific Islander
2.97
3.63
3.31
Hispanic/Latin@
3.24
3.79
3.36
White/Caucasian
3.37
3.88
3.37
Other
3.21
3.88
3.30
Position
Dean
3.58
3.82
3.38
Associate Dean
3.65
3.86
3.34
Department Head
3.34
3.97
3.31
Academic Librarians
3.10
3.83
3.31
Gender. Table 4.3 (Appendix E) shows that both male and female academic
librarians show higher scores for Non-Calculative Identity and lower scores for Affective
Identity and Social Normative Identity, although the differences between males and
females on three MTL identities were not statistically significant based on separate
independent samples t-test analyses. There was no difference in the scores for males (M=
3.29, SD= .72) and females (M=3.28, SD= .70) on Affective Identity; males (M= 3.84,
SD=.60) and females (M= 3.86, SD= .57) on Non-Calculative Identity and males

63
(M=3.31, SD= .55) and females (M= 3.33, SD= .45) on Social Normative Identity.

This

suggests that both male and female participants in this study do not measure the cost or
benefits greatly when they are considering what motivates them to take on leadership
positions. Instead, they are motivated by the pleasure of leading and the feeling of social
obligation.
Race/Ethnicity. Survey data were examined to see if there were differences in
the motivation to lead identities by participants’ self-reported race/ethnicity. Table 4.4
(Appendix F) shows that although participants scored higher on Non-Calculative identity,
analysis of variance (ANOVA) analyses found that there were no statistical significances
on the MTL scale identities by the different race/ethnicity groups. This suggests that that
the participating ethnic groups in the national survey do not calculate the costs and
benefits for taking and seeking leadership positions. Instead the analysis suggests these
participants are more motivated to lead based on the pleasure of leading others and their
desires to fulfill a sense of social obligation.
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used in this study to determine
whether there were any significant differences between the means of independent
(unrelated) groups. The ANOVA cannot tell which specific groups were significantly
different so in order to determine that information, post-hoc tests were also run for the
ANOVAs that showed significant differences among the mean scores. In this study, the
first between-groups ANOVA run was on comparing the mean scores of race/ethnicity
and their motivations to lead (Appendix G). Since none of the Sig. values were less
than .05, there was no statistical significance among the mean scores of race/ethnicity in
this study and their motivations to lead.

64
Position. For the purpose of this study, the term “current library leader” is
identified by librarians who fall under the categories of Dean, Associate Dean, and
Department Head. The term “aspiring library leader” is identified by all other academic
librarian positions. Statistically there was a significant difference in the motivation to
lead of respondents based on their current position in libraries. Table 4.6 (Appendix H)
reveals the ANOVA run for librarian position and their motivations to lead shows a
statistically significant difference among librarian positions for Affective Identity (F(3,
229) = 7.75, p = .000). This is not surprising because, as stated previously, people who
score higher on the Affective Identity scale generally have more leadership experience.
Current library leaders in this study have been in the profession an average of more than
10 years.
Post-hoc tests were run to identify where the significant differences occurred
among the mean scores. Tukey post-hoc comparisons found that Deans (M = 3.58) and
Associate Deans (M=3.65) gave higher ratings than Academic Librarians (M = 3.10).
Comparisons between Department Heads (M = 5.11) and the other three groups were not
statistically significant at p < .05. The significance of this finding will be discussed in
more detail in Chapter Five.
Factor Analysis
A principal component analysis was run to determine whether the sub-constructs
(MTL identities) identified in earlier research on motivation to lead were found with this
sample of academic librarians. In validation studies, Chan found the 27 survey items
loaded onto three factors or identities (Affective Identity, Non-Calculative Identity,
Social –Normative Identity) in military populations (Amit, Lisak, Popper, & Gal, 2007;

65
Chan & Drasgow, 2001; Maurer & Lippstreu, 2010), with university students (Bobbio &
Manganelli Rattazzi , 2006; Chan, Rounds, & Drasgow, 2000; Hong, Catano & Liao,
2011), and with managers and sales associates in retail (Taylor, 2012).
In this study, first, a Kaiser Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy (KMO)
was run to see if the value was .6 or above and the Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity value
was .05 or smaller. The value for this study was .81, exceeding the recommended value
of .6, and Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity was statistically significant at .000 demonstrating
p< .05. These results supported the factorability of the correlated matrix.
In order to extract the correct information, using Kaiser’s criterion, the researcher
was only interested in components that have an eigenvalue of 1 or more. An inspection
of the screeplot revealed a clear break after the third component (Figure 4.1). The threecomponent solution explained a total of 43.76 percent of the variance, which was
consistent with the original Motivation to Lead findings (Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow
2001). Upon closer examination of Table 4.8 (Appendix J), the researcher found that four
of the questions loaded differently than the original studies, but this could be a result of
the different populations involved in the research. The original studies focused on
military and university students from Singapore and the United States, while the current
study focused on academic librarians in the United States. The researcher found that all
of the Affective Identity components loaded as expected, but there were two questions
from Non-Calculative and two questions from Social-Normative that loaded slightly
higher on the Affective Identity component. Question 8h (“I have more of my own
problems to worry about than to be concerned about the rest of the group”) loaded as
a .399 on Affective Identity but higher on its own Non-Calculative component with

66
at .543 so this is not statistically significant. The three questions that rated higher on
Affective Identity were 8i (“Leading others is a waste of one’s personal time and effort”),
9a (“I feel that I have a duty to lead others”), and 9c (“I was taught in the value of leading
others”). The researcher believes that because of the wording of these questions and
because librarians generally enjoy helping people, respondents answered these questions
based on the mindset of wanting to lead others and feeling pleasure in doing so.

Figure 4.1: Factor Analysis Scree Plot
Data from the national survey helped broadly describe the motivation to lead of
academic librarians. Findings from the survey show these participants are motivated to
lead, not based on the benefits and rewards they may perceive from the profession (NonCalculative Identity), but on the pleasure of leading others and their social obligations to
leadership. In order to look more closely at the motivations to lead of African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians, the qualitative phase of this

67
study asked participants to describe their motivations to lead in greater detail. These
results told a somewhat different story than the national survey results.
Qualitative Results
The qualitative portion of this study explored the lived experiences of
underrepresented minority academic librarians in predominantly White academic library
environments, as well as those in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI) and Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU). The research participants were selected based
on the purpose and nature of the current study. The selected sample included 12
underrepresented minority academic librarians who self-identified as both current library
leaders and aspiring library leaders (Academic Librarians). In order to make an informed
decision about participating in the qualitative portion of the study, each participant was
given a copy of the interview protocol, which included the purpose and nature of the
study (Appendix D). Participants were also given a consent form to sign before the
interview took place (Appendix B). The researcher interviewed six self-identified
African American/Black females, three self-identified Hispanic/Latino males, and three
self-identified Hispanic/Latina females. For the purpose of this study, the term “current
library leader” is identified by librarians who fall under the categories of Dean, Associate
Dean, and Department Head. The term “aspiring library leader” is identified by all other
academic librarian positions. As such, there were seven aspiring library leaders and five
current library leaders. At the time of the study, four participants identified as working in
an HBCU or an HSI, while eight stated they were not currently working at an HBCU/HSI.

68
The participants’ involvement in this phase of the study was also completely
voluntary, and their privacy was guaranteed in writing by the researcher. As a result,
participants chose their own pseudonyms to replace their real names, and the researcher
only used regional identification terms instead of the real names of their universities. All
interviews took place via the telephone or video conferencing, based on the participants’
levels of comfort and availability. Although phone interviews were more cost-effective
and convenient for participants, the researcher acknowledges that this form of
interviewing had its limits. For example, the researcher could not observe and interpret
the participants’ body language and facial reactions to questions asked.
The interviews took place during the months of October and November of 2013
and also January 2014. The researcher recorded the audio from each interview with the
permission of each participant. Each audio recording was transcribed by a paid student
assistant. These transcriptions were checked both by the researcher and the participants to
ensure that the participants were represented correctly in their interviews. In-vivo coding
was used by the researcher to develop themes from each interview. The researcher
compiled codes from each interview in order to gather the necessary information that
would thoughtfully and correctly represent each participant’s lived experience. The
codes that emerged will be discussed in more detail below and in Chapter Five. While
the intention of the study was to collect the lived experiences of each participant’s
motivation to lead as an underrepresented minority academic librarian, the researcher
noted that some of the participant’s motivation to lead changed from their individual
responses on the initial survey. The sections below give a summary of each participant’s
lived experience.

69
Qualitative Findings
The findings in the qualitative phase of the study are presented in various forms
including tables, direct quotes from the participants’ interviews, and themes identified by
the researcher. Findings revealed that participants were motivated to lead based on a
strong desire to make a positive change in academic libraries, to help their communities,
and to pave the way for other underrepresented minority academic librarians to become
leaders as well. In order to remain in their careers, participants self-identified several
factors that helped them succeed. Those factors included self-confidence, mentors,
networking outside their libraries, and persistence.
Categories used in this qualitative phase coincide with Chan’s Motivation to Lead
Theory; therefore; this chapter analyzes participant interviews using Affective Identity,
Non-Calculative Identity, and Social Normative Identity. First, the researcher briefly
describes emerging themes from the interviews and then provides participant biographies
based on their survey results and the identities in which they scored the highest during the
quantitative phase of the study. Finally, the researcher provides results to each interview
question
Emerging Themes
Obligation. Most of the participants in this second phase felt like they had to
lead based on a sense of obligation. That obligation was either because they felt no one
else would “step-up” or the job would not be performed to their high standards. There
were also feelings of obligation based on the fact that most of these participants were in
the clear minority at their institutions and no one else from their race/ethnicities could
represent their voices. Some of the participants stated they took leadership positions in

70
their libraries because they felt obligated to “pave the way” for other underrepresented
minorities to not only join the profession, but to become leaders themselves. The
participants who stated this felt a sense of obligation to those who came before them and
wanted to “pay it forward” by creating more opportunities for other underrepresented
minority librarians entering the field.
Lack of diversity. Another strong, recurring theme that surfaced in the
interviews was the disappointment in the progress of diversity in the profession. Several
of the participants revealed they were the only person of color in their libraries. There
was a strong perception that current academic library leaders were not doing enough to
properly recruit, and especially retain and promote, underrepresented minority librarians
in the profession. A majority of the interviewees expressed a sense of frustration with the
lack of opportunity provided to librarians currently in the field as they spoke of being
boxed into “diversity” positions and not offered other leadership roles. Many of these
librarians felt they needed to seek leadership positions outside their libraries in order to
receive the leadership experience they needed to succeed. Others spoke of being the lone
Hispanic/Latin@ or African American/Black voice at the table and needed to represent
the whole of their ethnic backgrounds.
Reward. Finally, many of the librarians in this qualitative portion of the study
revealed they had a sense of reward and the positive feelings associated with doing a
good job and helping others. Participants stated that they genuinely enjoyed helping
patrons with research and participating in the daily academic discourse with other
scholars. Some of the participants stated how excited they were that they were considered
faculty and had the opportunity to travel and present their own research at national and

71
international conferences. Many used these opportunities to connect with other
underrepresented minority librarians and network with other institutions.
Participant Biographies Based on MTL Identities
Table 4.6 (Appendix H) shows a brief synopsis of each participant’s background
and his or her scoring on the Motivation to Lead scale. A majority of these interview
participants scored highest on Social Normative scale, and a more detailed analysis of the
interview data supports this statistical finding.
Affective Identity
Isabel Woods. Ms. Woods works at a Hispanic Serving Institution and selfidentifies as an African American female. She scored highest on the Affective Identity
Scale, but her responses to the interview questions showed that she seemed to lead more
based on a sense of obligation, which falls under the Social Normative Identity scale. To
her, academic library leadership is defined as “the group of librarians ranging from a
dean/director down to the department heads/chairs, who work together to provide a
strategic plan for the library while also ensuring that the plan is successfully carried out.”
Ms. Woods is currently a department head within the reference and instruction
department at her institution. She has been a librarian for over 10 years, and all of those
years she has spent in academic libraries. Her responsibilities increased over the years,
and she has worked in four academic libraries as a professional librarian. In addition to
her responsibilities as a department head, Ms. Woods is also currently responsible for
campus outreach activities, collection management, and liaison work with several
academic departments.

72
When asked why she became a librarian, Ms. Woods stated that she was looking
for a “safe” place to work. The word “safe” was later clarified to mean that she wanted a
place where she could do intellectual work because she came from a home environment
that was not centered on academia or “book smarts.” Although her family and friends
back home were smart, she wanted to be in an environment where she could engage in
academic and thoughtful discourse. As an undergraduate, Ms. Woods had the
opportunity to work in her university library. She found that she really enjoyed helping
people and loved looking for information. This is when she discovered that a career in
librarianship would allow her to “be an intellectual, do research, and still help people in a
‘safe’ environment.” Those reasons have not changed over the years, but Ms. Woods
insists they are no longer fulfilling. Those reasons “no longer make as much sense to
[her] as they did 10 years ago.” When asked to elaborate on those feelings, Ms. Woods
went on to explain that she feels frustrated with the profession. Although she is in a
leadership position, she feels discouraged and feels she is being sabotaged by some of her
coworkers.
When asked what she thought current academic library administrators need to
know to better support African American/Black librarians, Ms. Woods said that they need
to know that any underrepresented minority academic librarian is no different than
anyone else in regards to their skills and abilities. She says that URM academic
librarians “don’t need or like to be micromanaged” and that all librarians, regardless of
race/ethnicity, should be treated equally. Unless the URM librarian is specifically hired
to be a leader of a diversity initiative, the only leadership expectations an academic

73
library administrator should have for URM librarians should be within the specific area
of hire.
Ms. Woods leads out of a sense of obligation and feels that if no one else steps up,
she will do it herself. She wants to give back to other librarians who struggled with their
careers and feels the only reward she would receive would be to know that these
librarians were doing better than she did or that they achieved their career goals.
Ms. Woods says that she came in to a “broken organization” and she no longer
feels her current position as a department head offers her the same fulfillment she
experienced ten years ago. Because of a power struggle within her current institution,
there was a general feeling of deception and negativity. As a result, Ms. Woods found
herself in a library department that “on the surface claimed they wanted a new leader and
change, but that has fought tooth and nail to avoid any type of change, even slight
change.” She feels that she is being sabotaged by her colleagues and not getting any
support from her superiors. Consequently Ms. Woods is considering leaving not only her
work environment but the library profession all together, “The culture of this library, in
combination with the previous place I worked, have affected my motivation to stay and
lead by making me NOT want to stay and never want to lead again”. She feels she is not
equipped with the skills needed to be a successful leader in this particular environment
and needs new skills if she wants to be able to go back to helping others. Ms. Woods will
be leaving the profession at the end of 2014 to either return to school to pursue a PhD or
start a home business. After ten years of being an academic librarian, Ms. Woods feels
she has “had enough” and has “taken enough punishment from this field to last a lifetime.”

74
Non-Calculative Identity
None of the interview participants scored solely on the Non-Calculative Identity
scale.
Social Normative Identity
KR Librarian. Ms. KR Librarian self-identifies as a Hispanic female and has
been an academic librarian since 2007. She scored highest on the Social Normative
Identity scale. While earning her master’s degree in library science, Ms. KR Librarian
was also a graduate assistant in the academic library where she is currently working as a
tenured, full-time instruction librarian. She did not intentionally plan to be a librarian,
but her background in teaching and her master’s degree in linguistics lead her down the
academic librarian path. After teaching abroad for many years, Ms. KR Librarian
decided it was time for a career change. She was offered a sizable scholarship and a
graduate assistant position at a library school and decided to continue on the path.
Originally Ms. KR Librarian took the librarian position because it was a good
opportunity and she liked the salary and her colleagues. She found that she was able to
incorporate some of her “old skills” as a teacher into her new position as an instructional
designer. It was a nice meld of both worlds, and she felt like she could use her creativity;
however, there are many challenges in her current library that are discouraging her from
remaining in the profession. According to Ms. KR Librarian, her library has gone through
many drastic changes without any reasons or understanding as to why the new changes
were made. There is a new dean in her library, so she is hoping for some positive
changes. For example, there are several vacant librarian positions due to budget crises;
she is hoping this new dean can help balance the budget and hire some, if not all, of those

75
vacant positions. Ms. KR Librarian also mentioned the need for a better leadership
structure. Her library is considered a flat organization where no formal department heads
are hired. The problems Ms. KR Librarian sees with this structure is that people who
take on team leader positions are not always qualified to lead their groups. It sometimes
appears that these new team leaders only take on the role of team leader for the extra
money. Her hope is that the new library dean will see the flaws in this flat organizational
layout and make positive changes that will benefit the library and give leadership
responsibilities to others.
When asked why she did not apply for a team leader position, Ms. KR Librarian
stated it was because she felt discouraged. Her former dean sent her to the Minnesota
Institute for Early Career Librarians, but when she returned, she was not given the
opportunity to show what she had learned in the institute. There was no follow-up either
from her dean or from the Minnesota Institute itself. She said she would consider
applying for a team leader position, but there just is not the opportunity to do so because
the current team leaders generally stay until they retire. The increase in salary gives them
less incentive to leave. Ms. KR Librarian said that current library administrators need to
give URM librarians more opportunities to lead. They need to start with putting URM
librarians in charge of projects and gradually increase responsibilities.
Ms. KR Librarian feels she leads out of a sense of obligation. Not only does she
want to prove herself as a leader, she wants to set an example to other URM librarians
and bring more diverse populations to the profession. Her sense of obligation is more
than to her library or to diverse populations; it is an obligation to herself. She wants to
show her management style and knows that she can be an effective leader in her

76
institution and in the profession. When asked if there are any other issues she wanted to
bring up in the interview, Ms. KR Librarian admitted that the only reason she stays in the
profession is because she is a single mother. She says she has a good salary and is
tenured at her institution, but she knows she could make more money in the corporate
world. Unfortunately she is not comfortable leaving the security of her library position to
take a chance on the private sector.
Biblio Beagle. Ms. Beagle scored highest on the Social Normative Identity scale;
yet her interview seems to reflect that she leads more out of a sense of desire (Affective
Identity). As an academic librarian for six years, Ms. Beagle self-identifies as a Hispanic
female. Before becoming an academic librarian, Ms. Beagle worked in a public library
and then later became a staff person in an academic library. It was her time as a staff
person in an academic library that made Ms. Beagle want to be an academic librarian.
She decided to take a position far away from her home at a predominately White
university in the mid-west. Unlike many of the participants in this study, Ms. Beagle’s
experiences as an academic librarian are very positive.
Ms. Beagle is currently the instruction coordinator and multicultural librarian.
She also serves as a library liaison to several interdisciplinary departments on her campus
and handles the collection development for these areas. The instruction coordinator is a
new aspect of Ms. Beagle’s job, and she is still trying to navigate her way through this
new position. When asked how she is combating this challenge, Ms. Beagle states that
she works in a very supportive environment. In addition to providing support during the
transition from multicultural librarian to her current position, her library helped lead her
through the tenure process and supported her research agenda. As a result, Ms. Beagle

77
was able to earn tenure a full year earlier than expected. She says there is a strong
informal mentoring process at her institution and there is an expectation for all librarians
to lead in one form or another.
Ms. Beagle thinks that academic library administrators need to understand the
challenges URM librarians face, which sometimes include geographic locations.
Although Ms. Beagle came from a predominantly Latin@ city/state, she was made to feel
comfortable in her new predominantly White environment. She says it is because she
was never made to feel a “token” and was provided with leadership opportunities right
away. As a result, Ms. Beagle feels her background (not race) has helped her thrive in
her current institution. Since a large majority of her current student population is White,
a great percentage of those students are also first-generation college students from lowsocioeconomic backgrounds, just like Ms. Beagle. She connects with these students
based on lived experiences rather than ethnic or racial background.
Although Ms. Beagle is seemingly happy at her current library and enjoys taking
some leadership roles, she does feel a sense of frustration when her colleagues do not step
up and lead. She then feels obligated to take on more leadership roles in order to get the
desired outcome her library needs.
Paul Rose. Mr. Rose is an academic librarian who works at a large research one
institution, and he scored highest on the Social Normative Identity scale. He self
identifies as a Mexican-American male. When asked how he defines academic library
leadership, Mr. Rose says there are three components: the willingness to step forward, the
obligation to speak up, and finally the opportunity to mentor others. Mr. Rose uses these
components in his leadership style. He has been a librarian since 1995 and worked at

78
several university libraries until he came to his current institution in 2001. Mr. Rose is
currently managing several units in this library, including the cataloging, the acquisitions,
and the maps departments.
One of the main reasons Mr. Rose became a librarian was because someone
recommended it to him. He was working in the interlibrary loan department at his
undergraduate university when the Government Documents Librarian told him about
opportunities in library science. At that time, Mr. Rose worked in a very supportive
environment and was encouraged to seek his master’s degree. Another reason Mr. Rose
wanted to become a librarian is because he saw it as a “very accepting” and “liberal”
profession. He found his politics coincided with the politics of librarianship: “freedom of
information,” “open access,” and intellectual challenge. When asked if his reasons for
becoming an academic librarian have changed over the years, Mr. Rose said no.
While Mr. Rose is in a supportive environment and enjoys his management
position, he still faces some challenges when it comes to supervising some of his
subordinates. Part of those challenges is trying to motivate them and dealing with
problem workers. He has the fundamental belief that people generally want to be
productive so he approaches difficult persons with this mind-set. He does not get “hung
up on the process” and instead lets his subordinates get the job done the way that works
for them. For the most part, this mentality has helped Mr. Rose deal with difficult
situations, but on rare occasions, he has had to take it up to the top. On those very rare
occasions, the problem worker had to be terminated.

79
Still, Mr. Rose enjoys working at his current institution and reminds himself of
the mission of the library each time he faces a difficult decision. He believes in what his
library is trying to do as an organization and believes that his relationships with current
administrators (and his co-workers) are positive and “everyone is buying into the bigger
mission”. Part of that mission means understanding the diversity of the campus
community. Mr. Rose believes current administrators need to hire people from diverse
backgrounds to reflect the community in order to “relate to our users and be able to then
allow them to fulfill their goals and objectives....”
As a follow up to that answer, Mr. Rose was not sure if his race/ethnicity plays
out in his motivation to lead in his current library. He says he is a product of his
experiences, which includes race and ethnicity to some degree, but he does not
necessarily approach academic librarianship from that perspective. Instead Mr. Rose
provides his expertise based on his evaluation of each situation, not necessarily his
identity as a Hispanic male, “I don’t wake up in the morning and say, ‘I’m going to go
and work and present the Hispanic perspective’. I get up and say, “I’m going to go to
work and do the best I can to provide… the services that my users need….’”
Thinking about his leadership style, Mr. Rose feels satisfied, even proud, of the
fact that he leads a very productive team that contributes positively to the mission of the
library. However, he also feels there is a sense of obligation to his leadership style as
well. He has a desire to play “a positive role in society” and feels his position as his
current library allows him to do that. When asked if he ever feels like he leads based on
the benefits and rewards he receives, Mr. Rose laughs and says, “I don’t think I base it off
benefits and rewards… I’m not paid… in general what we as profession should be paid!”

80
Mr. Rose is very much an optimist and feels like the library world has made
positive strides in regards to underrepresented minorities in the workforce. He fully
recognizes libraries still need to do more, but he does not concern himself with being the
representative “successful Hispanic… or the successful gay person, or the successful
whatever”. Instead Mr. Rose concentrates on being a successful person and strives to do
the best job he possibly can.
Carmen Pimentl. Ms. Pimentl scored highest on the Social Normative Identity
scale, and she has been in the library profession since 1991 and has been in academic
libraries since 1998. She self-identifies as a Latina and is currently working in reference
and instruction at her institution but does not feel comfortable divulging much else
regarding her current position except to say that she is actively involved in her library’s
information literacy committee. She became a librarian because she was trying to find
something that matched what she enjoyed doing. She had worked in the for-profit sector
for a while and found that she needed something more in her life other than making
money to help her feel more fulfilled. At first she was drawn to public libraries because
she wanted to work directly with Latino communities, “to specifically work with books,
literacy, cultural things, and connecting that to the community.” Since her change to
academic libraries, she has faced a lot of frustrating moments that have taken her away
from the community she loves to serve. As an academic librarian, Ms. Pimentl has had
the opportunity to work with researchers and to even pursue her own research interests,
but she feels she remains in the position because it pays well and she now has a family to
support.

81
The challenges Ms. Pimentl has faced have been in dealing with the bureaucracy
and the administrators of her institution. She feels isolated and undervalued. She noted
that the people at her institution who seem to value her more are often outside of her
library. As a result, Ms. Pimentl says she has lowered her expectations of her current
library and looks outside its walls for support. She says she has reached the point where
she no longer has the energy to put herself out there to be a leader in her institution. In
the beginning when she actively sought leadership roles in her library, she was often met
with resistance and was even over-looked for managerial positions. At one point Ms.
Pimentl went to her human resources department to get a file with all the comments
people on search committees were making about her and discovered these people said
things such as “out for yourself” or “so ambitious” or “not a good fit.”
These comments were disheartening to Ms. Pimentl. She has done years of
research on the recruitment and retention of URM academic librarians and found herself
facing the exact same problems she was writing about in her articles. She says she is
burned out and disillusioned with the profession and therefore has chosen not to write on
the topic anymore. When asked why she has chosen to stay at her institution, given the
hostile work environment, she says it is mainly because of family. Her children are
young and still in school, and she does not want to uproot their lives. She also has a
decent salary and benefits that she does not want to lose.
She leads out of a combination of satisfaction and obligation. There is a certain
satisfaction of knowing that she did something good for the community and for her
students, but she also feels a sense of obligation, like she has to “pay-back” those who

82
sacrificed and opened doors for her: “I’m here because of other leaders… librarians of
color that came before me and the spaces that they opened up….”
Rasheda Dotson. Ms. Dotson scored highest on the Social Normative Identity
scale, which is consistent with the responses she gave in her one-on-one interview. She
is a self-identified Black woman who has worked in both public and academic libraries
for over 13 years but has been a professional librarian for the last two years. Ms. Dotson
made the transition from public to academic libraries because she wanted to be a subject
specialist and did not want to do public programming. The reason she became a librarian
in the first place was because she had two jobs in her undergraduate years working in a
bookstore and being a tutor for foster kids. She decided to combine both elements of
working with books and helping people learn. Since being in the profession officially for
two years, Ms. Dotson’s feelings about becoming a librarian have not changed much, but
she has found new reasons. For example, she realized how few African Americans there
were working in libraries. Early on in her career she knew she wanted to impact
librarianship in a way that acknowledged and served people of color.
There are challenges that Ms. Dotson faces in her current position, but isolation is
not one of them. Even though her area is located outside of the library because it is a
special collection and physically has its own space, and even though Ms. Dotson is not
considered a library faculty member, she is instead considered an administrative
professional. As an administrative professional, she is responsible for providing the same
information literacy services but without adequate resources.

83
Despite these challenges, Ms. Dotson still feels very motivated to lead in her
current library environment. Her position is unique in that she works within the Black
Cultural Center on her campus and most of the staff she works with is African American.
They collaborate to create programming and services that cater to African American
students and highlight the African American culture. However, she is the only one of
two African American librarians within her university library system, which makes her
feel “a bit discouraged”. Ms. Dotson finds it “ridiculous” that she is still finding herself
in work environments in which she is the only African American librarian, and often the
only person of color. That is one of the motivating factors of her staying in the
profession. Although Ms. Dotson states that she leads out of a sense of satisfaction, she
still feels somewhat obligated to stay. Dotson says she wants to positively impact
African American lives by equipping them with the resources they need to become
information literate and playing a role in making libraries culturally aware of the people
they serve. She feels that current academic library administrators need to show that they,
along with their greater organizations, support diversity through collections, services,
programs, and staffing, and they are not relying solely on URM librarians to provide all
of the diversity that exists in the library.
Serena Smith. Ms. Smith is an archivist at a Hispanic Serving Institution and
self-describes as an African American female. She received her degree in library science
and has always been an archivist since receiving her degree. Ms. Smith scored highest on
the Social Normative Identity scale. She describes academic library leadership as people
who encourage leadership within organizations and delegate authority to others. When

84
asked if her reasons for going into academic librarianship have changed, she claims they
have not changed but now she wants to get a PhD.
As a person of color, living in an extremely conservative state, Ms. Smith feels
she has a lack of agency because of who she is. Therefore, she looks for leadership roles
outside of the library because there are no leadership opportunities within her institution.
She wishes that academic library leaders would recognize the leadership potential in
others, especially people of color. She recounts a story of a White colleague who started
at the same time she did and that colleague was taken to lunch. She was never mentored
in such a way and never invited to lunch. She wants current leaders to open their eyes
and pay attention to those individuals who have not had the same opportunities that
others have. Leaders need to have an awareness of the system they create and take note
of whom it is they are leading.
Ms. Smith says she leads out of a sense of obligation because there is only one
other African American person who is tenured in her institution. She recognizes there is
a vacuum and jumps in to fill the void when no one else will do it. She says it is
important URM academic librarians have a voice. She also leads because she sees the
benefits of leading, not benefits within her own library but rather outside. The provost
invites her to be on campus-wide committees because she is known and valued outside
her building, but her library colleagues do not seem to offer the same respect. When
asked if she would ever consider leaving her institution, Ms. Smith says no because the
benefits outweigh the lows. She is very well funded, is able to travel extensively for her
career, is known in the profession, and is also well-respected on her campus.

85
Sandra Marks. Ms. Marks is the associate librarian and self-identifies as a
Black/African American female, and she scored highest on the Social Normative Identity
scale. She has been a librarian since 1997 and head of many libraries in the past. Ms.
Marks is in charge of outreach, reference, and instruction in her current institution, and
several staff report directly to her. Although she is part of a larger library organization,
she is the only librarian in her building. Ms. Marks became a librarian because she
already had a social sciences background and studied race, class, and gender. There were
no college graduates in the family so she decided to go in to librarianship to help her
community. When asked if her reasons for becoming a librarian have changed, Ms.
Marks says those reasons made sense to her when she was young; however, her energy is
now very low. The people in her environment are privileged and not at all the population
she envisioned helping. She feels very ambivalent about her career choice now.
Ms. Marks was asked about the challenges she faced in her current position.
While she feels supported at her institution, she does not feel connected to other
librarians. Now instead of fitting in, she feels she is more of a “chameleon”. She says
her current library affects her motivation to stay and lead by using its resources to
develop and grow. When asked what she thinks current academic library administrators
should do to help encourage URM academic librarians, she says they need to pay
attention to why there are so few URM librarians. She says it’s a very isolating
profession when one is the only person of color in the institution.
When asked how her race/ethnicity plays a part on her motivation to lead, Ms.
Marks says it plays a large role. She refers back to her original goal of going into
librarianship: “I need to diversify this thing!” There are so few URM academic librarians

86
in leadership roles; it’s easy to get jaded. While she mainly feels the need to lead based
on a sense of obligation to “diversify this thing,” Ms. Marks also contends that she leads
based on group composition. She considers herself a team player and likes the feeling of
leading, but she will not take the reins unless asked or no one else steps up to the plate.
She feels very collegial but not as much with her White counterparts because they tend
not to be as collegial with her.
Ms. Marks ends the conversation with how difficult it is to get a leadership
position in academic libraries now. Ten years ago she felt she could have gotten any job
she wanted but not anymore. She feels the profession pays lip service to diversity and
instead plays it safe by hiring traditional librarians instead of taking a chance on
librarians of color. It’s easier for them to “go with what they know”.
Sarah Anderson. Ms. Anderson was available to interview via Skype. She is a
confident, woman who self-identifies as a Black/African American female. Ms.
Anderson is head of special collections in her library. She has been a librarian for one
year and became head of special collections in 2013. Although this is technically a new
position for Ms. Anderson, it is not a new experience. She already has special collections,
instruction, and budget experience from a previous job. Ms. Anderson scored highest on
the Social Normative Identity scale.
Ms. Anderson defines academic library leaders as people who assume
responsibilities of academic library needs and successfully facilitate and delegate said
duties. Like many of the other participants, the reason she became a librarians is because
she grew up in libraries and decided to take a job in her school’s library when she was an
undergraduate. Her reasons for becoming a librarian haven’t changed much, but she

87
stated that she wants to be known as the face of librarianship and replace the stereotype
of the “White lady in a bun”.
One of the challenges Ms. Anderson faces in her current position is that there is so
much to do and it can be overwhelming. As the Skype interview went on, she had to stop
the interview a few times to answer peoples’ questions or answer the phone. She says
she feels like she is the only person working in her department. Ms. Anderson will not
leave the position anytime soon because she feels invested in the institution. She
considers herself “homegrown” because she attended her institution as an undergraduate,
worked in their library, and now is a librarian in the same library. However, she did say
that she plans on leaving for more opportunities if she does not get the directorship
position at her current institution when her current library director leaves. Ms. Anderson
says that staying at her institution would be ideal and that her race/ethnicity does play a
role in her desire to lead because this institution is an HBCU. However, leadership in her
institution is not necessarily all African American/Black because of its status. When
asked to think about her leadership style and why she chose to be a library leader, Ms.
Anderson stresses that she leads based on a sense of satisfaction because she loves
showing people new skills. She feels she also leads based on obligation because no one
else in her department seems to want to advance and she feels if she doesn’t do it, “it’s
not going to get done”. Finally, Ms. Anderson feels she leads based on the benefits and
rewards she will receive in the long-run. Not only does she get to learn new skills herself
that will be transferable, she gets to put these things on her resume, which will later help
her get a new leadership job if she needs one.

88
When asked what she thinks current academic library administrators need to
know to better support URM academic librarians, she stressed that they need to
understand that these librarians are not tokens. People of color tend to be diversity
officers, but don’t force them to do it if there are others who are more qualified to be
diversity officers. Ms. Anderson goes on to say that academic library administrators
should not label people of color and automatically assume they will represent all diverse
populations or be the official spokesperson for their race/ethnicity.
The thing that Ms. Anderson seems to struggle with the most is her desire to “toot
her own horn”. She does not know why, but for some reason she feels uncomfortable
accepting kudos for accomplishments. Her thought is perhaps she has a subconscious
repulsion to drawing attention to herself and getting recognition for doing a good job.
Chicano Librarian. Although his interview states he is most interested in leading
based on his desire to lead (Affective Identity), Mr. Chicano Librarian scored
overwhelmingly higher on the Social Normative Identity scale. Mr. Chicano Librarian is
a library dean at a large state university, which happens to also be a Hispanic Serving
Institution. He self-identifies as a Chicano male and has been a librarian since 1974. His
road to librarianship began during his freshman year in college when he took a job in his
university library as a student assistant. That led to his love of libraries, and he accepted
a part-time staff position and eventually a full-time clerical position in the same library.
He was later asked to develop one of the first Chicano Studies collections in the United
States. Mr. Chicano Librarian found himself identifying and acquiring materials, writing
bibliographies, and providing specialized services before he even became a professional
librarian. Although his undergraduate degree was in accounting, Mr. Chicano Librarian

89
decided to accept a fellowship to attend library school. Upon graduation, he took a
position as Assistant Head of Public Services, overseeing reference and circulation, at his
alma mater. As the years went on, Mr. Chicano Librarian’s interests and responsibilities
increased. He continued to accept leadership roles both within his academic library units
and also within the greater library community: President of the Association of Latino
Faculty Staff and Students, President of the REFORMA Educational Foundation, and
elected member of the ALA Executive Committee.
Mr. Chicano Librarian’s passion for libraries stems from when he first decided to
become a librarian. He wanted to serve in a capacity that would contribute to the
improvement of the educational, social, and economic status of Latin@s in the United
States. Believing that information and knowledge are power, Mr. Chicano Librarian
wanted to make sure that the history and culture of Latin@s were well-represented in the
collections of academic libraries. He also wanted to make sure the proper levels of
services and the right kinds of services were available to Latin@ populations. Finally,
Mr. Chicano Librarian wanted to ensure that libraries had an adequate number of Latin@
librarians. When asked if his reasons have changed over the years, he explains that he is
even more motivated now than ever because while some conditions have changed for
Latin@s, this population continues to be under-represented and under-served.
Some of the challenges Mr. Chicano Librarian has faced in his tenure are not
surprising. They include decreasing annual budgets, resistance to change or new ideas,
and a library that was underutilized by the campus community. As the current dean of
this particular academic library, he says they have learned to live within their means. He
also says that although some employees (he calls them “team members”) have a hard

90
time accepting change, a good solution is to provide opportunities for professional/staff
development and include all team members in discussions and decision-making. For the
most part he finds that people will eventually come around. Those who don’t, eventually
move on or retire. Mr. Chicano Librarian advocates for slow, well thought-out, organic
change. This helps team members to adjust their frame of thought and prepare
themselves for the change. Another thing Mr. Chicano Librarian did to combat one of
the challenges he faced when taking his current position was to implement policy and
programmatic changes designed to increase use of the library and its recourses. This
included simple things such as allowing food and drink in the library, implementing a
lecture series, and establishing a marketing committee to help with marketing the library
to the campus community. As a result the library has established new service
departments, re-designed some spaces to help library patrons feel more comfortable, and
submitted a plan for refurbishing the expansion of the library building.
The culture of his current library had a reputation of keeping people “in their
place”. Mr. Chicano Librarian felt that creativity and initiative were not practiced
because the previous campus administration was not very supportive of the library.
However, the current administration is very supportive of Mr. Chicano Librarian, which
allows him to encourage his team members to “push the envelope,” take calculated risks,
and try new things. Mr. Chicano Librarian suspects that some of the people in his current
institution were “not happy with having a Mexicano as an administrator” because their
body language.
When asked if his race/ethnicity plays on his motivation to lead in academic
libraries, Mr. Chicano Librarian says he believes URM academic library leaders serve as

91
role models, especially when they serve as mentors to students, staff, and other librarians.
He works to encourage students and staff to consider and pursue librarianship as a career.
He feels his leadership style is both “collegial and participatory,” and he leads out of a
sense of obligation and enjoyment. Since he was a young man, he has been entrusted
with leadership roles, and he takes these opportunities very seriously. Mr. Chicano
Librarian says more needs to be done to promote librarianship among URM, especially
Hispanic/Latin@.
Both Affective and Non-Calculative
Ira James. Interestingly, Ms. James is the only participant in the second phase of
the study to have scored equally high on both the Affective Identity and the NonCalculative Identity scales. Ms. James is a director at an academic library in the South
East. She self identifies as a “Black, not African American” female. Ms. James said she
felt “out of place” at one of her previous institutions which was an HBCU because they
were satisfied with what they were doing and did not want to learn or do new things.
Needless to say, she left to pursue more challenging roles.
Originally planning on earning a law degree, Ms. James dropped out of law
school after a year and decided to pursue a degree in library science. When asked why
she decided to do this instead, she stated that she wanted to hold intelligent conversations.
The reasons for her becoming an academic librarian have not changed. She likes being in
an academic environment and knows people actually want to be there.
A challenge that Ms. James has faced in her tenure as an academic librarian, more
specifically as a library administrator, is that she appears to be younger than she actually
is. Many times outsiders will treat her as a subordinate, and she has to correct them and

92
tell them that she is actually the library dean. Often times many of these same offenders
are the faculty who work on campus and feel the library must meet their specific needs,
rather than the needs of the students. As a result, Ms. James feels like she is always
educating these people on what the library’s purpose is on campus and what her role as
the library dean actually means.
Ms. James says that she hopes her academic library administrator colleagues can
see that URM academic librarians are just as smart as everyone else and not all librarians
are built to “fit the mold”. When asked what her motivation is for leading, Ms. James
says she initially started taking on leadership roles to move up the ladder for financial
gain, but she now likes to mold other librarians and influence (not mentor) these people.
This is why she has started teaching online library courses to future librarians. Ms. James
is a determined person who likes having goals and doesn’t like to give up. Her motto is
“I want to prove you wrong!”
Both Social Normative and Non-Calculative
Gordito Renquito. Mr. Renquito is a self-identified Latino who scored equally
highest on both the Social Normative Identity and the Non-Calculative Identity scales. He
is not shy and not afraid to speak his mind. The interview was conducted via Skype, and
when the researcher noticed Mr. Renquito was in an open area where his peers could hear
his interview, he laughed and said he had nothing to hide. It was refreshing to see
confidence and challenge to the status quo of librarianship because he has often found
himself one of the only URM academic librarians in different environments. Mr.
Renquito enjoys ruffling feathers when needed and stands confident in his knowledge,

93
talents, and record as a successful academic librarian, regardless of his physical abilities
or his race/ethnicity.
Challenging the status quo comes naturally to Mr. Renquito. As an immigrant to
the United States, he came to this country as a child and as a person with a physical
challenge, Mr. Renquito speaks his mind about injustices and inequities in academic
librarianship. He describes academic library leadership as an effort on the part of library
planning and carrying out the mission. This goes beyond library managers; he stresses
that everyone in the library should do these things.
Mr. Renquito came to librarianship through his studies as a doctoral candidate in
History. Once he realized he no longer wanted to be in that field, he changed his studies
to librarianship and has been an academic librarian for eight years. He is now in charge
of collection development and the liaison to several academic disciplines at a large
research institution. When asked to think about the reasons he became a librarian, he
admits that it was not his first choice. Mr. Renquito wanted to be a historian, but he took
a job at an inner city public library to make ends meet and decided to become a librarian
after that.
Not surprisingly, like many of the librarians in this study, one of the challenges
Mr. Renquito faces in his current position is communication. The communication
between the library administration and the librarians and staff is so strained that a
consultant was brought in to help remedy the situation, but according to Mr. Renquito,
“Consultants are wonderful. They come up with a wonderful theory, but when it comes
to the day to day mechanics, that’s where things break down”. That’s when he feels like
the system fails and he feels like he’s trapped in the movie “Groundhog Day” and the old

94
patterns keep repeating themselves. The way Mr. Renquito deals with these issues is to
build relationships. He says he has taken people in the library out to coffee, lunch, or
dinner in order to cultivate relationships and encourage healthy communication channels.
Regardless of the challenges Mr. Renquito’s library faces, he will not leave because he is
tenured and feels comfortable there. Plus, since he is one of the only few URM librarians
at his institution, he feels it will leave a gap in their personnel.
There are very few African-American and Latin@ librarians in library leadership
roles in academia so he stays to help fill that gap because so many of them are led into
public librarianship positions. Therefore, Mr. Renquito says that current academic library
leadership needs to know how to make academic libraries more attractive to URM
librarians. In his opinion, this starts at the high school level where counselors should
start directing students of color into more challenging professions, and that is where the
library administrators can work closely with high school counselors. Since this
partnership is not happening, and since there are very few URM librarians, Mr. Renquito
stays in the profession and leads out of a sense of obligation: “we are having to still
provide the same level of service that we’ve always been expected to provide, but now
we’re doing it with less, and so there is an obligation, not only to my colleagues, but also
to my students”.
Results of Interview Questions
Leadership definition. When asked how they defined leadership, each
participant stated something different and yet there was a recurring theme of
transformational leadership throughout each answer. Leadership was defined as more
than managing the day-to-day events that happen in a library building. They believe that

95
the role that academic library administrators play in planning, implementing, overseeing,
and evaluating the products and services they provide is leadership. Every participant
stated that library leadership involves articulating a vision for the continued development
of the organization through implementing innovative change to enhance student learning
in transformative ways. Some of the most transformative ways mentioned by participants
included hiring diverse librarians, increasing information literacy, and improving
technology. Each participant affirmed that leaders have a responsibility to motivate
every member of the organization by clarifying their roles, setting clear goals, and
involving all members of the team to participate in some decision-making roles.
Lack of diversity. All participants expressed concern for lack of diversity in the
profession. One person even said that she realized how very few African Americans
were working in librarianship and acknowledged that may have had something to do with
why she did not originally think of becoming a librarian at first. She later says that she is
glad she gave librarianship a second look because she would have missed opportunities to
participate in a profession she now loves.
Some participants said current library leadership was not doing enough to help
combat the issue of lack of diversity. Ms. Pimentl felt that for current academic library
leaders, diversity is “just lip-service”. Likewise, Ms. Dotson, who works at a large
institution that prides itself on diversity, stated that she was extremely disappointed in her
university and expected more from them. She, like many others in this portion of the
study, found themselves the only people of color at their institutions. Mr. Renquito said
that he challenges his library administration to hire more diverse librarians but nothing
seems to come to fruition.

96
The lack of diversity was so prevalent at Mr. Chicano Library’s institution that a
few months after he arrived in his new position as dean of his library, a person who was
just introduced to him said ‘Gee, you certainly do not look like a dean. You look more
like the guy that fixed my roof last week.” Mr. Chicano Librarian said he was so shocked
that all he could do was walk away. The person who said this to him has since retired
from the university.
Many of the participants in this study, with the exception of one, found
themselves challenged and questioned more than their White counter-parts. They
deduced it was based in part to their race/ethnicity and felt that they to work twice as hard
at their jobs to prove themselves.
Reasons for becoming a librarian. Before becoming library leaders or seeking
positions of leadership in the field, these underrepresented minority academic librarians
chose to become librarians for many reasons. They each stated in one form or another
that they had “a bigger goal than just making money” because going into librarianship is
much like going into teaching. Unless one acquires higher levels of upper administration,
the pay for academic libraries is not lucrative. Some stated they wanted to foster their
love of books and learning. Ms. Woods, for example, wanted a “safe” place to interact
with academics and have intelligent conversations. Although her home life was loving
and supportive, no one in her family went to college. Ms. Woods felt the need to be
among academics and discuss scholarly ideas with others like her. While she does
engage in these scholarly communications, she is still disappointed in how some of her
colleagues treat her. Ms. Woods, like the other participants in the second phase of this
study, stated that she really enjoyed the idea of working with researchers and found that

97
publishing and presenting their own research was very fulfilling. They all liked the idea
of contributing to a body of knowledge and adding their voice to the scholarly
communication landscape of academia.
Most of the participants stated they wanted to help increase the diversity of
librarianship. Ms. Dotson, specifically, said she wanted to “impact librarianship in a way
that acknowledged people of color….” She and others were approached by librarians they
knew to consider librarianship and were encouraged to apply for diversity scholarships.
Several of the interviewees mentioned library school scholarships and how that helped to
influence their decision to become librarians. Many of them admitted to wanting to be
public librarians first because that is how they were “funneled” or they felt they would be
closer to their ethnic/racial communities.
Some were drawn to the public library first because those environments were
more open to the communities they served. Mr. Renquito worked in an inner city public
library and thoroughly enjoyed his work there, but he later sought an academic library
position to fulfill his need to be connected with research and academia. Like the others in
this study, Mr. Chicano Librarian wanted to serve in a capacity that would help the
underserved, but for him he specifically wanted to help “the improvement of the
educational/social and economic status of Chicanos/Latinos”. He strongly believes that
information and knowledge on how to use that information is power. His reasons for
becoming a librarian have not changed because he continues to serve the underrepresented in his community, especially now as a library dean in an HSI. He worries
that Latin@s are still at the bottom in terms of educational attainment and looks for ways
of helping to improve their chances of succeeding at his university by implementing

98
library policies and contributing to university policies that affect Hispanics/Latin@s in
his community.
Reasons change. For many, the reasons for becoming a librarian did not change
over the years. As an example, Mr. Rose stated how he focuses on his library’s mission
and rests in the fact that he and his staff do their best to fulfill that mission. However, the
challenges faced in the profession by some of the participants have made them reassess
their desire to stay in the profession all together. Many of the participants stated the
main reason they stay in the field is because they have earned tenure and/or have family
they cannot easily move.
Ms. Woods, Ms. Pimentl, Ms. Smith, and Ms. KR Librarian all said they were
dealing with especially difficult work environments and no longer felt the same desire to
remain in the profession as they once had. They talked about going back to the private
work sector or going back to graduate school to earn a PhD. The reasons they, and others
in the study like them, remain are based on convenience and obligation. Too often,
librarians and other leaders find it necessary to move to get ahead. It is difficult to find
an academic library position of equal or greater responsibility and pay if one is not
willing to move out of state. Several participants had children in school or spouses with
decent paying jobs and did not feel comfortable uprooting their lives for another job and
more uncertainty. Most of the participants received tenure (or the equivalent thereof) at
their institutions and did not want to start the process at another university.
Professional challenges. A lot of the librarians interviewed for this section stated
they faced many challenges in their current positions. Words such as “isolated” and “not
valued” surfaced throughout their dialogs. One person claims to have been denied a

99
higher position in her library because of her library colleagues’ misperceptions of her
personality and her intentions, “[They were] portraying me as like this selfish person
because I had put myself out there….”
Ms. Woods found frustration with the organization in which she currently works,
“It is truly what I call a broken organization.” She feels she walked into a toxic
environment and now is a target for her colleagues to take aim and vent their own
frustrations at her. She, Ms. KR Librarian, and Mr. Renquito all said that communication
was one of the biggest issues at their institutions. In these cases the higher administration
does not seem to communicate well with their libraries and perhaps as a result, the library
administrators do not communicate effectively with their librarians or staff. Ms. KR
Librarian says that one of the biggest frustrations for her was when her library
administration would force radical changes with no evidence to support the reasons for
mandated changes. Mr. Renquito compares communication at his institution to that of
the movie Groundhog’s Day because ideas are repeated annually and never actually come
to fruition, “So we talk about ‘Oh, let’s break down silos.’ “Let’s collaborate. ‘Let’s
communicate…,’ and we don’t do that!”
Many of the participants stated they needed more or did not receive any
mentoring at their institutions. Ms. Smith was uncomfortable answering the question
regarding the challenges she faced at her institution because she felt it would identify her,
but she did feel comfortable sharing her disappointment in mentoring at her institution.
She found that at least one of her White colleagues was invited to lunch by the “top
administrators” and asked about career trajectory. Ms. Smith, on the other hand, was
never treated to lunch. Both Ms. Pimentl and Ms. Smith state that people who value their

100
work most “are often outside of the library”. As a result, they find themselves seeking
mentorships and support outside of their libraries. They have learned to lower their
expectations of their library colleagues, superiors, and their institutions themselves.
Contrary to those stories, Ms. Beagle, Ms. Anderson, and Ms. Marks said they all felt
supported at their libraries. Ms. Beagle expressly commented that she was fortunate to
receive enough mentoring and encouragement from her library leaders that she was able
to earn tenure a year earlier than expected. Ms. Anderson also says she is receiving a
great deal of mentoring at her library, and her dean is actually grooming her to become
the next library dean.
Ms. Dotson is head of a cultural center on her campus and says she faced many
challenges because she is not only new to the position but also fairly new to the field of
librarianship all together. She is also not considered a faculty member, like the other
librarians at her institution, and her cultural center is not wholly integrated into the
greater library system on her campus. Although she has these things stacked against her,
she is still expected to provide the same types of services to their students without
adequate resources and feels she and her staff must stretch their capacities and increase
their flexibility and creativity to accomplish their instruction and service goals. Ms.
Dotson, like others in this study, found herself to be one of the only librarians of color at
her institution, “I’m the only African American librarian here… and not a faculty
member, which makes it feel like I have less, I don’t know, influence… I have to work a
little bit harder to kind of prove myself here.”

101
Other challenges faced by participants in this study are decreasing annual budgets
and resistance to change. KR Librarian reports that several faculty positions in her
library have not been filled because of university budget constraints. As librarians at her
institution quit or retire, those positions are not filled and the workload for the remaining
librarians increases substantially. Mr. Chicano Librarian says that as a dean, he is always
trying to push the envelope with implementing change and motivating his staff to buy
into his vision for the future of the library, but he is often times met with a great deal of
resistance from “team players” who find comfort in the status quo. In those instances he
encourages them as much as he can, “Just like you do a team player… in baseball… [if]
they’re not… batting or running,…the coach needs to talk to the team member” and let
them know they’ve become a “weight on the team”. Mr. Chicano Librarian is finding
that those most resistant to change either retire or leave. Echoing this stated challenge is
Mr. Rose. Although he says his staff is generally motivated to do good work because
they believe in the mission of the library, he still finds it challenging to deal with
managing and supervising difficult people. Mr. Rose claims there are very few difficult
people under his supervision, but he states that he has learned from those experiences and
helped the worker grow or, in some extreme cases, he has had to “move through the
process all the way to the unfortunate ending of terminating an employee”.
Motivations to stay. Ms. Beagle, Ms. Marks, and Ms. Anderson feel supported in
their libraries and that helps increase their motivation to stay and their desire to want to
lead. Ms. Anderson is actually a graduate from the same institution and feels a strong
sense of investment and commitment to her organization because she is “homegrown”.
Mr. Chicano Librarian says that his current upper administration is very supportive and

102
encourages his creativity and initiative in creating a library the whole campus community
can be proud of. As such, he says he and his library faculty/staff “push the envelope” and
that has encouraged him to stay. Mr. Rose feels a motivation to stay and lead because he
believes in his institution’s mission statement and feels his colleagues strive to provide
the best possible service to patrons based on that mission statement. He goes on to say
that the upper administration have formed positive relationships with faculty and staff,
and he feels that has contributed deeply to morale and desire to want to stay.
Other participants in this study did not feel a commitment to their institution
based on support received. Instead, they choose to stay to use the opportunity for them to
be able to help diversity issues in their library and in the library profession. Ms. Pimentl
said that despite the challenges she has faced at her current institution, she will continue
to seek leadership positions within her library because she wants to be able to recruit, hire,
and promote other underrepresented minority librarians of color. Although Ms. Dotson is
not considered faculty like her other library peers and is the only African American
librarian on her campus, she is motivated to stay because she is the only African
American librarian on campus: “I think it’s a double-edged sword because I’m motivated
by being the only one, but on the other hand, it’s actually not really that great being the
only one.” Ms. Dotson goes on to say that she thinks it is ridiculous that she is still
finding herself in work environments in which she is still a minority. Although the
biggest motivator for Ms. Dotson to stay and lead in libraries has been to contribute to the
diversity of her campus and profession, her other strong desire is to positively impact
African American lives by equipping them with the resources they need to become
successful college students. She does not want to leave because she is head of their

103
Black Cultural Center on her campus and primarily works with African American staff
that collaborate to create programming and services that cater to Black students.
Other motivating factors deal with educating outside entities regarding the library
profession. Ms. James works at a smaller, private college and finds herself motivated to
stay and lead in her environment because she wants to educate her university on what
librarians actually do. “I’m dealing with a problem of people thinking the library being
everything but the library. And… they want the library to solve their problems when
they’re at the mercy of… having a [last] minute deadline.” Ms. James says that teaching
faculty at her institution are the ones whom she must educate the most on this issue, “I’m
not the bookstore, I’m not, I’m not your babysitter, I don’t do your papers….”
There are some librarians who have stated they no longer want to stay in their
institutions. Ms. KR Librarian and Ms. Woods have lost their motivation to stay and lead
in their institutions, but they feel they cannot leave because of their outside obligations.
Ms. KR Librarian says she was asked to attend a highly competitive and well-respected
national leadership institute for academic librarians from underrepresented backgrounds,
but when she returned to her university with the hopes of sharing what she learned, she
was never provided with the opportunity. “That was a great program, and I loved it… I
learned a lot, and I met some really great people… I was really appreciative that [the
library dean] wanted me to do that, but nobody followed up with me. There was nothing
to do after that!”
Ms. Woods blatantly states that she has completely lost the motivation to lead in
her library because she feels she does not have impact as a leader there. She credits the
negativity of the organization in part, but also says that she feels she needs to learn new

104
leadership skills that will help her deal with dysfunctional situations. At the time of this
interview, Ms. Woods was actively applying to graduate schools that specialized in
granting doctorates with an emphasis in organizational behavior.
Although Ms. Marks does not state any specific problems in her library, she also
does not feel motivated to stay and lead in her current environment. Ms. Marks has been
in her library for over ten years and says it is because she is “a known entity” and “they
know what I’m already capable of.” It is because of this feeling of familiarity that she is
contemplating seeking leadership opportunities elsewhere.
What current library leaders need to know. All participants expressed the
desire for library leaders to hire a more diverse workforce (Mr. Rose and Ms. Marks
stated leaders needed to think beyond race/ethnicity in their hiring practices). The bottom
line was that the workforce needed to have the ability to relate to 21st century library
users and have the ability to help these users fulfill their educational goals and objectives.
In addition to hiring diverse staff, Ms. Dotson specifically said that library leaders needed
to support diversity through collections, services, [and] programs” as well.
Many of the participants acknowledged that current library administrators are not
aware of the diversity issues in their own libraries and make no real visible effort to
address the changing needs of their profession and their libraries. Instead, according to
Ms. Pimentl, library administrators are focusing more on issues of technology or
state/nationally-mandated ideas rather than on the diversity within their own walls. One
person specifically said that library leaders should take a good look at themselves and ask
why they have such little diversity in their libraries. Ms. Marks says that if libraries are
not attracting a diverse work force, leaders should not only look at their recruitment

105
tactics but also closely examine their retention and promotion efforts. Others echoed this
sentiment by stating library leaders needed to “make an effort” and “put themselves out
there”. However, the participants cautioned against disingenuous efforts.
Several of the respondents repeated phrases such as “I’m not the token,”
“spokesperson,” “poster child” of their race/ethnicity and advised current library leaders
against making their underrepresented minority librarians the “diversity librarian” if they
have no desire to be such: “Yes, I’m Black and it’s fantastic, but that’s not all I am. I
have the same skill-set as anybody else. I might even have a better skill-set than some!”
Ms. Anderson states that in this day and age underrepresented minority librarians still
have to “be that much better, that much faster, [and] that much smarter” than White
counterparts, “but we don’t have to be the token”. She feels that if leaders allow
librarians from diverse backgrounds to be pigeonholed as solely the “diversity person”,
the danger is that librarian will not be seen for his/her potential leadership in other
aspects of librarianship.
In short, participants stated that library leaders must get to know their librarians
better and avoid labels. Mr. Chicano Librarian says that as a library dean, he does his
best to get to know his librarians’ career paths in order to understand how best to support
their leadership potential. He wants to know their aspirations and compares those to the
types of opportunities currently available in his library. He says that academic library
leaders need to better assess their professional development tools in order to create more
opportunities for their library workers, especially librarians from diverse backgrounds.
Ms. Smith says that leaders need to have an awareness of their library systems, “Open
your eyes sometimes and see who has not been given these opportunities and why.”

106
Oftentimes, Ms. Smith says, underrepresented minority librarians are overlooked because
library leaders do not take the time to consciously assess the needs of their librarians.
Part of being aware of the environment is also being aware of the fact that many
academic librarians move from completely different parts of the country, and that may
pose another set of challenges to underrepresented minority librarians. Ms. Biblio, for
example, moved from an area of the country densely populated with Hispanic/Latin@s to
a state that was significantly different and thousands of miles away from her family and
friends. She said she was fortunate enough to have the support she needed to acclimate
to her new environment successfully. That success was due in part to the fact that her
current library administration provided resources to help her build new support systems.
Ms. Biblio says that library leaders must provide additional training and not force the
underrepresented minority librarian into a “pre-designed mold” that may have worked for
other librarians in the past. She stresses that leaders should allow underrepresented
minority librarians the opportunity to explore their options in order to help them develop
the leadership roles that fit them.
[A]llow them to see themselves and how they fit in that library and not
just as the token Latina, not as the token African American librarian, but
to really see how their role fits and how their voice and their perspective
are heard.
Race/ethnicity on MTL in current library. A majority of the librarians in their
interviews stated that their race/ethnicity played a large role in their motivations to lead:
“Students kind of look up to me… I’m sort of in a position to speak up for them… [and
to] speak up for inclusion of more librarians [from diverse backgrounds].” This quote by
Ms. Pimentl was echoed by other librarians in this study who said they were motivated to

107
stay and represent minority voices at their institutions. Ms. Smith said that as the only
tenured black female at her institution, she feels a strong need to “fill that void” and
“encourage and push” for other minority voices that may otherwise be silent if she were
not there to represent them. Many of the participants in this study said that if they left
their institutions, there would be no other librarian of their particular race/ethnicity, and
in some cases, no other librarians from diverse backgrounds. Ms. Dotson said she feels
motivated to present a professional example of what it means to be an underrepresented
minority librarian:
I’ve always been the only black person… And so in that sense… I feel that
I do have to be an example… just to be present and show other black
people that it can be done and that there are other avenues… So, it’s
something that I’m always cognizant of when it comes to where I’m
working and my visibility and how I interact with people and how I…
affect things within my organization. So I’m always interested in
programs and collections and in serving some other viewpoints that are
not coming from the rest of the staff… So in that sense there is a
motivation. There is a sense of responsibility, and it’s not something I shy
away from.
Others said they felt their race/ethnicity played a large role in their motivations
because of where they worked and they wanted to set an example for other
underrepresented minorities. Ms. Anderson, for example, works at an HBCU and
believes that the “relate-ability factor” comes into play on these types of campuses and
having diversity in leadership will help students from diverse backgrounds to feel more
connected to their schools. Many of the students are also African American and look up
to her as a role model. Mr. Chicano Librarian, who works at an HSI, says he believes
underrepresented leadership in libraries serve as role models and should also serve as
mentors to students, staff, and librarians. He uses his race/ethnicity to try and recruit

108
Latin@ librarians into the field but mostly into positions of leadership themselves. Mr.
Chicano Librarian also says he wants to help other Latin@s see their own potential
because quite often they pigeonhole themselves into thinking they will never be more
than library staff and convince themselves they cannot earn a master’s degree. He is
trying to change that thought with his own library staff by encouraging them to pursue
master’s degrees and providing them with scholarship information. On a similar note,
KR Librarian works at an HSI and says she would like to be a leader to other “Hispanic
women or other women of color who are thinking of becoming… librarians.” She, like
the other participants in this study, wants people from diverse backgrounds to know they
can succeed in these types of positions.
There was also strong desire to challenge the preconceived stereotypes people
have of librarians and diversify the profession from the top-down. Ms. James says she
finds herself reminding people every day that underrepresented minorities are just as
smart as anybody else. She works at a private university and says that sometimes people
will come in to her library asking her for the director’s office: “And I’m like, that’s me!
And then their jaws drop.” Ms. Marks proudly says her motivation is to help “diversify
this thing” because she sometimes gets jaded by looking around and seeing the reality of
a predominantly White profession. She wants to be part of a workforce that encourages
people of all backgrounds to seek leadership positions and change the landscape of
librarianship by helping to foster an institutional commitment to diversity, rather than
“just paying lip service”.
Not all participants in this study feel their race/ethnicity was beneficial to their
leadership aspirations. Ms. Woods felt that her motivation to lead has been damaged by

109
her race/ethnicity because she is “not from here”. As an African American, Ms. Woods
currently works at an HSI as a department head and says she feels like “an outsider” and
also feels like she cannot communicate with the people she is supposed to be leading:
“because to them you’re not the right color, and you don’t speak the right language, and
you’re not from the area….” Ms. Woods goes on to say that she is not motivated to lead
at her institution because her colleagues are “intentionally rude” and deliberately speak
Spanish in front of her when they do not want her understand them. At one point, a
sympathetic co-worker told Ms. Woods that her staff was negatively talking about her
and planning to derail any initiatives she planned to bring forward. Crestfallen, Ms.
Woods now asks herself daily, “Why should I even be motivated to help someone who
doesn’t… who can’t even show me respect?” Ms. Woods strongly believes it is her
race/ethnicity that keeps her apart from her subordinates and feels the current
arrangement is creating a very negative atmosphere: “I never looked at my skin color
before and thought that this would make a difference, but apparently here it does.”
Officially this is the second HSI Ms. Woods has worked, but this is the first time
she has encountered such hostility in the work place. When asked if her feelings about
leading would be different if she were at another institution, she said, “I definitely think it
would be different if I worked at an HBCU, and I’ve seen the difference when I work at
[other institutions].” Ms. Woods has also worked at a traditional academic library, where
again, she was in the minority. The current situation has created such a problem for Ms.
Woods, that she is seriously considering leaving the profession all together.
Finally, there were two participants who stated their race/ethnicity did not play a
large role on their motivations to stay and lead at their current institutions. Ms. Biblio

110
says her background of being a first-generation college student, regardless of her race, is
her motivating factor. She has since become actively involved in programs on her
campus that are targeted primarily to first generation, low socioeconomic students. She
says that at least fifty percent of the students on her campus are the first in their families
to attend college:
I’m from a different demographic than the than 98% of this campus. I’m
in a predominantly white institution, and I feel that not so much my race
or ethnicity but my background and where I come from as… the first
generation college student from a low income family… [is] more of a
motivator. I feel obligated to pay it forward and reach back and help those
who maybe didn’t have someone like me in in the library… who cared
about their experience…
Mr. Rose also says that his race/ethnicity is not a contributing factor to why he
stays and leads at his current institution. He says that he is a product of his experiences,
which race and ethnicity obviously play a factor, but he also considers his socioeconomic level, his gender, and his worldview of things as having more to do with his
motivation that just race/ethnicity. He says he does not sit in a room and speak “as a
Hispanic;” instead he provides feedback to library issues and leads based on his
experiences and his evaluations of events:
These are my experiences, and they’re a mixture because I deal [with]
everybody…I don’t wake up in the morning and say, ‘I’m going to go and
work and represent the Hispanic perspective’. I get up and say, I’m going
to go to work and do the best I can to provide the services that my users
need and do my job to the best that I can.
Summary of Findings
This chapter represented the research findings and analysis on the motivation to
lead of underrepresented minority academic librarians, specifically those of African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ decent. The data and themes that emerged from

111
the study were analyzed to determine their impact on the research question, In what ways
does understanding the role of motivation to lead play a role in the retention and
promotion of underrepresented minority academic librarians? The sub-research
questions were also investigated further:
1. What factors influence an underrepresented minority librarian’s motivation to
lead in an academic library setting?
2. Are there differences between current and aspiring academic librarians and their
motivation to lead in academic library settings? Does this vary by race/ethnicity?
The purpose of this study was to examine the motivation to lead in a large sample
of underrepresented minority academic librarians and to explore a deeper understanding
of their motivations through one-on-one interviews with African American/Black and
Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians. While this chapter discusses key findings of the
study, Chapter Five will discuss the answers to the above research questions in greater
detail.
The significant findings in this chapter reveal that although there was no statistical
difference among race/ethnicities in the motivation of lead on the national scale, the oneon-one interviews with African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ librarians revealed
that a majority of the participants scored highest on the Social Normative identity scale.
The researcher did not intentionally set-out to interview these specific participants.
Instead, the participants for the second phase of this study were randomly selected, based
on their interest in being interviewed and other predetermined selection criteria described
in Chapter Three. The differences in this study’s quantitative and qualitative results
could be due in part to the survey instrument’s limited view of this study’s population

112
and the realities that these participants face in their profession. The previous studies on
motivation to lead focused on military, business, and academic populations, which
traditionally are male-dominated fields. Librarianship is predominantly a female
dominated profession, and the participants in the second phase of this study were from
underrepresented backgrounds. Previous studies on this topic did not conduct qualitative
analyses of their findings so it is hard to conclude if those findings would not yield
similar results to this study’s findings.
Quantitative Analysis Summary
Statistical differences by gender. The study showed that there was no statistical
difference on the MTL scale for males and females in the study. Both male and female
academic librarians score higher on the Non-Calculative Identity scale, suggesting that
both male and female participants in the national survey do not measure the cost or
benefits greatly when they are considering what motivates them to take on leadership
positions. Instead, they are motivated by the pleasure of leading and the feeling of social
obligation.
Statistical differences by race/ethnicity. Results concluded there was no
statistical difference among the different races/ethnicities and their motivations to lead.
Further analysis revealed that most participants of the national survey scored highest on
Non-Calculative identity, suggesting that the participating racial/ethnic groups do not
calculate the costs and benefits for taking and seeking leadership positions. Instead the
statistical findings suggest these participants are more motivated to lead based on the
pleasure of leading others and their desire to fulfil social obligations. Chan (1999) found
significant differences in motivation to lead based on race/ethnicity, but the findings in

113
this study were surprising. As in Chan’s study, the researcher expected to see a
significant difference between race/ethnicity in Social-Normative and Affective Identities.
One reason for this finding may be the study’s population. Chan discussed how those
who scored higher on the Social-Normative scale were from minority backgrounds and
lead based on a sense of obligation; conversely, those who scored higher on Affective
Identity scale were from White backgrounds and lead based on a strong sense of pleasure.
Since a majority of Chan’s participants were male, this may account for the statistical
differences. Previous studies also found that people who scored higher on the SocialNormative and Non-Calculative scales also expressed more of collectivist, rather than an
individualist, viewpoints (Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001). Several studies have
found that women tend to be more collectivist in their ways of thinking and interpreting
the world (Arora, Singhai, & Patel, 2011; Cooper, et. al., 2013; Greenfield & Suzuki,
1998; Kahttab, et. al., 2012; Testé, 2012).
Statistical differences by position. Analysis of motivation to lead based on
current position did show a statistical difference between current library leaders and
aspiring library leaders. In the national survey, library leaders scored higher than
aspiring library leaders (academic librarians) on Affective Identity. This is not surprising
since traditionally people who score higher on the Affective Identity scale generally have
more leadership experience. The statistical significance of this finding will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter Five.
Data from the national survey helped broadly describe the motivation to lead of
academic librarians. Findings from the survey show these participants are motivated to
lead, not based on the benefits and rewards they may perceive from the profession (Non-

114
Calculative Identity), but on the pleasure of leading others and their social obligations to
leadership. In order to look more closely at the motivations to lead of African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians, the qualitative phase of this
study asked participants to describe their motivations to lead in greater detail. These
results told a somewhat different story than the national survey results.
Qualitative Analysis Summary
In this study, interview participants offered specific stories and examples of how
their race/ethnicity plays a role in their motivations to lead at their current institutions.
Other themes were also discovered and are summarized below. A more detailed analysis
of these findings will be discussed in more detail in Chapter Five.
Feelings of obligation. All librarians interviewed for this study wanted to do the
best job possible, and a recurring theme in most of the interviews was the feeling of
obligation. On more than one occasion, the researcher heard that if it weren’t for outside
influences, some of these librarians would have already quit the profession or gone on to
other institutions. Many of the participants had families and were the primary
breadwinner. Many echoed the remark, “If I didn’t have kids, I probably would have
left”. Almost all of the participants stated they were staying and leading based on a
strong sense of obligation and a desire to “pay-back” and “pay-forward”. Pimentl said,
“My parents worked really hard… this is nothing like the kind of work that they had to
do.” These librarians wanted to remain in the position as a way to thank their families for
the sacrifices made for them, the librarians of color who opened doors for them, and may
have also helped provide scholarships, and most importantly they had a sense of
obligation to pay their fortunes forward to up-coming librarians of color.

115
Frustrations with lack of diversity. Several of the interview participants stated
they were the only underrepresented minorities in their libraries. Many believed that
current academic library leaders were not doing enough to address the problems of
diversity in academic libraries. Several participants felt discouraged with the lack of
leadership opportunities for librarians of color and stated they felt compelled to advise
current leaders against pigeonholing underrepresented librarians into “diversity” positions
without getting to know their potential and allowing them to develop other leadership
skills. In order to cultivate their leadership skills, some of the academic librarians in the
second phase of this study sought opportunities to lead outside of their libraries. Some
spoke of being the lone Hispanic/Latin@ or African American/Black voice at the table
and resented being asked to represent the whole of their ethnic backgrounds.
Feelings of reward. Another major theme throughout the interviews was a
strong sense of reward associated with knowing they are doing a good job and helping
their communities. All of the participants in the second phase of this study stated that
they deeply enjoyed helping patrons with research and contributing to the scholarly
communication within academia themselves. Some of them felt a strong sense of pride in
their own research and discussed their own publications and presentations. Many said
they would not have the opportunity to contribute to library scholarship if it were not for
working in academic libraries. The ones who published and presented on important
library topics found themselves traveling to national conferences where they formed
strong networks with other underrepresented minority librarians and sought other
leadership opportunities outside of their institutions.

116
In short, the findings in this study indicate that underrepresented minority
librarians have a strong sense of obligation when it comes to their motivations to lead.
Findings also indicate that although there is no perceived statistical significance on the
motivation to lead of librarians based on their race/ethnicity or their gender, there is a
difference based on their current position as either a library leader or an aspiring library
leader. This chapter also briefly touched on underrepresented minority librarians’
motivations to lead in their current environments and discussed the supports and
constraints experienced by these participants in their current settings. A more detailed
discussion of the findings will be discussed in Chapter Five.

CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Summary of the Study
This chapter summarizes the previous four chapters, presents conclusions drawn
from the current study, and discusses implications for academic library leadership,
implications for social justice, and thoughts for future research. The chapter begins with
a summary of the problem, follows with a review of the research questions and the
methodology, and then discusses results of the study in greater detail. The purpose of
this study was to investigate the motivations to lead of underrepresented minority
academic librarians, specifically African American/Blacks and Hispanic/Latin@s, who
are currently working either at a predominantly White institution, a Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI), or at a Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Institution.
Summary of the Problem
Studies have shown the social inequities perpetuated by educational institutions in
the U.S. continue to benefit White students more so than their underrepresented minority
counterparts (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977; Gordon & Generett, 2011; Kim & Taylor,
2008; Lareau & McNamara Horvat, 1999). Due to demographic changes in the United
States, specifically the changing student populations of colleges and universities, the need
for more underrepresented minority leaders, especially in academic libraries, is necessary
to help the changing population succeed in higher education. Academic library leaders
have the potential to influence students’ academic success through library policies,
collections, budgets, and staffing. Consequently, it is important for these library leaders

117

118
to fully understand their student population in order to make informed decisions
regarding their libraries and their library users. In addition to potentially better assisting
underrepresented minority students, the increase of diversity in academic libraries could
also prove to be beneficial for surrounding communities because underrepresented
minority librarians have a better understanding of not only the cultural and language
differences, but also the information needs of these diverse populations (Alire, 2001; Kim
& Sin, 2008).
Although the profession has invested years in recruitment efforts, retention and
promotion of underrepresented minority librarians remains a challenge for libraries
(Adkins & Espinal, 2004; Davis & Hall, 2007; Diaz, Tellman & Jones,1998; Epps, 2008;
Hall, 2007; Winston, 2008). This mixed-methods study used Motivation to Lead (MTL)
theory, (which measured three correlated factors: Affective Identity, Non-Calculative
Identity, and Social-Normative Identity), to explore the motivations that help
underrepresented minority academic librarians stay in the library profession and pursue
leadership positions within the field. This chapter delves deeper into the quantitative and
qualitative findings by dissecting individuals’ motivations to lead and exploring how
understanding those motivations can help increase the retention and promotion rates of
underrepresented minority academic librarians.
Much of the current research on leadership looks at leader characteristics and how
those influence organizational success. Literature on diversity in academic libraries
generally focuses on why underrepresented minority librarians leave the profession. To
date, there is no research that investigates the motivation to lead of these librarians. In
order to understand retention and promotion of underrepresented minority academic

119
librarians, it is important to understand the obstacles these librarians face and what
motivates them to pursue leadership positions in a predominantly White profession.
Review of Methodology and Research Questions
This study used a mixed-methods design to collect quantitative and qualitative
data through a national survey of academic librarians and through semi-structured, openended interviews with African American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians.
This approach allowed for a more inclusive look at the questions and a better
understanding of the issues faced by this particular group of academic librarians because
it first looked at the issue of motivation to lead from a broad, national lens and then
focused on the more comprehensive details of lived experiences. The first phase used the
27-item Motivation to Lead (MTL) scale (Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001), which
measured three dimensions of MTL: Affective-Identity, Social-Normative Identity, and
Non-Calculative identity. The instrument was not only distributed online to various
academic library listservs, but it was also emailed to underrepresented minority library
caucus leaders and posted to social media network sites for a broader dissemination.
After the quantitative data results were collected and analyzed, the researcher
identified twelve participants for the second phase of the study. Using an appreciative
inquiry approach to help elicit in-depth answers, the researcher interviewed six African
American/Black females, three female Hispanic/Latinas, and three male Hispanic/Latinos.
Each interview took place either over the phone or via Skype, depending on participant
comfort level and availability. The researcher is based in California, but ten of the
participants were located out of state. This means the researcher tried to accommodate
diverse time zone restrictions by sometimes interviewing participants either very early in

120
the morning or late in the evening, Pacific Standard Time. All dates and times were
chosen by the participants in order to accommodate their busy personal and professional
schedules. The interviews were conducted between October 2013 and January 2014, and
the interviewer used a secure office location to audio record each interview. The
transcripts were typed by a paid student assistant and stored in a secure, locked cabinet
inside the secure office location. The researcher then gave each participant the
opportunity to provide written feedback on his/her own transcript. Finally the researcher
coded each transcript in order to identify recurring themes.
In order to gain more insight into what motivates these individuals to stay in the
profession and seek leadership opportunities, each participant was asked a series of 12
interview questions (Appendix D). Those questions were guided by the main research
question in this study: In what ways does understanding the role of motivation to lead
play a role in the retention and promotion of underrepresented minority academic
librarians? The following sub-research questions were also investigated and answered
through both the quantitative and qualitative phases of this study:
1. What factors influence an underrepresented minority librarian’s motivation to
lead in an academic library setting?
2. Are there differences between current and aspiring academic librarians and their
motivation to lead in academic library settings? Does this vary by race/ethnicity?
Discussion of Findings
Findings indicate that although a majority of academic librarians scored highest
on the Non-Calculative Identity scale, Social Normative Identity and Affective Identity
scored similarly. Survey results suggest that most academic librarians do not pursue

121
leadership positions based on the benefits they receive; rather, they lead based on a sense
of obligation and pleasure. However, one-on-one interviews with African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latin@ academic librarians reveal a different story with
more in-depth reasons behind why they chose to stay in the profession.
Factors that Influence Motivation to Lead
There were several individual factors that interview participants credited with
staying in the profession. Some of those factors included things like having selfconfidence, pairing up with respected mentors, networking with other minority academic
librarians outside of their libraries, and having a strong sense of persistence when faced
with obstacles. In addition to these individual reasons, the researcher discovered three
major themes woven throughout all of the participants’ responses which influenced their
motivations to stay and lead in academic libraries. Those themes included a sense of
obligation, a sense of reward, and feelings of disappointment in diversity efforts in
academic libraries.
Sense of obligation. Research has shown that employees driven by a sense of
obligation, rather than personal ambition, are more likely to work toward the benefit of
their greater organization and speak up more at work (Tangirala & Kamdar, 2013).
When one thinks of the word “obligation,” usually negative connotations of moral and
legal commitments come to mind where a person feels bound to do something based on
guilt, or because of an agreement, or to repay a debt. The term obligation, in this current
study, does not necessarily reflect negative feelings from participants. On the contrary,
most of the participants expressed almost a sense of honor and pride when they talked
about their obligations. Most of the participants in this second phase felt like they had to

122
lead based on a sense of obligation and responsibility, usually to themselves but
sometimes to others. There were three librarians (Woods, Pimentl, and KR Librarian)
who expressed deep feelings of frustration with librarianship and wanted to leave the
profession all together, but they felt obligated to stay based on the stability of their jobs
for the sake of their families.
Some of the participants clearly stated they wanted to take leadership positions
because they felt no one else would “step-up” or the job would not be performed to their
own high standards. All of the librarians who were interviewed took pride in their work
and wanted to ensure their libraries were doing all they could to help support student
learning needs. They had a strong desire to succeed in meeting challenges placed before
them and often found themselves taking on roles that no one else wanted to take. Some
of the librarians, Ms. Anderson and Ms. Dotson, for example, were the only librarians in
their units and often felt like, by default, they had to take leadership roles because their
staff was counting on them to do so.
There were also feelings of obligation based on the fact that most of these
participants were in the clear minority at their institutions and no one else from their
race/ethnicities could represent those important voices if they left. “Voice is…
participation in and acceptance of the academic and intellectual process… Voice is
identity, a sense of self, a sense of relationship to others, and a sense of purpose. Voice is
power…” (McElroy-Johnson, 1993, p. 86). The voices mentioned in the interviews were
not only of other librarians from diverse backgrounds but also student voices from
underrepresented communities. The participants cautioned that they are not speaking for

123
every minority person at their university, but they also felt that other librarians may not
fully understand the “voiceless” and may not be able to accurately represent their needs.
In addition to wanting to give voice to others, the participants in this study all
wanted to “give back” to those diverse librarians who set the road before them and “pay it
forward” to a new set of diverse librarians who will eventually follow in their footsteps.
This concept of reciprocity was studied by researchers who found that pro-social
behavior was more strongly influenced by the obligation to reciprocate (“paying it back”)
and less affected by the expectation of reciprocity (“paying me forward”) (Korsgaard,
Meglino, Lester, & Jeong, 2010). Furthermore, other research has found that moral
responsibility to “pay back” others was associated with a person’s perceived importance
of the past rather than feelings of guilt or “what’s in it for me?” (Zimmermann, Abrams,
Doosje, & Manstead, 2011).
In addition to wanting to be a voice, many of the interviewees credited family
obligation as one of the main reasons for staying in the profession. As previous studies
have indicated, Hispanic/Latin@ and African American/Black individuals exhibit high
degrees of loyalty and commitment to their families (Coleman, Ganong, & Rothrauff,
2007; Fingerman, VanderDrift, Dotterer, Birditt, & Zarit, 2011; Fuligni, 2001; Fuligni,
Tseng, & Lam, 1999; Groger & Mayberry, 2001). One of the ways participants in this
study demonstrate respect for their families is to succeed in their current positions. Thus,
family respect and responsibility strongly motivated their desires to stay. Some of the
participants were single mothers: Although balancing work and family commitments is a
significant source of strain for all working parents, working single mothers suffer
additional anxiety (Okimoto & Heilman, 2012); however, the participants in this study

124
knew the work they were doing was also benefiting their children. They did not express
feelings of anxiety, but three librarians did express some feelings of resentment at the fact
they had to stay in their current libraries because they could not uproot their families. In
order to make the best of their situations, they seek leadership opportunities outside their
libraries.
Disappointment with diversity. Studies show that a lack of diversity leads to
biased selection of research, uniformity of opinion, poor decision making, and a mistrust
in the system (Inbar & Lammers, 2012; Kivlighan, 2008; Lazos Vargas, 2008). Although
the American Library Association (ALA) has committed to recruiting more
underrepresented minority librarians, numbers still show that White females continue to
dominate the profession (ALA, 2012a). This is another reason why nearly all of the
participants in this study stated they wanted to remain in academic libraries. Building off
the concept of giving voice to the voiceless, several of the participants revealed they were
the only persons of color in their libraries, and there was a strong perception that current
academic library leaders were not doing enough to properly recruit, and especially retain
and promote, underrepresented minority librarians in the profession.
A majority of the interviewees expressed a sense of frustration with the lack of
opportunity provided to librarians currently in the field as they spoke of being boxed into
“diversity” positions and not offered other leadership roles. Librarians in this study
cautioned library leaders against tokenism. Many of these librarians felt they had to seek
leadership positions outside their libraries in order to receive the experience they needed
to succeed. Finally, some of the librarians stated that because of the lack of diversity,

125
they experienced isolation and therefore sought diverse professional relationships through
ALA sponsored caucuses such as REFORMA and BCALA.
Feelings of reward. There is ample research on the topic of reward and its effect
on human motivation, specifically the primitive and modern parts of human brains and
the conscious/unconscious calculation of risks and rewards (Morse, 2006). The concept
of “reward” in this study was not specifically defined in monetary terms; rather, the
researcher found that interview participants expressed feelings of reward that were
closely tied to social acceptance. Although the national survey scores indicated NonCalculative identity was the highest for participants, qualitative participant scores showed
they valued Social Normative and Affective identities more. This means that participants
in the second phase of this study did look at the benefits and rewards when taking
leadership positions, but they seemed to look at those rewards based on feelings of social
norm and pleasure.
Participants weighed the needs of their communities, their libraries, and their
families before deciding to take leadership roles. They took the time to investigate how
fulfilling the needs of others could also help their own needs. A study on interpersonal
relationships found that participants calculated the costs and consequences to both
themselves and those they were contemplating helping, and that their sense of moral
obligation to help was greater when both the recipient and the participant faced higher
levels of need (Sorkhabi, 2012). That explains why these participants revealed they had a
sense of reward and the positive feelings associated with doing a good job and helping
others. Participants stated that they genuinely enjoyed helping patrons with research and
participating in the daily academic discourse with other scholars. Some of the participants

126
stated how excited they were that they were considered faculty and had the opportunity to
travel and present their own research at national and international conferences. Many
used these opportunities to connect with other underrepresented minority librarians and
network with other institutions.
Differences of MTL among Academic Librarians
Quantitative results showed that there was little to no statistical significance in the
motivation to lead mean scores between and among gender or race/ethnicity. However,
there was a statistical difference in the motivation to lead scores among those in current
leadership positions and those seeking leadership positions. This finding supports Chan’s
Affective Identity concept that a person is motivated to lead others by an innate desire
that comes from the satisfaction and pleasure of simply being a leader. Quantitative
results showed that current library leaders scored higher on Affective Identity scale than
aspiring library leaders. This is because people who scored higher on Affective Identity
generally have more leadership experience and have been in the profession longer.
Qualitative findings also echoed this strong sense of Affective Identity among the
interview participants who were current library leaders. The researcher got a strong sense
from the interviewees that each of them received a certain amount of pleasure from
taking leadership positions, but those librarians who were in the profession for a
significantly longer period of time outwardly voiced their pleasure with leadership.
These individuals saw themselves as leaders and “love to lead,” but deeper conversations
revealed that, with the exception of Mr. Chicano Librarian who expressly said he always
loved to lead (even in team sports as a child), the other Affective Identity leaders did not
always start out that way. They, like the current aspiring librarians, found themselves

127
leading based on a sense of obligation (Social Normative Identity). This finding suggests
that, with more time and more experience, the aspiring library leaders will learn to also
“love to lead” one day.
Those considered “current library leaders” currently hold positions in academic
libraries as deans/directors/university librarians, associate deans/associate
directors/associate university librarians, and department heads/supervisors/coordinators.
Those considered “aspiring library leaders” in this study currently hold positions in
academic libraries as academic librarians in various departments such as reference,
instruction, archives, systems, or metadata.
Understanding MTL’s Role in Retention and Promotion
Understanding the role of employee motivation is an important tool that all
leaders need to learn how to use. However, understanding motivation in academic
libraries, specifically the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority librarians is
often completely overlooked by today’s library leaders. Current library leaders can use
their understanding of motivation to lead theory to help inspire more underrepresented
minority librarians to take on leadership roles. Not all motivation comes from the outside;
research has shown (including this current study) that each individual has his/her own set
of motivating factors. It is the responsibility of current library leaders to carefully
identify and address these motivating factors and build strategic leadership development
plans for each of their librarians.
Many library leaders may lack the knowledge in implementing successful
motivational programs that increase retention and promotion rates of underrepresented
minority librarians. Results from this study show that leaders must create positive work

128
environments and provide leadership opportunities for all of their librarians. Although
there are many individual factors that contribute to a librarian’s motivation to lead,
current library leaders must work with their librarians to identify, on individual levels,
successful processes and programs that will work for their career goals. Mr. Chicano
Librarian stated that he takes the time to get to know his librarians and their career
trajectories before tasking them with projects and leadership opportunities. On a similar
note, Ms. Biblio Beagle shared how in her library, even though she is one of the only
ethnic minorities (not only at her institution but also in the state where she lives), her
current library leaders took the time to get to know her career passions and the factors
that contributed to her desire to want to lead. They discovered that she had a deep
affinity for first-generation college students and research. As a result (and with proper
training and mentoring), she now works closely with first-generation college students and
earned tenure/promotion a year early.
Identifying individual motivational factors may sound time consuming, but it is
less costly than librarian turnover. People tend to want to stay when they are in work
environments that make them feel valued and appreciated for a job well done. A library
leader who takes the time to find out the African American social sciences librarian he
just hired a few months ago also has a passion for information literacy may task him with
taking the lead on developing a new curriculum for the library’s information literacy
program. That could lead to a larger leadership role of tasking him to work with campus
curriculum committees to help develop campus-wide curriculum policies. Each step in
the individual’s leadership development plan should be carefully plotted through ongoing discussions between the current library leader and the academic librarian.

129
Once a leadership development plan, based on the academic librarian’s passions
and motivations, is clearly identified, it is imperative for the library leader to recognize
and reward her librarians accordingly. Academic library leaders should not assume that
people feel valued and appreciated just because they continue to be productive and grow
in their leadership capacities. They should also not assume that the recognition and
reward system that works for one librarian will work for others. Although results from
this study show that monetary incentives are not huge motivational factors for these
participants, that does not suggest people do not want to be compensated for the good
work they do. Incentives can be both monetary and non-monetary. The current budgetary
landscape for academic libraries does not always allow for pay increases or financial
compensation, but a library leader should be on the lookout for professional development
opportunities or chances to be part of university policy and strategic planning. Again, the
reward is based on the librarian’s comfort and preference (Bessell, Dicks, Wysocki, &
Kepner, 2012).
Implications for Leadership Practice
Studies in business show racial diversity in employment is associated with
increased sales, more customers, and greater profits for companies (Herring, 2009).
Increasing diversity in university librarianship, specifically library leadership positions,
may not only benefit the universities but also increase retention rates of minority students.
One of the ways to support the academic success of minority students and improve
pedagogy is to hire more qualified minority university librarians to help teach
information literacy courses and to help minority students feel more at ease in the library.
Retaining those minority librarians will also increase the pool of future potential

130
university library leaders. Brown & Stout-Dapaz (2001) and Conteh-Morgan (2001)
discuss how library deans tend to hire images of themselves and how hiring diverse
library instructors helps to quell minority and inter-national students’ feelings of
alienation. If university libraries don’t start hiring qualified, diverse individuals as their
leaders, they will continue to have difficulty serving their growing diverse populations
effectively and lose future minority library leaders.
Implications for Social Justice
Since it is the responsibility of library deans to ensure patrons feel comfortable
and not feel alienated or anxious about coming in the building, it would be wise if more
academic library deans reflected the cultural diversity of their student populations.
University libraries must be proactive in establishing policies and programs designed to
support the academic success of minority students by not only hiring more qualified
minority academic librarians but also diversifying collections, and expanding services to
minority university students (Puente, Gray, & Agnew, 2008). In addition, university
library leaders must be mindful of the unique needs of an increasingly diverse student
population to ensure that university libraries are a welcoming place for all students
(Switzer, 2008). A recent study found that although more Latin@ students use the
physical library than white students, Latin@ students still do not perform as well as white
students on information literacy assessments (Dabbour & Ballard, 2011). Given the
differences in test scores, researchers suggest improvements in pedagogy for minority
students are needed (Dabbour & Ballard, 2011). Without higher numbers of diverse
librarians and library leaders, serving the ever-changing communities will be difficult.

131
Limitations of the Study
This study offered insight into the motivations to lead of underrepresented
minority academic librarians. Findings from this study can help current academic library
leaders build leadership development plans for each of their librarians, based on the
passions and motivations of each of those librarians. Nevertheless, this study, as with
any research study, has limitations which much be acknowledged. Those limitations
include survey interpretation, generalizability, and positionality.
The Motivation to Lead instrument has been vetted by several other researchers
and tested for validity and reliability not only by those other researchers but by this
researcher as well. However, as with any survey instrument, there are limitations. One
of the limitations of this particular instrument is that it was mainly designed for military
personnel. As such, some of the questions may be interpreted differently by different
populations. In this case, the population was predominantly female. Military personnel
are traditionally male dominated. For this reason, the researcher placed more emphasis
on the qualitative results of this study’s findings.
Although the national survey produced a fairly large research sample (n=248), the
qualitative interview participants were not fully representative of the quantitative national
sample. It would have been ideal to interview three African American/Black males
instead of six African American/Black females for a more balanced perspective on the
current state of academic libraries, but no African American/Black males stated they
wanted to be interviewed for the second phase of the study. Also, since a majority of the
national survey participants scored highest on Non-Calculative Identity and a majority of
the qualitative participants scored highest on Social-Normative and Affective Identity,

132
the data are not generalizable. However, data from this study can inform and provide
valuable insight to academic library leaders on the motivations to lead of
underrepresented minority academic librarians.
It is important to note that the researcher’s positionality could have also presented
a limitation. The researcher is currently employed as an academic librarian at a four-year
institution and is a member of a racially underrepresented minority group. The researcher
is also seeking leadership positions within academic libraries. As such, researcher bias
may have been derived from personal experiences, which in turn, could have influenced
the study. On the other hand, as an academic librarian from a similar background as the
participants, being an “insider” afforded the participants a sense of trust and the
researcher a deeper understanding of the lived experiences of these librarians. Efforts to
reduce biases and maintain objectivity included member checking of transcripts to ensure
the researcher captured participant feelings and experiences accurately.
Finally, another limitation of the study was distance. All, except for two,
participants were located outside of the researcher’s state of California. This means most
participants wanted to be interviewed via telephone. While this was the most convenient
form of communication for all parties involved, the researcher could not read body
language or facial cues during the interview.
Areas for Future Research
It is clear from this study that further research on successful retention and
promotion programs of minority university librarians is needed. Looking at the failing
retention and promotion efforts that affect minority librarians will allow the researcher to
investigate what does work for future retention and promotion efforts. Current academic

133
library leaders can put to use the lessons learned for retaining, nurturing, and promoting
more diverse librarians into positions of leadership. While a majority of the current
research focuses on the success of diversity recruitment efforts, with the exception of a
handful of ARL retention programs, there is little research on successful retention and
promotion strategies that universities themselves can put in place. Not all universities are
associated with ARL; therefore, those libraries also need effective programs to help retain
current minority librarians and develop potential library leaders.
In addition to investigating retention and promotion successes, and in addition to
studying non-ARL institutions, future research should also look at the internal and
external motivating factors at play when it comes to library leadership development. To
date, no other research (aside from this current study) looks at motivation to lead in
librarianship. Research using motivation to lead theory focusing mainly on current
underrepresented minority library leaders could help establish a baseline for future
research on potential library leaders. More research on retention efforts and motivational
factors can present practical implications for leadership selection, training, and
development in university libraries. In researching library leaders’ motivations to lead,
one could discover additional motivational factors that will help expand the range of
motivational factors beyond what is discussed in this study (Amit, Lisak, Popper & Gal,
2007; Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgo, 2001; Lisak, 2004).
Another area of research could be developing best practices for current academic
librarians to follow when creating individual leadership development plans and
investigating the organizational success of university libraries that have higher diversity
retention rates. There are success stories in retention and promotion in academic libraries

134
based on programs that help foster leadership development for underrepresented minority
librarians. For example, in a state where 90% of the population is White, the University
of Nebraska-Lincoln University Libraries established a committee and a “Multicultural
Services Team” in order to help increase the number of minority librarians from 2.6% of
the faculty in 1999 to 12.2% in 2009 (Anaya, Maxey-Harris, Panigabutra-Roberts, 2010).
They credit their success to a sincere leadership team that values diversity.
Conclusion of the Study
To date, the face of academic librarianship is still radically different from the
changing faces of students in colleges and universities. Academic libraries are most often
led by White women and men with very few librarians of color in the field, let alone in
positions of leadership (Kyrillidou & Morris, 2012). To be more specific,
underrepresented minority academic librarians hold 7.1% of the deanships at Association
of Research Libraries (ARL) (Kyrillidou & Morris, 2012). This is an important issue
because the racial makeup of students attending colleges and universities is changing and
is disproportionate to the academic leadership of their educational environments,
especially in their libraries. As more underrepresented minority students graduate from
high school and seek post-secondary opportunities, the numbers of underrepresented
minority students in colleges and universities continue to increase and the numbers of
URM educators, namely librarians, will need to keep up in order to help these students
succeed (U.S. Department of Education, 2011).
Library leaders can help students succeed through developing library services,
collecting diverse resources, and creating a welcoming environment for underrepresented
minority students (Hall, 2007). Studies have shown that students feel more safe and

135
comfortable coming to the library when they see a more diverse staff in the building
(Elteto, Jackson, & Lim, 2008). University libraries have the power to provide diverse
educational environments that prepare students to succeed in diverse societies (Winston,
2001), yet studies suggest that American educational institutions continue to replicate
existing social inequalities by shaping their settings to benefit White students and their
families (Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977; Gordon & Generett, 2011; Kim & Taylor, 2008;
Lareau & McNamara Horvat, 1999).
Still, academic libraries fail to retain and promote highly qualified individuals
because current library leaders lack the understanding of what motivates an
underrepresented minority librarian to stay in the profession and seek leadership positions.
Soon this generation of library leaders will retire, and researchers agree that retention and
promotion efforts should not lie solely with national diversity programs. They argue that
all academic libraries should have a vested interest in recruiting, retaining, and promoting
minority librarians (ALA, 2011a; Musser, 2001; Winston, 2001; Winston, 2008).
Unfortunately, many highly qualified underrepresented minority librarians leave
their institutions for other jobs or for other professions all together. Research tells us that
some of the main reasons they leave are due to discrimination, isolation, a lack of
mentoring, and having very little professional support from their peers and library leaders
(Alire, 2001; Bonnette, 2004; Olivas & Ma, 2009; Thornton, 2001). While some
institutions have mentoring programs or residency programs put in place to help new
librarians from underrepresented backgrounds succeed, these programs could prove
unsuccessful if library leadership is not fully behind the mission of retaining and
promoting diverse librarians. Mentoring programs alone do not show diversity support

136
because mentorships depend on the relationship between the mentor and the mentee and
whether the mentor voluntarily enters the mentorship or was assigned without
consideration for strengths, weaknesses, and other important factors (Damasco & Hodges,
2012).
Current library leaders need to make more of an effort to retain and promote their
URM librarians by first getting to know them and understanding what motivates them to
want to stay in the profession. Every librarian chose a career in libraries, and in some
instances those reasons have changed over the years. Those reasons could be their
passion for staying in the profession. Finding and nurturing those passions can help both
the library leader and the URM librarian to hone their motivations to lead and seek
positions that will help the librarian develop more leadership skills and acquire more
leadership opportunities in the future.
Research says there is an attrition of underrepresented minorities in librarianship
because of limited opportunities for professional mobility and access to positions of
leadership (Davis & Hall, 2007, p. 16). The truth is that there is considerable
opportunity; it is just a lack of understanding on the part of library leaders, as to who their
librarians are and what their professional passions and talents are. It is important for
current library leaders to create opportunities for underrepresented minority librarians to
develop and demonstrate their leadership potential (Alire, 2001; Epps, 2008; Johnson,
2007; Wheeler, 2000). Otherwise, academic libraries will not be able to effectively
influence change and remain relevant to their users (Alire, 2001; Wheeler, 2000; Winston,
2001).

137
This study discussed, in detail, what the Motivation to Lead theory is and how it
can help retain and promote minority academic librarians. Prior to the MTL research on
motivation and motivation to lead focused on personality traits. This study encourages
current academic library leaders to go beyond personalities and instead to recognizes the
multidimensional nature of their librarians. Every potential new library leader brings
with him/her a set of personal characteristics such as knowledge, skills, abilities, and
personality. Current library leaders must learn to use MTL to recognize their librarians’
individual differences which interact with their interests and abilities. As time goes on,
librarian individual motivations to lead can change with leadership experiences and
training.
Motivation to Lead Theory does not assume people are born to lead or that people
have an unconscious desire for power (Carlyle, 1841; McClelland, 1975, 1985; Miner,
1977, 1993; Stahl, 1986). Instead, MTL assumes that leadership skills, leadership style,
and the understanding of what it means to be a leader are learned traits (Bandura, 1986,
1997; Chan, 1999; Chan & Drasgow, 2001). Getting to know URM academic librarian
passions and current motivations, establishing a leadership development plan, and
creating a positive work environment, will help with URM academic librarian career
trajectory and could potentially lead to a more diverse workforce in academic library
leadership. Transformational changes in academic library environments must be
implemented to encourage the motivation to lead in underrepresented minority academic
librarians. This study challenges current library leaders to think outside the box, beyond
diversity recruitment efforts and beyond mentoring. It invites these leaders to personally
get to know their underrepresented minority librarians by understanding their motivations

138
and learning how to nurture and reward those motivations to help “diversify this thing”
called academic library leadership.

APPENDIX A: EMAIL INVITATION TO PARTICIPATE IN SURVEY
My name is Antonia P. Olivas, and I am a doctoral candidate in the joint Educational
Leadership Program at University of California San Diego/California State University
San Marcos. The goal of this email is to recruit participants for my dissertation research.
All academic librarians, regardless of race/ethnicity, are invited to participate in the first
part of this study (https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/Motivation_to_Lead).
Current literature on the retention and promotion of underrepresented minority (URM)
academic librarians indicates that there is a severe lack of URM librarians in positions
of leadership. I am conducting a mixed methods study to examine the minority
leadership gap in academic libraries using an appreciative inquiry lens. I want to look
at the reasons why URM librarians choose to stay in the profession and why some of
them also choose to lead. I will specifically be exploring the experiences of African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latino academic librarians who are currently working in
academic libraries.
Activities Involved in the Research
Survey/Questionnaire: Part one of this research is a survey/questionnaire. All
academic librarians, regardless of race/ethnicity, are welcome to participate.
This instrument
includes a total of 36 questions which requires about 15 minutes to complete.
You have until August 31st to complete the full survey. You will be given the
opportunity to provide your contact information at the end of the survey only if
you would like to be contacted at a later date for the second part of this
research. This is the link to the Motivation to Lead (MTL) scale (Chan &
Drasgow, 2001) inviting all academic
librarians to participate: https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/Motivation_to_Lead
Interviews: The second part of this research is a one-on-one interview either in
person, over the phone, or online. You are not required to participate in the
second part of this study. The interview entails a minimum of 1 hour
responding to 13 questions, and going over your rights as a participant.
Risks
There are minimal risks in participating in the research. They include:
1. Loss of time or boredom while filling out the survey and/or answering
interview questions.
2. Recalling uncomfortable memories or current struggles that are deemed
difficult to articulate or share.
3. Experiencing deeply-rooted unexpected and unresolved feelings.
4. Personal information may be subject to being breached.

139

140
Safe guards
Safe guards are put in place to minimize risks. They include:
1. The primary investigator will house all survey answers in an electronic file on a
laptop where only the researcher has the password. The primary investigator is
working alone, thus limiting others to have access to data.
2. Your name and university will not be a requirement in order to participate in the
survey.
3. If you decide to participate in a later interview, you can ask the primary
investigator to turn off the audio-recorder and take a moment to recuperate, or
refuse to answer any question.
4. You will be directed to talk with people you trust (i.e., family, friend, and mentor),
make an appointment with a counselor, or if necessary, request to stop or withdraw
from the research. Also, a list of health services referrals in your area and from the
primary investigator’s home campus will be offered if a strong emotional reaction
is evoked during the interview and journal writing processes.
5. Documents will be kept in a locked cabinet and within a login-only accessible
computer with the primary investigator only having access to the documents. The
primary investigator is working alone, thus limiting others to have access to data.
Pseudonyms will be used to hide your identity.
Benefits
Although your participation will yield no direct personal benefits to you, the primary
investigator believes that your authentic participation will add an in-depth understanding
of your lived experiences to that of other academic librarians. In turn, your responses
add information to the motivation to lead of underrepresented minority academic
librarians.
Voluntary Participation
Your participation is entirely voluntary and may be withdrawn at any time. If the length
of the survey becomes inconvenient, you may stop at any time. There are no
consequences if you decide not to participate.
Incentive
There are no monetary incentives for participating in this research.
Questions and Contact Information
This study has been approved by the California State University San Marcos
Institutional
Review Board (IRB). If you have questions about the study, you may direct them to
the primary investigator, Antonia Olivas at tolivas@csusm.edu or (760) 750-4333, or
the primary investigator’s Chair, Dr. Carolyn H. Hofstetter at chofstet@ucsd.edu.
Questions about your rights as a participant should be directed to the IRB at (760) 7504029.

APPENDIX B: INFORMED CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN RESEARCH
You are being asked to take part in a research study. Research studies include only people
who choose to take part. This document is called an informed consent form. Please read
this information carefully and take your time making your decision. Ask the researcher to
discuss this consent form with you, please ask her to explain any words or information
you do not clearly understand. The nature of the study, risks, inconveniences,
discomforts, and other important information about the study are listed below.
Ms. Olivas is asking you to take part in a research study called: Understanding the
Motivation to Lead of Underrepresented Minority Academic Librarians
The person who is in charge of this research study is Antonia Olivas. This person is
called the Principal Investigator. However, Ms. Olivas is being guided in this research by
Dr. Carolyn Huie Hofstetter, University of California San Diego.
The research will be conducted online and in person.
Purpose of the study
The purpose of this study is to investigate the motivations to lead of underrepresented
minority academic librarians for a doctoral dissertation in Educational Leadership.
Should you take part in this study?




This form tells you about this research study. After reading through this form and
having the research explained to you by someone conducting this research, you
can decide if you want to take part in it.
You may have questions this form does not answer. If you do have questions,
feel free to ask Ms. Olivas to explain the study.
Take your time to think about the information that is being provided to you.

This form explains:






Why this study is being done.
What will happen during this study and what you will need to do.
Whether there is any chance of benefits from being in this study.
The risks involved in this study.
How the information collected about you during this study will be used and with
whom it may be shared.

141

142
Providing informed consent to participate in this research study is up to you. If you
choose to be in the study, then you should sign the form. If you do not want to take part
in this study, you should not sign this form.
Benefits
We are unsure if you will receive any benefits by taking part in this research study.
Risks or Discomfort
This research is considered to be minimal risk. That means that the risks associated with
this study are the same as what you face every day. There are no known additional risks
to those who take part in this study.
Compensation
You will receive no payment or other compensation for taking part in this study.
Cost
There will be no additional costs to you as a result of being in this study.
Conflict of Interest Statement
Antonia Olivas is the primary researcher on this project. She is currently an academic
librarian who is of underrepresented minority decent and is interested in pursuing
leadership positions within the academic library field. To ensure the integrity of the
study’s data, Ms. Olivas will work closely with her dissertation committee to keep
information confidential and true to respondents’ nature.
Who will see your information?
In this research study, we use and share your information to the extent authorized
(permitted) by you. We know that this information is private. If you authorize us to use
your information we will protect it as required by the law.
By signing this form, you are permitting University of California San Diego and
California State University San Marcos to use information collected about you for
research purposes.
How will my information be used?
By signing this form, you are giving your permission to use and/or share your
information as described in this document for any and all study/research related purposes
that Antonia Olivas may pursue after the dissertation. Your authorization to use your
information will not expire unless you revoke it in writing.

143
Your Rights:
You can refuse to sign this form. If you do not sign this form you will not be able to take
part in this research study.
How Do I Withdraw Permission to Use My Information?
You can revoke this form at any time by sending a letter clearly stating that you wish to
withdraw your authorization to use of your health information in the research. If you
revoke your permission:



You will no longer be a participant in this research study;
We will use the information collected prior to the revocation of your
authorization. This information may already have been used or we may need it to
complete and protect the validity of the research.

To revoke this form, please write to:
Antonia Olivas, Doctoral Candidate, UCSD/CSUSM
For IRB Study: #2013-114 Motivation to Lead Understanding Why
Underrepresented Minority Academic Librarians Choose to Stay
Kellogg Library
California State University San Marcos
333 S. Twin Oaks Valley Rd.
San Marcos, CA 92096-0001
While we are conducting the research study, we cannot let you see or copy the research
information we have about you. After the research is completed, you have a right to see
the information about you, as allowed by UCSD/CSUSM policies.
Privacy and Confidentiality
Your study records will be private and confidential. Certain people may need to see your
study records. By law, anyone who looks at your records must keep them completely
confidential. The only people who will be allowed to see these records are:


Antonia Olivas, doctoral candidate , Carolyn Huie Hofstetter, dissertation
chair, and all other dissertation committee members



Certain government and university people who need to know more about the
study. For example, individuals who provide oversight on this study may
need to look at your records. This is done to make sure that we are doing the
study in the right way. They also need to make sure that we are protecting
your rights and your safety.

144


The UCSD/CSUSM Institutional Review Board (IRB) and its related staff
who have oversight responsibilities for this study, staff in the UCSD Office of
Research Affairs, staff in the CSUSM Graduate Studies and Research

New information about the study
During the course of this study, we may find more information that could be important to
you. This includes information that, once learned, might cause you to change your mind
about being in the study. We will notify you as soon as possible if such information
becomes available.
Questions and Contact Information
This study has been approved by the California State University San Marcos Institutional
Review Board (IRB). If you have questions about the study, you may direct them to the
primary investigator, Antonia Olivas at tolivas@csusm.edu or (760) 750-4333, or the
primary investigator’s Chair, Dr. Carolyn H. Hofstetter at chofstet@ucsd.edu. Questions
about your rights as a participant should be directed to the IRB at (760) 750-4029. You
will be given a copy of this form to keep for your records.
o I agree to participate in the study.
o I agree to be audio recorded.
Consent to Take Part in Research and Authorization for the Collection, Use and
Disclosure of Information
It is up to you to decide whether you want to take part in this study. If you want to take
part, please read the statements below and sign the form if the statements are true. I freely
give my consent to take part in this study and authorize that my information as agreed
above, be collected/disclosed in this study. I understand that by signing this form I am
agreeing to take part in research. I have received a copy of this form to take with me.
______________________________________________
Signature of Person Taking Part in Study

Date

______________________________________________
Printed Name of Person Taking Part in Study
Statement of Person Obtaining Informed Consent and Research Authorization
I have carefully explained to the person taking part in the study what he or she can expect
from their participation. I hereby certify that when this person signs this form, to the best
of my knowledge, he/ she understands:
 What the study is about;

145




What procedures will be used;
What the potential benefits might be; and
What the known risks might be.

I can confirm that this research subject speaks the language that was used to explain this
research and is receiving an informed consent form in the appropriate language.
Additionally, this subject reads well enough to understand this document or, if not, this
person is able to hear and understand when the form is read to him or her.
___________________________________________________________
Signature of Person Obtaining Informed Consent / Research Authorization

_________
Date

_______________________________________________________________
Printed Name of Person Obtaining Informed Consent / Research Authorization

APPENDIX C: SURVEY INSTRUMENT
My name is Antonia Olivas, and I am a doctoral candidate in my final year of the
Joint Educational Leadership Program at the University of California San Diego and
California State University San Marcos. I am currently conducting a study on the
motivation to lead of African American/Black and Hispanic/Latino academic librarians. I
am using the Motivation to Lead Scale (Chan & Drasgow, 2001) for the first part of this
mixed-methods study. If you identify as an academic librarian, regardless of
race/ethnicity, you are invited to participate in this survey/questionnaire. This is a 36
question instrument and should take approximately 15 minutes to complete.
If you decide you do not want to participate, you are not required to complete the
survey/questionnaire. Please note, the results of this confidential study will be used in my
final dissertation.
Thank you for your interest and your willingness to participate. The link for this
study will expire August 31st, 2013 at 11:59pm (PST). Please feel free to forward the
link to your academic librarian colleagues.
This study has been approved by the Institutional Review Board at California
State University San Marcos.
Regards,
~Antonia Olivas, Education Librarian & Doctoral Candidate
tolivas@csusm.edu

146

147
1. I agree to participate in
this study and



Yes, I agree and understand.



No, I do not agree to participate in

understand the results of

this study.

this
survey/questionnaire
will be used in the
researcher's final
dissertation.


Yes



No



Open ended



Female



Male

5. Are you currently



working at an



Historically Black



Yes, I am currently working at an
HBCU.
Yes, I am currently working at an
HSI.
No, I do not currently work at either
an HBCU or an HSI university.

2. I am an academic
librarian working at a
college or university
library:
3. I identify my
race/ethnicity as...
4. I self-identify as...

College/University
(HBCU) or a Hispanic
Serving Institution

148
(HSI)?
6. My current position in
my library is...



Dean/Director/University Librarian



Associate Dean/Associate
Director/Associate University
Librarian

7. How many years have



Department Head



Other (please specify, open ended)



Open ended

you been working as an
academic librarian?
Motivation to Lead Scale
These are the original Chan & Drasgow (2001) Motivation to Lead survey
questions.
1.

Strongly Disagree, 2. Disagree, 3. Neither Agree nor Disagree, 4. Agree, 5. Strongly Agree

8. I am the type of person who is not
interested in leading others.
9. Most of the time I prefer being a leader
than a follower when working in a group.
10. I am definitely not a leader by nature.
11. I am the type of person who likes to be
in charge of others.
12. I believe I can contribute more to a
group if I am a follower rather than a
leader.
13. I usually want to be the leader in the
groups that I work in.
14. I am the type who would actively
support a leader but prefers not to be
appointed as a leader.
15. I have a tendency to take charge in most
groups or teams that I work in.
16. I am seldom reluctant to be the leader
of a group

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1
1

2
2

3
3

4
4

5
5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

149
17. I am only interested to lead a group if
1
2
3
4
there are clear advantages for me.
18. I will never agree to lead if I cannot see
1
2
3
4
any benefits from accepting that role.
19. I would only agree to be a group leader
1
2
3
4
if I know I can benefit from that role.
20. I would agree to lead others even if
1
2
3
4
there are no special rewards or benefits
with that role.
21. I would want to know what’s in it for
1
2
3
4
me if I am going to agree to lead a group.
22. I never expect to get more privilege if I
1
2
3
4
agree to lead a group.
23. If I agree to lead a group, I would never
1
2
3
4
expect any advantages of special benefits.
24. I have more of my own problem to
1
2
3
4
worry about than to be concerned about the
rest of the group.
25. Leading others is a waste of one’s
1
2
3
4
personal time and effort.
26. I feel that I have a duty to lead others if
1
2
3
4
I am asked.
27. I agree to lead whenever I am asked or
1
2
3
4
nominated by the other members.
28. I was taught in the value of leading
1
2
3
4
others.
29. It is appropriate for people to accept
1
2
3
4
leadership roles or positions when they are
asked.
30. I have been taught that I should always
1
2
3
4
volunteer to lead others if I can.
31. It is not right to decline leadership
1
2
3
4
roles.
32. It is an honor and privilege to be asked
1
2
3
4
to lead.
33. People should volunteer to lead rather
1
2
3
4
than wait for others to ask or vote for them
to lead.
34. I would never agree to lead just because
1
2
3
4
others voted for me.
35. Would you be willing to be
 Yes, I would like to be
interviewed individually

considered for an interview.

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

150
(one-on-one) for this study?



36. Thank you for selecting the

No, thank you.
Please provide your most

option of being considered

updated and convenient contact

for a future confidential one-

information where you can be

on-one interview. I will

reached.

contact you within 30 days to



Name:

let you know if you have



University:

been selected as an interview



Email Address:

participant. Please provide



Phone Number:

your contact information
below. All information
provided will be held in strict
confidence, and no one
(except for the researcher)
will have access to this
information. Your contact
information will be destroyed
once the study has been
completed. Again, thank you
for your willingness to
participate in this study.

APPENDIX D: INTERVIEW PROTOCOL & QUESTIONS
Date
Time of Interview
Place of interview
Participant
(pseudonym)
Participant title
Participant contact
information

Purpose of the Study
This topic aims to capture information about the overall experience of participants in
university and college libraries who are currently in positions of leadership or are actively
pursuing leadership positions in these types of libraries. This study is important because
there is a disproportion of academic library leaders of color to the growing
underrepresented minority student population (specifically African Americans/Blacks
and Hispanic/Latinos). Academic library leaders are ultimately responsible for the
collections, the programming, the services, and the overall environment of their libraries.
With the steady increase of African American/Black and Hispanic/Latino(a) college
students, it is important to have academic library leaders who are familiar with and
understand their demographic needs.
You are invited to participate in this study because you identify as an academic librarian
currently in a leadership position or actively pursuing a leadership position, and you also
identify as African American/Black or Hispanic/Latino(a).
Description of Procedure

151

152
Thank you for signing the consent form. Below are the activities involved in the second
phase of this mixed methods study.
 Interview: This interview entails a minimum of 1 hour responding to 13 questions,
and going over your rights as a participant.
Recording and Transcripts
The interview will be audio recorded. A transcription of this interview (including your
written responses) will be provided to you so that you can have the opportunity to review
your representation and confirm the transcription.
Risks
There are minimal risks in participating in the research. They include:
1. Recalling uncomfortable, sad memories or current struggles that are deemed
difficult to articulate or share.
2. Experiencing deeply-rooted unexpected and unresolved feelings.
3. Personal information may be subject to being breached.
Safe guards
Safe guards are put in place to minimize risks. They include:
1
2

3

You can ask the primary investgator to turn off the audio-recorder and take a
moment to recuperate, or refuse to answer any question.
You will be directed to talk with people you trust (i.e., family, friend, and mentor),
make an appointment with a counselor, or if necessary, request to stop or
withdraw from the research. Also, a list of health services referrals in your area
and from the primary investigator’s home campus will be offered if a strong
emotional reaction is evoked during the interview and journal writing processes.
Documents will be kept in a locked cabinet and within a login-only accessible
computer with the primary investigator only having access to the documents. The
primary investgator is working alone, thus limiting others access to data.
Pseudonyms will be used to hide your identity.

Benefits
Although your participation will yield no direct benefits to you personally, the researcher
believes that your authentic participation will add an in-depth understanding of your lived
experiences to that of other underrepresented minority academic librarians. In turn, your
responses add information to the motivation to lead research regarding African
American/Black and Hispanic/Latino(a) academic librarians.
Voluntary Participation

153
Your participation is entirely voluntary, and may be withdrawn at any time. If the length
of the interview becomes inconvenient, you may stop at any time. There are no
consequences if you decide not to participate.
Incentive
There are no monetary incentives for participating in this research.
Contact Information
This study has been approved by the California State University San Marcos Institutional
Review Board (IRB). If you have questions about the study, you may direct them to the
primary investigator, Antonia Olivas at tolivas@csusm.edu or (760) 750-4333, or the
primary investigator’s Chair, Dr. Carolyn H. Hofstetter at chofstet@ucsd.edu. Questions
about your rights as a participant should be directed to the IRB at (760) 750-4029.
Do you agree to participate in this study?
Do you agree to be audio recorded?
Questions
1. Since this study is completely confidential and your identity will not be shared with
anyone, you are welcome to choose your own alias. This is the name by which you
will be referred throughout the study. I recommend not using an alias you’ve used in
the past and not using an alias with your real initials. For example, if your name is
Janet Smith, do not use the name Joan Simpson. Feel free to be creative, but please
note that the researcher reserves the right to change your alias to protect your identity
or if your alias is deemed inappropriate (For example: no profanity or culturally
insensitive names will be used).
2. How do you define academic library leadership?
3. Tell me about yourself (Example: How long have you been in the library profession?
More specifically, how long have you been an academic librarian? What is your
position at your current library and what are your major responsibilities at this
library?)
4. Think about the reasons you became a librarian. Please tell me about these reasons.
5. Have those reasons changed? Why/Why not?

154
6. What challenges, if any, have you faced in your current position? What did you learn
from these challenges?
7. When you think about the culture of your current library, are there ways in which it
affects your motivation to stay and lead in this environment? How?
8. As a Hispanic/Latina academic librarian, what do you think current academic library
administrators need to know to better support underrepresented minority librarians
pursue their own leadership roles?
9. In what ways, if any, does your race/ethnicity play on your motivation to lead in your
current library?
10. Think about your leadership style and why you choose to be a library leader. Do you
feel you lead based on the satisfaction/pleasure of leading? Or do you feel you lead
because of sense of obligation? Or do you feel you lead based on the benefits/rewards
you receive?
11. Is there anything else you’d like to tell me about your experiences as an
underrepresented minority academic librarian who has chosen to stay in the
profession?
12. May I contact you in the future with follow-up questions?

APPENDIX E

Table 4.3: Mean Identities by Gender
I self-identify as...
Affective
NonIdentity
Calculative
Identity
Mean
3.2825
3.8642
N
190
180
Female
Std.
.70353
.57460
Deviation
Mean
3.2946
3.8386
N
43
42
Male
Std.
.72329
.59820
Deviation
Mean
3.2847
3.8594
N
233
222
Total
Std.
.70565
.57785
Deviation

155

Social
Normative
Identity
3.3290
178
.44685
3.3122
42
.54887
3.3258
220
.46672

APPENDIX F

Table 4.4: Mean Identities by Race/Ethnicity
Race/Ethnicity
Affective
NonSocialIdentify Calculative Normative
Identity
Identity
Mean
3.2370
3.7852
3.3630
N
30
30
30
Hispanic/Latin@
Std.
.47207
.64322
.37246
Deviation
African
American/Black

White

Asian Pacific
Islander

Other

Total

Mean
N
Std.
Deviation

3.2469
45
.77231

3.9127
42
.67051

3.1843
41
.48852

Mean
N
Std.
Deviation

3.3652
122
.73056

3.8841
117
.51611

3.3726
116
.47101

Mean
N
Std.
Deviation

2.9653
16
.63598

3.6270
14
.49806

3.3095
14
.44696

Mean
N
Std.
Deviation

3.2056
20
.70667

3.8772
19
.67168

3.2982
19
.52123

Mean
N
Std.
Deviation

3.2847
233
.70565

3.8594
222
.57785

3.3258
220
.46672

156

APPENDIX G

Table 4.5: Race/Ethnicity ANOVA
Sum of df Mean
F
Sig.
Squares
Square
Between
2.681
4
.670 1.35 .251
Groups
4
AffectiveIdentity
Within Groups 112.842 228
.495
Total
115.523 232
Between
NonCalcIdentity Groups
Within Groups
Total
Between
SocNormIdentity Groups
Within Groups
Total

1.118

4

72.676 217
73.794 221
1.135

4

46.569 215
47.703 219

157

.280 .835 .504
.335

.284 1.31 .267
.217

APPENDIX H

Table 4.6: Post Hoc Test for Current Position
Tukey HSD
Depend. (I)
(J) Current
Mean
Variable Current
Position
Differe
Position
nce (IJ)
-.07184
Associate
Dean
Department .24003
Dean
Head
Academic
.47839*
Librarians
Dean
.07184
Department .31187
Assoc.
Head
Dean
Academic
.55024*
Librarians
Affective
Dean
-.24003
Associate
-.31187
Dept.
Dean
Head
Academic
.23836
Librarians
Dean
.47839*
Academic Associate
Librarian Dean
.55024*
Department -.23836
Head

158

Std.
Error

Sig.

.17792 .978

95% Confidence
Interval
Lower
Upper
Bound
Bound
-.5323
.3886

.14335 .340

-.1310

.6110

.12487 .001

.1552

.8015

.17792 .978
.16947 .257

-.3886
-.1267

.5323
.7505

.15415 .002

.1513

.9492

.14335 .340
.16947 .257

-.6110
-.7505

.1310
.1267

.11250 .150

-.0528

.5295

.12487 .001

-.8015

-.1552

.15415 .002

-.9492

-.1513

.11250 .150

-.5295

.0528

159
Table 4.6: Post Hoc Test for Current Position (Continued)
Tukey HSD
Depend. (I)
(J) Current
Mean
Std. Sig.
Variable Current
Position
Differe Error
Position
nce (IJ)
Associate
-.03987 .15502 .994
Dean
Department -.15181 .12508 .619
Dean
Head
Academic
-.00626 .10851 1.00
Librarians
0
Dean
.03987 .15502 .994
Department -.11194 .14850 .875
Assoc
Head
Dean
Academic
.03361 .13484 .995
Librarians
NonCalc.
Dean
.15181 .12508 .619
Associate
.11194 .14850 .875
Dept
Dean
Head
Academic
.14555 .09898 .457
Librarians
.00626 .10851 1.00
Dean
0
Academic Associate
-.03361 .13484 .995
Librarian Dean
Department -.14555 .09898 .457
Head

95% Confidence
Interval
Lower
Upper
Bound Bound
-.4412
.3615
-.4756

.1720

-.2872

.2747

-.3615
-.4964

.4412
.2725

-.3155

.3827

-.1720
-.2725

.4756
.4964

-.1107

.4018

-.2747

.2872

-.3827

.3155

-.4018

.1107

160
Table 4.6: Post Hoc Test for Current Position (Continued)
Tukey HSD
Depen.
(I)
(J) Current Mean
Std. Sig. 95% Confidence
Variable Current Position
Differe Error
Interval
Position
nce (ILower Upper
J)
Bound Bound
Associate
.04600 .12630 .98
-.2810
.3730
Dean
3
Department .07599 .10217 .87
-.1885
.3405
Dean
Head
9
Academic .07288 .08895 .84
-.1574
.3032
Librarians
5
- .12630 .98
-.3730
.2810
Dean
.04600
3
Soc.
Norm.
Assoc.
Department .02999 .12039 .99
-.2817
.3417
Dean
Head
5
Academic .02688 .10940 .99
-.2564
.3101
Librarians
5
- .10217 .87
-.3405
.1885
Dean
.07599
9
Dept
Head
Associate
- .12039 .99
-.3417
.2817
Dean
.02999
5

APPENDIX I
Table 4.7: Demographics of Interview Participants Showing Their Original Scores on the
MTL Survey

Name

SelfIdentified

Gender

HSI/
HBCU

Position

Years

Beagle

Hispanic

Fem.

No

Academic
Librarian

6

Highest
Identity
Social
Normative

Chicano
Librarian

No

Academic
Librarian
Academic
Librarian

15

Social
Normative
NonCalculative/
Social
Normative
Social
Normative

Chicano

Male

Yes

Renquito

Latino

Male

No

Pimentl

Latina

Fem.

KR
Librarian

Hispanic

Fem.

No

Academic
Librarian

6

Social
Normative

Rose

MexicanAmerican

Male

No

Academic
Librarian

18

Social
Normative

Woods

AfricanAmerican

Fem.

Yes

Dotson

Black

Fem.

No

Departme
nt Head
Academic
Librarian

Smith

AfricanAmerican

Yes

Academic
Librarian

Marks

Black/Africa
n American

Fem.

No

Departme
nt Head

15

James

Black not
AfricanAmerican

Fem.

No

Associate
Dean

22

Social
Normative
Affective
Identity/
NonCalculative

Anderson

Black/Africa
n American

Yes

Departme
nt Head

1

Social
Normative

Fem.

Fem.

161

Dean

39

8

2

Affective
Identity
Social
Normative

13+

Social
Normative

10

APPENDIX J
Table 4.8: Factor Analysis Pattern Matrixa
Component
SocialAffective
7b. Most of the time I prefer being a leader

Non-Calculative

Normative

.680

than a follower when working in a group.
7d. I am the type of person who likes to be

.763

in charge of others.
7f. I usually want to be the leader in the

.692

groups that I work in.
7h. I have a tendency to take charge in most

.631

groups or teams that I work in.
7i. I am seldom reluctant to be the leader of

.627

a group.
8d. I would agree to lead others even if there
are no special rewards or benefits with that

.626

role.
8f. I never expect to get more privilege if I

.628

agree to lead a group.
8g. If I agree to lead a group, I would never

.649

expect any advantages of special benefits.
9a. I feel that I have a duty to lead others.

.405

9b. I agree to lead whenever I am asked or

.664

nominated by the other members.
9c. I was taught in the value of leading

.377

others.
9d. It is appropriate for people to accept
leadership roles or positions when they are

.681

asked.
9e. I have been taught that I should always

.612

volunteer to lead others if I can.
9f. It is not right to decline leadership roles.

.564

9g. It is an honor and privilege to be asked

.595

to lead.

162

163
Table 4.8: Factor Analysis Pattern Matrixa (Continued)

Affective

Component
NonCalculative

9h. People should volunteer to lead
rather than wait for others to ask or
vote for them to lead.
Rev7a
Rev7c
Rev7e
Rev7g
Rev8a
Rev8b
Rev8c
Rev8e
Rev8h
Rev8i
Rev9i

SocialNormative
.439

.630
.727
.734
.697

.399
.474

Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.
Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization.
a. Rotation converged in 4 iterations.

.799
.646
.817
.720
.543
.493

REFERENCES
Adkins, D., & Espinal, I. (2004). The diversity mandate. Library Journal, 129(7), 52-54.
Retrieved from http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/
login.aspx?direct=true&db=ulh&AN=12880496&site=ehost-live
Adkins, D., & Hussey, L. K. (2005). Unintentional recruiting for diversity. Public
Libraries, 44(4), 229-233.
Aguirre, A., Jr. (2000). Women and minority faculty in the academic workplace:
Recruitment, retention and academic culture. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
ALA. (2011a). ALA Demographic Studies. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/research/initiatives/membershipsurveys/ALA_Demographi
c_Studies_March2011.pdf
ALA. (2011b). Our Spectrum Scholars. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/aboutala/offices/diversity/spectrum/spectrumscholars.cfm
ALA. (2011c). Spectrum Scholarship Program. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/aboutala/offices/diversity/spectrum/index.cfm
ALA. (2012a). ALA demographic studies: March 2012. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/research/sites/ala.org.research/files/content/March%202012%
20report.pdf
ALA. (2012b). Diversity counts: 2009-10 updated tables. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/offices/sites/ala.org.offices/files/content/diversity/diversitycou
nts/diversitycountstables2012.pdf
ALA. (2013a). Number employed in libraries. ALA Library Fact Sheet 2. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet02
ALA. (2013b). Number of libraries in the United States. ALA Library Fact Sheet 1.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet01
ALA Office for Research and Statistics. (2012). Diversity counts: Summary of findings.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/aboutala/sites/ala.org.aboutala/files/content
/governance/officers/eb_documents/2012_2013ebdocuments/ebd12_10_diversity
_counts.pdf
Alire, C. A. (2001). Diversity and leadership: The color of leadership. Journal of Library
Administration, 32(3-4), 99-114. doi: 10.1300/J111v32n03_07

164

165

Amit, K., Lisak, A., Popper, M., & Gal, R. (2007). Motivation to lead: Research on the
motives for undertaking leadership roles in the Israel Defense Forces (IDF).
Military Psychology, 19(3), 137–160.
Anaya, T., Maxey-Harris, C., & Panigabutra-Roberts, A. (2010). Strategies for diversity
initiatives: A case study at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries. In E. Pankl,
D. Theiss-White, & M. Bushing (Eds.) Recruitment, Development, and Retention
of Information Professionals: Trends in Human Resources and Knowledge
Management (pp. 46-61). Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference.
doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-601-8.ch003
ARL. (2006). ARL homepage. Retrieved from http://www.arl.org.
ARL. (2013). Leadership and career development program. Retrieved from
http://www.arl.org/leadership-recruitment/leadership-development/leadershipcareer- development-program.
Arora, S., Singhai, M., & Patel, R. (2011). Gender and education determinants of
individualism - collectivism: A study of future managers. Indian Journal of
Industrial Relations, 47(2), 321-328. Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct
=true& db=buh&AN=71586308&site=ehost-live
Arrow, K. J. (1998). What has economics to say about racial discrimination? Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 12, 91–100.
Atwater, L. E., Brett, J. F., Waldman, D., DiMare, L., & Hayden, M. V. (2004). Men’s
and women’s perceptions of the gender typing of management subroles. Sex Roles,
50, 191–199. doi:10.1023/B:SERS.0000015551.78544.35
Avolio, B. J. & Hannah, S. T. (2008). Developmental readiness: Accelerating leader
development. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 60(4), 331347. doi: 10.1037/1065-9293.60.4.331.
Ayman, R., & Korabik, K. (2010). Leadership: Why gender and culture matter. American
Psychologist, 65, 157–170. doi:10.1037/a0018806
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist,
37(2), 122-147. Retrieved from http://jamiesmithportfolio.com/EDTE800/wpcontent/PrimarySources/Bandura3.pdf
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of self-control. New York: W. H.
Freeman.

166
Bandura, A., Adams, N. E., Hardy, A. B., & Howells, G. N. (1980). Test of the generality
of self-efficacy theory. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 4(1), 39-66. Retrieved
from
http://link.springer.com.ezproxy.csusm.edu/content/pdf/10.1007%2FBF01173354
.pdf
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44(1), 1-26.
doi: 10.1111/j.1744- 6570.1991.tb00688.x
Bass, B.M. (1990). Bass & Stogdill’s handbook of leadership: Theory, research &
managerial applications (3rd ed.). New York: The Free Press.
Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg more employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. American
Economic Review, 94, 991–1013.
Bessell, I., Dicks, B., Wysocki, A. & Kepner, K. (2012). Understanding motivation: An
effective tool for managers. University of Florida IFAS Extension. Retrieved from
https://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/hr017
Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (2006). The gender pay gap: Going, going . . . but not gone.
In F. D. Blau, M. C. Brinton, & D. B. Grusky (Eds.), The declining significance of
gender? (pp. 37–66). New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Bobbio, A. & Manganelli Rattazzi, A. M. (2006). A Contribution to the Validation of the
Motivation to Lead Scale (MTL): A Research in the Italian Context. Leadership,
2(1), 117-129. doi: 10.1177/1742715006057240
Bonnette, A. E. (2004). Mentoring minority librarians up the career ladder. Library
Administration & Management, 18(3), 134-139.
Borden, V. M. (2010). The Top 100: Graduate Degrees Conferred. Diverse: Issues in
Higher Education, 27(11), 14-22.
Bourdieu, P. & Passeron, J. C. (1977). Reporoduction in education, society, and culture.
Beverly Hills: Sage.
Brewer, J., & Winston, M. D. (2001). Program evaluation for internship/residency
programs in academic and research libraries. College & Research Libraries, 62(4),
307-315. Retrieved from http://crl.acrl.org//content/62/4/307.
Carlyle, T. (1841). On heroes, hero-worship, and the heroic history.
Cattell, R.B. (1965). The scientific analysis of personality. Baltimore: Penguin Books.
Chan, K. Y. (1999). Toward a theory of individual differences and leadership:
understanding the motivation to lead. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

167
Chan, K. Y., & Drasgow, F. (2001). Toward a theory of individual differences and
leadership: Understanding the motivation to lead. Journal of Applied Psychology,
86(3), 481–498.
Chan, K. Y., Rounds, J., & Drasgow, F. (2000). The relation between vocational interests
and the motivation to lead. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 57, 226–245.
Cheung, F. M., & Halpern, D. F. (2010). Women at the top: Powerful leaders define
success as work + family in a culture of gender. American Psychologist, 65, 182–
193. doi:10.1037/a0017309
Clemmons, A., & Fields, D. (2011). Values as determinants of the motivation to lead.
Military Psychology, 23(6), 587-600. doi:10.1080/08995605.2011.616787
Coleman, M., Ganong, L., & Rothrauff, T. (2007). Acculturation and Latinos’ beliefs
about intergenerational obligations to older parents and stepparents. Journal of
Intergenerational Relationships, 5(3), 65-82. Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct
=true& db=aph&AN=27186022&site=ehost-live
Cooper, P. J., Pauletti, R. E., Tobin, D. D., Menon, M., Menon, M., Spatta, B. C., &
Perry, D. G. (2013). Mother-Child Attachment and Gender Identity in
Preadolescence. Sex roles, 69(11-12), 618-631.doi: 1 0.1007/s11199-013-0310-3
Correll, S. J., Benard, S., & Paik, I. (2007). Getting a job: Is there a motherhood penalty?
American Journal of Sociology, 112, 1297–1338. doi:10.1086/511799
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Neo PI-R professional manual. Odessa, FL:
Psychological. Retrieved from http://www.unifr.ch/ztd/HTS/inftest/WEBInformationssystem/en/4en001/d590668ef5a34f17908121d3edf2d1dc/hb.htm.
Creswell, J.W. (2008). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education,
Inc.
Creswell, J.W. & Plano Clark, V.L. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Damasco, I. T. & Hodges, D. (2012). Tenure and promotion experiences of academic
librarians of color. College & Research Libraries, 73(3), 279-301.
Davenport, N. (2006). Place as library? Educause Review, 41. Retrieved from
http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/erm0616.pdf#search=percent22econtentpercent20davenportpercent22.
Davis, D.M. & Hall, T.D. (2007). Diversity counts. Office for Research and Statistics.
Office for Diversity: American Library Association. Retrieved from

168
http://www.ala.org/offices/sites/ala.org.offices/files/content/diversity/diversitycou
nts/diversitycounts_rev0.pdf
Diaz, J., Tellman, J., & Jones, D. (1998). Affirmative action in ARL libraries.
Association of Research Libraries. Office of Leadership and Management
Services, Washington, DC, ARL Spec Kit#230.
Eagly, A. H., & Chin, J. (2010). Diversity and leadership in a changing world. American
Psychologist, 65(3), 216-224. doi:10.1037/a0018957
Elteto, S., Jackson, R. M., & Lim, A. (2008). Is the library a welcoming space?: An urban
academic library and diverse student experiences. portal: Libraries and the
Academy,8(3), 325-337. doi:10.1353/pla.0.0008.
Ely, R. J., & Thomas, D. A. (2001). Cultural diversity at work: The effects of diversity
perspectives on work group processes and outcomes. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 46(2), 229-273. Retrieved from
http://web.mit.edu/cortiz/www/Diversity/Ely%20and%20Thomas,%202001.pdf
Emmert, M. A., & Taher, W. A. (1992). Public sector professionals: The effects of public
sector jobs on motivation, job satisfaction and work involvement. American
Review of Public Administration, 22, 37–48.
Epps, S.K. (2008). African American women leaders in academic research libraries.
portal: Libraries and the Academy, 8(3), 255-272. Retrieved from
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/pla/summary/v008/8.3.epps.html
Esri. (2012). Minority population growth – The new boom: An analysis of America’s
changing demographics. Retrieved from
http://www.esri.com/library/brochures/pdfs/minority-population-growth.pdf
Evans, A. & Breinig Chun, E. (2007). Are the walls really down? Behavioral and
organizational barriers to faculty and staff diversity (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass).
Fiedler, F. E., & Garcia, J. E. (1987). New approaches to effective leadership: Cognitive
resources and organizational performance. New York: Wiley.
Fingerman, K. L., VanderDrift, L. E., Dotterer, A. M., Birditt, K. S., & Zarit, S. H.
(2011). Support to aging parents and grown children in black and white families.
Gerontologist, 51(4), 441-452. Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct
=true& db=aph&AN=63714552&site=ehost-live
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behavior. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Fuligni, A. J. (2001). Family obligation and the academic motivation of adolescents from
Asian and Latin American, and European backgrounds. In A. Fuligni (Ed.),

169
Family obligation and assistance during adolescence: Contextual variations and
developmental implications (New Directions in Child and Adolescent
Development Monograph) (pp. 61 – 76). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Fuligni, A. J., Tseng, V., & Lam, M. (1999). Attitudes toward family obligations among
American adolescents from Asian, Latin American, and European backgrounds.
Child Development, 70, 1030 – 1044.
Gabris, G. T., & Simo, G. (1995). Public sector motivation as an independent variable
affecting career decisions. Public Personnel Management, 24, 33–50.
Goldberg, L. R. (1981) Language and individual differences: The search for universals in
personality lexicons. In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of Personality and Social
Psychology, (pp. 414-165. Vol. 2). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Retrieved from
http://projects.ori.org/lrg/PDFs_papers/universals.lexicon.81.pdf
Gordon, J. & Generett, G. (2011). Introduction to special issue: Social justice and
education. Educational Foundations, 25(1-2), 3. Retrieved from
http://global.factiva.com.ezproxy.csusm.edu/redir/default.aspx?P=sa&NS=16&AI
D=9C AL000600&an=EDFOUN0020110429e71100001&cat=a&ep=ASI
Gottfried, A. E., Gottfried, A. W., Reichard, R. J., Guerin, D. W., Oliver, P. H., & Riggio,
R. E. (2011). Motivational roots of leadership: A longitudinal study from
childhood through adulthood. Leadership Quarterly, 22(3), 510-519. Retrieved
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.04.008
Grbich, C. (2013). Qualitative data analysis: An introduction. London: Sage Publications.
Greene, J. C., Caracelli, V. J., & Graham, W. D. (1989). Toward a conceptual framework
for mixed-method evaluation designs. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis, 11(3), 255-274. doi: 10.3102/01623737011003255
Greenfield, P. M., & Suzuki, L. K. (1998). Culture and human development: Implications
for parenting, education, pediatrics, and mental health. In W. Damon, I. E. Sigel,
& K. A. Renninger (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4 Child
psychology in practice (5th ed., pp. 1059–1109). Hoboken: Wiley.
Grodsky, E., & Pager, D. (2001). The structure of disadvantage: Individual and
occupational determinants of the Black–White wage gap. American
Sociological Review, 66, 542–567.
Groger, L., & Mayberry, P. S. (2001). Caring too much? Cultural lag in African
Americans' perceptions of filial responsibilities. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Gerontology, 16(1), 21-39. doi:10.1023/A:1010637510362
Hall, T. D. (2007). Race and place: How unequal access perpetuates exclusion. American
Libraries, 38(2), 30-33.

170
Heilman, M. E., & Okimoto, T. G. (2008). Motherhood: A potential source of bias in
employment decisions. Journal of Applied Psychology,93, 189–198.
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.93.1.189
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2002). University library directors in the
Association of Research Libraries: The next generation, part two. College &
Research Libraries, 63(1), 73-90. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/63/1/73.full.pdf
Herring, C. (2009). Does diversity pay?: Race, gender, and the business case for diversity.
American Sociological Review, 74, 208-224. doi: 10.1177/000312240907400203
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hong, Y., Catano, V. M., & Liao, H. (2011). Leader emergence: The role of emotional
intelligence and motivation to lead. Leadership & Organization Development
Journal, 32(4), 320-343. doi:10.1108/01437731111134625
Hough, L. M. (1992). The “Big Five” personality variables – construct confusion:
Description versus prediction. Human Performance, 5(1-2), 139-155. doi:
10.1080/08959285.1992.9667929
House, R. J. (1997). A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership. In J. G. Hunt & L. L.
Larson (Eds.), Leadership: The cutting edge (pp. 189-2007). Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press.
House, R.J., Wright, N. S., & Aditya, R. N. (1997). Cross-cultural research on
organizational leadership: A critical analysis and a proposed theory. In P. C.
Earley & M. Erez (Eds.), New Perspectives in International
Industrial/Organizational Psychology (pp. 535-625). San Francisco: New
Lexington Press.
Hunter, J. E., & Hirsh, H. R. (1987). Applications of meta-analysis. In C. L. Cooper & I.
T. Robertson (Eds), International Review of Industrial and Organizational
Psychology (pp. 321-357). Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons.
Inbar, Y., & Lammers, J. (2012). Political diversity in social and personality psychology.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(5), 496-503. doi:
10.1177/1745691612448792
Johnson, P. (2007). Retaining and advancing librarians of color. College & Research
Libraries, 68(5), 405-417. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/68/5/405.full.pdf+html
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J., & Turner, L.A. (2007).Toward a definition of mixed
methods research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2), 112-133.

171
Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2000). Five-factor model of personality and transformational
leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(5), 751-765. Retrieved from
http://www.timothy-judge.com/Judge%20%26%20Bono%20JAP%202000.pdf
Judge, T. A., Bono, J. E., Ilies, R., & Gerhardt, M. W. (2002). Personality and leadership:
A qualitative and quantitative review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 765780. doi: 10.1037//0021-9010.87.4.765.
Kahttab, S. A., Al-Manasra, E. A., Zaid, M. K. S. A., & Qutaishat, F. T. (2012).
Individualist, Collectivist and gender moderated differences toward online
purchase intentions in Jordan. International Business Research, 5(8). doi:
10.5539/ibr.v5n8p85
Kark, R., & Van Dijk, D. (2007). Motivation to lead, motivation to follow: The role of
the self-regulatory focus in leadership processes. Academy of Management
Review, 32(2), 500-528.
Kawahara, D., Esnil, E. M., & Hsu, J. (2007). Asian American women leaders: The
intersection of race, gender, and leadership. In J. L. Chin, B. Lott, J. K. Rice, & J.
Sanchez-Hucles (Eds.), Women and leadership: Transforming visions and diverse
voices (pp. 297–313). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Kim, J. & Taylor, K. (2008). Rethinking Alternative Education to Break the Cycle of
Educational Inequality and Inequity. Journal of Educational Research, 101(4),
207-219. Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com
/login.aspx?direct=true&db=aph&AN=31891749&site=ehost-live
Kim, K. & Sin, S. J. (2008). Increasing ethnic diversity in LIS: Strategies suggested by
librarians of color. The Library Quarterly, 78(2), 153-177. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/528887.
Kite, M. E., Deaux, K., & Haines, E. L. (2008). Gender stereotypes. In F. L. Denmark &
M. A. Paludi (Eds.), Psychology of women: A handbook of issues and theories
(2nd ed., pp. 205–236). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Kivlighan Jr, D. M. (2008). Compositional diversity and the research productivity of PhD
graduates. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 1(1), 59. doi: 10.1037/19388926.1.1.59
Korsgaard, M., Meglino, B. M., Lester, S. W., & Jeong, S. S. (2010). Paying you back or
paying me forward: Understanding rewarded and unrewarded organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(2), 277-290.
doi:10.1037/a0018137

172
Kovach, Kenneth. (1999). Employee motivation: Addressing a crucial factor in your
organization's performance. Human Resource Development. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press.
Kvale, S. & Brinkmann, S. (2009) Interviews: Learning the craft of qualitative research
interviewing. Los Angeles: Sage.
Kyrillidou, M. & Bland, L. (2010). ARL annual salary survey: 2009-2010. Washington,
DC: Association of Research Libraries.
Kyrillidou, M. & Morris, S. (2012). ARL annual salary survey: 2011-2012. Washington,
DC: Association of Research Libraries.
Laden, B. V. & Hagedorn, L. S. (2000). Job satisfaction among faculty of color in
academe: Individual survivors or institutional transformers? New Directions for
Institutional Research, 2000(150), 57-66. doi: 10.1002/ir.10505
Lance, K. C. (2005). Racial and ethnic diversity of US library workers. American
Libraries, 36(5), 41-43. Retrieved from
http://www.lrs.org/documents/workforce/Racial_and_Ethnic.pdf
Langston, C. A., & Sykes, W. E. (1997). Beliefs and the Big Five: Cognitive bases of
broad individual differences in personality. Journal of Research in Personality,
31, (2), 141-165. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jrpe
Lareau, A. & McNamara Horvat, E. (1999). Moments of social inclusion and exclusion:
Race, class, and cultural capital in family-school relationships. Sociology of
Education, 72(1), 37-53.
Lee, C. (1995). Prosocial organizational behaviors: The roles of workplace justice,
achievement striving, and pay satisfaction. Journal of Business and Psychology,
10, 197–206.
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). Toward a unifying social cognitive
theory of career and academic interest, choice and performance. Journal of
Vocational Behavior Monograph, 45(1), 79-122. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jvbe.
LePine, J. A., Piccolo, R. F., Jackson, C. L., Mathieu, J. E., & Saul, J. R. (2008). A metaanalysis of teamwork processes: Tests of a multidimensional model and
relationships with team effectiveness criteria. Personnel Psychology, 61(2), 273307. Doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6570.2008.00114.x
Lord, R. G., Brown, D. J., Harvey, J. L., & Hall, R. J. (2001). Contextual constraints on
prototype generation and their multilevel consequences for leadership perceptions.
Leadership Quarterly, 12, 311–338. doi: 10.1016/S1048-9843(01)00081-9

173
Lord, R. G., De Vader, C. L., & Alliger, G. M. (1986). A meta-analysis of the relation
between personality traits and leadership perceptions: An application of validity
generalization procedures. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71(3), 402-409.
Lord, R. G., & Hall, R. J. (1992). Contemporary views of leadership and individual
differences. Leadership Quarterly, 3(2), 137-157. doi: 10.1016/10489843(92)90030-J
Madon, S., Guyll, M., Aboufadel, K., Montiel, E., Smith, A., Palumbo, P., & Jussim, L.
(2001). Ethnic and national stereotypes: The Princeton trilogy revisited and
revised. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,27, 996–1010.
doi:10.1177/0146167201278007
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50(4), 370396. doi:10.1037/h0054346
Maume, D. J., Jr. (1999). Occupational segregation and the career mobility of White men
and women. Social Forces, 77, 1433–1459.
Maurer, T. J., & Lippstreu, M. (2010). Self-initiated development of leadership
capabilities: Toward establishing the validity of key motivational constructs and
assessment tools. United States Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and
Social Sciences. Retrieved from
http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a532359.pdf.
McClelland, D. C. (1975). Power: The inner experience. New York: Irvington.
McClelland, D. C. (1985). Human motivation. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.
McConnell, C. (2004). Staff and leadership shortages? Grow your own. American
Libraries, 35(9), 34-36. Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.csusm.e
du/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ulh&AN=14619779&site=ehost-live
McElroy-Johnson, B. (1993). Giving voice to the voiceless. Harvard Educational Review,
63(1), 85-104. Retrieved from http://www.metapress.com.ezproxy.csusm.edu
/content/x10557r8mxmj7p81/fulltext.pdf
Meyer, J. P., & Allen, N. J. (1987). Organizational commitment: Toward a threecomponent model. Research Bulletin No. 660. The University of Western Ontario,
Department of Psychology, London.
Meyer, J. P., & Allen, N. J. (1991). A three-component conceptualization of
organizational commitment. Human Resources Management Review, 1(1), 61-89.
Retrieved from
http://iag_puc_2007.msimoes.dyndns.org:10080/textos/Administracao/ADM_282
5-Organizacoes/artigos/meyer%20e%20allen.pdf

174
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded
sourcebook. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Miner, J. B. (1977). Motivation to manage: A ten year update on “Students in
Management Education” research. Atlanta, GA: Organizational Measurement
Systems Press.
Miner, J. B. (1993). Role motivation theories. London: Routledge.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (1994). Role of entrepreneurial task
motivation in the growth of technologically innovative firms: Interpretations from
follow-up data. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 627–630.
Montague, R. (2005). Library access Midwest program (LAMP): A regional recruitment
alliance for library and information science. Grant Proposal, Graduate School of
Library and Information Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL.
Morgan, J. C., Farrar, B., & Owens, I. (2009). Documenting diversity among working
LIS graduates. Library Trends, 58(2), 192-214. Retrieved from
https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/bitstream/handle/2142/15365/58.2.morgan01.pdf?s
equenc e=2
Morse, G. (2006). Decisions and desire. Harvard Business Review, 84(1), 42. Retrieved
from
http://files.marlythlpc.webnode.es/2000000364a1ad4b165/decisiones_y_deseo__
cerebro.pdf
Musser, L. R. (2001). Effective retention strategies for diverse employees. Journal of
Library Administration, 33(1), 63-72. doi: 10.1300/J111v33n01_06
NCES. (2009). The condition of education. U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved
from http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2009/2009081.pdf
NCES. (2011a). Fast facts (students). Institute of Education Statistics. Retrieved from
http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=98
NCES. (2011b). Fast facts (faculty). Institute of Education Statistics. Retrieved from
http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=61
NCES. (2012). Employees in degree-granting institutions, by race/ethnicity, sex,
employment status, control and level of institution, and primary occupation: Fall
2011. Digest of Education Statistics. Retrieved from
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d12/tables/dt12_260.asp
Newport, F. (2001). Americans see women as emotional and affectionate, men as more
aggressive. Gallup Poll News. Retrieved from
http://www.gallup.com/poll/releases/pr010221.asp

175
Niemann, Y. F., Jennings, L., Rozelle, R. M., Baxter, J. C., & Sullivan, E. (1994). Use of
free responses and cluster analysis to determine stereotypes of eight groups.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 379-390. doi:
10.1177/0146167294204005.
Okimoto, T. G., & Heilman, M. E. (2012). The “bad parent” assumption: How gender
stereotypes affect reactions to working mothers. Journal Of Social Issues, 68(4),
704-724. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2012.01772.x.
Olivas, A. & Ma. R. (2009). Increasing retention rates in minority librarians through
mentoring. Electronic Journal of Academic and Special Librarianship, 10(3).
Retrieved from
http://southernlibrarianship.icaap.org/content/v10n03/olivas_a01.html.
Pallant, J. (2010). SPSS survival manual: A step by step guide to data analysis using
SPSS. Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press.
Phan, T., Hardesty, L., Hug, J., & Sheckells, C. (2011). Academic libraries 2010: First
look. Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2012/2012365.pdf
Popper, M. (2000). The development of charismatic leadership. Political Psychology,
21(4), 729-744. doi: 10.1111/0162-895X.00214
Powell, G. N., Butterfield, D. A., & Parent, J. D. (2002). Gender and managerial
stereotypes: Have the times changed? Journal of Management,28, 177–193.
doi:10.1177/014920630202800203
Preskill, H. S., & Catsambas, T.T. (2006). Reframing evaluation through appreciative
inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Quiñones, M. A., Ford, J. K., & Teachout, M. S. (1995). The relationship between work
experience and job performance: A conceptual and meta-analytic review.
Personnel Psychology, 48(4), 887-910. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6570.1995.tb01785.x.
REFORMA. (2011). RNCIV press release. REFORMA: The National Association to
Promote Library & Information Services to Latinos and the Spanish Speaking.
Retrieved from
http://reforma.membershipsoftware.org/content.asp?admin=Y&contentid=161.
Rudestam, K.E., & Newton, R. R. (2007). Surviving your dissertation: A comprehensive
guide to content and process. Los Angeles: Sage Publications.
Sanchez-Hucles, J. V., & Davis, D. D. (2010). Women and women of color in leadership:
Complexity, identity, and intersectionality. American Psychologist, 65, 171–181.
doi:10.1037/a0017459.
Saldaña, J. (2013). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Los Angeles: Sage.

176
Schein, V. E. (2001). A global look at psychological barriers to women’s progress in
management. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 675–688. doi:10.1111/00224537.00235.
Schunk, D.H. (1989). Self-efficacy and cognitive skill learning. In C. Ames & R. Ames
(Eds.), Research on Motivation in Education: Volume 3: Goals and Cognitions
(pp. 13-44). San Diego: Academic Press.
Schwartz, S. (1994). Are there universal aspects in the structure and contents of human
values? Journal of Social Issues, 50(4), 19–45.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1987). Toward a universal psychological structure of
human values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 550-562.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1990). Toward a theory of the universal content and
structure of values: Extensions and cross-cultural replications. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58(5), 878-891.
Seidman, I. (2006) Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in
education and the social sciences (3rd ed). New York: Teachers College Press.
Shoge, R.C. (2003). Library as place in the lives of African Americans. In H. A.
Thompson (Ed.), Learning to Make a Difference: Proceedings of the Eleventh
National Conference of the Association of College and Research Libraries,
April 10-13, 2003 (pp. 202-210). Chicago: Association of College and Research
Libraries.
Singelis, T.M., Triandis, H. C., Bhawuk, D., & Gelfand, M. J. (1995). Horizontal and
vertical dimensions of individualism and collectivism: A theoretical and
measurement refinement. Cross Cultural Research, 29(3), 240-275. doi:
10.1177/106939719502900302
Sorkhabi, N. (2012). Care Reasoning in Interpersonal Relationships: Cognition about
Moral Obligation and Personal Choice. North American Journal Of Psychology,
14(2), 221-244. Retrieved from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/
login.aspx?direct=true&db=aph&AN=74620947&site=ehost-live
Stahl, M. J. (1986). Managerial and technical motivation: Assessing needs for
achievement, power and affiliation. New York, NY: Westport.
Taylor, A.M. (2012). Cultivating an engaged workforce: The roles of leader personality,
motivation, and leadership style. Retrieved from
http://dcekozhikode.co.in/sites/default/files/leadership.pdf
Tangirala, S., Kamdar, D., Venkataramani, V., & Parke, M. R. (2013). Doing right versus
getting ahead: The effects of duty and achievement orientations on employees’
voice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98(6), 1040-1050. doi:10.1037/a0033855.

177
Testé, B. (2012). Impact of an individualist vs. collectivist context on the social
valorization of internal explanations. International Journal Of Psychology, 47(3),
222-229. doi:10.1080/00207594.2011.626042
Thomas, J., Dickson, M., & Bliese, P. (2001). Values predicting leader performance in
the U.S. Army Reserve Officer Training Corps Assessment Center: Evidence of a
personality mediated model. The Leadership Quarterly, 12, 181–196.
Thornton, J. K. (2001). African American female librarians: A study of job satisfaction.
In T. Y. Neely & K. Lee-Smeltzer (Eds.), Diversity Now: People, Collections,
and Services in Academic Libraries (pp.141-164). Philadelphia, PA: Haworth
Press.
Triandis, H. C. (1977). Interpersonal behavior. Monterrey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Triandis, H. C. (1980). Value, attitudes and interpersonal behavior. In M. M. Page (Ed.),
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, Beliefs, Attitudes and Values (Vol. 1, pp.
195-259). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Triandis, H.C. (1998). Vertical and horizontal individualism and collectivism: Theory
and research implications for international comparative management. Advances in
International Comparative Management, 12, 7-35.
Tupes, E. C., & Christal, R. E. (1992). Recurrent personality factors based on trait ratings.
Journal of Personality, 60(2), 225-251. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1992.tb00973.x
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2009). Household data annual averages: Employed
persons by detailed occupation, sex, race, and Hispanic or Latino ethnicity.
Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.pdf.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). Most children younger than age 1 are minorities, Census
Bureau reports. Retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/population/cb12-90.html.
U.S. Department of Education, (2011). National center for education statistics. In Digest
of Education Statistics, 2010 Retrieved from
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d10/ch_3.asp
Van Iddekinge, C., Ferris, G. R., & Heffner, T. S. (2009). Test of a multistage model of
distal and proximal antecedents of leader performance. Personnel Psychology, 62,
463–495.
van Knippenberg, D., De Dreu, C. K., & Homan, A. C. (2004). Work group diversity and
group performance: An integrative model and research agenda. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89(6), 1008-1022. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.89.6.1008.

178
Wheeler, M. B. (2000). Averting a crisis: Developing African American librarians as
leaders. In E. J. Josey and M. L. DeLoach (Eds.), Handbook of Black
Librarianship (pp. 169-182). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Whitmire, E. (2003). Cultural diversity and undergraduates’ academic library use.
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(3), 148-161. Retrieved from
http://polaris.gseis.ucla.edu/ewhitmir/jal2003.pdf.
Williams, K., & O’Reilly, C. (1998). Demography and diversity: A review of 40 years of
research. In B. Staw and R. Sutton (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior
(Vol. 20, pp. 77-140). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Winston, M. (1998). The role of recruitment in achieving goals related to diversity.
College & Research Libraries, 59(3), 204-247. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/59/3/240.full.pdf.
Winston, M. (2008). Diversity: The research and the lack of progress. New Library World,
109(3/4), 130-149. doi:10.1108/03074800810857595.
Winston, M., & Li, H. (2002). Diversity and organizational success: a survey of chief
academic officers in liberal arts colleges. ACRL Conference Proceedings.
Retrieved from www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlevents/winston.PDF
Winston, M., & Li, H. (2007). Leadership diversity: a study of urban public libraries.
Leadership, 77(1), 61-82. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/512956
Winston, M.D. (2001). The importance of leadership diversity: The relationship between
diversity and organizational success in the academic environment. College &
Research Libraries, 62(6), 517-526. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/62/6/517.full.pdf+html
Wood, R. E., & Bandura, A. (1989). Social cognitive theory of organizational
management. Academy of Management Review, 14(3), 361-384. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/258173
Yager, E. (2000). Working with a diverse workforce. Enterprise, 29(33), 14. Retrieved
from
http://ezproxy.csusm.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.csusm.e
du/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bwh&AN=2791527&site=ehost-live
Zaccaro, S. J., Gilbert, K. K., Thor, K. K., & Mumford, M. D. (1991). Leadership and
social intelligence: Linking social perceptiveness and behavioral flexibility to
leader effectiveness. Leadership Quarterly, 2(4), 317-342. Doi: 10.1016/10489843(91)90018-W

179

Zimmermann, A., Abrams, D., Doosje, B., & Manstead, A. R. (2011). Causal and moral
responsibility: Antecedents and consequences of group-based guilt. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 41(7), 825-839. doi:10.1002/ejsp.826
Zweigenhaft, R. L., & Domhoff, G. W. (2006). Diversity in the power elite: How it
happened,why it matters. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

