Organizational Citizenship Behavior in the Public Library and Its Relationship to Leader-Member
Exchange and Perceived Supervisor Support

A Dissertation presented to the
Faculty of the Simmons College Graduate School of Library and information Science

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

By Rachel G. Rubin, MLIS

©2013
Rachel G. Rubin
All rights reserved

UMI Number: 3586983

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3586983
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Organizational Citizenship Behavior in the Public Library and Its Relationship to LeaderMember Exchange and Perceived Supervisor Support
Rachel G. Rubin
Peter Hernon, Ph.D., Committee Chairperson
Simmons College Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Abstract
Organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) has been studied extensively in a variety of
settings for the last thirty years. There has been no research, however, on OCB in the public
library environment. OCB is grounded on the premise that helping others in the organization,
even when such behavior is unrewarded, has a cumulative effect that is beneficial both for
individual staff members and for the organization as a whole. This focus on “helpful” behaviors
is especially relevant for a field such as public librarianship, given its foundation on altruistic
ideals.
This dissertation begins to address the lack of research on organizational citizenship
behaviors in public libraries by examining the relationship among OCB and two of its correlates:
Leader-Member Exchange (LMX) and perceived supervisor support. Analysis of data reveals
that OCB shows a statistically significant correlation with both LMX and perceived supervisor
support, but that perceived supervisor support is a more powerful predictor of OCB in the
workplace studied. One of the primary findings of this research is that institutions wishing to
encourage OCB must focus not only on the citizenship behaviors of front-line staff, but also on
the skills of the middle managers and other managerial leaders who directly oversee them.
Immediate supervisors play a critical role in facilitating OCB by maintaining high quality
iii

exchange relationships with, and demonstrating consistent support for, their supervisees. This
finding has practical importance not only for how managerial leaders should be expected to
perform, but also for their hiring, training, and development.
Organizational citizenship behavior has been shown to impact positively traditional
work outcomes such as effectiveness and productivity, as well as attitudinal and behavioral
outcomes such as organizational commitment and engagement. This research affirms the
importance of OCB as an organizational construct and highlights its potential for the public
library environment. Further, it provides practical methods for fostering and maintaining a
workplace culture that values and encourages citizenship behaviors. This study will be of
particular interest to library administrators, human resource managers, and those in managerial
leadership positions as they seek to hire for, train, develop, and retain both managerial and
front-line staff who demonstrate behaviors that improve interpersonal relationships and
organizational effectiveness.

iv

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the members of my dissertation committee, Peter Hernon, Camila
Alire, and Luis Herrera, for their guidance and support throughout the dissertation process. I
am especially grateful to Peter Hernon, whose direction was invaluable and whose patience
was most appreciated.
I am indebted to the library staff and Director from the institution at which the data
gathering for this research took place. I could not have completed this work without their time,
tolerance, and attention. I was impressed with the level of dedication they demonstrated not
only to the completion of this research, but to each other.
I cannot imagine going through this process without the friendship, encouragement, and
laughter provided by my inimitable cohort in the Simmons College Ph.D. in Managerial
Leadership in the Information Professions program. My brilliant colleagues made this journey
not only tolerable, but enjoyable, and for that I thank them from the bottom of my heart.
Thanks also to the members of the cohorts who came before, who provided more advice and
support than could have been expected of them, and to those who came after, whose new
perspectives made the experience of this program even more fulfilling. With the students,
faculty, and staff of the Simmons GLSIS doctoral program, I have built a strong and lasting
network of professional colleagues and personal friends. Thank you.
This dissertation would not have been completed without the support of the Board of
Trustees and staff at Bexley Public Library. Finishing a dissertation while working full-time as a
library director is only possible with the patience of the staff and the encouragement of the
board. I am very fortunate.
v

There are not words to describe the gratitude I feel to my family and friends, who
tolerated my unavailability and my stress, and who never wavered in their support throughout
this process. I am especially grateful to my uncle, William Rubin, who spent his Saturday
mornings helping me to learn SPSS and guiding my data analysis. I owe him a lifetime supply of
bagels and lox. My parents, Drs. Richard and Marcia Rubin, and my grandparents, Dr. Milton
and Esther Rubin, are and were the best teachers I will ever have. They always believed that I
would one day become “the next Dr. Rubin.” I finally did it.

vi

Dedication
This dissertation is dedicated to my parents, Richard and Marcia Rubin, and to the
memory of my grandparents, Milton and Esther Rubin: my role models for truth, honor,
excellence, and justice.

vii

Table of Contents

Chapter One: Introduction
Problem Statement
Theoretical Framework
Reciprocity and Social Exchange
Leader-Member Exchange
Literature Review
OCB: Antecedents and Motivation
LMX and OCB
OCB and Perceived Supervisor Support
OCB, LMX and PSS
Interaction Effects
OCB and the Library
Hypothesized Model
Hypotheses
Procedures
Research Design
Methodology
Data Quality
Conclusion
References
Chapter Two: Overview of Findings
Overview of Hypothesis Testing
Findings
Proposed Model
Additional Hypotheses
Conclusion
References
Chapter Three: Discussion: Hypothesis Testing
The Role of LMX
LMX and Dyad Tenure
The Role of PSS
PSS and LMX
Beyond Support and Exchange: The Role of the Direct Supervisor
Conclusion
References
Chapter Four: Study Implications for Libraries
Overview of Participating Library
Implications for Managerial Leadership Training Programs
OCB, LMX, PSS, and Gender
Practical Implications for Public Libraries

1
4
5
5
8
11
16
20
23
26
30
31
37
40
41
41
42
43
44
45
59
63
64
72
74
75
76
77
77
78
79
80
85
87
88
91
91
94
95
96
viii

Conclusion
References
Chapter Five: Conclusions and Suggestions for Further Research
Limitations
Suggestions for Further Research
Conclusion
References
Bibliography
Appendix A: Feasibility and Interest E-mail to Directors
Appendix B: Implied Consent E-mail (Supervisor)
Appendix C: Implied Consent Cover Letter (Subordinate)
Appendix D: Reminder E-mail
Appendix E: Organizational Citizenship Behavior Scale
Appendix F: LMX-7 Instrument
Appendix G: Survey of Perceived Supervisor Support

99
100
103
106
106
114
115
118
135
136
137
138
139
140
141

ix

List of Figures
Figure 1.1: Hypothesized Model

39

Figure 2.1: Proposed Model with Findings

72

Figure 3.1: Revised Model: PSS as a Function of LMX: Correlations with Altruism,
Courtesy, and Overall OCB

84

x

List of Tables
Table 2.1: Summary Statistics: OCB

61

Table 2.2: Summary Statistics: LMX 7

62

Table 2.3: Summary Statistics: Perceived Supervisor Support

62

Table 2.4: Correlation between Overall LMX and: Overall OCB, the Five Dimensions
of OCB

64

Table 2.5: Correlation Table: Overall LMX and Overall PSS

65

Table 2.6: Correlation between PSS and Overall OCB, Five Dimensions of OCB

65

Table 2.7: Partial Correlation LMX and Altruism, Controlling for PSS

66

Table 2.8: Partial Correlation: PSS and Altruism, Controlling for LMX

66

Table 2.9: Model Summary and Regression Coefficients

67

Table 2.10: Partial Correlation: LMX and Courtesy, Controlling for PSS

68

Table 2.11: Partial Correlation: PSS and Courtesy Controlling for LMX

68

Table 2.12: Model Summary and Regression Coefficients

68

Table 2.13: Correlations: LMX/Altruism, Controlling for Dyad Tenure

69

Table 2.14: Correlations: Dyad Tenure/Altruism Controlling for LMX

67

Table 2.15: Coefficients

70

Table 2.16: Correlations: LMX/Courtesy, Controlling for Dyad Tenure

70

Table 2.17: Correlations: Dyad Tenure/Courtesy Controlling for LMX

71

Table 2.18: Coefficients

71

Table 2.19: Tests of between-Subjects Effects: Leader-Member Gender Similarity
and LMX Quality

73
xi

Table 2.20: Tests of between-Subjects Effects: Leader-Member Gender Similarity
and PSS

74

Table 2.21: Tests of between-Subjects Effects: Gender Match and Overall OCB

75

Table 2.22: Tests of between Subjects Effects: Gender and the Five Dimensions of OCB

75

xii

Chapter One
INTRODUCTION

Organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) is traditionally defined as “individual behavior
that is discretionary, not directly or explicitly recognized by the formal reward system, and in
the aggregate promotes the efficient and effective functioning of the organization” (Organ,
Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006, p. 3). These activities are “extra-role,” or not required by the
formal job description, and prosocial in nature, directed more at creating effective relationships
than effective task completion. Put simply, to exhibit OCB is to partake voluntarily in workplace
activities that are above and beyond, even when there is no guarantee that such efforts will be
rewarded. When many members of a work unit or organization perform OCB consistently over
time, the result is not just improved interpersonal relationships, but better organizational
performance (Podsakoff, Whiting, Blume, & Podsakoff, 2009).
First proposed nearly 30 years ago, the specific kinds of behaviors considered to be
manifestations of OCB have changed little. Examples include taking the initiative to orient new
colleagues, volunteering to attend events or functions that help to improve the image of the
organization, tolerating temporary impositions without complaint, making timely and
constructive statements to management or to outsiders, and protecting and conserving
organizational resources (Bateman & Organ, 1983; Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006).
These activities not only offer a means to manage organizational interdependencies and
facilitate collective outcomes, they also improve productivity by reducing the need to focus

1

scarce resources on simple maintenance functions and “improve the ability of others
(i.e.,coworkers and managers) to perform their jobs by freeing up time for more efficient
planning, scheduling [and] problem solving” (Netemeyer, Boles, McKee, & McMurrian, 1997, p.
86). In the most commonly used framework, citizenship behaviors are categorized into a fivedimensional taxonomy comprised of altruism (helping), compliance (conscienciousness),
sportsmanship, courtesy, and civic virtue (LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002; Organ, Podsakoff, &
Mackenzie, 2006). These behaviors are often distinguished in the literature by their intended
target, which can be other individuals (OCBI) such as supervisors, co-workers, or customers, or
the organization itself (OCBO) (Morrison, 1996; Williams & Anderson, 1991).
Two environmental factors that have the most influence on OCB are the quality of
leader-follower relationships and the level of perceived leader support. Bateman and Organ
(1983) initially suggested that “supervisory behavior—especially that generally described as
‘supportive’ or ‘considerate’” could lead to OCB (p. 593). Subsequent research confirms the
critical importance of supportive leader behavior in fostering these extra-role behaviors (Bolino
& Turnley, 2003; Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). In addition, the organizational
responsibility rests with the leader to provide the resources that encourage and enable
employees to participate in OCB. Organ, Podsakoff, and Mackenzie (2006) propose that
leaders:
. . . can select employees who have a greater ability to exhibit OCB because of
their dispositional characteristics . . . or they can attempt to enhance
employees’ ability to exhibit OCB through training or modeling forms of the
behavior. This is important because even highly motivated employees may
2

not be able to exhibit some forms of OCB if they do not have the skills that
enable them to do so. (p. 94)
The leader can also directly influence the work environment in a way that facilitates OCB by
changing the structure of tasks, workflow, or other conditions, as well as the policies and
procedures that govern workplace behavior (Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). Because
OCB requires employees to take action that is outside of strict role requirements, leaders must
also ensure that such departures are possible: “The extent to which an employee exhibits
organizational citizenship behavior, or any behavior, is a function of the employee’s ability,
motivation, and opportunity” (Organ, Mackenzie & Podsakoff, 2006, p. 93).
The overarching “helping” theme, as well as its relationship to innovative and extra-role
behaviors, makes OCB a natural fit with librarianship. The discipline of library and information
science (LIS) has a long historical and ideological relationship with altruism (Rubin, 2010). Since
the late 1800s, when librarianship emerged concurrently with other service professions such as
medicine, law, social work, teaching, and nursing, librarianship’s purpose has been to help
others and to improve the lot of the citizenry rather than to make money. Even after more than
a century, librarianship remains for the most part altruistic, and those who join its ranks
continue to embrace service as a core value (Rubin & Rubin, 2012).
Although a commitment to service continues, library practitioners and theorists agree
that libraries are experiencing other changes at an unprecedented rate. Just as front-line
library staff are expected to innovate and adapt to changes in technology, service expectations,

3

and staffing patterns, so too must managerial leaders 1 be prepared to guide effectively their
employees through an uncertain landscape. The role of library directors and middle managers
encompasses not only organizational direction-setting and culture building, but also the
selection, development, and retention of employees with the knowledge, skills, and abilities
best suited to this rapidly-changing environment (Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2003). A critical
element in fostering a flexible and innovative library culture is the conscientious development
of the organizational citizenship behavior of employees (Peng, Hwang, & Wong, 2010).
PROBLEM STATEMENT
Organizational citizenship behavior has been linked to positive organizational outcomes
including employee satisfaction, organizational effectiveness, service quality, and improved
managerial productivity. Despite its positive influence on organizational health and the
important implications of OCB vis-à-vis employer-employee relations, no study has explored
OCB in a public library nor its relationship to perceived leader support in the context of leaderfollower relationship quality. The purpose of this study is to address that void by examining the
following overarching questions: Does the quality2 of the leader-follower relationship affect the
extent to which library employees engage in OCB? What is the relationship among perceived
leader supportiveness, leader-follower relationship quality, and OCB? Do demographic or
external factors such as gender and leader-subordinate dyad duration affect OCB?
The results of this study will not only enhance the understanding of an organizational
phenomenon that is currently absent from the literature of library and information science

1

Managerial leadership is the intersection of management and leadership and “refers to that activity in which
managers help an organization establish and achieve its purpose and direction” (Hernon, 2010, p. 3).
2
See section “Leader-Member Exchange” in the literature review.

4

(LIS), it will provide further elucidation on a topic that remains enigmatic for organizational
theorists and researchers. On a practical level, improving the understanding of OCB in the
library environment will be beneficial to library managerial leaders, library staff, and public
sector organizations as a whole. Indeed, Organ, Podsakoff, and Mackenzie (2006) reflect on the
need to understand better OCB in alternative environments: “significant forms of OCB in
nonprofit organizations might take a somewhat different form or emphasis—and therefore
require variations in operationalization—from what we see in the private sector” (p. 30).
From selection and recruitment to job design, employee development, relationship
building, and training for managers and leaders, OCB affects nearly every area of organizational
life. A greater understanding of the antecedents and motivators of citizenship behaviors will
allow library leaders to increase focus on OCB as an indicator of organizational fit as they seek
to recruit, select, and retain employees with the skills and attributes to create both
interpersonal and organizational success. In addition, it provides a new lens through which to
view leadership ability, leader-employee relationships, and organizational outcomes.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Reciprocity and Social Exchange
Underlying the mechanisms of OCB are the norm of reciprocity and social exchange
theory (Blau, 1964; Gouldner, 1960). Gouldner (1960) postulated that “a norm of reciprocity, in
its universal form, makes two interrelated, minimal demands: (1) people should help those who
have helped them, and (2) people should not injure those who have helped them” (p. 171).
Gouldner argued that the base egoistic motivation for reciprocity (i.e., reciprocating a good
deed in anticipation that the favor will be returned) has evolved into a socially expected moral
5

norm (Deckop, Cirka, & Andersson, 2003; Gouldner, 1960). Although generally understood as a
party-to-party direct exchange, the value of reciprocity transcends individual relationships and
extends to the community as a whole: “one who fails to repay debts may benefit individually;
however, such action is likely to cause conflict and a break-down of reciprocity, and thus
threaten the stability of the social group. The norm of reciprocity inhibits such exploitation, and
serves to maintain the social system” (Deckop, Cirka, & Andersson, 2003, p. 103). Thus, the
benefits of successful reciprocal social relationships may extend far beyond the individuals
involved in an exchange transaction.
These social exchange mechanisms also apply in the workplace setting. While a
reciprocal relationship may exist directly between two parties, it is not limited to this
arrangement. For example, an employee who receives a favor from a colleague may not return
the favor directly. Instead, that person may “pay it forward” to another recipient and thus
increase the number of exchange relationships in the system. The resulting expansion of
reciprocal relationships will ultimately allow benefits to return to the original initiator, even if
not from the initial recipient (Deckop, Cirka, & Andersson, 2003). Even organizations
themselves can be seen as partners in exchange as employees seek to maintain these social
systems.
In both social and organizational life, there are two types of exchange relationships:
economic and social (Blau, 1964). In an economic exchange, the terms are fixed and timebound (i.e., employees do their jobs, for which they receive a regular paycheck). In social
exchange relationships, neither the terms nor the duration of the exchange are specified in
advance:
6

One person does another a favor, and while there is a general expectation of
some future return, its exact nature is definitely not stipulated in advance . . .
Since there is no way to assure an appropriate return for a favor, social
exchange requires trusting others to discharge their obligations. (Blau, p. 93,
p. 94)
Thus, the social exchange relationship is informal, unspecified, and predicated on the trust that
the other party will experience a felt obligation to reciprocate.
On the surface, an organization’s exchange relationship with employees may appear
purely economic. However, social exchange relationships in the workplace are pervasive. For
example, receiving support (i.e, access to resources or information) from either the
organization in general or from specific individuals creates in employees a desire to reciprocate
(Wayne, Shore, Bommer, & Tetrick, 2002). In order to establish an ongoing exchange
relationship, however, a high degree of trust must also exist among the participants. Wat and
Shaffer (2005) note that “any uncertainty over the reciprocation of the unspecified role
contributions would compel the violated party to be less bound to the relationship and less
likely to perform OCBs” (p. 410). This is illustrative of the fact that one of the ways in which
employees reciprocate support, especially from a leader, is by performing organizational
citizenship behaviors (Deckop, Circka, & Andersson, 2003; Netemeyer et al., 1997). OCB can be
used as a form of social capital in exchange relationships in the workplace, even by employees
who may have few resources to offer to colleagues or supervisors.

7

Leader-Member Exchange
The centrality of the exchange relationship in OCB makes it a logical fit with LeaderMember Exchange (LMX) theory, which is unique among leadership theories in its focus on the
dyadic relationship between a leader and an individual follower (Gerstner & Day, 1997; Ilies,
Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2007). Leader-Member Exchange relationships are described based on
their quality; employees are either part of an in-group, based on high quality exchanges and
“expanded and negotiated role responsibilities;” or an out-group, with low quality exchanges
“based on the formal employment contract” (Northouse, 2013, p. 163). LMX has traditionally
been a predominantly descriptive theory, explaining why certain exchange dynamics exist in the
workplace, although more recently theorists have focused on a more prescriptive approach
(Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995).
Leader-Member Exchange theory was first proposed as an alternative to traditional
leadership theories which focused heavily on the characteristics of the leader and considered
followers collectively as a group instead of as individuals (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). Vertical
Dyad Linkage theory (VDL), as LMX was originally conceptualized, shifted the focus to the oneto-one relationship between an individual leader and an individual follower (Dansereau, Graen,
& Haga, 1975). This allowed for the possibility that leaders might employ different leadership
styles based on their relationships with individual subordinates. This was also the first theory to
postulate that followers did not just follow; instead, they were active participants in an
interdependent social exchange process. VDL also emphasized the concept of role-making, in
which superiors permitted subordinates to “negotiate job-related matters” and to exert a
degree of control over their role in the workplace (Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975).
8

Over time, VDL evolved into the more egalitarian LMX, and the role-making model
evolved into a leadership-making model (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). This change allowed
theorists to move away from describing in-group and out-group dynamics and move toward a
prescriptive approach that encourages leaders to develop actively high quality in-group
relationships with all employees. Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) describe this as a process
whereby: “emphasis is placed not on how managers discriminate among their people but
rather on how they may work with each person on a one-on-one basis to develop a partnership
with each of them” (p. 229). Thus, the theoretical growth from VDL to LMX shifted the sole
authority for the relationship from the leader (who permits negotiation) to a mutually beneficial
partnership model. This process of negotiation, much like OCB, has its theoretical roots in
Gouldner’s (1960) theory of reciprocity and Blau’s (1964) social exchange theory (Ilies,
Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2007).
The leader-member exchange cycle develops over time as the leader and follower
progress through three stages: stranger, acquaintance, and mature partnership. In a successful
leadership-making model, the final stage is defined by roles that are negotiated (informal) and
reciprocal, and in which both the leader and follower have moved beyond self-interest to
working for the good of the group (Northouse, 2013). These high quality LMX relationships are
characterized by an advanced form of social exchange which is manifested in mutual trust,
respect, reciprocity, obligation, and role negotiation for the subordinate (Graen & Uhl-Bien,
1995; Northouse, 2013; Wang, Law, Hackett, Wang, & Chen, 2005). Conversely, low quality
LMX is characterized by a hierarchical, rule-bound, contractual relationship (Northouse, 2013).

9

Thus, the formation of a healthy social exchange relationship is essential to the establishment
and maintenance of high quality LMX.
Just as both the terms and duration of social exchange relationships are unspecified, the
leader-member exchange process is inferred, not explicit. Exchanges are built on often
spontaneous leader-follower interactions that amount to negotiations: “subordinates do
certain activities that go beyond their formal job descriptions, and the leader, in turn, does
more for these subordinates” (Northouse, 2013, p. 149). The type and timing of the
reciprocation are unclear, and the rewards from a supervisor may be informal (praise or
mentoring) or formal (promotions or salary increases) (Wayne, Shore, & Liden, 1997).
Employees who maintain high quality exchange relationships with their supervisors reap a
number of benefits including higher employee performance ratings, better objective
performance, greater overall satisfaction, greater satisfaction with supervisor, increased
organizational commitment, and more positive role perceptions (Fisk & Friesen, 2012; Gerstner
& Day, 1997).
The importance of the supervisor-supervisee relationship cannot be over-emphasized.
Wayne, Shore, and Liden (1995) note that “research on LMX suggests that the exchange
between an employee and his or her direct superior is the primary determinant of employee
behavior” [emphasis added] (p. 103). This places a tremendous amount of responsibility on the
supervisor to manage social exchange actively and conscientiously in the workplace and to
purposefully ameliorate low quality LMX.
While high quality LMX relationships result in improved employee performance, low
quality relationships may negatively impact employee performance. Among the more ominous
10

possibilities of LMX is the self-fulfilling prophecy; if a leader has low expectations of a
subordinate, the leader may only provide routine tasks, little feedback, and limited
development opportunities, essentially encouraging the employee to demonstrate the
expected poor performance (Gerstner & Day, 1997; Wayne, Shore, & Liden, 1997). Indicatively,
the association between LMX and performance is stronger when measured from the leader’s
point of view, suggesting that leaders may see what they expect to see in the performances of
their subordinates (Gerstner & Day, 1997). Employees with access to a high quality exchange
relationship, by contrast, will likely gain valuable skills and experiences and develop a positive
affiliation with the leader that will lead to reciprocal behavior and nurture the LMX cycle
(Wayne, Shore, & Liden, 1997).
LITERATURE REVIEW
Discretionary work behaviors have been of interest to organizational theorists since the
early twentieth century (Barnard, 1938; Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). Barnard (1938)
suggested that employees’ “willingness to contribute” is a fundamental component of
organizational functioning that implies a commitment that goes beyond compliance with a
formal contract (p. 84). Katz and Kahn (1966) later proposed that, in addition to hiring and
retaining employees who are high-performing in their in-role requirements, effective
organizations must inspire “innovative and spontaneous behavior: performance beyond role
requirements for accomplishments of organizational function” (p. 337). Bateman and Organ
(1983) helped to articulate a new vocabulary to describe this previously un-named and
unstudied phenomenon by developing a new conceptual model of organizational behavior
(LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002).
11

Bateman and Organ’s (1983) proposed model emerged as a counterpoint to the
commonly held belief that job satisfaction and job performance are empirically unrelated
(Organ, 1988). They submitted that:
[d]efined narrowly as quantity of output of quality of craftsmanship . . .
performance does not consistently or appreciably follow from satisfaction in a
direct functional relationship. But there are other conceptions of performance
that often may be more salient to the practitioner. (Bateman & Organ, 1983,
pp. 587-588)
This broader understanding of performance highlighted the supra, or extra, role behaviors that
“cannot be prescribed or required in advance for a given job. These behaviors include any of
those gestures . . . that lubricate the social machinery of the organization but that do not
directly inhere in the usual notion of task performance” (p. 588). Bateman and Organ called
these kinds of discretionary activities “citizenship” behaviors.
In the original operationalization of OCB, Smith, Organ, and Near (1983) posited that
there were two classes of organizational citizenship: (1) altruism, or helping, behaviors aimed at
individuals and arising out of situational demands (e.g., a colleague in immediate need of
assistance); and (2) generalized compliance, defined by an “impersonal sort of
conscientiousness” that motivates employees to perform discretionary tasks for the benefit of
the system rather than for individuals (p. 657). In other words, an employee who engages in
these behaviors does what a “’good employee ought to do’” (p. 662). Organ (1988) later
expanded the construct from two to five dimensions:

12

1. Altruism or helping: spontaneously assisting others (e.g., helping to orient a new
employee);
2. Conscientiousness or compliance: adherence to the spirit as well as the letter of the
law (e.g., is punctual and does not take undeserved breaks);
3. Sportsmanship: tolerating trivial inconveniences without complaint (e.g., does not
take up managers’ time with small inconveniences);
4. Courtesy: consulting with others before taking action (e.g., advises a manager or
colleague in advance of a decision that may affect them); and
5. Civic virtue: keeping up with matters that affect the organization (e.g., makes
suggestions to improve the quality of the organization)3 (Organ, Podsakoff, &
Mackenzie, 2006).
Although some researchers evaluate OCB on alternate scales, the five-item taxonomy above is
the most robust and frequently used iteration of OCB dimensions (Kark & Waismel-Manor,
2005; LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002).
One of the difficulties facing scholars of OCB is a lack of conceptual clarity (LePine, Erez,
& Johnson, 2002). The construct has been criticized on the grounds that the distinction
between in-role and extra-role behaviors can be difficult for managers or practitioners to
distinguish (Williams & Anderson, 1991) and a number of studies have indicated that
employees often are rewarded for OCB by supervisors, especially in performance evaluations
and through promotions (Cochrane, Dumler, & Schnake, 1995; Mackenzie, Podsakoff, & Fetter,
1993; Mackenzie, Podsakoff, & Paine, 1999). Korsgaard, Meglino, Lester, and Jeong (2010) note
3

In 1990, Organ added two additional constructs, peacekeeping and cheerleading. These items, however, are
difficult for managers to distinguish from altruism/helping (Podsakoff et al., 2009).

13

that even Organ (1997) modified his definition of OCB “such that it does not ‘require as a
construct definition that OBC be “beyond the job” or “not lead to system rewards'” (Korsgaard
et al., 2010, p. 277). Organ’s (1997) revised definition of OCB describes its functioning as
“performance that supports the social and psychological environment in which task
performance takes place” (p. 95).
Even in early writing on the subject, Smith, Organ, and Near (1983) acknowledged and
accounted for the possibility that formal rewards might result. They argued, however, that it is
highly unlikely that the possibility of reward would influence whether or not an employee
engaged in OCB:
. . . given the infrequency and unsystematic nature of most appraisal systems,
coupled with the fact that many supervisors have limited control over formal
rewards, it seems unlikely that most of the variance in ‘good citizen’ behavior
is explained by the calculated anticipation that they will pay off in largesse for
that person. (p. 654)
Podsakoff et al. (2009) note that no matter which of Organ’s definitions is used, a positive
correlation between discretionary OCB and organizational effectiveness can be expected.4
Some researchers have suggested additional components of OCB, 5 while others have
utilized only subsets of Organ’s five-dimensional model in their research (LePine, Erez, &
Johnson, 2002; Van Dyne, Graham, & Dienesh, 1994). The variety of scales in use has led to
4

See Bolino, Turnley, and Niehoff (2004) for research on the possible negative aspects of OCB as related to
individual and/or organizational effectiveness.
5
Moorman and Blakely (1995), for example, developed a four-dimensional conceptualization of OCB comprised of
interpersonal helping, individual initiative, personal industry, and loyal boosterism based on the work of Graham
(1989). Although a number of studies have used this scale for a variety of reasons, a majority of studies use of the
five-dimensional tool as constructed by Podsakoff, Mackenzie, Moorman, and Fetter (1990), based on the work of
Organ (1988).

14

some discrepancy in how OCB is operationalized and studied (Babcock-Roberson & Strickland,
2010; LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002). In their meta-analysis, LePine, Erez, and Johnson (2002)
conclude that competing taxonomies largely overlap with Bateman and Organ’s (1983) original
framework, but that substantive differences in measurement scales make comparison across
the body of OCB literature difficult. Indeed, the authors remark that “in the pool of 133 studies,
we count more than 40 different measures of behavior that scholars have referred to as OCB or
something very similar. . .” (p. 62).
In addition, related organizational theories such as contextual performance (Borman &
Motowidlo, 1993); prosocial organizational behavior and organizational spontaneity (Brief &
Motowidlo, 1986; George & Brief, 1992); and extra-role behaviors (Van Dyne, Cummins, &
McLean-Parks, 1995) overlap conceptually with OCB (Organ, 1990; Organ, Podsakoff, &
Mackenzie, 2006). Organ, Podsakoff, and Mackenzie (2006) argue that none of these
companion concepts include all of the generally required components of OCB, and that OCB
remains both practically and theoretically distinct. They concede, however, that even after
nearly 30 years and more than 650 published research studies on the subject “the way we
should define OCB is not crystal clear” (pp. 36-37; Podsakoff et al., 2009). Despite this lack of
conceptual clarity, the behaviors identified as falling under the umbrella of OCB remain
important influences on individual and organizational success (Podsakoff et al., 2009).
While the greatest impact of OCB is on an organization’s social mechanisms, its positive
effect on organizational and individual performance is also well documented (LePine, Erez, &
Johnson, 2002; Podsakoff et al., 2009). A number of studies have shown that positive effects on
traditional performance measures such as productivity, customer satisfaction, reduced
15

turnover, and reduced costs correlate with OCB (Podsakoff et al., 2009). In a study of general
managers from a national restaurant chain, for example, Walz and Niehoff (2000) find that
altruism, sportsmanship, and civic virtue had a moderate negative correlation with customer
complaints (r=-.40 to r=-.53) and that helping and sportsmanship were negatively correlated
with costs (r=-.58 and r=-.57). A meta-analysis by Podsakoff et al. (2009) found that overall OCB
correlates with efficiency (r=.40), costs (r=-.52), and unit level performance (r=.47). These
findings are consistent with Borman, White, and Dorsey (1995) as cited in Gerstner and Day
(1997): “the inclusion of interpersonal factors can increase the variance explained in
performance ratings by as much as two times that explained by ability, job knowledge, and
technical factors alone” (p. 834). OCB has also been linked to individual, as well as
organizational, effects such as managerial ratings of employee performance and reward
allocation, and demonstrates a negative correlation to counterproductive work behaviors such
as absenteeism and theft (Bowling, 2010; Podsakoff et al., 2009).
OCB: Antecedents and Motivation
Bateman and Organ (1983) laid the groundwork for identifying possible antecedents of
OCB. They posited that mood, satisfaction, personality, attributes, and leader supportiveness
were potential precursors of citizenship activities. These factors were later examined and
indeed found to be correlated with “good soldier” behaviors (Ilies, Nahrang, & Morgeson, 2007;
LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002; Organ, 1988; Podsakoff, Whiting, Podsakoff, & Blume, 2009;
Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983). Since then, a number of studies have investigated the
preconditions that lead to OCB, introducing numerous antecedents into the literature. In their
meta-analysis, LePine, Erez, and Johnson (2002) note that in the pool of 133 empirical articles
16

included in their research, over 200 correlates were presented. The five most frequently
appearing antecedents (statistically significant at p<.01) were: leader support (r=.32),
satisfaction (r=.24), fairness (r=.23), conscientiousness (r=.23), and organizational commitment
(r=.20).
Additional research suggests that organizational commitment, justice, fairness, and the
“big five” personality traits (emotional stability, extraversion, openness, conscientiousness, and
agreeableness) are also predictors of OCB (Chiaburu, Oh, Berry, Li, & Gardner, 2011; LePine,
Erez, & Johnson, 2002). Indeed, Rioux and Penner (2001) note that past research “provides
substantial evidence that individual difference in personality traits and affect account for
significant amounts of variance in OCB” (p. 1306). They also conclude that personality traits
and measures of affect, such as service orientation, positive affect, and extroversion, play a role
on par with attitudinal and environmental influences. Proactive personality, 6 in particular, is
associated with high quality leader-follower relationships, greater job satisfaction, and higher
levels of OCB (Li, Liang, & Crant, 2010). Thus, both intrinsic and extrinsic factors may influence
an employee’s ability and willingness to engage in OCB.
Based on the work of Katz and Kahn (1966) and other social and organizational
psychologists, Smith, Organ, and Near (1983) posit that mood state (positive affect),
environmental factors (e.g., leader supportiveness and task interdependence) and individual
attributes (e.g., neuroticism and extroversion) have the greatest impact on citizenship
behaviors. In addition, different aspects of OCB (e.g., altruism as opposed to sportsmanship)
may themselves be influenced by different factors (Chen & Chiu, 2008; Organ & Ryan, 1995;
6

Proactive personality describes those individuals who take the initiative to influence their environment (Li, Liang,
& Crant, 2010).

17

Podsakoff, Mackenzie, Paine, & Bachrach, 2000; Smith, Organ & Near, 1983). For example,
Smith, Organ, and Near (1983) found that altruism was most strongly influenced by positive
affect, as defined by job satisfaction. Environmental factors such as leader supportiveness,
however, most directly influenced generalized compliance. They also found that the best direct
predictor of generalized compliance was the participant’s score on a personality inventory,
providing additional support for the hypothesis that personality type plays an important role in
employee OCB (Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983; Rioux & Penner, 2001).
Morrison (1996) and others argue that it is the responsibility of managerial leaders to
hire staff with a strong service orientation, to create a positive service climate, and to socialize
new employees effectively (Kelley & Hoffman, 1997; Morrison, 1996). Morrison (1996) notes
that organizations must establish “social exchange, identification with organizational objectives,
and empowerment” early on in the employee’s initiation in order to foster a climate that
encourages OCB in addition to other social and service-oriented behaviors (p. 499). Even
expectations established in the first days of working together can affect subordinate
perceptions of exchange quality six months later (Liden, Wayne, & Stilwell, 1993). In their crossdepartmental study, Cochran, Dumler, and Schnake (1995) found that the highest levels of OCB
existed in the department rated highest in culture as defined by shared norms. Their findings
suggest that a leader’s ability to create a strong culture with shared values and expectations of
reciprocity will lead to more instances of OCB.
The question of what motivates employees to engage in citizenship behavior has also
produced a distinct line of research. Rioux and Penner (2001) propose that there are two ways
to think about the motivation to display OCB: (1) as a reaction (reciprocation) to antecedents
18

such as satisfaction and leader support, or (2) as a proactive display of intrinsic motivation.
While much of the literature on OCB relies on the norm of reciprocity to explain why employees
engage in social exchange in the workplace, Rioux and Penner (2001) posit that OCB can be
driven instead by three personal motives: organizational concern, prosocial values, or
impression management. 7 These motives are either altruistic (i.e., organizational concern and
prosocial values) or egoistic (i.e., impression management) (Connell, 2006; Yuan, 2007). The
implication is that employees may conscientiously manipulate their display of OCB to satisfy an
intrinsic need, at times even for their own benefit.
A review of the literature suggests that the question of what motivates OCB, internally
or externally, consciously or unconsciously, has myriad possible answers. One antecedent on
which almost all studies seem to agree, however, is that a subordinate’s relationship with his or
her supervisor qua leader is one of the most powerful predictors of citizenship behaviors.
Fortunately, the link between LMX and OCB has been explored in a number of studies.
LMX and OCB
Leader-Member Exchange and OCB share a theoretical foundation in reciprocity and a
practical foundation in the power of the leader-follower relationship. Ilies, Nahrgang, and
Morgeson (2007) conducted a meta-analysis in which they found a moderate (r=.37) positive
correlation between LMX and OCB. They note that the predictive efficacy of LMX applies to
OCB as much as to task performance: “the fact that LMX predicts citizenship behaviors as
strongly as it predicts task performance suggests that the benefits associated with high-quality
leader-member exchanges exceed what has been suggested by the validity of LMX in predicting
7

Organizational concern indicates care for the organization; prosocial values suggest concern for others;
impression management refers to concern for one’s image.

19

task performance alone” (Ilies, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2007, p. 273). Thus, the effect of high
quality LMX relationships becomes even more important when their impact on OCB is
considered.
While LMX is the most commonly studied leadership theory in connection with OCB,
research has also connected OCB to ethical leadership, servant leadership, and, more
frequently, transformational leadership. Li and Hung (2009) propose a relationship between
transformational leadership behaviors and high-quality leader-member exchange. They note
that:
Members in a transformational leadership context interact more frequently
with their leaders and have their leaders’ support, confidence,
encouragement, and consideration, and hence are more satisfied with their
leader, identify with the leader, trust in the leader, and by extension, are
more willing to form and maintain a high quality relationship with the leader.
(p. 1131)
LMX, they conclude, is the mechanism by which transformational leadership behaviors impact
employee behavior.
It is unsurprising, then, that Wang et al. (2005) found that Leader-Member Exchange
fully mediated the relationship between transformational leadership behaviors and OCB. They
contend that transformational leadership behaviors are essential for a leader to achieve high
quality LMX relationships. Their findings suggest that transformational leadership behaviors
function as a social currency that fosters high-quality LMX, and consequently OCB, by
enhancing follower receptivity to role-expanding offers and extra-role behaviors. They also
20

articulate a gap in the LMX literature such that it: “focuses strongly on the outcomes of highquality leader-member exchange, giving less attention to how leaders can build high-quality
exchange relationships with their followers,” [emphasis added] a void they suggest can be filled
with the integration of transformational leadership behavior into the LMX/OCB relationship (p.
430). Bhal, Ansari, and Aafaqi (2007) suggest that, in addition to transformational leadership
behaviors, demographic variables such as length of LMX dyad tenure and gender similarity (i.e.,
whether or not the leader and member are of the same gender) may also correlate with LMX
quality.
While leaders typically have easy access to resources and information to use for
exchange, this is often not the case for subordinates. OCB is among the few organizational
activities that employees can exhibit or withhold at their discretion, making it an ideal currency
of exchange with which employees can “repay” their leaders should they chose to do so (Ilies,
Nahrgan, & Morgeson, 2007, p. 269; Settoon, Bennet, & Liden, 1996). Anand, Vidyarthi, Liden,
and Rousseau (2010) argue that this is because OCB, unlike task performance, is not dependent
on skill level or job description. These kinds of activities are available to all employees,
withholding them is not likely to be penalized, and their voluntary nature allows them to be
demonstrated spontaneously in response to benefits received from others. Indeed,
vanYperen, van den Berg, and Willering (1999) suggest that OCB also contributes to employees’
sense of agency by granting them a tool to help control the balance of power in the employeesupervisor relationship. That is, an employee has the ability to decide whether and to what
degree to reciprocate. This is not the case with required in-role performance. When OCBs are
electively performed by employees in the workplace, their presence demonstrates a sense of
21

obligation to the leader, to colleagues, and to the organization (Ilies, Nahrgang, & Morgeson,
2007). Lapierre and Hacket (2007) conclude that:
Subordinates who display OCB are likely to convey to their supervisors a
commitment to contribute beyond formally prescribed role requirements . . .
In doing so, they are likely to make a favourable impression, thereby
cultivating high-quality LMX. In this sense, OCB is a social currency that helps
to nourish the social exchange relationship with the supervisor. (p. 542)
In return for OCB, leaders reciprocate with rewards such as special privileges, career
development opportunities, additional support, and increased job autonomy. These extra
resources may result in employees’ increased ability to perform at a higher level, in addition to
strengthening organizational commitment (Basu & Green, 1997; Wang et al., 2005; Wayne,
Shore, & Liden, 1997).
Basu and Green (1997) note that the benefits of high quality exchange relationships lead
to not only improved social functioning, but also additional creativity. Their findings suggest
that employees who are supported by their supervisors and committed to the organization are
also more likely to be innovative. Although they do not refer to OCB specifically, the latitude
that high LMX relationships provide to employees is imperative for the demonstration of extrarole thought and behaviors: “leaders can create an environment that encourages free thinking,
exchange of information . . . the latitude to explore and examine new ways of handling old
problems . . . and have the opportunity to engage in unconventional thought and behavior” (p.
480). The high autonomy, high support environment described is precisely the kind of
environment in which both organizational citizenship behaviors and innovative thought
22

processes thrive. In fact, a workplace that is high in leader support is one of the primary
predictors of OCB.
OCB and Perceived Supervisor Support
Despite the myriad correlates presented as antecedents of OCB, Smith, Organ, and
Near’s (1983) original suggestion that leader supportiveness is paramount has withstood
empirical examination (LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002). LePine, Erez, and Johnson (2002) assert
that leaders can make the greatest impact on OCB because: (1) they serve as role models for
discretionary, prosocial behaviors; and (2) leader supportiveness creates an exchange
relationship that is non-contractual in nature. LePine, Erez and Johnson (2002) conclude in
their meta-analysis that, of all correlates presented in the literature, leader support is the best
predictor of OCB.
It is important to note that there is a clear distinction in the OCB literature between
proximal and distant leaders. Burton, Sablynski, and Sekiguchi (2008) found that the direct
supervisor has the greatest influence on extra-role behaviors: “when an individual perceives a
good quality relationship with his/her supervisor and sees the formal procedures of the
organization as fair, he/she goes above and beyond his/her ‘normal’ duties” (p. 57).
Eisenberger, Stinglhamber, Vondenberghe, Sucharski and Rhoades (2002) similarly assert that
because they are more frequently in contact with employees, direct supervisors more easily
convey intangible, value-based skills. This view is substantiated by Choi (2009), who also
attributes to supportive leaders the role of prescribing norms and values, which may influence
behavior and create a culture that fosters helping. Gerstner and Day (1997) go so far as to
conclude: “on the basis of our review of the literature, we view the relationship with one’s
23

supervisor as a lens through which the entire work experience is viewed” (p. 840). 8 In sum,
the literature overwhelmingly confirms the critical importance of the supervisor in developing a
wide variety of workplace behaviors and attitudes among front-line staff.
One of the most important and influential aspects of this supervisor-employee
relationship is the level of support the employee perceives from the supervisor. The construct
of Perceived Supervisor Support (PSS) describes the degree of supervisor commitment felt by
the subordinate (Shore & Tetrick, 1991). Chen, Wang, Chang, and Hu (2008) define PSS as “the
positive feedback and benefits that subordinates receive from their supervisors for their
contributions” (p. 322). In practical terms, this may include the assignment of challenging tasks,
fair distribution of rewards, constructive feedback, consultation, delegation, recognition,
development, empowerment, leading by example, and demonstrating empathy, among other
behaviors (Basu & Green, 1997; Chen et al., 2008, p. 322; Hackett & LaPierre, 2004; Ladebo,
2008; O’Donnell, Yukl, & Taber, 2012; Sparrowe, Soetjipto, & Kraimer, 2006). Maertz, Griffith,
Campbell, and Allen (2007) suggest that a supervisor who demonstrates high levels of support
provides access to these benefits on a regular basis, yielding both increased trust and positive
feelings toward the supervisor.
The nature of the reciprocal exchange relationship created by leader support is critical
to the ongoing sustainability of OCB. In a high-quality leader-member exchange relationship,
the employee feels obligated to not only perform the job adequately, but also engage in
behaviors that directly benefit the leader and that are beyond the scope of usual job
expectations (Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983; Wayne, Shore, Bommer, & Tetrick, 2002). Likewise,
8

The terms supervisor and leader are used interchangeably in the OCB literature to address perceived support, and
that convention is continued here.

24

the leader feels obligated to reciprocate such actions by providing the employee with rewards
and privileges (Wayne, Shore, & Liden, 1995). A prequalification of these strong social
exchange relationships is the perception that they are fair and justly 9 distributed (Burton,
Sablynski, & Sekiguchi, 2008; Mierhan, Rietmann, & Jonas, 2008; Netemeyer et al., 1997; Wat &
Shaffer, 2005). Bolino and Turnley (2003) summarize:
Research has shown that employees are more willing to go beyond the call of
duty when they believe that: (1) important outcomes (e.g., promotions or pay
raises) are fairly distributed by the organization; (2) the procedures used to
make critical organizational decisions are just; and (3) their direct supervisors
are truthful, consider employees’ point of view, and show concern for the
rights of employees. (p. 63)
This itemization draws attention to the central issues of fairness, justice, trust, and the
importance of the direct supervisor in the facilitation of citizenship behaviors. Consistent with
the observations of Bolino and Turnley (2003), Mierhans, Rietmann, and Jonas (2008) conclude
that fairness and PSS are so highly correlated as to be almost inseparable.
Wayne, Shore, Bommer, and Tetrick (2002) similarly found that employees are more
likely to form positive relationships with supervisors who administer rewards on the basis of
performance and provide opportunities to be involved in decision making. Increased
participation in decision making augments an employee’s PSS and consequently the likelihood
that the employee will reciprocate the perceived support via OCB (Deckop, Cirka, & Andersson,

9

Both distributive and procedural justice are described in the OCB literature. Distributive justice refers to the
perceived fairness of an organizational outcome (i.e., pay increases), while procedural justice refers to the process
by which that outcome was determined (Burton, Sablynksi, & Sekiguchi, 2008).

25

2003, vanYperen, van den Berg, & Willering, 1999). Berman, Costigan, and Itler (1998) found
that the only demographic variable correlated with trust of supervisor is length of time in
position. The importance of the length of the supervisor/supervisee relationship (dyad
duration) is also reflected in research on LMX, suggesting that both increased trust and
negotiated role responsibilities may increase over time (Bhal, Ansari, & Aafaqi, 2007). Wat and
Shaffer (2005) found that trust in supervisor is significantly related to all dimensions of OCB
and that high quality LMX relates to both greater trust in supervisor and to conscientiousness.
OCB, LMX and PSS
High quality LMX has a positive impact not only on the level of trust in a leader, but also
on perceived supervisor support (Chen et al., 2008). Supervisor support can be operationalized
in an LMX context by:
(a) spending time talking about each person’s problem, concerns, and
expectations, (b) using “active” listening skills … (c) refraining from imposing
the leader’s or management’s frame of reference … and (d) sharing some of
the leader’s expectations about his or her own job, the member’s job, and
their working relationship. (Gerstner & Day, 1995, pp. 838-839)
In a reversal of the traditional OCB/LMX relationship, the findings of Lapierre and Hackett
(2007) suggest that conscientious displays of OCBs by employees may allow them to influence
the quality of the relationship with their leaders, switching the direction of influence from LMX
 OCB to OCB  LMX (p. 540). These results are consistent with the theoretical arguments of
Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) that “followers can play a role in determining the quality of the

26

relationship with their leader” (Lapierre & Hackett, 2007, p. 548). This also highlights the
reciprocal potential of exchange relationships in the organizational context.
Supervisor support not only positively influences OCB, but also impacts other behavioral
and attitudinal outcomes such as employee turnover, perceived organizational support, and
other extra-role behaviors (Chen, Eisenberger, Johnson, Sucharski, & Aselage, 2009;
Eisenberger, Stinglhamber, Vandenberghe, Sucharski, & Rhodes, 2002; Maertz, Griffith,
Campbell, & Allen, 2007). Settoon, Bennett, and Liden (1996) found that, while in-role
behaviors are also affected by the nature of the relationship with the supervisor, extra-role
behaviors are particularly sensitive to supervisory affect: “the more that relationships or
exchanges between supervisors and subordinates are based on mutual trust and loyalty,
interpersonal affect, and respect for each other, the better the subordinate’s performance in
terms of expected and ‘extra’ or citizenship behaviors” (p. 224). The quality of supervisor
support, therefore, is as or more critical than leader proximity to the facilitation of OCB.
Basu and Green (1997) also note the importance of supervisor support in creating an
environment that encourages innovative behaviors, a subject of particular relevance for
modern libraries. They point out that “by providing emotional support, leaders encourage and
motivate followers to assert their ideas, take risks, and be innovative” (p. 481). Indeed, their
findings suggest that followers who have support from their leaders and are committed to the
organization are more likely to display innovative behaviors than those who do not feel
supported. Unsurprisingly, the importance of supervisor support may become even more
valuable during times of duress. Chen and Chiu (2008) describe highly supportive supervisors as
those who:
27

back up subordinates, give credit to subordinates for difficult decisions and
trade-offs that the subordinates make, avoid becoming overly critical . . .
reframe stressful events as developmental opportunities, and will inspire
subordinates to perceive difficult situations as meaningful challenges
necessary for developing one’s personal and professional skills. (p. 3)
Supervisors may also provide support by fostering resilience and optimism in difficult times and
by mitigating employment stressors such as work overload, role ambiguity, and role conflict
(Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002). PSS, then, extends beyond the fair distribution of rewards and
the engagement of employees in the decision-making process.
Finally, it is important to note the distinction between perceived organizational support
(POS), which has its own body of literature, and PSS. In discussing POS, Morrison (1996) notes
that “employees who feel that their organization cares about them will define their
employment relationship as social rather than economic and thus their obligations as broad and
diffuse rather than narrow and quid pro quo” (p. 503). Both PSS and POS can elicit positive
outcomes in terms of extra-role behaviors such as those associated with OCB. Complicating this
relationship is that supervisors serve as embodiments of the organization and contribute to
employee’s conceptions of POS, in addition to being individuals with whom employees may
form personal relationships (Anand et al., 2010; Maertz et al., 2007). Thus, the accessible
leader is both an individual capable of developing exchange relationships with an employee and
the personification of the organization with whom an employee may equally engage. Wayne,
Shore, and Liden (1997) note, however, that:

28

the amount, usefulness, and consistency of feedback received from an
organization are separate from the amount, usefulness, and consistency of
feedback received from a leader. . . Thus, even though leaders are important
organizational representatives, employees appear to view exchanges with an
organization and a leader as distinct. (p. 85)
A further complication influencing this relationship is that employees relate decision making by
top management to a global organizational sense of support. Nontheless, it is almost
exclusively the direct supervisor who provides what employees perceive as “supervisor”
support as opposed to a sense of organizational support that might be provided by a distant
leader (Wayne, Shore, Bommer, & Tetrick, 2002).
Employees, consciously or not, are sensitive to the relationship between perceived
organizational support and perceived supervisory support. Wayne et al. (2002) found that the
perception of organizational support over time leads employees to “desire and accept a highquality exchange with their supervisor” (p. 592). They add that “because leaders tend to
allocate more rewards to employees with whom they have high-quality exchanges, over time
LMX may influence employees’ perceptions of organizational support” (p. 592; Wayne, Shore, &
Liden, 1997). This feedback loop illustrates the difficulty of teasing out the direction of causality
between these interrelated phenomena.
When examined together, LMX is more strongly correlated with OCB than with POS
(Anand et al. 2010; Settoon et al., 1996). This distinction is supported by research that suggests
that LMX predicts OCBI (behaviors that benefit individuals) more strongly than it predicts to
OCBO (behaviors that benefit the organization) (Ilies, Nahrgang & Morgeson, 2007). By
29

contrast, perceived organizational support, as opposed to leader support via LMX or PSS, has
stronger predictive validity with OCBO (Eiseneberger, Armeli, Rexwinkel, Lynch, & Rhoades,
2001; Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002). In the final analysis, however, Shanock, and Eisenberger
(2006) found that PSS, not POS, appears to have the most direct influence on extra role
behaviors such as OCB.
Interaction Effects
It is difficult to tease out all of the interaction effects among the related constructs of
perceived supervisor support, perceived organizational support, and LMX, and even more
complex to explore their relationships to OCB. All three constructs have been empirically
established as conceptually distinct and predictive of each other, but directionality, strength,
mediating effects, and intervening variables have not been definitively established (Settoon et
al., 1996; Shanock, & Eisenberger, 2006; Wayne et al., 1997; Wayne et al., 2002). Smith, Organ,
and Near (1983), for example, found a relationship between leader supportiveness and the
conscientiousness (compliance) dimensions of OCB. Via job satisfaction, they also found a
positive indirect influence on altruism. The correlation among PSS, job satisfaction, and OCB is
supported by additional research suggesting that not only does PSS increase job satisfaction
and subsequently OCB (Chen & Chiu, 2008), but that the performance of OCB could increase
supervisor support, creating a circular effect that leads to increased employee satisfaction
(Ladebo, 2008). These intercorrelations make it difficult to determine the direction of influence
and the causal relationships among these variables.
In addition, supervisors may need to use different tactics to influence employee
behavior depending on the quality of the LMX relationship. For example, Sparrowe, Soetjipto
30

and Kraimer (2006) found that among employees who perceive a low-LMX relationship,
inspirational appeals and exchange tactics negatively affect helping behaviors, while
consultation tactics (i.e., asking for input) are positively correlated. Exchange tactics are
positively correlated with helping behavior, however, among employees with high LMX. In
addition, employees may be motivated by having what they perceive to be comparatively
“closer” relationships with their supervisors than do their colleagues. That is, employees who
believe they have a higher quality relationship (as measured by LMX) with a supervisor relative
to their coworkers will engage in more OCBs (Vidyarthi, Liden, Anand, Erdogan, & Ghosh, 2010).
Given the complexity of these interrelationships, it is important to place the current study in
the context of these multifaceted and highly interactive human behaviors.
OCB and the Library
Peng, Hwang, and Wong (2010) authored the only published empirical study of OCB in a
library setting. Their research in an academic library in Taiwan suggests that the workplace skills
necessary for success both at present and in the future require a new breed of employee
capable of innovation, a high tolerance for change, and the ability to adapt to new intellectual
and service challenges. They propose that these qualities are often manifested in extra-role
behaviors, and that library leadership has a responsibility to adjust occupational roles and
responsibilities, as well as environmental factors, in order to facilitate OCB.
Peng, Hwang, and Wong (2010) note that discretionary behaviors are not necessarily
common or positively viewed in the library setting. They argue that administrators must create
an environment that tolerates and even embraces extra-role initiative and independent task
design: “OCB often requires employees to deviate significantly from workplace practices and
31

norms. An autonomous work environment may provide librarians with necessary discretion to
perform OCB” (p. 288). They conclude that those in leadership positions should provide
increased job autonomy, facilitate employee autonomy, and increase intrinsic and extrinsic job
satisfaction, all of which have a positive impact on employee OCB. Ultimately, the
responsibility for creating work environments that allow for and encourage OCB lies with
managerial leaders.
Not only is OCB linked with innovation, it also has the potential to play a critical role in
the service experience, both from the internal and the customer perspectives. Morrison (1996)
argues that many service-oriented behaviors are inherently forms of citizenship, and Payne and
Webber (2006) found that employee satisfaction positively correlated with service-oriented
OCB 10 as well as both customer satisfaction and customer loyalty. These findings have
noteworthy implications for public library staff, as the majority of them perform in boundaryspanning roles. 11 Although he was not writing about librarians specifically, Organ (1990)
proposed that:
[A] certain personality trait may, on the one hand, predispose individuals
toward careers in those jobs or professions which has as their raison d’etre
the ministering to others’ needs or problems. That same trait might well
predict the extent to which people will render such aid in a form or fashion
well beyond formal role prescriptions. (p. 49)
10

Service-oriented OCB is directed at the customer. Examples include altruistic behavior, promoting the
organization to the customer, and demonstrating a positive attitude (Bettencourt, Gwinner, & Meuter, 2001;
Payne & Webber, 2006).
11
Boundary-spanning employees (those who have direct contact with customers) become a source of information
to the customer about the organization and to the organization about the customer. This interaction is particularly
vital because boundary spanners serve as an organization’s external representation. Effective boundary spanners
have strong interpersonal skills, are flexible and adaptable, and are high in empathy (Brown & Schneider, 1985).

32

The notion that the same characteristics that predispose some people to choose
librarianship may also incline them to partake in OCB has not been tested empirically.
However, in a study that included academic library staff, Bettencourt, Gwinner, and Meuter
(2001) note that personality accounted for the most unique variance in service-oriented OCB
among boundary-spanning employees. Their findings on the impact of attitude, personality,
and knowledge predictors on service-oriented OCB indicates “that the employee-disposition
variables of service orientation and empathy are the best predictors of contact-employee
service-delivery OCBs” (p. 36). In addition, they provide insight into the service orientation of
the library staff who participated in their study, noting that: “the personality variables [service
orientation and empathy] entirely account for the relationship between attitudes and
participation in OCB” (p. 36). Indeed, the relationship between personality and disposition to
both service behaviors and OCB is well documented (Bettencourt et al., 2001; Chiaburu, Oh,
Berry, Li, & Gardner, 2011; Konovsky & Organ, 1996; Li, Liang, & Crant, 2010).
Service-oriented organizational cultures such as libraries may be prime environments
for citizenship behaviors, in part because library staff may innately embrace a commitment to
public service. Rayner, Lawton, and Williams (2012) argue that “public sector professionals are
motivated to perform helping behaviors due to an intrinsic value system that includes altruistic
behavior as well as a belief in a ‘public service ethos’” (p. 118). In order for this ethos to
manifest as OCB, boundary-spanning staff must be empowered to engage in discretionary
value-added behaviors. These behaviors are “critical in service encounters because no one can
specify in advance the full range of things that a service employee might have to do in response
to unpredictable customer requests” (Bowen, Gilliland, & Folger, 1999, p. 19). Employees
33

should also be encouraged to participate in citizenship behaviors directed not just at the
customer, but at colleagues and peers throughout the organization. Bell and Menguc (2002)
note that “in addition to making a direct contribution to service quality, OBC indirectly improves
the customer-orientation of customer contact personnel through the provision of assistance
and support among co-workers. In other words, OCBs make both direct and indirect
contributions to the quality of service provided” (p. 134; Morrison, 1996). OCB, then, can
improve not only customer contact interactions, but also internal efficiencies and relationships.
In addition to the developing literature on service, research on the relationship between
gender and OCB has also begun to emerge (Farrell & Finkelstein, 2007). The evidence that OCB
is a gendered phenomenon is diverse. Heilman and Chen (2005) suggest that women are
expected to perform “altruistic” OBCs while men are expected to display “civic virtue” OCBs.
Allen and Rush (2001) found that women are expected to perform OCB more frequently than
men overall. These results reflect a possible gender expectation bias based on the assumption
that women are naturally more nurturing and helpful than are men. There is also evidence that
men’s participation in OCB is more noticeable (and thus more highly rewarded in performance
evaluations) than women’s, who are “expected” to perform helping behaviors (Heilman &
Chen, 2005; Kidder & Parks, 2001).
Farrell and Finkelstein (2007) suggest that when:
[A] woman (or a man) behaves as women (or men) are stereotypically
expected to behave, their behavior will be more likely to be attributed to
traditional [i.e., social exchange] motives. When a woman (man) doesn’t
behave as women (men) are stereotypically expected to behave, their
34

behavior will be more likely to be attributed to impression management. (p.
85)
This is an interesting observation in the context of librarianship, which is often stereotyped as a
feminized profession (Rubin, 2010). Librarianship has been and continues to be dominated by
women, but historically women have held non-managerial roles (Golub, 2010). It is only
recently that women have begun to take on the majority of managerial and directorial positions
(Golub, 2010). As this shift takes place, the relationship among gender, leadership, and OCB
will become increasingly relevant. Some facets of OCB, such as attending optional meetings or
staying late to complete projects, may be inherently biased against women, who may be less
able to adjust their schedules due to family responsibilities (Kark & Waismel-Manor, 2005).
Work-life benefits, however, have been shown to increase OCB regardless of gender (Lambert,
2000; Morrison, 1996). Ultimately, leaders should be aware of the potential danger of
attribution error due to gender stereotypes, especially as they more conscientiously explore
OCB in the library environment.
In sum, the literature on OCB and its correlates is diverse and often inconsistent. The
direction of causality between OCB and related constructs such as PSS, POS, and LMX has not
been conclusively determined, and findings related to which correlates (i.e., gender or dyad
duration) mediate and moderate influential relationships is not definitive (Cochrane, Dumler, &
Shnake, 1995; LePine, Erez, & Johnson, 2002). Netemeyer et al. (1997) offer an example of the
circuitous and inconclusive links among satisfaction, leader support, and the dimensions of
OCB:

35

Smith, Organ, and Near (1983) find that leader supportive behaviors’ effect on
the OCB dimension of altruism is best modeled as indirect through job
satisfactions’ (sic) effect on altruism. However, they also find a direct
leadership support effect on compliance. Podsakoff and colleagues (1990) . . .
do find a direct individualized leader support to job satisfaction path.
However, they find no support of a direct effect from individualized leader
support to OCBs, nor did they find the satisfaction to OCBs link to be
significant. In fact, they find that the effect of individualized leader support on
OCBs is mediated, but by “trust” in leader, not by job satisfaction. (Netemeyer
et al., p. 88)
Adding to the complexity of the literature, factors such as person-organizational fit (Netemeyer
et al. 1997), coworker support (Chiaburu & Harrison, 2008), organizational commitment
(Meierhans, Rietmann & Jonas, 2008), ethical climate (Huang, You, & Tsai, 2012), and employee
engagement (Babcock-Roberson & Strickland, 2010) have been introduced and studied in the
context of OCB. Further, in addition to OCBO and OCBI, more targeted forms of OCB have been
proposed including change-oriented OCB (Bettencourt, 2004) and service-oriented OCB
(Morrison, 1996).
Untangling the web of research and theory available on OCB has not been of primary
interest to investigators. As noted by LePine, Erez, and Johnson (2002), “the downside of this
breadth . . . is that there has been less effort focused on replicating and conducting studies that
systematically extend previous empirical research” (p. 62). They argue that even the
dimensions of OCB themselves “have yet to be distinguished from one another in the empirical
36

literature beyond factor analysis . . . most of the dimensions of OCB . . . are highly related to
one another and that there are no apparent differences in relationships with the most popular
set of predictors” (p. 60). Despite these complications, the authors note that the most
frequently utilized and evaluated method for assessing OCB is Organ’s original five-dimensional
taxonomy. Thus, Organ’s (1988) five-dimensional taxonomy as operationalized by Podsakoff,
MacKenzie, Moorman, and Fetter (1990) forms the foundation for this research.
HYPOTHESIZED MODEL
Given this discussion, the hypothesized model in Figure 1.1 is proposed. In this path
diagram, perceived supervisor support is expected to mediate 12 the relationship between LMX
and the interpersonal dimensions of OCB, with the length of leader-member dyad duration as a
moderator 13 of the LMX-OCB relationship.

12

A mediating variable accounts, at least partially, for the relationship between a predictor variable and an
outcome variable (McCartney, Burchinal, & Bub, 2006). A mediated relationship may be present among variables
when (1) X is significantly related to M, (2) M is significantly related to Y, and (3) the relationship of X to Y
diminishes when M is in the model (Little, Card, Bovaird, Preacher, & Crandall, 2007).
13
A moderator can be thought of as a variable that qualifies the relationship of the variables in a system (Little et
al., 2007). In other words, “the effect of the predictor on the outcome shifts, depending on values of the
moderator variable” (McCartney, Burchinal, & Bub, 2006, p. 88). Age is a typical example of a moderator.

37

Figure 1.1:
Hypothesized Model

H1(1)

ALTRUISM

H3(1)
H3(2)

PSS
H2

COURTESY

H1(2)
H1(3)

SPORTSMANSHIP

LMX
H1(4)

H4(1)

H4(2)

H1(5)

CIVIC VIRTUE

COMPLIANCE

Dyad Tenure

38

HYPOTHESES
The following hypotheses will be tested based on this model. Results are considered
significant at p=.05:
H1:

There is a positive correlation between LMX quality and the five dimensions of OCB: (1)
altruism, (2) courtesy, (3) sportsmanship, (4) civic virtue, and (5) compliance.

H2:

There is a positive correlation between LMX quality and PSS.

H3:

There is a positive correlation between Perceived Supervisor Support and OCB.

H4:

Perceived Supervisor Support accounts for a statistically significant proportion of the
variance between LMX quality and the helping dimensions of OCB: (1) altruism and (2)
courtesy.

H5:

Leader-member dyad tenure accounts for a statistically significant proportion of the
variance between LMX quality and the helping dimensions of OCB: (1) altruism and (2)
courtesy.
Outside the model (see Figure 1.1), four additional hypotheses related to leader-

member gender similarity and employee gender are tested. Each of these hypotheses is also
tested at p=.05. Because of the gendered nature of the library profession and the exploratory
purpose of this study, null hypotheses are proposed:
H6:

There is no correlation between leader-member gender similarity and LMX quality.

H7:

There is no correlation between leader-member gender similarity and Perceived
Supervisor Support.

H8:

There is no correlation between leader-member gender similarity and member OCB.

H9:

There is no correlation between employee gender and the five dimensions of OCB.
39

PROCEDURES
Research Design
Data were collected from a single large public library system in the Midwest. The site
was selected from a number of potential locations, all of which were large enough to provide a
total sample of at least 300 individuals. All sites considered were library systems with 15 or
more branches. Individual respondents include:
•

Full and part-time boundary-spanning public service information professionals and
paraprofessionals (degreed librarians and non-MLIS library assistants, or equivalent);
and

•

Direct supervisors of these individuals

This study excludes boundary-spanning circulation staff and other support staff because these
employees are neither likely to be degreed librarians nor to work in the same department as
degreed librarians. This is an important distinction given the study’s focus on librarians and
their exchange relationships with immediate supervisors and close colleagues. A final criterion
for inclusion is that qualified staff were not unionized. Because of the rigidity of role breadth for
union employees, extra-role behaviors may be adversely affected, and this variable is not
accounted for in this study.
Initial contact was made in October, 2012 with three library systems that met the above
criteria to assess feasibility and interest (see Appendix A). All of the directors contacted know
the investigator. One director agreed to participate, and the dissertation committee concurred.
The investigator met with this individual in December, 2012 and provided a summary of the
research proposal, a timeline, and copies of all instruments. Members of the supervisee and
40

supervisor groups were contacted via their work e-mail addresses to inform them about the
impending research. In January, 2013 the researcher attended a department heads meeting in
order to describe the research, encourage participation, and to answer questions from
supervisors.
Methodology
Participation in the research was voluntary. Via employer provided e-mail addresses, all
potential respondents received an implied consent cover letter from the researcher explaining
the purpose of the study and the methods by which their identities would be protected (Wu,
2009) (see Appendices B and C). A six digit code was assigned to each employee: two digits for
each branch, two digits for each supervisor, and two digits for each employee. A single list
matching the six digit codes to employees’ names for dyad matching purposes was maintained:
once the data were matched and analyzed, the name/ID number list as well as any other
identifying information was destroyed (Wu, 2009).
All survey instruments were distributed electronically via Survey Monkey. Demographic
information including age, race, gender, degree status (master of library and information
science), position title, length of leader-member dyad duration (supervisees only), and span of
control (supervisors only), was collected. Supervisors were sent separate links to Podsakoff et
al.’s (1990) 24-Item OCB Scale for each of their supervisees (see Appendix E). Out of
consideration for the time of supervisors and to encourage quality responses, supervisors were
asked to complete surveys for no more than 10 employees, who were randomly chosen. Rating

41

of OCB was completed only by supervisors in order to help prevent common method variance 14
(Organ & Ryan, 1995).
Employees received a single link that allowed them to complete the LMX-7
measurement scale (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) and the 16-item Survey of Perceived Supervisor
Support (Kottke & Sharafinski, 1988) instrument (see Appendices F and G). Although LMX
quality can be measured from either the supervisor or the subordinate perspective, LMX scores
are more reliable when assessed by the supervisee (Gerstner & Day, 1997). A reminder e-mail
was sent out two weeks after the initial distribution of surveys to increase response rate (see
Appendix D).
Data Quality
Three existing surveys were used for this study: the 24-Item OCB Scale, the Survey of
Perceived Supervisory Support, and the LMX-7. The reliability and validity of Podsakoff et al.’s
(1990) 24-Item OCB Scale has been tested in a number of studies. Using factor analysis, the
majority of these studies support Organ’s (1988) five-factor model of OCB. Reliability (alphas)
for factor loading averaged .81 (Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). Average internal
consistency reliability scores for the five OCB dimensions are as follows: altruism (.88), courtesy
(.87), conscientiousness (.85), sportsmanship (.88), and civic virtue (.84) (Organ, Podsakoff, &
Mackenzie, 2006). Although several OCB scales are available, Organ’s scale was chosen for a
number of reasons: first, his framework has the longest history and the most related
publications; second, a number of empirical studies have validated Podsakoff et al.’s (2009)
14

Podsakoff, Mackenzie, Lee, and Podsakoff (2003) define common method variance as “variance that is
attributable to the measurement method rather than to the constructs the measures represent” (p. 879). For
example, an employee who rates both LMX and her own OCB may lead to biased results. Obtaining OCB ratings
from a separate source helps to prevent this kind of measurement error.

42

instrument assessing Organ’s (1988) five dimensions; lastly, it is the most commonly used
framework (Netemeyer et al., 1997).
The Survey of Perceived Supervisory Support is a modified version of Eisenberger et al.’s
(1986) Survey of Perceived Organizational Support (POS), in which “supervisor” is substituted
for “organization.” The original POS scale was developed in order to measure organizational
commitment as perceived by employees and is grounded in social exchange theory (Shore &
Tetrick, 1991), making its modified version ideal for this study. Kottke and Sharafinski (1988)
repurposed the instrument to evaluate perceived supervisory support. Their analyses indicate
that the modification of that scale for supervisor support nearly replicated the findings for
reliability for the original scale. The reliability analysis for the new scale had an alpha of .98,
and the median factor loading was .87, indicating high reliability for the supervisory support
usage.
Lastly, the LMX-7 (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) is the most widely used LMX scale (Gerstner
& Day, 1997). Gerstner and Day (1997) found the LMX-7 scale to have sound psychometric
properties and reported an alpha of .89 for reliability. Although other measures of LMX exist
that explore the multidimensionality of LMX, the alternative measures correlate highly with the
LMX-7 instrument (Graen & Uhl-Bien , 1995). Thus, Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) and Gerster and
Day (1997) recommend its use as the most appropriate measure of LMX.
CONCLUSION
The literature on OCB is robust, however its operationalization, mechanisms, and even
its definition are not entirely clear. Further complicating this lack of clarity for public libraries is
the absence of study participants who include librarians. While a number of studies have
43

explored OCB in other environments, the effect of perceived supervisor support and LMX on
OCB may have noteworthy and profession-specific implications for the hiring, training, and
support of managerial leaders in public and other types of libraries, as well as for other public
service institutions.
Previous studies have linked organizational citizenship behavior to Leader-Member
Exchange and supervisory support. This research further explores the relationship among these
variables. In particular, findings will have implications for the role that high-quality leadermember exchange relationships between a front-line staff member and his or her direct
supervisor play in the encouragement of OCB. Given the numerous variables already
associated with OCB, LePine, Erez, and Johnson (2002), emphasize a need for a deeper
understanding of previously identified factors such as these, with the goal of providing greater
precision, as opposed to the introduction of new elements. In addition, this study also explores
these interactions in a new setting. Chapter 2 provides an overview of the findings of this
research.
REFERENCES
Allen, T., & Rush, M. (2001). The influence of ratee gender on ratings of organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 31(12), 2561-2587.
Anand, S., Vidyarthi, P.R., Liden, R.C., & Rouseau, D.M. (2010). Good citizens in poor-quality
relationships: Idiosyncratic deals as a substitute for relationship quality. Academy of
Management Journal, 53(5), 970-988.

44

Babcock-Roberson, M., & Strickland, O. J. (2010). The relationship between charismatic
leadership, work engagement, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal of
Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 144(3), 313-326.
Barnard, C.I. (1938). The functions of the executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Basu, R., & Green, S. G. (1997). Leader-member exchange and transformational leadership: An
empirical examination of innovative behaviors in leader-member dyads. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 27(6), 477-499.
Bateman, T.S., & Organ, D.W. (1983). Job satisfaction and the good soldier: The relationship
between affect and employee “citizenship.” Academy of Management Journal, 26(4), 587595.
Bell, S. J., & Menguc, B. (2002). The employee-organization relationship, organizational
citizenship behaviors, and superior service quality. Journal of Retailing, 78(2), 131-146.
Berman, J. J., Costigan, R. D., & Ilter, S. S. (1998). A multi-dimensional study of trust in
organizations. Journal of Managerial Issues, 10(3), 303-318.
Bettencourt, L. A. (2004). Change-oriented organizational citizenship behaviors: The direct and
moderating influence of goal orientation. Journal of Retailing, 80(3), 165-180.
Bettencourt, L. A., Gwinner, K. P., & Meuter, M. L. (2001). A comparison of attitude, personality,
and knowledge predictors of service-oriented organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 29-41.
Bhal, K.T., Ansari, M.A., & Aafai, R. (2007). The role of gender match, LMX tenure, and support
in leader-member exchange. International Journal of Business and Society, 8(2), 63-80.
Blau, P.M. Exchange and power in social life. New York, NY: Wiley, 1964.
45

Bolino, M. C., & Turnley, W. H. (2003). Going the extra mile: Cultivating and managing
employee citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Executive, 17(3), 60-71.
Bolino, M. C., Turnley, W. H., & Niehoff, B. P. (2004). The other side of the story: Reexamining
prevailing assumptions about organizational citizenship behavior. Human Resource
Management Review, 14(2), 229-246.
Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the criterion domain to include elements
of contextual performance. In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman (Eds.), Personnel selection in
organizations. (pp. 71-98). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Borman, W.C., White, L.A., & Dorsey, D. W. (1995). Effects of rate task performance and
interpersonal factors on supervisor and peer performance ratings. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 81, 168-177.
Bowen, D. E., Gilliland, S. W., & Folger, R. (1999). HRM and service fairness: How being fair with
employees spills over to customers. Organizational Dynamics, 27(3), 7-23.
Bowling, N. A. (2010). Effects of job satisfaction and conscientiousness on extra-role behaviors.
Journal of Business and Psychology, 25(1), 119-130.
Brief, A. P., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1986). Prosocial Organizational Behaviors. Academy of
Management Review, 11(4), 710-725.
Brown, David E. and Schnieder, B. (1985). “Boundary-spanning role employees and the service
encounter: Some guidelines for future management and research.” In Czepiel, Michael R.
Solomon, and Carol F. Surprenenant (Eds.), The Service Encounter (pp. 127-147). New York,
NY: Lexington Books.

46

Burton, J.P., Sablynski, C.J., & Sekiguchi, T. (2008). Linking justice, performance, and citizenship
via leader-member exchange. Journal of Business Psychology, 23(1/2), 51-61.
Chen, C., & Chiu, S. (2008). An integrative model linking supervisor support and organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Business and Psychology, 23(1-2), 1-10.
Chen, S.C., Wang, S.J. Chang, W.C. & Hu, C.S. (2008). The effect of leader-member-exchange,
trust, supervisor support on organizational citizenship behavior in nurses. Journal of
nursing research 16(4), 321-328.
Chen, Z., Eisenberger, R., Johnson, K.M., Sucharski, I.L., Aselage, J. (2009). Perceived
organizational support and extra-role performance: Which leads to which. The Journal of
Social Psychology 149(1), 119-124.
Chiaburu, D. S., & Harrison, D. A. (2008). Do peers make the place? Conceptual synthesis and
meta-analysis of coworker effects on perceptions, attitudes, OCBs, and performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(5), 1082-1103.
Chiaburu, D. S., Oh, I., Berry, C. M., Li, N., & Gardner, R. G. (2011). The five-factor model of
personality traits and organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 96(6), 1140-1166.
Choi, J.N. (2009). Collective dynamics of citizenship behavior: What group characteristic
promote group-level helping? Journal of Management Studies 46(6), 1396-1420.
Cochrane, D., Dumler, M., & Schnake, M. (1995). Encouraging organizational citizenship: The
effects of job satisfaction, perceived. Journal of Managerial Issues, 7(2), 209-221.

47

Connell, P. W. (2006). Transformational leadership, leader-member exchange (LMX), and OCB:
The role of motives (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses dataset. (Publication No. ATT 3197920)
Dansereau, F., Graen, F., & Haga, W.J. (1975). A vertical dayge linkage approach to leadership
within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of the role making process.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13, 46-78.
Deckop, J. R., Cirke, C. C., & Andersson, L. M. (2003). Doing unto others: The reciprocity of
helping behavior in organizations. Journal of Business Ethics, 47(2), 101-113.
Eisenberger, R., Armeli, S., Rexwinkel, B., Lynch, P. D., & Rhoades, L. (2001). Reciprocation of
perceived organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 42-51.
Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. (1986). Perceived organizational
support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 500-507.
Eisenberger, R., Stinglhamber, F., Vondenberghe, C., Sucharski, I.L., & Rhoades, L. (2002).
Perceived supervisor support: Contributions to perceived organizational support and
employee retention. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3), 565-573.
Farrell, S. K., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2007). Organizational citizenship behavior and gender:
Expectations and attributions for performance. North American Journal of Psychology, 9(1),
81-96.
Fisk, G. M., & Friesen, J. P. (2012). Perceptions of leader emotion regulation and LMX as
predictors of followers' job satisfaction and organizational citizenship behaviors. The
Leadership Quarterly, 23(1), 1-12.

48

George, J. M., & Brief, A. P. (1992). Feeling good-doing good: A conceptual analysis of the mood
at work-organizational spontaneity relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 112(2), 310-329.
Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analytic review of leader–member exchange theory:
Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6), 827-844.
Golub, E. (2010). Gender divide in librarianship: Past, present, and future. Library Student
Journal, 57, 7.
Gouldner, A.W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Sociological
Review, 25, 161-178.
Graen, G.B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Development of
leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a multi-level,
multi-doman perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219-247.
Graham, J.W. (1989). Organizational citizenship behavior: Construct redefinition,
operationalization, and validation. Unpublished working paper, Loyola University of
Chicago.
Hackett, R. D., & LaPierre, L. M. (2004, August). A meta-analytical explanation of the
relationship between LMC and OCB. Academy of Management Proceedings, T1-T6.
Heilman, M. E., & Chen, J. J. (2005). Same Behavior, Different Consequences: Reactions to
Men's and Women's Altruistic Citizenship Behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(3),
431-441.
Hernon, P. (Ed.) (2010). Shaping the future: Advancing the understanding of leadership. Santa
Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.

49

Hernon, P., Powell, R.R., & Young, A.P. (2003). The next library leadership: Attributes for the
next generation of library directors. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Huang, C.C., You, C.S., & Tsai, M.T. (2012). A multidimensional analysis of ethical climate, job
satisfaction, organizational commitment, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Nursing
Ethics 19(4), 513-529.
Ilies, R., Nahrgang, J. D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2007). Leader-member exchange and citizenship
behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(1), 269-277.
Kark, R., & Waismel-Manor, R. (2005). Organizational citizenship behavior: What’s gender got to
do with it? Organization, 12(6), 889-917.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R.L. (1966). The social psychology of organizations. New York, NY: Wiley.
Kelley, S. W., & Hoffman, D.K. (1997). An investigation of positive affect, prosocial behaviors
and service quality. Journal of Retailing, 73(3), 407-427.
Kidder, D. L., & Parks, J. (2001). The good soldier: Who is s(he)? Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 22(8), 939-959.
Konovsky, M. A., & Organ, D. W. (1996). Dispositional and contextual determinants of
organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 17(3), 253-266.
Korsgaard, M. A., Meglino, B. M., Lester, S. W., & Jeong, S. S. (2010). Paying you back or paying
me forward: Understanding rewarded and unrewarded organizational citizenship behavior.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(2), 277-290.
Kottke, J.L., & Sharafinski, C. E. (1988). Measuring perceived supervisory and organizational
support. Educational and Psychological Measurement 48, 1075-1079.

50

Ladebo, O. (2008). Perceived supervisory support and organizational citizenship behaviors: Is
job satisfaction a mediator? South African Journal of Psychology, 38(3), 479-488.
Lambert, S.J. (2000). Added benefits: The link between work-life benefits and organizational
citizenship behavior. Academy of Management, 43(5), 801-815.
Lapierre, L. M., & Hackett, R. D. (2007). Trait conscientiousness, leader-member exchange, job
satisfaction and organizational citizenship behaviour: A test of an integrative model.
Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 80(3), 539-554.
LePine, J. A., Erez, A., & Johnson, D. E. (2002). The nature and dimensionality of organizational
citizenship behavior: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology,
87(1), 52-65.
Li, C., & Hung, C. (2009). The influence of transformational leadership on workplace
relationships and job performance. Social Behavior and Personality, 37(8), 1129-1142.
Li, N., Liang, J., & Crant, J. M. (2010). The role of proactive personality in job satisfaction and
organizational citizenship behavior: A relational perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology,
95(2), 395-404.
Liden, R.C., Wayne, S.J., & Stilwell, D. (1993). A longitudinal study on the early development of
leader-member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology 78, 662-674.
Little, T. D., Card, N. A., Bovaird, J. A., Preacher, K., & Crandall, C. S. (2007) Structural equation
modeling of mediation and moderation with contextual factors. In T. D. Little, J. A. Bovaird,
& N. A. Card (Eds.), Modeling contextual effects in longitudinal studies. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

51

McCartney, K., Burchinal, M.R., & Bub, K.L. (2006). Best practices in quantitative methods for
developmentalists. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 71(3).
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Fetter, R. (1993). The impact of organizational citizenship
behavior on evaluations of salesperson performance. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 70-80.
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Paine, J. B. (1999). Do citizenship behaviors matter more
for managers than for salespeople? Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(4),
396-410.
Maertz, C.P., Griffith, R.W., Campbell, N.S., & Allen, D.G. (2007). The effects of perceived
organizational support and perceived supervisor support on employee turnover. Journal of
Organizational Behavior 28(8), 1059-1075.
Mierhans, D., Rietmann, B., Jonas, K. (2008). Influence of fair and supportive leadership
behavior on commitment and organizational citizenship behavior. Swiss Journal of
Psychology 67(3), 131-141.
Moorman, R. H., & Blakely, G. L. (1995). Individualism-collectivism as an individual difference
predictor of organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16(2),
127-142.
Morrison, E. (1996). Organizational citizenship behavior as a critical link between HRM practices
and service quality. Human Resource Management, 35(4), 493-512.
Netemeyer, R.G., Boles, J.S., McKee, D.O., & McMurrian, R. (1997). An investigation into the
antecedents of organizational citizenship behaviors in a personal selling context. Journal of
Marketing 61(3), 85-98.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
52

O’Donnell, M., Yukl, G., & Taber, T. (2012) Leader behavior and LMX: A constructive replication.
Journal of Managerial Psychology 27(2), 143-154.
Organ, D.W. (1988). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier syndrome. Lexington,
MA: Lexington Books.
Organ, D. W. (1990). The motivational basis of organizational citizenship behavior. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 12, 43-73.
Organ, D. W. (1997). Organizational citizenship behavior: It's construct clean-up time. Human
Performance, 10(2), 85-97.
Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P.M., & MacKenzie, S.B. (2006). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its
nature, antecedents, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Organ, D. W., & Ryan, K. (1995). A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispositional
predictors of organizational citizenship behavior. Personnel Psychology, 48(4), 775-802.
Payne, S. C., & Webber, S. S. (2006). Effects of service provider attitudes and employment
status on citizenship behaviors and customers' attitudes and loyalty behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 91(2), 365-378.
Peng, Y., Hwang, S., Wong, J. (2010). How to inspire university librarians to become “good
soldiers”? The role of job autonomy. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 36(4), 287295.
Podsakoff, P.M,, MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N.P. (2003). Common method biases in
behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879-903.

53

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. (1990). Transformational leader
behaviors and their effects on followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational
citizenship behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 1(2), 107-142.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Paine, J.B., Bachrach, D.G. (2000). Organizational citizenship
behaviors: A critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions
for future research. Journal of Management 26, 513-563.
Podsakoff, N. P., Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & Blume, B. D. (2009). Individual- and
organizational-level consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(1), 122-141.
Rayner, J., Lawton, A., & Williams, H. M. (2012). Organizational citizenship behavior and the
public service ethos: Whither the organization?. Journal of Business Ethics, 106(2), 117130.
Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2002). Perceived organizational support: A review of the
literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 698-714.
Rioux, S. M., & Penner, L. A. (2001). The causes of organizational citizenship behavior: A
motivational analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6), 1306-1314.
Rubin, R.E. (2010). Foundations of library and information science. New York, NY: NealSchumann Publishers, Inc.
Rubin, R., & Rubin, R.E. (2012). Justifying professional education in a self-service world. In W.
Crowley (Ed.), Defending professionalism: A resources for librarians, information specialists,
knowledge managers, and archivists (pp. 22-30). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.

54

Settoon, R. P., Bennett, N., & Liden, R. C. (1996). Social exchange in organizations: Perceived
organizational support, leader–member exchange, and employee reciprocity. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 81(3), 219-227.
Shanock, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2006). When supervisors feel supported: Relationships with
subordinates' perceived supervisor support, perceived organizational support, and
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(3), 689-695.
Shore, L.M., & Tetrick, L.E. (1991). A construct validity study of the survey of perceived
organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychology 76(5), 637-643.
Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1983). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its nature
and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68(4), 653-663.
Sparrowe, R. T., Soetjipto, B. W., & Kraimer, M. L. (2006). Do leaders' influence tactics relate to
members' helping behavior? It depends on the quality of the relationship. Academy of
Management Journal, 49(6), 1194-1208.
Van Dyne, L., Graham. J.W., & Dienesh, R.E. (1994). Organizational citizenship behavior:
Construct redefinition, measurement and validation. Academy of Management Journal,
37(4), 765-802.
vanYperen, N.W., van den Berg, A.E., & Willering, M.C. (1999). Towards a better understanding
of the link between participation in decision-making and organizational citizenship
behavior: A multi-level analysis. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology
72(3), 377-392.

55

Vidyarthi, P.R., Liden, R.C., Anand, S., Erdogan, B., Ghosh, S. (2010). Where do I stand?
Examining the effect of leader-member exchange social comparison on employee work
behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology 95(5), 849-861.
Walz, S.M., & Niehoff, B.P. (2000). Organizational citizenship behaviors: Their relationship to
organizational effectiveness. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, 24(3), 301-319.
Wang, H., Law, K. S., Hackett, R. D., Wang, D., & Chen, Z. C. (2005). Leader-member exchange as
a mediator of the relationship between transformational leadership and followers'
performance and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Journal,
48(3), 420-432.
Wat, D., & Shaffer, M. A. (2005). Equity and relationship quality influences on organizational
citizenship behaviors: The mediating role of trust in the supervisor and empowerment.
Personnel Review, 34(4), 406-422.
Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., Bommer, W. H., & Tetrick, L. E. (2002). The role of fair treatment and
rewards in perceptions of organizational support and leader-member exchange. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 87(3), 590-598.
Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., & Liden, R. C. (1997). Perceived organizational support and leadermember exchange: A social exchange perspective. Academy of Management Journal,
40(1), 82-111.
Williams, L.J., & Anderson, S.E. (1991). Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as
predicators of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17,
601-617.

56

Wu, Y. (2009). A multidimensional analysis of the relationship between leader-member
exchange and organizational citizenship behavior with an alternative measure of leadermember exchange (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses database. (Publication No. AAT 305092978)
Yuan, L. (2007). A motivational model of organizational citizenship behavior (Doctoral
dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (Publication No.
ATT 304946567)

57

Chapter 2
OVERVIEW OF FINDINGS

A total of 389 participants were sent e-mail surveys. Of those, 347 (89.2%) were
supervisees and 42 (10.8%) were supervisors. Supervisees completed 168 Leader-Member
Exchange surveys and 166 Perceived Supervisory Support surveys for response rates of 48.4%
and 47.8%, respectively. The 42 supervisors were asked to complete organizational citizenship
behavior inventories for 284 employees, of which 248 were returned for a response rate of
87.3%. Of the 165 supervisees who provided gender information, 20.6% were male (n=34), and
79.4% were female (n = 131). There were 124 supervisors who provided gender information:
female supervisors (n = 109) made up 87.9% of participants and male supervisors (n = 15)
comprised 12.1%. Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 provide summary statistics for the results of the OCB,
LMX, and PSS instruments including standard deviations and mean scores. 12
It is worth noting that responses from both supervisors and supervisees indicate
relatively high levels of LMX, PSS, and OCB at the participating organization. Supervisors rated
their employees’ OCB an overall average of 5.54 on the 7-point scale (79%). Supervisees
reported combined mean scores of 5.71 out of 7 on the Survey of Perceived Supervisor Support
(82%) and 3.88 on the 5-point LMX-7 scale (78%). The OCB item with the highest mean score
(6.11) was “The employee is always ready to lend a helping hand to those around him/her,” and

1

Copies of the complete OCB, LMX and PSS instruments and questions are presented in Appendices D, E, and F,
respectively.
2
Reverse scored items are indicated by (R). Reverse scored items are worded such that a higher score represents a
lower level of the attribute being measured. The scores must be “reversed” when coded so that a high score
reflects high level of agreement.

58

the highest mean score on the Survey of Perceived Supervisor Support (6.28) was “My
supervisor values my contribution to the well-being of my department.”

59

Table 2.1
Summary Statistics: OCB
N

Mean

Std.
Deviation

OCB1 HELPS OTHERS - WORKLOAD (ALT)

138

5.96

1.059

OCB2 IS A SQUEAKY WHEEL (R) (SPORT)

138

5.56

1.552

OCB3 HONEST WORK, HONEST PAY (CONSC)

138

6.04

1.052

OCB4 COMPLAINS ABOUT TRIVIAL MATTERS (R) (SPORT)

138

5.59

1.513

OCB5 AVOIDS CREATING PROBLEMS (CTSY)

138

5.90

1.154

OCB7 MAKES MOUNTAINS OUT OF MOLEHILLS (R) (SPORT)

138

5.62

1.572

OCB8 CONSIDERS IMPACT OF ACTIONS (CTSY)

138

5.70

1.252

OCB 9 ATTENDS OPTIONAL MEETINGS (CV)

136

4.99

1.314

OCB10 LENDS A HELPING HAND (ALT)

138

6.11

1.001

OCB11 ATTENDS OPTIONAL FUNCTIONS (CV)

138

4.57

1.538

OCB12 KEEPS UP WITH ANNOUNCEMENTS (CV)

138

5.89

.933

OCB13 HELPS OTHERS AFTER ABSENCE (ALT)

138

5.67

1.174

OCB14 DOES NOT ABUSE RIGHTS OF OTHERS (CTSY)

138

6.09

.966

OCB15 HELPS OTHERS WITH WORK PROBS (ALT)

138

5.93

.998

OCB16 FOCUSES ON WHAT'S WRONG (R) (SPORT)

138

5.62

1.467

OCB17 PREVENTS PROBLEMS (CTSY)

138

5.64

1.060

OCB18 ATTENDENCE ABOVE THE NORM (CONSC)

138

5.45

1.543

OCB19 ALWAYS FINDS FAULT (R) (SPORT)

138

OCB20 MINDFUL OF OTHERS (CTSY)

138

5.55

1.279

OCB21 DOESN'T TAKE EXTRA BREAKS (CONSC)

138

5.75

1.378

OCB22 OBEYS SPIRIT OF RULES (CONSC)

138

5.98

1.007

OCB23 HELPS ORIENT NEW EMPLOYEES (ALT)

138

5.78

1.072

OCB24 MOST CONSCIENTIOUS (CONSC)

138

5.66

1.337

5.60

1.300

Valid N (listwise)
136
ALT=Altruism; SPORT=Sportsmanship; CONSC=Conscientiousness/Compliance; CTSY=Courtesy; CV=Civic Virtue

60

Table 2.2
Summary Statistics: LMX 7
N

Mean

Std.
Deviation

LMX1 I KNOW WHERE I STAND

168

4.14

1.003

LMX2 UNDERSTANDS YOUR PROBLEMS

168

3.95

1.037

LMX3 RECOGNIZES YOUR POTENTIAL

168

4.03

1.006

LMX4 USES POWER TO HELP

168

4.07

.859

LMX5 WOULD BAIL YOU OUT

168

3.14

1.051

LMX6 I WOULD JUSTIFY AND DEFEND MY LEADER

168

3.96

.918

LMX7 QUALITY OF WORKING RELATIONSHIP

168

3.89

.957

Valid N (listwise)

168

Table 2.3
Summary Statistics: Perceived Supervisor Support
N

Mean

Std.
Deviation

PSS1 VALUES MY CONTRIBUTION

166

6.28

1.142

PSS2 WOULD REPLACE ME (R)

166

5.25

1.749

PSS3 APPRECIATES EXTRA EFFORT

166

6.18

1.135

PSS4 CONSIDERS MY GOALS

166

5.57

1.449

PSS5 WANTS TO KNOW IF I HAVE COMPLAINTS

166

5.54

1.594

PSS6 HAS MY BEST INTERESTS IN MIND

166

5.48

1.575

PSS7 HELP IS AVAILABLE

166

6.05

1.432

PSS8 CARES ABOUT MY WELLBEING

166

5.89

1.518

PSS9 NOTICE BEST JOB

166

5.96

1.321

PSS10 WILLING TO HELP

166

5.64

1.384

PSS11 CARES ABOUT MY SATISFACTION

164

5.68

1.405

PSS12 WOULD TAKE ADVANTAGE (R)

166

5.86

1.591

PSS13 SHOWS CONCERN

166

5.35

1.591

PSS14 CARES ABOUT MY OPINIONS

166

5.78

1.399

PSS15 TAKES PRIDE

166

5.75

1.373

PSS16 MAKES JOB INTERESTING

166

5.11

1.485

Valid N (listwise)

164

61

OVERVIEW OF HYPOTHESIS TESTING
Statistical analysis of all hypotheses was completed using IBM SPSS Statistics versions 20
and 21. The significance and strength of the correlations between the variables in Hypotheses
1-3 were tested using a two-tailed test for Pearson’s r. Pearson’s r is a measure of effect size
that indicates the strength of a correlation. In general, r values of 0-.2 are considered weak,
values of .3-.6 are considered moderate, and values of .7-1 are considered strong (Brace, Kemp,
& Snelgar, 2013). The proportion of variation (r2) is also reported for some items.
Hypotheses 6-9 were tested using partial correlation and with the Generalized Linear
Model (GLM) command in SPSS for the enter method of multiple regression. 3 Partial correlation
establishes whether or not a correlation exists between two variables after removing the
effects of other predictor (independent) variables on the criterion (dependent) variable. GLM is
the overarching model of which both linear regression and ANOVA are special cases. The
general purpose of multiple regression is to explore the relationship between multiple
independent variables and a dependent variable to help determine the best predictors of the
criterion variable (StatSoft, 2013). The enter method is a procedure by which the various
predictor variables are entered into the regression model at the same time as opposed to one
by one, which would require a theoretically based order hierarchy (Brace, Kemp, & Snelgar,
2013).
Significance for hypotheses tested using multiple regression were determined by using
the t statistic and the beta (β) value. The t statistic reports the unique variance explained by
the predictor variable, and the β values indicate the measure of the contribution to the model

3

This procedure also produces univariate ANOVA outputs.

62

in terms of standard deviations (Brace, Kemp, & Snelgar, 2013). That is, the higher the β value,
the greater the impact of the predictor variable. The proportion of the variance accounted for
by the regression model (Adjusted R2) is also reported.
FINDINGS
H1: There is a positive correlation between LMX quality and the five dimensions of OCB: (1)
altruism, (2) courtesy, (3) sportsmanship, (4) civic virtue, and (5) compliance
Of the five dimensions of OCB, altruism, compliance, courtesy, and civic virtue show
statistically significant, weak-to-moderate correlations with LMX (see Table 2.4). The
correlations between LMX and the helping dimensions of OCB (altruism and courtesy) are the
strongest (.284 and .292, respectively). The correlation between sportsmanship and LMX is not
statistically significant. Thus, Hypothesis 1 is supported for four of the five dimensions of OCB,
with the exception of sportsmanship.
Table 2.4
Correlation between Overall LMX and: Overall OCB, the Five Dimensions of OCB
OVERALL
OCB

LMX
LMX

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2tailed)
N

1

168

SPORTSMANSHIP

COMPLIANCE

**

.146

.240

.001

.001

.087

.005

.001

.008

136

138

138

138

138

136

ALTRUISM

**

.288

.284

**

COURTESY

CIVIC
VIRTUE

**

.292

**

.226

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

H2: There is a positive correlation between LMX quality and PSS
The findings strongly confirm the correlation between LMX and PSS (r=.859, p≤.05).
Thus, Hypothesis 2 was supported (see Table 2.5).

63

Table 2.5
Correlation Table: Overall LMX and Overall PSS
PSS
LMX

Pearson Correlation

**

.859

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

N

164

H3: There is a positive correlation between PSS and OCB
A moderate correlation exists between PSS and overall OCB (r=.387, p≤.05). Thus,
Hypothesis 3 is supported. As a further exploration of this correlation, a two-tailed t-test was
also run on PSS and the individual dimensions of OCB (see Table 2.6). Statistically significant,
moderate correlations exist between PSS and the helping dimensions of OCB, altruism and
courtesy. There are also statistically significant, weak-to moderate correlations between PSS
and the other three dimensions of OCB.
Table 2.6
Correlation between PSS and Overall OCB, Five Dimensions of OCB
OVERALL
OCB
PSS

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2tailed)
N

**

.387

PSS

ALTRUISM
1

.000
133

164

.365

**

SPORTSMANSHIP
**

.231

COMPLIANCE
**

.302

COURTESY
**

.417

CIVIC
VIRTUE
**

.246

.000

.007

.000

.000

.004

135

135

135

135

133

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

H4: Perceived Supervisor Support is a statistically significant mediator of the relationships
between LMX quality and the helping dimensions of OCB: (1) altruism and (2) courtesy
H4(1): Altruism
When controlling for PSS using partial correlation, no statistically significant correlation
emerges between LMX and altruism (p=.319) (see Table 2.7). In order to determine whether a
correlation exists between PSS and altruism with LMX removed from the relationship, a second

64

partial correlation was run controlling for LMX quality (see Table 2.8). In this case, PSS
demonstrates a statistically significant (p=.002) but weak (r=.264) correlation with altruism. In
this partial correlation model, LMX essentially drops out of the relationship with altruism.
A further exploration of this correlation was undertaken using the enter method for
multivariate regression (see Table 2.9). The regression model is sound and significant at p≤.05.
The Adjusted R2 value indicates that the model accounted for 12.7% of the variance. A
statistically significant Beta value (β=.504, t=3.141, p=.002) is found for PSS, but not for LMX
(β=-.160, t=-1.00, p=.319), confirming the results of the partial correlation. Thus, Hypothesis
H4(1) is supported.

Table 2.7
Partial Correlation: LMX and Altruism, Controlling for PSS
Control Variables
PSS

LMX
LMX

Correlation

ALTRUISM
1.000

-.087

Significance (2-tailed)

.319

Df

0

132

Table 2.8
Partial Correlation: PSS and Altruism, Controlling for LMX
Control Variables
LMX

ALTRUISM
ALTRUISM

Correlation

PSS

1.000

Significance (2-tailed)
Df

.264
.002

0

132

65

Table 2.9
Model Summary
Model

R

R Square

Adjusted R

Std. Error of

Square

the Estimate

Change Statistics
R Square

F Change

df1

df2

Sig. F Change

Change
a

1

.374

.140

.127

4.17725

.140

10.726

2

132

.000

a. Predictors: (Constant), PSS, LMX
b. Dependent Variable: ALTRUISM

Table 2.9 (Continued)
Regression Coefficients

Model
1 (Constant)

Unstandardized
Coefficients
Std.
B
Error
22.934

1.827

LMX

-.131

.131

PSS

.112

.036

Standardized
Coefficients
Sig.

95.0% Confidence
Interval for B
Lower
Upper
Bound
Bound

12.551

.000

19.320

26.549

-.160

-1.000

.319

-.390

.128

.275

-.087

-.081

.504

3.141

.002

.042

.183

.365

.264

.254

Beta

T

Correlations
Zeroorder

Partial

Part

a. Dependent Variable: ALTRUISM

H4(2): Courtesy
Testing this hypothesis using partial correlation, a statistically significant, weak negative
relationship emerges between LMX and courtesy when controlling for PSS (p=.044; r=-.174) (see
Table 2.10). A second partial correlation was tested controlling for LMX: a moderate and
statistically significant relationship remains (p=.0005, r= .361) between PSS and courtesy when
controlling for LMX (see Table 2.11).
A further exploration of this correlation using multiple regression indicates that the
regression model is significant at p=.0005 and accounts for 18.7% of the variance (see Table.
2.12). A significant Beta value (β=.689, t=4.452, p=.0005) exists for PSS. Although statistically
significant, the Beta and t values for LMX are comparatively weak (β=-.315, t=-2.035, p=.044).
Thus, H4(2) is supported.

66

Table 2.10
Partial Correlation: LMX and Courtesy, Controlling for PSS
Control Variables
PSS
COURTESY

COURTESY
Correlation

LMX

1.000

-.174

Significance (2-tailed)

.044

Df

0

132

Table 2.11
Partial Correlation: PSS and Courtesy, Controlling for LMX
Control Variables
LMX
COURTESY

COURTESY
Correlation

OVERALL PSS

1.000

Significance
(2-tailed)
Df

.361
.000

0

132

Table 2.12
Model Summary
Model

R

R Square

Adjusted R

Std. Error of

Square

the Estimate

Change Statistics
R Square

F Change

df1

df2

Sig. F Change

Change
a

1

.446

.199

.187

4.40159

.199

16.378

2

132

.000

a. Predictors: (Constant), PSS, LMX
b. Dependent Variable: COURTESY

Table 2.12 (Continued)
Regression Coefficientsa
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Model
1 (Constant)

B

Std.
Error

21.448

1.925

LMX

-.281

.138

PSS

.168

.038

95.0%
Confidence
Interval for B

Standardized
Coefficients
Beta

T

Sig.

Lower
Bound

Upper
Bound

Correlations
Zeroorder

Partial

Part

11.139

.000

17.639

25.257

-.315

-2.035

.044

-.554

-.008

.280

-.174

-.159

.689

4.452

.000

.093

.242

.417

.361

.347

a. Dependent Variable: COURTESY

67

H5: Leader-member dyad tenure accounts for a significant proportion of the variance
between LMX quality and the helping dimensions of OCB (1) altruism and (2) courtesy.
H5(a): Altruism
When controlling for dyad tenure, LMX retains a significant and moderate (r=.306,
p≤.05) relationship with altruism (see Table 2.13). When controlling for LMX, however, there is
no statistically significant relationship (p=.759) between dyad tenure and altruism (see Table
2.14). Using multiple regression, the model is statistically significant (p=.001) and accounts for
10% of the variance (Adjusted R2=.095) (see Table 2.15). A significant Beta exists for LMX
(β=.306, t=3.712, p=.0005) but not for dyad tenure (β=-.025, t=-.308, p=.759) (see Table 2.12).
Thus, Hypothesis 5a is not supported.
Table 2.13
Correlations: LMX/ALTRUISM, Controlling for Dyad Tenure
Control Variables
DYAD TENURE LMX

LMX
Correlation

ALTRUISM

1.000

.306

Significance (2-tailed)
Df

.000
0

133

Table 2.14
Correlations: DYAD TENURE/ALTRUISM Controlling for LMX
Control Variables
LMX
DYAD TENURE

DYADTEN1
Correlation

OCBALTRUISM

1.000

Significance (2-tailed)
Df

-.027
.759

0

133

68

Table 2.15
Coefficients
Model

Unstandardized

Standardized

Coefficients

Coefficients

B
(Constant)
1

LMX
DYAD TEN

Std. Error

22.796

2.006

.254

.068

-.096

.313

t

Sig.

Beta

Correlations
Zero-order

Partial

Part

11.362

.000

.306

3.712

.000

.306

.306

.306

-.025

-.308

.759

-.027

-.027

-.025

a. Dependent Variable: ALTRUISM

H5(b): Courtesy
There is a moderate relationship between LMX and courtesy when controlling for dyad
tenure (r=.300 p=.0005) (see Table 2.16), but not between dyad tenure and courtesy when
controlling for LMX (p=.118) (see Table 2.17). Using the enter method of multiple regression,
the regression model accounts for 9% of the variance and is significant at p=.001 (see Table
2.17). As with altruism, LMX returns a statistically significant Beta (β=-.298, t=3.628, p=.0005)
but dyad tenure does not (β=-.129, t=-1.572, p=.118) (see Table 2.18). Thus, Hypothesis H5(b) is
not supported.
Table 2.16
Correlations: LMX/COURTESY, Controlling for Dyad Tenure
Control Variables
DYAD
LMX
TENURE

LMXTOT
Correlation

OCB COURTESY

1.000

Significance (2-tailed)
Df

.300
.000

0

133

69

Table 2.17
Correlations: DYAD TENURE/COURTESY Controlling for LMX
Control Variables
LMX
DYAD TEN

DYAD TEN
Correlation

COURTESY

1.000

-.135

Significance (2-tailed)

.118

Df

0

133

Table 2.18
Coefficients
Model

Unstandardized

Standardized

Coefficients

Coefficients

B

Std. Error

T

Sig.

Beta

Correlations
Zero-

Partial

Part

order
(Constant)
1

LMX
DYAD TEN

22.705

2.203

.273

.075

-.540

.344

10.308

.000

.298

3.628

.000

.298

.300

.298

-.129

-1.572

.118

-.131

-.135

-.129

a. Dependent Variable: OCBCOURTESY

Proposed Model
Hypotheses 1-5 were reflected in the model proposed (see Figure 1.1). Figure 2.1
indicates correlations related to these hypotheses. This model shows all findings related to the
hypothesized model, including findings that were not statistically significant. Paths H4(a) and
H4(b) indicate the partial correlations between LMX and altruism and courtesy, when
controlling for PSS. 4

4

Correlations between PSS, altruism, and courtesy (without LMX) are shown in Figure 3.1.

70

Figure 2.1: Proposed Model with Findings

H1(1): r=.284, N=138, p≤.05

ALTRUISM

H4(1): r=-.087, N=132, p≥.05*
H2: r=.859, N=164, p≤.05

PSS

LMX

H4(2): r=-.174, N=132, p≤.05

COURTESY
H1(2): r=.292, N=138, p≤.05

H1(3): r=.146, N=138, p≥.05*
SPORTSMANSHIP

H1(4): r=.240, N=138, p≤.05
COMPLIANCE

H5(1): r=-.027, N= 133, p≥.05*

H5(2): r=-.135, N= 133, p≥.05*

DYAD TENURE

H1(5): r=.226, N= 136, p≤.05
CIVIC VIRTUE

*Not statistically significant

71

ADDITIONAL HYPOTHESES
In addition to the hypotheses related to the proposed model, four hypotheses were
tested related to supervisor/supervisee gender match. Data are provided for 122
supervisor/supervisee pairs. There are 92 cases of gender matched relationships, including four
male/male matches and 88 female/female matches. There are 19 cases of a male
supervisor/female supervisee mismatch and 11 cases of a female supervisor/male supervisee
mismatch.
The data were analyzed using the GLM command in SPSS for univariate ANOVA. The
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test can reveal the interactive effect of multiple independent
variables on a dependent variable. In addition to the statistical significance, the estimate for
overall effect size, Partial Eta Squared (ƞ2), is also given.
H6: There is no correlation between leader-member gender similarity and LMX quality
The effect of gender match on LMX was analyzed using univariate ANOVA procedures.
The results are not statistically significant (p=.226; partial ƞ2=.012) (see Table 2.19). Therefore,
the null hypothesis is supported.
Table 2.19
Tests of Between-Subjects Effects: Leader-Member Gender Similarity and LXM Quality
Dependent Variable: LMX
Source

Type III Sum of

df

Mean Square

F

Sig.

Squares

Partial Eta
Squared

a

1

39.783

1.483

.226

.012

66767.651

1

66767.651

2489.227

.000

.954

39.783

1

39.783

1.483

.226

.012

Error

3218.717

120

26.823

Total

95521.000

122

3258.500

121

Corrected Model
GENDERMATCH

Corrected Total

39.783

a. R Squared = .012 (Adjusted R Squared = .004)

72

H7: There is no correlation between leader-member gender similarity and Perceived
Supervisor Support
The effect of gender match on PSS was analyzed using univariate ANOVA. The results
are not statistically significant (p= .179; partial ƞ2=.015) (see Table 2.20). Thus, the null
hypothesis is supported.
Table 2.20
Tests of Between-Subjects Effects: Leader-Member Gender Similarity and PSS
Dependent Variable: PSS
Source

Type III Sum of

df

Mean Square

F

Sig.

Squares

Partial Eta
Squared

a

1

676.580

1.823

.179

.015

715129.770

1

715129.770

1927.370

.000

.942

676.580

1

676.580

1.823

.179

.015

Error

44153.652

119

371.039

Total

1057598.000

121

44830.231

120

Corrected Model
GENDERMATCH

Corrected Total

676.580

a. R Squared = .015 (Adjusted R Squared = .007)

H8: There is no correlation between leader-member gender similarity and member OCB
The effect of gender match on OCB was analyzed using univariate ANOVA. The results
are not statistically significant (p= .585; partial ƞ2=.976) (see Table 2.21). The null hypothesis is
supported.

73

Table 2.21
Tests of Between-Subjects Effects: Gender Match and overall OCB
Dependent Variable: OVERALL OCB
Source

Type III Sum of

Df

Mean Square

F

Sig.

Partial Eta

Squares

Squared
a

1

106.487

.300

.585

.002

1717954.880

1

1717954.880

4832.873

.000

.976

106.487

1

106.487

.300

.585

.002

Error

42656.735

120

355.473

Total

2377461.000

122

Corrected Model

106.487

GENDERMATCH

Corrected Total
42763.221
a. R Squared = .002 (Adjusted R Squared = -.006)

121

H9: There is no correlation between employee gender and the five dimensions of OCB
The hypothesis was tested using multivariate GLM procedures. There is no statistically
significant relationship between gender and any of the five dimensions of OCB (See Table 2.22.)
The null hypothesis was supported.
Table 2.22
Tests of Between-Subjects Effects: Gender and the Five Dimensions of OCB
Source
GENDER

Dependent
Variable
ALTRUISM
SPORTSMANSHIP
COMPLIANCE
COURTESY
CIVIC VIRTUE

Type III
Sum of
Squares

Mean
Square

df

F

Sig.

Partial
Eta
Squared

Noncent.
Parameter

Observed
f
Power

.318

1

.318

.015

.902

.000

.015

.052

50.243

1

50.243

1.150

.285

.009

1.150

.187

1.287

1

1.287

.053

.819

.000

.053

.056

16.984

1

16.984

.677

.412

.005

.677

.129

1.144

1

1.144

.081

.776

.001

.081

.059

a. R Squared = .000 (Adjusted R Squared = -.007)
b. R Squared = .009 (Adjusted R Squared = .001)
c. R Squared = .000 (Adjusted R Squared = -.007)
d. R Squared = .005 (Adjusted R Squared = -.002)
e. R Squared = .001 (Adjusted R Squared = -.007)
f. Computed using alpha = .05

CONCLUSION
Findings reveal that LMX has a statistically significant correlation with each of the five
dimensions of OCB, except for sportsmanship. However, the correlations between perceived
74

supervisor support and the individual dimensions of OCB, as well as with overall OCB, are
stronger than their correlations with Leader-Member Exchange. Further, PSS appears to almost
completely mediate the relationship between LMX and the helping dimensions of OCB. Lastly,
neither supervisor-supervisee gender match, supervisee gender, nor dyad tenure correlate with
LMX, PSS, or OCB in this study population.
There are two main areas in which chapter findings are notable. First, the results add to
the general understanding of the relationship among LMX, PSS, OCB, and the intervening
variables of gender and dyad tenure. Second, they reveal initial insights into the previously
unexplored area of OCB in the public library environment. Chapter 3 discusses hypotheses
related to the former, and Chapter 4 discusses the latter. Because of the particular relationship
between gender and librarianship, hypotheses related to gender are addressed in Chapter 4.
REFERENCES
Brace, N., Kemp, R, & Sneglar, R. (2013). SPSS for Psychologists (5th Ed.) New York, NY:
Routledge.
StatSoft, Inc. (2013). General Linear Models. Electronic Statistics Textbook. Retrieved from
http://www.statsoft.com/textbook/general-linear-models

75

Chapter 3
DISCUSSION: HYPOTHESIS TESTING

Findings from this study reveal that PSS appears to mediate the relationship between
LMX and OCB. In addition, the overall correlation between PSS and OCB is stronger than the
correlation between LMX and OCB. This does not imply that the impact of LMX on OCB or other
extra role behaviors is negligible, rather, it confirms the complexity of the interaction among
these variables in the workplace environment. It also affirms the importance of the direct
supervisor in the employer-employee relationship, irrespective of whether their influence is
measured via LMX or PSS.
THE ROLE OF LMX
From its inception, LMX theory concerned itself with the exchange relationship between
a single leader and a single follower. It is not surprising, given the shared theoretical origins in
social exchange, that a number of studies show LMX to be a statistically significant predictor of
OCB. As noted in Chapter 1, however, the myriad correlates of OCB presented in the literature
complicate a clear understanding of the antecedents of OCB and the role that high quality LMX
plays in its facilitation. Results of this study suggest that supervisors who wish to encourage
OCB among their employees should focus on supervisory support (PSS), rather than overall LMX
quality. That being said, the strong correlation between LMX and PSS (r=.859) suggests that the
two constructs are conceptually linked, despite the much broader focus ostensibly
encapsulated by LMX.

76

Overall, LMX shows statistically significant, weak-to-moderate correlations with four of
the five dimensions of OCB. As theorized, the highest correlations are with the interpersonal
“helping” dimensions: altruism (r=.284) and courtesy (r=.292). LMX does not show a statistically
significant relationship with sportsmanship (r=.146; p=.087). This finding may be due, in part,
to the difficulty of capturing the concept of sportsmanship, which is by definition the absence of
particular behaviors (e.g., whining or taking up the time of the manager with minor complaints).
In addition, all of the items designed to measure sportsmanship are reverse scored on the
instrument (e.g., “The employee is the classic ‘squeaky wheel’ that always needs greasing”),
and the definition of this aspect of OCB also appears to be the most nebulous. Podsakoff,
Mackenzie, Paine and Bachrach. (2000) note that, among other characteristics, “’good sports’
are people who not only do not complain … but also maintain a positive attitude … are not
offended when others do not follow their suggestions, [and] are willing to sacrifice their
personal interest for the good of the work group …” (p. 517). Determining an acceptable degree
of abstention from or participation in a broad array of largely subjective organizational
behaviors is a difficult proposition.
LMX and Dyad Tenure
When controlling for dyad tenure, LMX maintains a statistically significant correlation
with both altruism and courtesy. This does not hold true for dyad tenure when controlling for
LMX. These findings challenge the idea that high quality leader-member exchanges require a
considerable amount of time to develop into “mature partnerships” before OCB or other forms
of exchange become noticeable to supervisors. While some studies have used dyad duration as
a moderator in assessing LMX and its correlates, Wayne, Liden, and Sparrow (1994) suggest
77

that “the quality of exchange that develops between a leader and a member is established
fairly soon after the relationship begins and [remains] fairly stable throughout the duration of
the relationship” (p. 697). Therefore, an emphasis on dyad duration may be misplaced when
seeking to develop high quality LMX relationships (Bhal, Ansari, & Aafaqi, 2007).
The strong correlation between perceived supervisory support and OCB suggests the
need not only for supervisors to engage proactively in high quality exchange relationships with
all supervisees as early as possible in the employment relationship, but also to offer support
(via recognition or expressions of caring, for example) as the initial gesture of exchange. The
findings related to dyad tenure echo the need for early action on the part of the supervisor: if it
is not necessary for exchange relationships to reach the “mature partnership” stage in order to
result in reciprocation by employees via OCB, it becomes even more critical to build offers of
support into employee orientation and initiation. Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) note that either
party may initiate the “offering” that may open the door to a high quality exchange
relationship. As the individual with control of both power and resources in the organization,
however, the manager has a major responsibility to serve as the instigator of this process.
THE ROLE OF PSS
In their meta-analysis, LePine, Erez, and Johnson (2002) determine that leader support is
the strongest predictor of OCB based on the cumulative results of previous research. Findings
from this study support their conclusion to the extent that perceived supervisor support is a
good predictor of OCB and a much better predictor than LMX. The relationship shown in this
study between LMX quality and overall OCB (r=.288) is not as strong as the moderate
correlation between OCB and PSS (r=.387). PSS, then, accounts for 15% of the variance in the
78

correlation model (R2=.150), while LMX accounts for only 8% (R2=.083). While the proportion of
overall OCB predicted by PSS, nearly twice as much as LMX, is notable, the effect of PSS is even
more important given the large number of potential correlates presented in the literature. The
fact that PSS accounts for 15% of the variance is especially striking.
The initial finding that suggest a moderate correlation between PSS and OCB is also
supported by the partial correlation and multiple regression analyses. These results indicate
that in the presence of PSS, LMX has a minimal impact on the helping dimensions of OCB in the
workplace. This finding implies that perceived supervisor support substantively mediates the
relationship between LMX quality and altruism and courtesy. In addition, the correlations
between PSS and altruism and courtesy (r=.365 and r=.417, respectively) were stronger than
their correlations with LMX. Indeed, when controlling for PSS, LMX does not correlate with
altruism and only weakly with courtesy. When controlling for LMX for the same variables,
however, PSS maintains statistically significant correlations with both, accounting for 7% of the
variance in altruism (r=.264) and 13% of the variance in courtesy (r=.361) in the partial
correlation. These findings again indicate that PSS is a more powerful predictor of citizenship
behaviors than is Leader-Member Exchange.
PSS AND LMX
Certainly, “support” is an important element of the exchange relationship between a
supervisor and a supervisee. However, it is just one piece of a high quality LMX relationship,
typically characterized by additional forms of social exchange such as approval, trust, esteem,
and consideration (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). The findings of this study are, therefore, notable
in their suggestion that perceived support alone may play a more critical role than other LMX
79

mechanisms in the fostering of OCB in the workplace. While there may be other beneficial
effects from the additional forms of social exchange through which LMX is operationalized,
supervisors and organizations looking to encourage OCB among their employees may opt not to
focus equally on developing all aspects of LMX quality. Instead, they might target their
professional development models on fostering supportive behaviors that enhance an
employee’s overall sense of care from direct supervisors.
A strong focus on expressions of supervisor support fits with the dyadic partnership
building phase of LMX described by Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995). In this conceptualization,
managers take the lead in offering high quality LMX relationships to all employees as opposed
to just a select few (a change from the passive focus on the in-group and out-group dichotomy
to a more prescriptive model). This appears to support an approach to employee assimilation
in which explicit offers of supervisor support are the initial exchange currency, ostensibly
leading to higher levels of employee OCB.
The implication that PSS has a greater impact than LMX in predicting OCB may also stem
from the limitations inherent in the LMX 7 instrument itself. While Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995)
contend that the 7-item scale is the most appropriate measure of LMX, Northouse (2013) and
others have noted that while the LMX 7 is a reliable and valid measure, as well as being the
most commonly used instrument, it may lack construct validity. In addition, its psychometric
soundness has not been rigorously tested (Gerstner & Day, 1997; Liden & Maslyn, 1998). Of
particular interest given the focus of this study, Berneth, Armenakis, Field, Giles, and Walker
(2007) concluded that the measurement of “exchange” in available LMX scales “seems indirect
at best and non-existent at worst” (p. 981). These scholars go on to assert that “the fact that
80

LMX 7 is a highly reliable instrument that predicts a number of important organizational
outcomes does not necessarily mean that it is relevant to and representative of social exchange
conceptualization of LMX” (Berneth et al., 2007, pp. 982-983). Berneth et al. (2007) developed
a scale to measure leader member social exchange (LMSX) but few studies have utilized this
instrument.
Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) state that the “centroid item” of the LMX 7 scale is the
assessment of the effectiveness of the working relationship with the leader. If that is the case,
then overall relationship quality becomes the foundational construct being measured, not the
quality of the exchange relationship. The initial conceptualization of the LMX scale was
intended to measure leadership support and leadership attention as part of the social exchange
process (Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975). Modern theorists, however, describe the
dimensions of LMX measured by the LMX 7 alternatively as respect, trust, and mutual
obligation, or as contribution, loyalty, and affect (Gerstner & Day, 1997). Although the inclusion
of mutual obligation factors addresses the reciprocal nature of LMX, it may be that the seven
items are more fully representative of relationship quality as operationalized through support
rather than by exchange. 1 Indeed, the high intercorrelation between LMX and PSS (r=.859)
implies as much. Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) argue that the ability to build and exchange
partnership is predicated on trust, respect, and support, yet no empirical validation studies
indicate that the LMX 7 does, in fact, measure exchange quality (Liden & Maslyn, 1998).

1

Several items on the LMX 7 scale, such as “Regardless of how much formal authority your leader has built into his
or her position, what are the chances that your leader would use his or her power to help you solve problems in
your work?” are similar to items on the Survey of Perceived Supervisor Support, for example, “Help is available
from my supervisor when I have a problem.”

81

Given the conceptual link between LMX and PSS, and the fact that support appears to
be a substantial contributor to the concept of LMX, a case can be made for placing PSS under
the umbrella of the LMX construct. That is, supervisor support is a subset of LMX that serves as
the currency with which leader-member exchange relationships are developed. As such, a
revised and simplified model is proposed (see Figure 3.1) in which PSS is not considered a
mediator of LMX, but instead is encapsulated by LMX as a mechanism through which work
behaviors are influenced.
The primary focus of this study is on the helping dimension of OCB, based on the
assumption that both Leader-Member Exchange and perceived supervisor support would be
more strongly correlated with these person-oriented dimensions. This assumption is borne out
in the findings, thus, these two dimensions are indicated separately in the figure. Findings also
suggest that PSS is a statistically significant mediator of the relationship between LMX and OCB
and that PSS is a stronger predictor both of overall OBC as well as its individual dimensions.
Therefore, the correlations between LMX and the dimensions of OCB have been omitted and
only the correlations between PSS and OCB are shown in the figure.

82

Figure 3.1
Revised Model: PSS as a Function of LMX: Correlations with Altruism, Courtesy and Overall
OCB 2

ALTRUSIM
LMX

PSS

r=.365, N=135, p≤.05

r=.387,N=164, p≤.05

r=.417, N=135, p≤.05

2

OVERALL OCB

COURTESY

Relationships shown are statistically significant correlations between PSS and the criterion variables.

83

BEYOND SUPPORT AND EXCHANGE: THE ROLE OF THE DIRECT SUPERVISOR
Findings that suggest that supervisor support is one of the more powerful predictors of
OCB are not, in and of themselves, surprising. Gerstner and Day (1997) noted that “a highquality relationship with one’s supervisor can affect the entire work experience in a positive
manner, including performance and affective outcomes,” and they are not alone in attributing
significant power to the supervisor vis a vis the organizational experience for employees (p.
835). Although this study focuses on the effects of supervisor support and exchange quality as
predictors of OCB, it would be remiss not to explore briefly role modeling and organizational
culture as components of supervisory influence.
As a result of the nature of their position in the power structure and their accessibility to
employees, supervisors can have a particularly powerful impact on the experience of
organizational socialization. This influence includes the role modeling and encouragement of
specific work behaviors such as OCB (MacKenzie, Podsakoff, & Paine, 1999; Yaffe & Kark, 2011),
in addition to less tangible outcomes such as work attitudes, adaptation to organizational
culture, affective commitment, and ethical decision-making (Kottke & Pelletier, 2013; Loi, Lai, &
Lam, 2012; Weiss, 1977). Kottke and Pelletier (2013) note that “for the majority of . . .
employees, their immediate supervisor is the primary representation of the organization,
providing daily direction, feedback, evaluation, and information about the job, work group, and
organization” (p. 416). Thus, as the de facto source of organizational learning, the supervisor
must not only normalize OCB as a workplace behavior, but also as a representation of a
workplace culture that values interpersonal helping.

84

As noted, citizenship behaviors are not typically supported by formal job descriptions,
training, or rewards (Yaffe & Kark, 2011). Because it is rarely formalized, one of the most
effective ways for supervisors to demonstrate the importance and value of OCB is through role
modeling. When supervisors role model OCB, they not only legitimize citizenship behaviors as
desirable conduct, they also strengthen the team’s collective identity and shared values,
signifying that the group is important and “worthy of members’ extra efforts” (Yaffe & Kark,
2011, p. 809). Thus, it should be of interest both to individual institutions and to professional
organizations to develop OCB not only in front-line staff but also in supervisors. Mackenzie et
al. (1999) note that:
… managers are in highly visible positions, affecting more people as role
models and leaders . . . This wider span of influence means that managerial
OCBs reach a larger audience with potentially greater impact than the
behavior of nonmanagerial employees. . . Thus, OCBs may be more important
at a managerial level, because the modeling of these behaviors has a
“multiplier” effect on subordinates. (p 399)
Institutions and professional organizations engaged in employee development may wish to
focus on hiring for and developing OCB in supervisors. Supervisory training should also draw
attention to the managerial leader’s role as a source of organizational learning for supervisees
not just for policy and procedures, but also as behavioral role models and a source of
information about organizational culture.
The effect of supervisor OCB on group values and identity points to the larger
implications about OCB as function of organizational culture (Yaffe & Kark, 2011). As defined by
85

Schein (1990), “culture is what a group learns over a period of time as that group solves its
problems of survival in an external environment and its problems of internal integration. Such
learning is simultaneously a behavioral, cognitive, and an emotional process” (p. 111). In lay
terms, “organizational culture is the way things are done—especially when no one is looking”
(Umiker, 1999). This simplified definition returns to the origins of OCB as a good Samaritan
behavior: helping others in need even if no one is watching.
Although the responsibility for driving organizational culture is generally attributed to
top-level leaders (Schein, 1990), immediate supervisors are in a unique position to model
culturally acceptable behaviors as well as to monitor employee adherence to communal norms.
Yaffe and Kark (2011) note that “deliberate role modeling is one of the primary mechanisms by
which leaders create, maintain, and sometimes change their group culture” (p. 809). Whether
or not the organizational culture supports going above and beyond to help others as a desirable
problem solving behavior can be telegraphed by managers even, perhaps especially, without
explicit instruction. Thus, managerial leaders should be aware that their own modeling of OCB,
as well as their response to its display by others, has implications for organizational culture that
extend beyond individual behaviors and inform employees’ understanding about the way
“things are done.”
CONCLUSION
One of the primary implications of this study is the importance of the direct supervisor
in creating a workplace in which OCB is fostered, encouraged, and modeled. Specifically,
findings from this study suggest that, via LMX and/or PSS, the exchange relationship offered by
a supervisor may have a profound impact on an employee’s resulting participation in citizenship
86

behaviors, especially if introduced early in the employment relationship. Further, a focus on
offering support, rather than on over all LMX quality, may magnify the effect of this initial
exchange. Finally, it is important for employers and human resource professionals to focus not
just on the OCB of supervisees, but also on ensuring that supervisors are effective OCB role
models capable of affirming a culture of interpersonal helping.
In organizations like public libraries, employees are required to engage in helpful
behaviors due to the nature of the work. It may be more likely, therefore, to find relatively
higher levels of reported LMX and PSS than those found in non-service organizations. The
results of this study not only confirm high levels of LMX, PSS, and OCB, but also suggest a
number of practical applications for libraries. Chapter 4 discusses these library-centric
implications.
REFERENCES
Bernerth, J.B., Armenakis, A.A., Field, H.S., Giles, W.F., & Walker, H.J. (2007). Leader-member
social exchange (LMSX): development and validation of a scale. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 28(8), 979-1003.
Bhal, K.T., Ansari, M.A., & Aafai, R. (2007). The role of gender match, LMX tenure, and support
in leader-member exchange. International Journal of Business and Society, 8(2), 63-80.
Dansereau, F., Graen, F., & Haga, W.J. (1975). A vertical dyad linkage approach to leadership
within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of the role making process.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13, 46-78.
Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analytic review of leader–member exchange theory:
Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6), 827-844.
87

Graen, G.B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Development of
leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a multi-level,
multi-doman perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219-247.
Kottke, J.L., & Pelletier, K.L. (2013). Measuring and differentiating perceptions of supervisor and
top leader ethics. Journal of Business Ethics, 113(3), 415-428.
LePine, J. A., Erez, A., & Johnson, D. E. (2002). The nature and dimensionality of organizational
citizenship behavior: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology,
87(1), 52-65.
Liden, R.C., & Maslyn, J.M. (1998). Multidimensionality of leader-member exchange: An
empirical assessment through scale development. Journal of Management. 24(1), 43-72.
Loi, R., Lai, J.Y.M., & Lam, L.W. (2012). Working under a committed boss: A test of the
relationship between supervisors’ and subordinates’ affective commitment. The Leadership
Quarterly, 23(3), 466-475.
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Paine, J. B. (1999). Do citizenship behaviors matter more
for managers than for salespeople? Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(4),
396-410.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (5th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Paine, J.B., Bachrach, D.G. (2000). Organizational citizenship
behaviors: A critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions
for future research. Journal of Management 26, 513-563.
Schein, E.H. (1990). Organizational culture. American Psychologist, 45(2), 109-119.

88

Umiker, W. (1999). Organizational culture: The role of management and supervisors. Health
Care Supervisor 17(4), 22-27.
Wayne, S.J., Liden, R.C., & Sparrowe, R.T. (1994). Developing leader-member exchanges: The
influence of gender and ingratiation. American Behavioral Scientist, 37(5), 697-714.
Weiss, H.M. (1977). Subordinate imitation of supervisory behavior: The role of modeling in
organizational socialization. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 19, 89105.
Yaffe, T., & Kark, R. (2011). Leading by example: The case of leader OCB. American Psychological
Association, 96(4), 806-826.

89

Chapter 4
STUDY IMPLICATIONS FOR LIBRARIES

Studies on OCB and librarianship are noticeably absent from the literature. This is the
first to focus solely on library employees and to examine OCB in a public library setting. The
dearth of research in this area is disappointing given the focus of other OCB studies on prosocial 1 behaviors, altruism, service orientation, customer service, and other areas of critical
importance to library work. In addition, the gender expectation bias and potential for leadermember gender similarity to affect OCB also augment its importance as a construct worthy of
study. Given the gendered nature of the profession, with regard both to the high proportion of
female employees and the feminized stereotype of library work, gender implications related to
OCB may be especially pertinent in the context of librarianship.
OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPATING LIBRARY
Findings from this study reveal high levels of LMX, PSS, and OCB at the participating
organization. There is no information available about average scores in public libraries for
comparison purposes, however, the overall high scores on the PSS, OCB, and LMX inventories
suggest a strong culture of collegiality, interpersonal helping, and recognition. In addition, they
imply an environment in which employees generally feel supported by their supervisors and in
which supervisees regularly engage in observable extra-role behaviors. As participation in the
study was voluntary, the high response rates also suggests a strong level of commitment to the

1

Pro-social orientation suggests the high likelihood that an individual would assist another individual in need with
no promise of reward (Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). This characteristic has also been shown to correlate
with OCB in a number of studies (Grant & Mayer, 2009; McNeely & Meglino, 1994).

90

organization: staff are willing to go “above and beyond” when asked to partake in activities that
will benefit the institution, even when they are not required to do so.
The positive results may be explained in part by the formalized management training
program in place for current managers and those on the management track. Strong
management training may yield more, and more effective, supervisor support. In order to
understand better the findings of the present research with regard to supervisor development,
a follow-up e-mail was sent to the participating library director to seek additional details about
the topic and format of the organization’s management training. The director described the
program as being about nine months long and organized for a small group of no more than 18
employees.
The program is highly structured and includes both one-on-one and group instruction
and mentoring. Each participant receives a coach, who is not his or her supervisor, with whom
the trainee meets regularly. The participants meet as a class for formal instruction, provided by
a member of the library staff, on the following topics: interviewing and selection; the manager’s
role in on-the-job learning; sustaining high performance with feedback; redirection and
reinforcement; resolution of problems; complaints and conflicts; positive discipline for a
healthy workplace; stewardship of public resources; and recommitting to public service. 2 Each
participant is also given a leadership assessment tool at the beginning of the course that helps
to identify areas for improvement on which the participant focuses throughout the process. In
addition, participants complete assignments and role playing as part of the curriculum. This
rigorous program also has the attention and support of library administration: participants who
2

It should be noted that a number of these topics are thematically related to the concepts underlying the survey of
perceived supervisor support, including responsiveness/caring, recognition, and respect.

91

fail to learn and demonstrate effective management and leadership acumen are sometimes
removed from supervisory positions. Although it is not possible to conclude definitively that
this program is responsible for the high LMX, PSS, and OCB scores reported by study
participants suggest that this emphasis on supervisor training is highly successful.
In addition to strong supervisor support, the high overall scores given to supervisee OCB
may indicate strong hiring practices (i.e., successful recruitment and selection of pro-social,
service-oriented staff), effective and standardized training and onboarding, or a combination of
these factors. As previously noted, organizational citizenship behaviors may be more prevalent
in libraries than in other kinds of organizations due to the potential predisposition of library
staff toward “helping” behaviors. Managerial leaders in public libraries have the opportunity to
take advantage of these innate qualities in pursuit of service excellence. In this area,
supervisors may need only to encourage behaviors which are already intuitive. Supervisors
should be prepared to provide strong support to naturally pro-social subordinates in order to
foster OCB.
Supervisors did not rate all areas of OCB equally, however. The two lowest-rated OCB
items pertain to attending optional meetings or functions. It has been anecdotally observed
that this is one area in which public librarians tend to be less willing to engage (e.g.,
volunteering for after-hours events or attending early morning or after-hours meetings). For
most professions, these kinds of activities are considered par for the course; but this does not
appear to be the case for this study group and may reflect a more pervasive attitude toward
expectations around work time. A possible explanation for these findings is that public libraries
have service desks that need to be staffed between certain hours. This necessarily requires
92

that staff be present during set times. The rigorous and often immutable scheduling
requirements may impact staff feelings of autonomy and create defensiveness around the
hours that staff control. These results suggest that librarians tend to view this aspect of their
work as a job and not as a profession, and may be hesitant to go above and beyond in this area.
Implications for Managerial Leadership Training Programs
The success of the program developed in-house at the participating institution also has
implications for the management and leadership trainings offered by national organizations
such as the Public Library Association (PLA) and the American Library Association (ALA). Each of
these large entities has a program or programs dedicated to the development and ongoing
education of managers and leaders. PLA, for example, offers both a Certified Public
Administrator course as well as a Leadership Academy. 3 The Library Leadership and
Management division of ALA provides ongoing webinars and other trainings designed to
encourage excellence in management and leadership practices in libraries.
The training provided to the supervisors in this study is a clear example that, even
without a specific focus on LMX, PSS or OCB, an overall improvement in supervisory skills may
result in higher quality LMX, an improved sense of perceived supervisory support, and more
frequent displays of OCB. That is, supervisors are able to develop high quality LMX and provide
effective supervisor support without being familiar with the underlying theoretical constructs.
Further strengthening managerial leadership training by strategically incorporating the practical
applications of these theories at the local and national level may further increase their
3

Additional information about the Certified Public Administrator program, which is open to those with three or
more years of supervisory experience, can be found at http://ala-apa.org/certification/application/. The
Leadership Academy is a new initiative, started in 2013, and accepts only a small group of selected participants.
Information about the program can be found at http://www.ala.org/pla/education/leadershipacademy.

93

effectiveness at encouraging OCB. In addition, strategic inclusion of these concepts will create
a wider awareness of this construct and its impact on organizational effectiveness.
OCB, LMX, PSS, AND GENDER
One of the more surprising findings was the lack of correlation shown between leadermember gender similarity and LMX, PSS, or any of the five dimensions of OCB. This finding was
unexpected given the variety of studies suggesting the powerful impact that leader-member
gender similarity has on employee outcomes like role expectations, behavioral perceptions, and
leader-member relationships (Tsui & O’Reilly, 1989; Waismel-Manor, Tziner, Berger, & Dikstein,
2010). Dienesh and Liden (1986) argue that leader-member characteristics such as gender may
impact the development of high quality LMX, and Tsui and O’Reilly (1989) note that differences
in characteristics between employees and supervisors have a negative impact on outcomes
such as supervisor affect. In addition, Javidan, Bemmels, Devin, and Dastmalchian (1995)
suggest that, while women may be more accepting of men as supervisory role models, men are
less likely to identify with female leaders. The inference is that high quality LMX relationships
may be harder to develop in leader-member dyads that are dissimilar, especially if the
supervisor is female and the supervisee male. Further, Allen and Rush (2002) suggest that
while women are expected to perform OCB as part of their traditional gender role, men’s OCB
is often over-reported because it is outside the norm of typical male behavior. None of the
above possibilities were observed in this study.
The relationship between librarianship and gender may also have implications for the
statistically non-significant finding related to sportsmanship. Kark and Waismel-Manor (2005)
suggest that some elements of OCB are stereotypically female (e.g., altruism and courtesy),
94

while others are more typically associated with men (e.g., sportsmanship). The term
“sportsmanship” itself has masculine connotations, and the authors note that even its
manifestations are tied to stereotypically masculine role expectations: “the implications of
good sportsmanship are that emotional responses, sharing of sore feelings, paying attention to
details and responses that seem personal and subjective should be ruled out” (p. 901). Thus,
the gendered nature of the language used to describe OCB may have a particular impact when
applied in feminized settings like public libraries.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES
This is not the first study to suggest that the intersecting areas of employee affect,
personality, and work environment together help to determine levels of OCB. Public libraries,
however, are in a unique position to develop new organizational practices centered around the
facilitation of OCB as a foundation for hiring and training procedures, as well as internal and
external customer service models.
In practical terms, the findings about both LMX and PSS are instructive. With regard to
LMX, perhaps the most important actionable conclusion for leaders is to shift focus away from
identifying members of the in-group and out-group, and to embrace a leadership strategy
focused on equitable leadership-making activities as early as possible in the work relationship.
Leaders and managers at all levels should be trained to provide, and rewarded for offering, high
quality exchange relationships to their subordinates. This partnership-building approach
encourages all employees to participate actively in the social exchange aspect of work-life and
to move beyond a purely economic exchange model. Of course, not all employees will chose to
participate in reciprocal exchanges, but a manager who attempts to build relationships with all
95

employees may be seen as fairer and more equitable. This perception alone may be improve a
manager’s ability to initiate and maintain high quality relationships successfully. As the findings
from this study suggest, initiating the LMX process with offers of supervisor support may yield
the added benefit of reciprocation via OCBs.
With regard to PSS, there are also clear implications for library practice. Although the
PSS scale is unidimensional (Eisenberger, Huntington, Hutchison, & Sowa, 1986; Kottke &
Sharafinski, 1988), the items that make up the instrument can be conceptually grouped into
several themes (Eisenberger et al., 1986). Although the following groupings have not been
tested empirically, a practical reading of the items (see Appendix G) results in some loose
classifications of types of support:
•

Appreciation/Recognition (items 1, 2, 3, 9, 15);

•

Consideration/Caring (items 6, 8, 11, 13, 16);

•

Attention/Respect (items 4, 5, 12, 14) ; and

•

Assistance (items 7, 10).

Organizational hiring practices, interventions, and the structure of professional
development for managerial leaders may be grounded in these areas in order to increase
subordinate perceptions of support and to improve supervisory effectiveness. Two examples of
how this might work in a library setting include: (1) the implementation of hiring practices that
ensure the selection of supervisors who can successfully demonstrate competence in the four
areas of supervisory support, and (2) management training that includes instruction on how to
operationalize the four areas of support; for example, objective-setting activities that integrate
the goals and values of individual employees with the goals and values of the organization. This
96

approach (promoting the right people into supervisory and other leadership positions and then
training them to provide effective support to subordinate) should bolster not only PSS and
subsequently OCB, but also high quality LMX relationships. High quality LMX, regardless of its
impact on OCB, can lead to additional positive organizational and individual outcomes.
In addition to a focus on the hiring and training of supervisors, equally important is to
devote strategic attention to the hiring and training of subordinates. In terms of recruitment
and selection, organizations should embrace a strategic and consistent effort to identify and
retain staff who not only have technical prowess, but who also possess the desired personality
and dispositional characteristics (e.g., proactive personality, pro-social orientation, and positive
affect 4) that lend themselves to OCB. Designing hiring practices that include some form of
personality inventory may be beneficial both for front-line staff and for their leaders, who
should be expected to model appropriate citizenship and interpersonal behaviors. Indeed,
organizations must make a commitment to providing front-line staff with access to effective
support and to supervisors who can serve as OCB role models. As noted by O’Donnell, Yukl, and
Taber (2012):
… relations-oriented behaviors can be used in appropriate situations to
develop subordinate skills, confidence, and trust of the leader . . . Leaders
who expect subordinates to make sacrifices or to do more than is required in

4

A note of caution about proactive disposition and pro-social orientation. These are different than extroversion,
which is a unique personality trait. Much has been made recently about the value of both extroverts and introverts
in the workplace. Proactive personality is not extroversion, it is the ability to “actively create and manage exchange
relationships within the organization and ultimately display positive work attitudes and behaviors” (Li, Liang, &
Crant, 2010, p. 396). That being said, extroversion as a personality trait has also been shown to positively correlate
with OCB (Chiaburu et al., 2011).

97

formal job descriptions should be prepared to set an example in their own
behavior. (p. 152)
The findings from this research serve to support the suggestion made by Organ,
Podsakoff, and Mackenzie (2006) to hire for disposition, provide targeting and adequate
training, ensure supervisory role models, and to create a work environment that encourages
and sustains OCB. Emphasis should be placed on the importance of providing access to an
effective supervisor who may foster not only desired work behaviors, but also instill implicit
norms such as work attitudes and expectations rooted in organizational culture (MacKenzie,
Podsakoff, & Paine, 1999; Yaffe & Kark, 2011). Libraries need to be proactive, selective, and
strategic in their support of employees from the point-of-hire, through the onboarding and
orientation process, and for the duration of the career trajectory.
CONCLUSION
There are a number of ways in which public libraries interested in developing and
maintaining high levels of OCB can do so. Hiring practices must be deliberate and well defined,
library administrators should ensure that supervisors have the resources and skills to offer
effective support to their subordinates, and supervisors must be empowered to recognize,
reward, and negotiate with individual staff members not only to develop high quality LMX
relationships, but to provide support to individual employees in the ways that yield the greatest
impact. In addition, it is important to remember that OCB is a product of latitude. An
organization that successfully assimilates OCB into its culture may also require a lessening of
control: employees must be granted the autonomy to perform spontaneously outside their
proscribed roles at their discretion.
98

A number of practical implications can be drawn from this research on OCB in the library
environment, but it is important to emphasize the exploratory nature of the findings and
conclusions. The results of this study have practical and important implications for the training
and development of managerial leaders, but they also raise a number of important questions
and areas for further study. Chapter 5 summarizes the overall findings of this research and offer
a number of related topics for further investigation.
REFERENCES
Allen, T., & Rush, M. (2001). The influence of ratee gender on ratings of organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 31(12), 2561-2587.
Chiaburu, D. S., Oh, I., Berry, C. M., Li, N., & Gardner, R. G. (2011). The five-factor model of
personality traits and organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 96(6), 1140-1166.
Dienesh, R.M., & Liden, R.C. (1986). Leader-member exchange model of leadership: A critique
and further development. Academy of Management Review, 11, 618-634.
Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. (1986). Perceived organizational
support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 500-507.
Grant, A.M., & Mayer, D.M. (2009). Good soldiers and good actors: Prosocial and impression
management motives as interactive predictors of affiliative citizenship behaviors. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 900-912.
Javidan, M., Bemmels, B., Devin, K.S., & Dastmalchian, A. (1995). Superior and subordinate
gender and the acceptance of superiors as role models. Human Relations 48(11), 12711284.
99

Kark, R., & Waismel-Manor, R. (2005). Organizational citizenship behavior: What’s gender got to
do with it? Organization, 12(6), 889-917.
Kottke, J.L., & Sharafinski, C. E. (1988). Measuring perceived supervisory and organizational
support. Educational and Psychological Measurement 48, 1075-1079.
Li, N., Liang, J., & Crant, J. M. (2010). The role of proactive personality in job satisfaction and
organizational citizenship behavior: A relational perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology,
95(2), 395-404.
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Paine, J. B. (1999). Do citizenship behaviors matter more
for managers than for salespeople? Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(4),
396-410.
McNeely, B.L., & Meglino, B.M. (1994). The role of dispositional and situational antecedents in
prosocial organizational behavior: An examination of the intended beneficiaries of
prosocial behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(6), 836-844.
O’Donnell, M., Yukl, G., Taber, T. (2012) Leader behavior and LMX: A constructive replication.
Journal of Managerial Psychology 27(2), 143-154.
Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B. (2006). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its
nature, antecedents, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Tsui, A.S., & O’Reilly, C.A. (1989) Beyond simple demographics effects: The importance of
relational demography in superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of Management Journal,
32, 402-423.

100

Waismel-Manor, R., Tziner, A., Berger, E. , & Dikstein, E. (2010). Two of a kind? Leader-member
exchange and organizational citizenship behaviors: The Moderating role of leader-member
similarity. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(1), 167-181.
Yaffe, T., & Kark, R. (2011). Leading by example: The case of leader OCB. American Psychological
Association, 96(4), 806-826.

101

Chapter 5
CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

The study of OCB in public librarianship is particularly apt albeit surprisingly absent.
Rayner, Lawton and Williams (2012) note that OCB should be of interest to those in the public
sector because it has practical implications such as improving relationships between colleagues
and customers as well as increasing efficiency and reducing waste, all of which are pertinent to
the effective administration and functioning of public libraries. In addition, they affirm the
unique place of OCB in professions committed to public service and in which a “’public service
ethos’” is the dominant paradigm (p. 118). Consistent with the idea that librarians may be
naturally inclined toward helping behaviors, results of this study find not only high levels of OCB
at the participating institution, but also of perceived supervisor support and LMX quality.
Despite the theoretical and empirical evidence suggesting that OCB is a valuable
organizational asset, it is currently absent from the library and information science (LIS)
management literature. Formally integrating the theoretical implications and practical
ramifications of OCB into LIS education may help to expand the capacity of public libraries by
more consciously utilizing existing social mechanisms and value systems to improve
organizational effectiveness. As a field that embraces service as a core value, an approach to
management that privileges interpersonal relationships may find support and acceptance at all
levels. In addition, more targeted attention in the LIS management literature on the supervisorsupervisee relationship may yield wide-ranging and beneficial organizational outcomes.

102

The most important finding from this study is that perceived supervisor support alone,
not leader-member exchange, is the more powerful predictor of organizational citizenship
behavior. That an immediate supervisor can profoundly impact the work behaviors of
supervisees is not a new supposition. However, the implications from this research may alter
the ways in which supervisors should be expected to approach and develop these critical
workplace relationships and should encourage library administrations to focus greater
attention on developing the skill-sets of managerial leaders. While other organizational factors
such as perceived organizational support and the influence of more distant organizational
leaders are also important to consider, this finding affirms the unique contribution of the
supervisor as a source of support, a role model, and an enforcer of cultural norms. Thus, it is
essential for those in supervisory roles to embrace these responsibilities in pursuit of creating
library environments favorable to OCB.
In the final analysis, it may be that employees are more likely to perform OCB in
response to perceived supervisor support not as a means to create or foster exchange,
although this may be a by-product, but as an outcome of generally feeling more satisfied,
committed, or positive as a result of feeling supported. Indeed, a better understanding of the
role of satisfaction on performance outcomes was the original impetus for theories concerning
the existence of organizational citizenship behavior, and mood state was one of the
antecedents proposed by Bateman and Organ (1983) in their initial discussion of the OCB
construct. Later studies have also supported the correlations among OCB, positive mood state,
and job satisfaction (Chen & Chiu, 2008; Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). Thus, while
supportive leader behavior may have a direct impact on OCB, it is also possible that this
103

influence is mediated by additional attitudinal dimensions. The idea that PSS could be mediated
by other variables in the facilitation of OCB also suggests a possible shift in research focus from
reciprocity toward a motivational model related to the interaction among workplace
environment (including supervisor support), affect, personality, and mood state.
The strength of PSS as a predictor of OCB does not, however, devalue the sizable
number of studies that find a correlation between LMX quality and OCB. It is likely that the
mechanisms through which high quality LMX relationships are developed, including support,
trust, and reciprocity, may individually correlate to varying degrees with OCB. It is also
probable that cultivating high quality exchange relationships will, even if indirectly, lead to
higher levels of OCB by encouraging exchange behaviors. A number of studies also suggest that
LMX may serve as the mediating variable for additional workplace factors that influence OCB
such as fairness or justice climate (Manogran, Stauffer, & Conlon, 1994).
Leader-Member Exchange remains a fitting companion leadership theory for OCB.
However, a deeper understanding of the specific ways in which LMX is operationalized (such as
through PSS) may provide a more thorough picture of the OCB-LMX relationship and potentially
reveal additional and actionable findings for practitioners. As it stands, the positioning of LMX
as a direct or indirect predictor of OCB depends on the other variables in question. Thus, while
much about the LMX-PSS-OCB relationship remains unclear, what is certain is that it is not just
the role of the supervisor, and not just the responsibility of the supervisee, to create a work
environment in which OCB is encouraged and appreciated. Organizational citizenship behavior
is a team effort.

104

LIMITATIONS
One limitation of this study is that voluntarily filling out a survey may itself be
considered a form of OCB. It is possible that those employees who did not participate in the
study are those who do not feel supported by their supervisors or their organization and
therefore did not feel compelled to participate in voluntary activities such as this research. If
this is the case, then supervisory assessment results may be skewed (i.e., those employees who
did not participate may not feel supported). It is worth noting, however, that supervisors were
asked to rate a random sample of their employees, not necessarily those employees who
agreed to participate in the study. Even so, supervisors’ overall ratings of employee OCB
remained high.
One limitation regarding the findings related to gender is sample size. There were only
four male/male matches, so it is difficult to draw substantive conclusions about the role of
gender matching on OCB, LMX, or PSS from this study. The fact that there were no statistically
significant findings related to gender should be considered with this sample size limitation in
mind. It would be beneficial to replicate this study in additional library systems or to control for
gender match in study design.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
Although this study contributes new information to the understanding of organizational
citizenship behaviors in the workplace, it also raises a number of additional questions and
provides the foundation for a wide variety of future research. A number of possible areas for
future exploration are discussed below.

105

Identify the Mechanisms by which Supervisor Support Leads to OCB
In their meta-analysis, LePine, Erez, and Johson (2002) found that leader support was
the strongest predictor of OCB. This research supports this conclusion to the extent that
perceived supervisor support is a good predictor of OCB and much better than LMX. However,
more research is needed to understand better why this particular behavior on the part of
supervisors leads to organizational citizenship behaviors:
•

Is it because it initiates and maintains reciprocity?

•

Is it because it leads to high levels of organizational commitment or job satisfaction
among employees?

•

Does it establish an organizational culture and environment in which positive mood
state is more likely to be maintained?

•

What kinds of employees are most positively influenced by supervisor support?

Identifying LMX, PSS, and OCB Best Practices in Model Libraries
Follow-up studies may focus on those libraries with high levels of LMX, PSS, and OCB in
order to identify which employment practices are shared by those organizations so that a set of
“best practices” can be created that may be used by other organizations. Once these best
practices are identified, it would then be beneficial to examine whether or not these practices
translate across different types of organizations, including those that are not service
professions.

106

Replication Study Using an Exchange-Based Measure of LMX
Future research on the interrelationship among LMX, PSS, and OCB should replicate
previous studies using the LMSX (or other similar instrument) to evaluate whether or not an
exchange-based LMX instrument results in the same correlations with OCB.
Replication Study in Countries Other than the United States
There is a large body of literature examining OCB in an international context, but only
Peng, Hwang, and Wong (2010) have begun to explore OCB in the library context abroad.
Future research should examine the relationship among LMX, PSS, and OCB from a global
perspective in order to evaluate the applicability of these constructs across cultures. This
research may also be valuable for libraries in the United States, current and future employees
of which are likely to be increasingly diverse.
Replication Study Using Multiple Library Locations and/or Library Types
This preliminary investigation was conducted at only one institution. A number of
replication studies could be conducted exploring OCB in various library environments including
library systems of different sizes, union environments, and types (e.g., academic and special
libraries) in order to further explore the validity and generalizability of the findings presented
here. Additional studies would also increase the profile and the importance of OCB among
library administrators, trainers, and HR professionals.
Evaluation of the Constructs and Assessment Tools Used to Measure Perceived Supervisor
Support and Leader Member Exchange
Due to the strong correlation shown between LMX and PSS, and the similarity of a
number of the items on the LMX and PSS scales, further investigation into the nature and
dimensionality of these constructs is warranted. It may be that the LMX 7 instrument is
107

weighted too heavily toward “supportive” exchange behaviors, or it may be that supervisor
support alone has significant predictive validity for leader-member exchange quality.
The Effect of Leader-Member Gender Similarity on LMX and OCB in Female-Dominated
Professions
While a number of studies have found that leader similarity, and gender match impact
LMX and OCB, this study did not. Soldner (2009) also found no correlation between supervisor
and supervisee gender match and OCB in his study of predominantly female (87.2%) employees
at a rehabilitation facility. The implication from these studies supports the possibility that
leader-member dyad similarity, even a characteristic as powerful as gender, may be less
important in the delivery of OCBs than previously thought. Findings in both of these studies
suggest the need to investigate further to ascertain if this is due to:
1. the characteristics of the men who self-select to join librarianship or other ‘helping’
occupations;
2. strong hiring or training practices; or
3. whether leader-member gender similarity is not a particularly powerful moderator
in female dominated settings.
Attributes of Male Librarians and Their Expectations of and Attitudes toward Female
Supervisors
Men who self-select to join a traditionally female-dominated field such as librarianship
may be more comfortable with female supervisors and colleagues than men who choose to join
less feminized or more gender neutral occupations. This is a hypothesis worth exploring further,
especially as women move in greater numbers into library management and administration
(Gollub, 2010).
108

An Exploration of the Impact of Race, Ethnicity, and Cultural Identity on LMX, PSS, and OCB
This study did not examine race, ethnicity, or cultural identity for either subordinates or
supervisors. Traditional cultural factors such as power distance, collectivism, and assertiveness
may impact both how subordinates interact with supervisors and to what degree they engage
in OCB. In addition, leader-subordinate racial or ethnic similarity may also have an effect on
LMX, PSS, and OCB. As public library staff and patrons become increasingly multicultural, this
will be a critical area to explore in depth.
The Measurement of the Sportsmanship Dimension of OCB in a Female-Dominated Work
Environment
This study reveals no statistically significant correlation between LMX and
sportsmanship. Although there is no evidence to link directly this result with the stereotypically
feminized workplace, the findings here lend credence to previous studies that suggest that such
a connection may exist. More generally, the presence and ultimate importance of
“sportsmanship” as a component of OCB is, especially in female dominated professions, an area
worthy of future exploration.
Librarianship, Professionalism and the Concept of “Work Time”
This is an important area for further study, especially as it relates to professional
identity. For most professions, meetings or commitments outside the standard work day, such
as early morning or after-work meetings, are considered par for the course. This has not been
the case with librarians: in this area, librarians anecdotally appear to view their work as a job
and not as a profession. Given the current and expanding debate around librarianship as a
career deserving of an advanced degree, further exploring the origins of this attitude, its

109

implications for both the present and future of the profession, and how it relates to internal
and external perception of the field, could provide meaningful insights.
An Exploration of the Impact of Leader-Leader Exchange on Leader-Member Exchange and
Subsequent OCB
This preliminary research focused solely on the exchange relationships between
managerial leaders and boundary-spanning followers. An expansion of this hierarchy to include
leader-leader exchange quality and its impact on the OCB of boundary-spanners would be
beneficial. In other words: does the relationship between a manager (leader) and his or her
administrator (leader) influence the manager’s ability to maintain exchange relationships with
and offer support to subordinates? This research may be particularly valuable in identifying the
behaviors in which library administrators should engage in order to facilitate PSS, LMX and OCB
among managerial leaders and their subordinates.
Follow-up of Survey Non-Participants and the Implications for OCB
A follow-up survey of employees who choose not to participant in an OCB survey may
be illustrative. Voluntary survey-taking may be a form of OCB, and the views of staff who do not
display high levels of OCB may be under-represented with regard to perceived supervisory
support or LMX.
Proactive Personality, Boundary-Spanning Public Library Staff, and OCB
This area for future research may have particular importance to the hiring process.
Individuals with proactive personality are predisposed “toward taking personal initiative to
influence one’s environment” and have a “behavioral tendency to identify opportunities to
change things at work and to act on those impulses” (Li, Liang, & Crant, 2010, p. 395). In
addition to the pro-social service orientation, proactive personality is also a good predictor of
110

OCB. It will be beneficial to investigate whether both professional and paraprofessional
boundary-spanning public library staff also tend to exhibit proactive personalities. Proactive
personality has been shown to lead to higher quality LMX relationships, greater satisfaction in
the workplace, and higher levels of organizational citizenship behavior (Li, Liang & Crant, 2010).
This is also suggestive of a strong sense of self-efficacy and external locus of control. A better
understanding of both the personality and dispositional characteristics of current public library
staff would be useful in further understanding the best ways to hire for and encourage both
OCB and high quality LMX across institutions.
An Investigation of the Personality Characteristics of Boundary-Spanning Public Library Staff
and the Implications for OCB
Several studies suggest that the five factor personality inventory predicts citizenship
behaviors over and above job satisfaction (Chiaburu et al. 2011; Ilies et al., 2009). A better
understanding of the current personality traits of boundary-spanning information professionals
and paraprofessionals may be helpful as libraries look to recruit employees who are naturally
inclined to service behaviors that include OCBs. Over time, the strategic inclusion of personality
factors as a part of the interview and selection process, as well as the supervisor-supervisee
matching process, may result in outcomes such as improved customer service experience,
values consonance, and increased employee commitment.
Dyad Tenure and OCB and Supervisor/Subordinate Matching
If, as Wayne, Liden, and Sparrow (1994) suggest, “the quality of exchange that develops
between a leader and a member is established fairly soon after the relationship begins and
[remains] fairly stable throughout the duration of the relationship,” then it becomes even more
critical to match new employees with supervisors with whom they will be likely to form high
111

quality exchange relationships (p. 697). It will be valuable to identify the dimensions on which
matching may take place, and to develop a process for making these assessments at the point
of hire.
Organization-Directed OCB in the Public Library
It is important to note that the present study focuses on the aspects of OCB related to
helping other individuals (OCBI). There is a large body of research on elements of OCBO, or
behaviors directed at helping the organization. This kind of citizenship may have different
motivators and antecedents, especially in the public sector (Grant & Mayer, 2009; Ilies, Fulmer,
Spitzmuller, & Johnson, 2009; Rioux & Penner, 2001). As such, this unexplored aspect of OCB in
libraries also has notable research potential.
The “Voice” Dimension of OCB in Public Librarianship
The five-dimensional taxonomy of OCB used for this study does not include “voice,” a
quality proposed by Van Dyne, Graham, and Dienesch (1994), but not included in Organ’s
model (see Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006). This item includes “speaking out to
discourage activities harmful to the organization” (Organ, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 2006, p. 29).
Although this dimension includes a speaking truth to power component, it is constructive in
nature and does not include criticizing the organization or its policies. As such, there may also
be a natural tension between the “voice” and the “sportsmanship” dimensions of OCB that is
worth exploring further. This is an area rich for future research, especially in a discipline like
librarianship with a history of social action and staff members for whom the work is often
driven by passion and a desire to advocate for others.

112

The Relationship among Organizational Values, Individual Values, and OCB
Such research would be especially timely given the current financial struggles of many
public libraries and the resulting tensions between boundary spanning staff and administration,
as the former seek to do more with less and the latter seek to find the most efficient and costeffective methods to provide service (Rubin & Rubin, 2012). Rayner, Lawton, and Williams
(2012) caution:
If changing organizational values appear to privilege organizational goals,
associated with economy, efficiency, and effectiveness, rather than citizen
and/or user interests, then OCB maybe threatened. In terms of our
conceptualization of the public service ethos, any change in public service
practices may impact motivation towards public service. (p. 121)
Future research on the implications of these practices in libraries may help library
administration better understand the views of library staff, and vice verse. It may also assist
both groups as they navigate this new environment in which OCB may be increasingly
threatened.
The Effectiveness of National Managerial Leadership Training Programs with Regard to OCB
The investigator could find no mention of organizational citizenship behavior in the
training curriculums developed by either ALA or PLA. As demonstrated by the organization
participating in this study, this does not necessarily mean that current training models have no
impact on OCB among employees. A study of the effectiveness of these nationally promoted
managerial leadership programs and the resulting impact on citizenship behaviors among frontline staff and managerial leaders may be advantageous. Results may indicate a need to
113

incorporate training based on PSS and/or LMX theories with an intent to further increase OCB
among library staff.
CONCLUSION
The lack of research on OCB in librarianship is disappointing, but the topic need not
remain a void in the LIS management and leadership literature. This valuable area is wide open
for future research as well as for practical integration into hiring, training, development, and
retention of library staff. The human resource management systems in place in libraries are far
too often based on convenience and tradition rather than on evidence-based practices. A more
thorough understanding of OCB in the public library setting may go far in helping to integrate
best practices and set the stage for additional exploration of how employee behaviors,
characteristics, and motivations can be leveraged to improve library service.
The world in which libraries function is changing rapidly and often surprisingly. In this
period of uncertainty, a work environment in which employees feel that colleagues and
supervisors alike are invested in mutually beneficial relationships and demonstrate a shared
commitment to service may be increasingly powerful. Further, the ability to take risks,
innovate, and act in ways that are not prescribed by role requirements allow boundaryspanning library staff to adapt quickly and flexibly in response to their changing environment
and in the ways best suited to meet the evolving needs of patrons. Regardless of the changes
that are sure to come to libraries, a commitment to service, both internal and external, will
remain paramount.
Helping others is what librarians do. But library staff have focused much more intently
on external customer service, often at the expense of internal relationships. Maintaining an
114

ethos of helpfulness over time will require that librarians help each other, as well.
Administrators and managerial leaders must be committed to the creation of organizations that
support and encourage internal reciprocity as strongly as they are committed to serving their
communities. Relationships matter, and the quality of the relationship between a supervisor
and a supervisee matters a great deal.
The presence of organizational citizenship behaviors implies a deep commitment not
only to the mission of the organization, but to the health of human connections in the
workplace. Indeed, a healthy organization is not one which merely meets its goals and in which
employees do only what is asked of them. In a healthy workplace, employees aspire to be good
organizational citizens, to go above and beyond in support of their colleagues and customers,
and in so doing advance the mission of their institutions. The broad implications of
organizational citizenship behavior – from efficiency to service to social dynamics – make it a
unique and far reaching foundation on which to build an organizational culture and the
structures that support it.
REFERENCES
Bateman, T.S., & Organ, D.W. (1983). Job satisfaction and the good soldier: The relationship
between affect and employee “citizenship.” Academy of Management Journal, 26(4), 587595.
Chen, C., & Chiu, S. (2008). An integrative model linking supervisor support and organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Business and Psychology, 23(1-2), 1-10.

115

Chiaburu, D. S., Oh, I., Berry, C. M., Li, N., & Gardner, R. G. (2011). The five-factor model of
personality traits and organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 96(6), 1140-1166.
Golub, E. (2010). Gender divide in librarianship: Past, present, and future. Library Student
Journal, 57, 7.
Grant, A.M. & Mayer, D.M. (2009). Good soldiers and good actors: Prosocial and impression
management motives as interactive predictors of affiliative citizenship behaviors. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 900-912.
Ilies, R., Spitzmuller, M., Fulmer, I. S., & Johnson, M. D. (2009). Personality and citizenship
behavior: The mediating role of job satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 945959.
LePine, J. A., Erez, A., & Johnson, D. E. (2002). The nature and dimensionality of organizational
citizenship behavior: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology,
87(1), 52-65.
Li, N., Liang, J., & Crant, J. M. (2010). The role of proactive personality in job satisfaction and
organizational citizenship behavior: A relational perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology,
95(2), 395-404.
Manogran, P., Stauffer, J., & Conlon, E. J. (1994). Leader-member exchange as a key mediating
variable between employees perceptions of fairness and organizational citizenship
behavior. Academy oOf Management Best Papers Proceedings, 249-267.
Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B. (2006). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its
nature, antecedents, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
116

Peng, Y., Hwang, S., Wong, J. (2010). How to inspire university librarians to become “good
soldiers”? The role of job autonomy. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 36(4), 287295.
Rayner, J., Lawton, A., & Williams, H. M. (2012). Organizational citizenship behavior and the
public service ethos: Whither the organization? Journal of Business Ethics, 106(2), 117-130.
Rioux, S. M., & Penner, L. A. (2001). The causes of organizational citizenship behavior: A
motivational analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6), 1306-1314.
Rubin, R., & Rubin, R.E. (2012). Justifying professional education in a self-service world. In W.
Crowley (Ed.), Defending professionalism: A resources for librarians, information specialists,
knowledge managers, and archivists (pp. 22-30). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Soldner, J. L. (2009). Relationships among leader-member exchange, organizational citizenship
behavior, organizational commitment, gender, and dyadic duration in a rehabilitation
organization (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
database. (Publication No. ATT 305000056)
Van Dyne, L., Graham. J.W. & Dienesh, R.E. (1994). Organizational citizenship behavior:
Construct redefinition, measurement and validation. Academy of Management Journal,
37(4), 765-802.
Wayne, S.J., Liden, R.C., & Sparrowe, R.T. (1994). Developing leader-member exchanges: The
influence of gender and ingratiation. American Behavioral Scientist, 37(5), 697-714.

117

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, T. & Rush, M. (2001). The influence of ratee gender on ratings of organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 31(12), 2561-2587.
Anand, S., Vidyarthi, P.R., Liden, R.C., & Rouseau, D.M. (2010). Good citizens in poor-quality
relationships: Idiosyncratic deals as a substitute for relationship quality. Academy of
Management Journal, 53(5), 970-988.
Babcock-Roberson, M., & Strickland, O. J. (2010). The relationship between charismatic
leadership, work engagement, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal of
Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 144(3), 313-326.
Barnard, C.I. (1938). The functions of the executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Basu, R., & Green, S. G. (1997). Leader-member exchange and transformational leadership: An
empirical examination of innovative behaviors in leader-member fyads. Journal Of Applied
Social Psychology, 27(6), 477-499.
Bateman, T.S., & Organ, D.W. (1983). Job satisfaction and the good soldier: The relationship
between affect and employee “citizenship.” Academy of Management Journal, 26(4), 587595.
Bell, S. J., & Menguc, B. (2002). The employee-organization relationship, organizational
citizenship behaviors, and superior service quality. Journal of Retailing, 78(2), 131-146.
Berman, J. J., Costigan, R. D., & Ilter, S. S. (1998). A multi-dimensional study of trust in
organizations. Journal of Managerial Issues, 10(3), 303-318.

118

Bernerth, J.B., Armenakis, A.A., Field, H.S., Giles, W.F., & Walker, H.J. (2007). Leader-member
social exchange (LMSX): development and validation of a scale. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 28(8), 979-1003.
Bettencourt, L. A. (2004). Change-oriented organizational citizenship behaviors: The direct and
moderating influence of goal orientation. Journal of Retailing, 80(3), 165-180.
Bettencourt, L. A., Gwinner, K. P., & Meuter, M. L. (2001). A comparison of attitude, personality,
and knowledge predictors of service-oriented organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 29-41.
Bhal, K.T., Ansari, M.A., & Aafai, R. (2007). The role of gender match, LMX tenure, and support
in leader-member exchange. International Journal of Business and Society, 8(2), 63-80.
Blau, P.M. Exchange and power in social life. New York, NY: Wiley, 1964.
Bolino, M. C., & Turnley, W. H. (2003). Going the extra mile: Cultivating and managing
employee citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Executive, 17(3), 60-71.
Bolino, M. C., Turnley, W. H., & Niehoff, B. P. (2004). The other side of the story: Reexamining
prevailing assumptions about organizational citizenship behavior. Human Resource
Management Review, 14(2), 229-246.
Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the criterion domain to include elements
of contextual performance. In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman (Eds.), Personnel selection in
organizations. (pp. 71-98). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Borman, W.C., White, L.A., & Dorsey, D. W. (1995). Effects of rate task performance and
interpersonal factors on supervisor and peer performance ratings. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 81, 168-177.
119

Bowen, D. E., Gilliland, S. W., & Folger, R. (1999). HRM and service fairness: How being fair with
employees spills over to customers. Organizational Dynamics, 27(3), 7-23.
Bowling, N. A. (2010). Effects of job satisfaction and conscientiousness on extra-role behaviors.
Journal of Business and Psychology, 25(1), 119-130.
Brace, N., Kemp, R, & Sneglar, R. (2013). SPSS for Psychologists (5th Ed.) New York, New York:
Routledge.
Brief, A. P., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1986). Prosocial Organizational Behaviors. Academy of
Management Review, 11(4), 710-725.
Brown, D.E. & Schnieder, B. (1985). Boundary-spanning role employees and the service
encounter: Some guidelines for future management and research. In Czepiel, Michael R.
Solomon, and Carol F. Surprenenant (Eds.), The Service Encounter (pp. 127-147). New York,
New York: Lexington Books.
Burton, J.P., Sablynski, C.J., & Sekiguchi, T. (2008). Linking justice, performance, and citizenship
via leader-member exchange. Journal of Business Psychology, 23(1/2), 51-61.
Chen, C., & Chiu, S. (2008). An integrative model linking supervisor support and organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Business and Psychology, 23(1-2), 1-10.
Chen, S.C., Wang, S.J. Chang, W.C. & Hu, C.S. (2008). The effect of leader-member-exchange,
trust, supervisor support on organizational citizenship behavior in nurses. Journal of
nursing research 16(4), 321-328.
Chen, Z., Eisenberger, R., Johnson, K.M., Sucharski, I.L., & Aselage, J. (2009). Perceived
organizational support and extra-role performance: Which leads to which. The Journal of
Social Psychology 149(1), 119-124.
120

Chiaburu, D. S., & Harrison, D. A. (2008). Do peers make the place? Conceptual synthesis and
meta-analysis of coworker effects on perceptions, attitudes, OCBs, and performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(5), 1082-1103.
Chiaburu, D. S., Oh, I., Berry, C. M., Li, N., & Gardner, R. G. (2011). The five-factor model of
personality traits and organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 96(6), 1140-1166.
Choi, J.N. (2009). Collective dynamics of citizenship behavior: What group characteristic
promote group-level helping? Journal of Management Studies 46(6), 1396-1420.
Chung-Kai, L. I., & Chia-Hung Hung. (2009). The influence of transformational leadership on
workplace relationships and job performance. Social Behavior & Personality: An
International Journal, 37(8), 1129-1142.
Cochrane, D., Dumler, M., & Schnake, M. (1995). Encouraging organizational citizenship: The
effects of job satisfaction, perceived. Journal of Managerial Issues, 7(2), 209-221.
Connell, P. W. (2006). Transformational leadership, leader-member exchange (LMX), and OCB:
The role of motives (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses dataset. (Publication No. ATT 3197920)
Dansereau, F., Graen, F., & Haga, W.J. (1975). A vertical dayge linkage approach to leadership
within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of the role making process.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13, 46-78.
Deckop, J. R., Cirke, C. C., & Andersson, L. M. (2003). Doing unto others: The reciprocity of
helping behavior in organizations. Journal of Business Ethics, 47(2), 101-113.
Dienesh, R.M., & Liden, R.C. (1986). Leader-member exchange model of leadership: A critique
121

and further development. Academy of Management Review, 11, 618-634.
Eatough, E. M., Chu-Hsiang Chang, Miloslavic, S. A., & Johnson, R. E. (2011). Relationships of
role stressors with organizational citizenship behavior: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 96(3), 619-632.
Eisenberger, R., Armeli, S., Rexwinkel, B., Lynch, P. D., & Rhoades, L. (2001). Reciprocation of
perceived organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 42-51.
Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. (1986). Perceived organizational
support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 500-507.
Eisenberger, R., Stinglhamber, F., Vondenberghe, C., Sucharski, I.L., & Rhoades, L. (2002).
Perceived supervisor support: Contributions to perceived organizational support and
employee retention. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3), 565-573.
Farrell, S. K., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2007). Organizational citizenship behavior and gender:
Expectations and attributions for performance. North American Journal of Psychology, 9(1),
81-96.
Fisk, G. M., & Friesen, J. P. (2012). Perceptions of leader emotion regulation and LMX as
predictors of followers' job satisfaction and organizational citizenship behaviors. The
Leadership Quarterly, 23(1), 1-12.
George, J. M., & Brief, A. P. (1992). Feeling good-doing good: A conceptual analysis of the mood
at work-organizational spontaneity relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 112(2), 310-329.
Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analytic review of leader–member exchange theory:
Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6), 827-844.

122

Golub, E. (2010). Gender divide in librarianship: Past, present, and future. Library Student
Journal, 57, 7.
Goulding, A., Bromham, B., & Hannabuss, S. (2000). Professional characters: The personality of
the future information workforce. Education for Information, 18(1), 7-31.
Gouldner, A.W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Sociological
Review, 25, 161-178.
Graen, G.B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Development of
leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a multi-level,
multi-doman perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219-247.
Graham, J.W. (1989). Organizational citizenship behavior: Construct redefinition,
operationalization, and validation. Unpublished working paper, Loyola University of
Chicago.
Grant, A.M., & Mayer, D.M. (2009). Good soldiers and good actors: Prosocial and impression
management motives as interactive predictors of affiliative citizenship behaviors. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 900-912.
Hackett, R. D., & LaPierre, L. M. (2004, August). A meta-analytical explanation of the
relationship between LMC and OCB. Academy of Management Proceedings, T1-T6.
Heilman, M. E., & Chen, J. J. (2005). Same Behavior, Different Consequences: Reactions to
Men's and Women's Altruistic Citizenship Behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(3),
431-441.
Hernon, P. (Ed.) (2010). Shaping the future: Advancing the understanding of leadership. Santa
Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
123

Hernon, P., Powell, R.R., & Young, A.P. (2003). The next library leadership: Attributes for the
next generation of library directors. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Huang, C.C., You, C.S., & Tsai, M.T. (2012). A multidimensional analysis of ethical climate, job
satisfaction, organizational commitment, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Nursing
Ethics 19(4), 513-529.
Ilies, R., Nahrgang, J. D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2007). Leader-member exchange and citizenship
behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(1), 269-277.
Ilies, R., Spitzmuller, M., Fulmer, I. S., & Johnson, M. D. (2009). Personality and citizenship
behavior: The mediating role of job satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 945959.
Javidan, M., Bemmels, B., Devin, K.S., Dastmalchian, A. (1995). Superior and subordinate gender
and the acceptance of superiors as role models. Human Relations 48(11), 1271-1284.
Kark, R., & Waismel-Manor, R. (2005). Organizational citizenship behavior: What’s gender got to
do with it? Organization, 12(6), 889-917.
Karriker, J. H. (2005). Organizational justice and organizational citizenship behavior: A mediated
multi-foci model (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
database. (Publication No AAT 305351680)
Katz, D., & Kahn, R.L. (1966). The social psychology of organizations. New York, New York:
Wiley.
Kelley, S. W., & Hoffman, D.K. (1997). An investigation of positive affect, prosocial behaviors
and service quality. Journal of Retailing, 73(3), 407-427.

124

Kidder, D. L., & Parks, J. (2001). The good soldier: Who is s(he)? Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 22(8), 939-959.
Konovsky, M. A., & Organ, D. W. (1996). Dispositional and contextual determinants of
organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 17(3), 253-266.
Korsgaard, M. A., Meglino, B. M., Lester, S. W., & Jeong, S. S. (2010). Paying you back or paying
me forward: Understanding rewarded and unrewarded organizational citizenship behavior.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(2), 277-290.
Kottke, J.L., & Pelletier, K.L. (2013). Measuring and differentiating perceptions of supervisor and
top leader ethics. Journal of Business Ethics, 113(3), 415-428.
Kottke, J.L., & Sharafinski, C. E. (1988). Measuring perceived supervisory and organizational
support. Educational and Psychological Measurement 48, 1075-1079.
Lambert, S.J. (2000). Added benefits: The link between work-life benefits and organizational
citizenship behavior. Academy of Management, 43(5), 801-815.
Ladebo, O. (2008). Perceived supervisory support and organizational citizenship behaviors: Is
job satisfaction a mediator? South African Journal of Psychology, 38(3), 479-488.
Lapierre, L. M., & Hackett, R. D. (2007). Trait conscientiousness, leader-member exchange, job
satisfaction and organizational citizenship behaviour: A test of an integrative model.
Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 80(3), 539-554.
LePine, J. A., Erez, A., & Johnson, D. E. (2002). The nature and dimensionality of organizational
citizenship behavior: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology,
87(1), 52-65.

125

Liden, R.C., & Maslyn, J.M. (1998). Multidimensionality of leader-member exchange: An
empirical assessment through scale development. Journal of Management. 24(1), 43-72.
Liden, R.C., Wayne, S.J., & Stilwell, D. (1993). A longitudinal study on the early development of
leader-member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology 78, 662-674.
Li, N., Liang, J., & Crant, J. M. (2010). The role of proactive personality in job satisfaction and
organizational citizenship behavior: A relational perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology,
95(2), 395-404.
Li, C., & Hung, C. (2009). The influence of transformational leadership on workplace
relationships and job performance. Social Behavior and Personality, 37(8), 1129-1142.
Little, T. D., Card, N. A., Bovaird, J. A., Preacher, K., & Crandall, C. S. (2007) Structural equation
modeling of mediation and moderation with contextual factors. In T. D. Little, J. A. Bovaird,
& N. A. Card (Eds.), Modeling contextual effects in longitudinal studies. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Loi, R., Lai, J.Y.M., & Lam, L.W. (2012). Working under a committed boss: A test of the
relationship between supervisors’ and subordinates’ affective commitment. The Leadership
Quarterly, 23(3), 466-475.
McCartney, K., Burchinal, M.R., & Bub, K.L. (2006). Best practices in quantitative methods for
developmentalists. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 71(3).
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Fetter, R. (1993). The impact of organizational citizenship
behavior on evaluations of salesperson performance. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 70-80.

126

MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Paine, J. B. (1999). Do citizenship behaviors matter more
for managers than for salespeople? Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(4),
396-410.
McNeely, B.L., & Meglino, B.M. (1994). The role of dispositional and situational antecedents in
prosocial organizational behavior: An examination of the intended beneficiaries of
prosocial behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(6), 836-844.
Maertz, C.P., Griffith, R.W., Campbell, N.S., & Allen, D.G. (2007). The effects of perceived
organizational support and perceived supervisor support on employee turnover. Journal of
Organizational Behavior 28(8), 1059-1075.
Manogran, P., Stauffer, J., & Conlon, E. J. (1994). Leader-member exchange as a key mediating
variable between employees perceptions of fairness and organizational citizenship
behavior. Academy Of Management Best Papers Proceedings, 249-267.
Mierhans, D., Rietmann, B., & Jonas, K. (2008). Influence of fair and supportive leadership
behavior on commitment and organizational citizenship behavior. Swiss Journal of
Psychology 67(3), 131-141.
Moorman, R. H., & Blakely, G. L. (1995). Individualism-collectivism as an individual difference
predictor of organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16(2),
127-142.
Morrison, E. (1996). Organizational citizenship behavior as a critical link between HRM practices
and service quality. Human Resource Management, 35(4), 493-512.

127

Netemeyer, R.G., Boles, J.S., McKee, D.O., & McMurrian, R. (1997). An investigation into the
antecedents of organizational citizenship behaviors in a personal selling context. Journal of
Marketing 61(3), 85-98.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice(5th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
O’Donnell, M., Yukl, G., & Taber, T. (2012) Leader behavior and LMX: A constructive replication.
Journal of Managerial Psychology 27(2), 143-154.
Organ, D.W. (1988). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier syndrome. Lexington,
MA: Lexington Books.
Organ, D. W. (1990). The motivational basis of organizational citizenship behavior. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 12, 43-73.
Organ, D. W. (1997). Organizational citizenship behavior: It's construct clean-up time. Human
Performance, 10(2), 85-97.
Organ, D. W., & Konovsky, M. (1989). Cognitive versus affective determinants of organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74(1), 157-164.
Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P.M., & MacKenzie, S.B. (2006). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its
nature, antecedents, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Organ, D. W., & Ryan, K. (1995). A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispositional
predictors of organizational citizenship behavior. Personnel Psychology, 48(4), 775-802.
Payne, S. C., & Webber, S. S. (2006). Effects of service provider attitudes and employment
status on citizenship behaviors and customers' attitudes and loyalty behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 91(2), 365-378.

128

Peng, Y., Hwang, S., Wong, J. (2010). How to inspire university librarians to become “good
soldiers”? The role of job autonomy. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 36(4), 287295.
Podsakoff, P.M, MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N.P. (2003). Common method biases in
behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879-903.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. (1990). Transformational leader
behaviors and their effects on followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational
citizenship behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 1(2), 107-142.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Paine, J.B., & Bachrach, D.G. (2000). Organizational citizenship
behaviors: A critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions
for future research. Journal of Management 26(3), 513-563.
Podsakoff, N. P., Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & Blume, B. D. (2009). Individual- and
organizational-level consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(1), 122-141.
Rayner, J., Lawton, A., & Williams, H. M. (2012). Organizational citizenship behavior and the
public service ethos: Whither the organization?. Journal of Business Ethics, 106(2), 117130.
Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2002). Perceived organizational support: A review of the
literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 698-714.
Rioux, S. M., & Penner, L. A. (2001). The causes of organizational citizenship behavior: A
motivational analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6), 1306-1314.
129

Rubin, R.E. (2010). Foundations of library and information science. New York, New York: NealSchumann Publishers, Inc.
Rubin, R., & Rubin, R.E. (2012). Justifying professional education in a self-service world. In W.
Crowley (Ed.), Defending professionalism: A resources for librarians, information specialists,
knowledge managers, and archivists (pp. 22-30). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Schein, E.H. (1990). Organizational culture. American Psychologist, 45(2), 109-119.
Settoon, R. P., Bennett, N., & Liden, R. C. (1996). Social exchange in organizations: Perceived
organizational support, leader–member exchange, and employee reciprocity. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 81(3), 219-227.
Shanock, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2006). When supervisors feel supported: Relationships with
subordinates' perceived supervisor support, perceived organizational support, and
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(3), 689-695.
Shore, L.M., & Tetrick, L.E. (1991). A construct validity study of the survey of perceived
organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychology 76(5), 637-643.
Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1983). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its nature
and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68(4), 653-663.
Soldner, J. L. (2009). Relationships among leader-member exchange, organizational citizenship
behavior, organizational commitment, gender, and dyadic duration in a rehabilitation
organization (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses
database. (Publication No. ATT 305000056).

130

Sparrowe, R. T., Soetjipto, B. W., & Kraimer, M. L. (2006). Do leaders' influence tactics relate to
members' helping behavior? It depends on the quality of the relationship. Academy of
Management Journal, 49(6), 1194-1208.
StatSoft, Inc. (2013). General Linear Models. Electronic Statistics Textbook. Retrieved from
http://www.statsoft.com/textbook/general-linear-models/
Tsui, A.S. & O’Reilly, C.A. (1989) Beyond simple demographics effects: The importance of
relational demography in superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of Management Journal,
32, 402-423.
Umiker, W. (1999). Organizational culture: The role of management and supervisors. Health
Care Supervisor 17(4), 22-27.
Van Dyne, L., Cummings, L. L., & Parks, J. (1995). Extra-role behaviors: In pursuit of construct
and definitional clarity (a bridge over muddied waters). Research in Organizational
Behavior, 17, 215.
Van Dyne, L., Graham. J.W. & Dienesh, R.E. (1994). Organizational citizenship behavior:
Construct redefinition, measurement and validation. Academy of Management Journal,
37(4), 765-802.
vanYperen, N.W., van den Berg, A.E., & Willering, M.C. (1999). Towards a better understanding
of the link between participation in decision-making and organizational citizenship
behavior: A multi-level analysis. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology
72(3), 377-392.

131

Vidyarthi, P.R., Liden, R.C., Anand, S., Erdogan, B., Ghosh, S. (2010). Where do I stand?
Examining the effect of leader-member exchange social comparison on employee work
behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology 95(5), 849-861.
Waismel-Manor, R., Tziner, A., Berger, E. , & Dikstein, E. (2010). Two of a kind? Leader-member
exchange and organizational citizenship behaviors: The Moderating role of leader-member
similarity. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(1), 167-181.
Walz, S.M., & Niehoff, B.P. (2000). Organizational citizenship behaviors: Their relationship to
organizational effectiveness. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, 24(3), 301-319.
Wan, H.L. (2011). The role of leader-member exchange in organizational justice: Organizational
citizenship behavior relationship. Research and Practice in Human Resource Management,
19(2), 71-91.
Wang, H., Law, K. S., Hackett, R. D., Wang, D., & Chen, Z. C. (2005). Leader-member exchange as
a mediator of the relationship between transformational leadership and followers'
performance and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Journal,
48(3), 420-432.
Wat, D., & Shaffer, M. A. (2005). Equity and relationship quality influences on organizational
citizenship behaviors: The mediating role of trust in the supervisor and empowerment.
Personnel Review, 34(4), 406-422.
Wayne, S.J., Liden, R.C., & Sparrowe, R.T. (1994). Developing leader-member exchanges: The
influence of gender and ingratiation. American Behavioral Scientist, 37(5), 697-714.

132

Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., Bommer, W. H., & Tetrick, L. E. (2002). The role of fair treatment and
rewards in perceptions of organizational support and leader-member exchange. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 87(3), 590-598.
Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., & Liden, R. C. (1997). Perceived organizational support and leadermember exchange: A social exchange perspective. Academy of Management Journal,
40(1), 82-111.
Williams, L.J., & Anderson, S.E. (1991). Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as
predicators of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17,
601-617.
Wu, Y. (2009). A multidimensional analysis of the relationship between leader-member
exchange and organizational citizenship behavior with an alternative measure of leadermember exchange (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses database. (Publication No. ATT 305092978)
Yaffe, T., & Kark, R. (2011). Leading by example: The case of leader OCB. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 96(4), 806-826.
Yuan, L. (2007). A motivational model of organizational citizenship behavior (Doctoral
dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (Publication No.
ATT 304946567)

133

Appendix A
Feasibility and Interest E-mail to Directors

Dear [Director Name]:
As you may know, I am nearing the end of a Ph.D. program through Simmons College in
Boston. I am preparing for the research portion of my dissertation, and [Insert Name of Library
System] has been identified as a possible location to carry out the research. My study will
examine a particular kind of organizational behavior, essentially “above and beyond” behavior,
which is considered to be outside a traditional job description (i.e., helping to orient new
employees, not complaining about trivial inconveniences, volunteering for teams, etc.). I will
be looking at whether or not the quality of the relationship between the direct supervisor and
the employee influences whether or not the employee engages in these activities. I will also be
looking at whether or not employees feel like their supervisor supports them, and whether or
not that also influences their helping behaviors.
The library system or systems that participate in the study will not be identified, and all data
about employees and their supervisors will be anonymous. I hope to do this research in January
of 2013.
If you would consider allowing this study to take place in your library system, please respond
to the following items:
1. Total number of supervisors in your system who directly oversee full and part-time
Public Service Information Staff
a. “Public Service Information Staff” are Librarians and Library Assistants (or
equivalent) whose primary job entails working with the public in an information
(non-circulation) capacity.
2. Total number of full and part-time Public Service Information Staff described above
(head count, not FTE)
a. Whether or not there is a union that includes the Public Service Information Staff
described above.
If I do not hear back from you or someone representing your library by Friday, October 12, I will
follow up with a telephone call. Feel free to contact me if you have any additional questions at
rrubin@bexleylibrary.org or 614-231-9709.
Thank you for your consideration.

134

Appendix B
Implied Consent E-mail (Supervisor)
Dear [Name],
[Name of institution] has given permission to Rachel Rubin, a Ph.D. student in the Managerial
Leadership in the Information Professions program at Simmons College in Boston, MA, to invite
you to participate in a research study for her dissertation.
The purpose of this research is to examine a workplace activity called “organizational
citizenship behavior” and how it is affected by the supervisor-supervisee relationship.
Organizational citizenship behaviors are above-and-beyond “helping” behaviors that, when
performed over time by many people, improve organizational effectiveness.
For this study, you will be provided with links (below) to questionnaires for each of your direct
supervisees. You will be asked to assess the extent to which you agree or disagree with
statements about their organizational citizenship behaviors. You will also be asked to provide
basic demographic information about yourself. The time required to complete the survey will
be approximately 10 minutes per subordinate. Please complete the surveys in a non-public
work space.
Participation in this research is entirely voluntary but very important. If you do choose to
participate, you are free to withdraw at any time. Your identity and the identity of your
supervisees will be protected. All questionnaires are assigned an identification number by me
that will be used when entering the data. All data will be treated as confidential and kept in a
secure location. Your name will not be linked to the survey, and the document linking your
name with your identification number will be destroyed once the data entry is complete.
Questions regarding this research should be directed to Rachel Rubin: (330) 618-3354 or
rrubin@bexleylibrary.org. If you have any questions concerning your rights as a research
participant that have not been answered by the investigator or if you wish to report any
concerns about the study, you should contact Dr. Peter Hernon of Simmons College at 617-5212794; email: peter.hernon@simmons.edu.
Thank you for your participation.
Rachel Rubin
Doctoral Candidate
Simmons College, Managerial Leadership in the Information Professions

135

Appendix C
Implied Consent Cover Letter (Subordinate)
Dear [Name],
[Name of institution] has given permission to Rachel Rubin, a Ph.D. student in the Managerial
Leadership in the Information Professions program at Simmons College in Boston, MA, to invite
you to participate in a research study for her dissertation.
The purpose of this research is to examine a workplace activity called “organizational
citizenship behavior” and how it is affected by the supervisor-supervisee relationship.
Organizational citizenship behaviors are above-and-beyond “helping” behaviors that, when
performed over time by many people, improve organizational effectiveness.
For this study, you will be provided with a link (below) to complete two surveys and to provide
some demographic information about yourself. Both surveys will ask you about your
relationship with your supervisor. The time required to answer the questions will be
approximately 20 minutes.
Participation in this research is entirely voluntary but very important. If you do choose to
participate, you are free to withdraw at any time. Your identity and the identity of your
supervisor will be protected. All questionnaires are assigned an identification number by me
that will be used when entering the data. All data will be treated as confidential and kept in a
secure location. Your name will not be linked to the survey, and the document linking your
name with your identification number will be destroyed once the data entry is complete.
Questions regarding this research should be directed to Rachel Rubin: (330) 618-3354 or
rrubin@bexleylibrary.org. If you have any questions concerning your rights as a research
participant that have not been answered by the investigator or if you wish to report any
concerns about the study, you should contact Dr. Peter Hernon of Simmons College at 617-5212794; email: peter.hernon@simmons.edu.
Thank you for your participation.
Rachel Rubin
Doctoral Candidate
Simmons College, Managerial Leadership in the Information Professions

136

Appendix D
Reminder E-mail

Dear [Name],
Recently you were invited to participate in a study examining the supervisee-supervisor
relationship and organizational citizenship behaviors. If you have not had a chance to complete
the surveys and would like to participate in this study, please complete them within seven days.
To begin or complete the surveys, click the link provided.
Your participation in this research is entirely voluntary but very important.
Thank you for your time.
Rachel Rubin
Doctoral Candidate
Simmons College, Managerial Leadership in the Information Professions

137

Appendix E
Organizational Citizenship Behavior Scale

(R) indicates a question that is reverse scored.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

The employee helps others who have a heavy work load.
The employee is the classic “squeaky wheel” that always needs greasing. (R)
The employee believes in giving an honest day’s work for an honest day’s pay.
The employee consumes a lot of time complaining about trivial matters. (R)
The employee tries to avoid creating bigger problems for coworkers.
The employee keeps abreast of changes in the organization.
The employee tends to make “mountains out of molehills.” (R)
The employee considers the impact of his/her actions on coworkers.
The employee attends meetings that are not mandatory, but that are considered
important.
10. The employee is always ready to lend a helping hand to those around him/her.
11. The employee attends functions that are not required, but help the organization’s
image.
12. The employee reads and keeps up with organizational announcements, memos, and so
forth.
13. The employee helps others who have been absent.
14. The employee does not abuse the rights of others.
15. The employee willingly helps others who have work related problems.
16. The employee always focuses on what’s wrong, rather than the positive side of
situations. (R)
17. The employee takes steps to try and prevent problems with other coworkers.
18. The employee’s attendance at work is above the norm.
19. The employee always finds fault with what the organization is doing. (R)
20. The employee is mindful of how his/her behavior affects other people’s job.
21. The employee does not take extra breaks or time away from work.
22. The employee obeys the organization’s rules and regulations even when no one is
watching.
23. The employee helps orient new people even though it is not required of them.
24. The employee is one of my most conscientious employees.

138

Appendix F
LMX 7 Instrument

1. Do you know where you stand with your leader…do you usually know how satisfied
your leader is with what you do?
2. How well does your leader understand your job problems and needs?
3. How well does your leader recognize your potential?
4. Regardless of how much formal authority your leader has built into her or her
position, what are the chances that your leader would use his or her power to help
you solve problems in your work?
5. Again, regardless of the amount of formal authority your leader has, what are the
chances that he or she would “bail you out” at her or her expense?
6. I have enough confidence in my leader that I would defend and justify his or her
decision if he or she were not present to do so.
7. How would you characterize your working relationship with your leader?

139

Appendix G
Survey of Perceived Supervisor Support

(R) indicates a question that is reverse scored.
1. My supervisor values my contributions to the well-being of our department.
2. If my supervisor could hire someone to replace me at a lower salary he/she would I so.
(R)
3. My supervisor appreciates extra effort from me.
4. My supervisor strongly considers my goals and values.
5. My supervisor wants to know if I have any complaints.
6. My supervisor takes my best interests into account when he/she makes decisions that
affect me.
7. Help is available from my supervisor when I have a problem.
8. My supervisor really cares about my well-being.
9. If I did the best job possible, my supervisor would be sure to notice.
10. My supervisor is willing to help me when I need a special favor.
11. My supervisor cares about my general satisfaction at work.
12. If given the opportunity my supervisor would take advantage of me. (R)
13. My supervisor shows a lot of concern for me.
14. My supervisor cares about my opinions.
15. My supervisor takes pride in my accomplishments.
16. My supervisor tries to make my job as interesting as possible.

140

