CRAFT AND JOB SATISFACTION:
NORTH CAROLINA LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE GRADUATES

Chad Henderson Morgan

A dissertation submitted to the faculty of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy in the School of Information and Library Science.

Chapel Hill
2013

Approved by:
Joanne Gard Marshall
Thomas R. Konrad
Barbara Moran
Irene Owens
Zeynep Tufekci

UMI Number: 3622424

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3622424
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© 2013
Chad Henderson Morgan
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

ii

ABSTRACT
Chad Henderson Morgan: Craft and Job Satisfaction: North Carolina Library and
Information Science Graduates
(Under the direction of Joanne Gard Marshall)
This dissertation examines the sources of job satisfaction among 1,833
library and information science (LIS) master’s program graduates in North
Carolina from 1964-2009. Only respondents who identified themselves as
librarians were included in the analysis. The study first examined the effects of
traditional work-related variables such as income, flexibility, co-workers, fringe
benefits, and setting on job satisfaction. Based on the outcomes of the first
regression analysis, the study goes on to examine perceptions of change in the
profession over the previous five years and, in particular, the effects of change
on older workers. Finally, the analysis introduces variables related to the notion
of craft, professional achievement, and family dynamics to determine what
impact they have on job satisfaction. The analysis also examines work-related
variables that may have been masking the influence of craft, professional
achievement and family dynamics. Craft combines the wish to perform one’s
work well independent of extrinsic factors or influences and the desire of the
worker to create a quality final outcome or product which can be certified as such
by objective standards. The major finding of the study is that craft and

iii

professional achievement are the largest determinants of job satisfaction among
LIS graduates. Meanwhile, variables such as marital status, whether or not one
has children, and breadwinner status had no discernible bearing on job
satisfaction. Supportive co-workers, being a woman, and membership in
professional organizations likewise correlate with job satisfaction, while being a
full-time worker, anxiety over job security, and working in an academic library
setting contributed to dissatisfaction. Although LIS graduates generally report
being very content in their jobs, this study suggests that they are anxious about
changes such as the increasing number of temporary and freelance jobs and the
perception that full-time staff are doing more work with fewer resources.

iv

Acknowledgements
One incurs enormous debt in the writing of any dissertation and this is
especially true in my case. I wish to thank first of all my colleagues and especially
my boss, Dean Irene Owens, at North Carolina Central University’s School of
Library and Information Sciences for the patience shown me in the process of
completing this process and the many special allowances that have been made
for me so that I could. I would like, too, to thank my students at NCCU SLIS
whose incisive comments during class discussions have often pushed me in the
direction of new insights.
I must also thank the members of my dissertation committee, Drs. Bob
Konrad, Barbara Moran, Irene Owens, and Zeynep Tufekci. Their comments both
prior to and during my defense suggested to me new ways of thinking about the
data and helped me to make sense of phenomena whose meanings initially
escaped my comprehension. The staff at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill’s School of Information and Library Science has helped me clear
administrative obstacles at every step of my academic career there. In this
connection, Lara Bailey, Student Services Coordinator, deserves special thanks.
Professionally, Dr. Joanne Marshall is the one person without whom
completion of this dissertation would have been unthinkable. She has been there
through every phase of the process going back to my admission to SILS as a
v

Triangle Research Libraries Network Fellow. Beyond helping with the
dissertation, Joanne made possible my entire professional career in LIS since
2005.
My greatest debt is to Jennifer Craft Morgan, my wife, for everything.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

LIST OF TABLES…………………………………………………………………...xi
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE, BACKGROUND, AND
RESEARCH QUESTIONS …………………………………………………………….1
Section 1.1 Background………………………………………………………..1
Section 1.2 Statement of Problem …………………………………………….2
Section 1.3 Research Questions…………………………………………………..2
Section 1.4 Conceptual Framework…………………………………………..3
Section 1.5 Organization of the Dissertation…………………………………5
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW………………………………………………..7
Section 2.1 Introduction……………………………………………………………..7
Section 2.2 Job Satisfaction and LIS………………………………………….7
Section 2.3 Craft and Information Work……………………………………..12
Section 2.4 The Development of Professions………………………………22
CHAPTER 3: RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY…………………….29
Section 3.1 Data Source………………………………………………………29
Section 3.2 Data Subset………………………………………………………33
Section 3.3 Data Analysis Plan………………………………………………34
CHAPTER 4: DATA ANALYSIS……………………………………………………...39
Section 4.1 Introduction and First Research Question…………………….39
vii

Section 4.2 Descriptive Results: Job Satisfaction………………………….40
Section 4.3 Analytic Strategy: Model 1: JOBSAT:
Conditions/Benefits Variables………………………………………………..42
Section 4.4 Measurement: Type of Library Context……………………….43
Section 4.5 Measurement: Organization Size………………………………45
Section 4.6 Measurement: Age………………………………………………46
Section 4.7 Measurement: Sex………………………………………………49
Section 4.8 Measurement: Race/Ethnicity………………………………….51
Section 4.9 Measurement: Full-time Worker or Not……………………….54
Section 4.10 Measurement: Income…………………………………………55
Section 4.11 Measurement: Working Conditions and Benefits…………...56
Section 4.12 Results: Conditions/Benefits Variables………………………62
Section 4.13 Age and New Skills/Proliferating Tasks Variables………….64
Section 4.14 Measurement: Learn New Skills……………………………...65
Section 4.15 Measurement: Job Security…………………………………...66
Section 4.16 Measurement: New Tasks…………………………………….66
Section 4.17 Measurement: More Difficult Tasks…………………………..67
Section 4.18 Measurement: More High-Tech Tasks………………………68
Section 4.19 Measurement: Wider Variety of Tasks……………………….70
Section 4.20 Measurement: Organization of Task Work………………….70
Section 4.21 Results: Age and New Skills/Proliferating
Tasks Variables………………………………………………………………..74
Section 4.22 Family Dynamics and Craft/Professional
Achievement Variables………………………………………………………..75

viii

Section 4.23 Family Dynamics Variables: Marital Status,
Children, Breadwinner, Livebetter …………………………………………...77
Section 4.24 Measurement: Craft and
Professional Achievement…………………………………………………….80
Section 4.25 Results: Family Dynamics and
Craft/Professional Achievement Variables………………………………….83
Section 4.26 Stepwise and Block Regression Models…………………….85
CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSIONS……………………………………………………….92
Section 5.1 Introduction……………………………………………………….92
Section 5.2 Craft and Professional Achievement…………………………..94
Section 5.3 Technology and Craft……………………………………………99
Section 5.4 Professional Achievement…………………………………….105
Section 5.5 Sex and Job Satisfaction………………………………………108
Section 5.6 Older Workers…………………………………………………..109
Section 5.7 Academic and School Librarians……………………………..113
Section 5.8 Pay……………………………………………………………….118
Section 5.9 Coworkers………………………………………………………119
Section 5.10 Family Dynamics……………………………………………...126
Section 5.11 Tensions between Age Groups……………………………..130
Section 5.12 Task Variety and Continuous Learning…………………….134
Section 5.13 The LIS Risk Economy……………………………………….138
Section 5.14 Limitations……………………………………………………..144
Section 5.15 Discussion……………………………………………………..146
APPENDIX I: KEY DEFINITIONS………………………………………………….150

ix

APPENDIX II: BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTE ON
THE DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIANSHIP IN NORTH CAROLINA ………….152
APPENDIX III: JOB SATISFACTION SURVEY ITEMS ………………………….158
APPENDIX IV: PEARSON CORRELATIONS: JOB SATISFACTION………….160
APPENDIX V: ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE: JOB SATISFACTION WITH
TYPER OF LIBRARY, AGE CATEGORIES, AND CURRENT JOB
TENURE CATEGORIES…………………………………………………………….168
APPENDIX VI: COLLINEARITY DIAGNOSTICS:
JOB SATISFACTION………………………………………………………………..172
REFERENCES……………………………………………………………………….173

x

List of Tables
Table 1: Open-ended WILIS1 Questions Analyzed………………………………..38
Table 2: LIS Graduate Job Satisfaction……………………………………………..42
Table 3: Job Settings Variables………………………………………………………44
Table 4: Type of Library Job Setting…………………………………………………45
Table 5: Conditions/Benefits Variables……………………………………………...53
Table 6: New Skills/Proliferating Tasks Variables………………………………….65
Table 7: Correlations: Age and New Skills/Proliferating Tasks…………………...75
Table 8: Family and Craft Variables…………………………………………………77
Table 9: The Craft-Careerism Continuum…………………………………………..82
Table 10: Stepwise Regression predicting Job Satisfaction………………………86
Table 11: Block Model Regression predicting Job Satisfaction…………………..88

xi

Chapter 1
Purpose, Background, and Research Questions

1.1 Background
The origins of the present work lay in the researcher’s longstanding
fascination with the lives of working people which dates at least back to an
occupational folklore graduate seminar taken in the mid-1990s. Recent high-profile
works by public intellectuals Sennett (2008) and Crawford (2009) emphasizing the
need for craft in modern work coincided roughly with data collection for the
Workforce Issues in Library and Information Sciences Study (WILIS). The fact that
the WILIS survey asked several questions that seemed to the researcher to pertain
directly to craft in information work presented a chance to test Sennett and
Crawford’s arguments among a large modern information workforce.
Library and Information Science (LIS) workers represent an attractive group
of workers to test the importance of craft in modern work because they seemed to
embody a paradox. On one hand, they were the kinds of office information workers
whose deskbound lives many of the critics of modern work decried. Yet in survey
after job satisfaction survey, LIS workers reported being overwhelmingly satisfied in
their work when contrasted with most other information professions. This paradox is
at the heart of what made LIS particularly attractive to the author. If craft played a
role in their job satisfaction, there existed the chance that a study of this

phenomenon could hold lessons for other information professions, whose
practitioners rarely reported being as happy as LIS workers. In addition, the large
population and large number of questions in the survey presented the opportunity to
look at how an unusually large number of variables impacted LIS job satisfaction,
including non-workplace variables.

1.2

Statement of Problem
The purpose of this research is to examine sources of job satisfaction among

LIS graduates. Specifically it looks at whether and how structural and technological
change in the profession is affecting traditionally high levels of librarian job
satisfaction. Given this focus, only respondents who identified themselves as
librarians are included in the analysis. In addition to focusing on the effects of
demographics and traditional workplace variables such as flexible hours, pay, fringe
benefits, and co-workers, it also seeks to find how factors that have not been studied
in the LIS literature have affected job satisfaction. It will examine job satisfaction in
three major contexts: job satisfaction in North America since the 1950s; the central
role of craft in LIS work; and LIS in competition with other professions.

1.3

Research Questions

1.

How do job satisfaction levels of librarians vary across age, sex, job level, job

type, length of career, and other workplace factors?
2.

How do household dynamics affect job satisfaction? Are breadwinners more

or less likely to be satisfied? Does marital status affect satisfaction? Do children?
2

3.

What role does craft and professional achievement play in job satisfaction?

1.4

Conceptual Framework
There are two distinct but overlapping conceptual frames for this dissertation.

The first is the large body of scholarship devoted to job satisfaction. Notable
precursors to the systematic study of job satisfaction include the establishment and
evolution of scientific management in the 1910s, the Hawthorne Studies at Harvard
Business School in the 1920s and 1930s, and Abraham Maslow’s pioneering
Hierarchy of Needs Theory, propounded in the 1950s. New models and approaches
to job satisfaction have proliferated in the decades since. Notable among them,
Locke’s Range of Affect Theory (1976) argues that one’s level of job satisfaction
increases as the gap between what one wants in a job and what one has in a job
narrows. Dispositional Theory holds that employees’ innate temperament
predisposes them to a certain range of satisfaction independent of the objective
merits or features of a given job (Judge, Locke, and Durham, 1997). Equity Theory
stresses the importance of the perception of fair and equal treatment to one’s level
of contentment (Huseman and Miles, 1987). Frederick Herzberg’s Two-Factor
Theory proposed that, while one set of factors tended to lead to worker satisfaction
(including achievement, recognition, advancement, and growth), a completely
separate group of factors caused dissatisfaction (such as salary, company policy,
supervision, relationship with one’s boss and peers, and security) (1968). In addition,
there exist several recognized instruments for measuring job satisfaction. Among
others, these include the Job Descriptive Index (JDI), the Brief Index of Affective Job

3

Satisfaction (BIAJS), the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire (MSQ), and the Job
Satisfaction Survey (JSS). The job satisfaction literature will be discussed in greater
detail in the literature review (section 2.2), although it is worth mentioning here that
there has been a trend in the job satisfaction literature in the last decade and more
to address the changing nature of work in the information age. The Workforce and
Aging in the New Economy (WANE) study looked specifically at how, with the
decline of internal labor markets and job security, tech workers in recent years came
to view their career and carved out meaningful professional lives for themselves
(McMullin and Marshall, 2010). In the spirit of WANE, the Workforce Issues in
Library and Information Science study (WILIS) seeks to examine how sources and
understanding of job satisfaction is changing for information workers as long-held
assumptions about what a job could and should be are challenged.
The second conceptual frame is an intellectual tradition which dates back at
least to Marx but which has found its fullest expression in the recent work of the
philosopher Richard Sennett (2000, 2008). Along the way, scholars as eminent and
diverse as historian Christopher Lasch, economist Harry Braverman, and
management thinker Peter Drucker have contributed to this discourse (Lasch, 1978,
1987; Braverman, 1998; Drucker, 1967, 1977, 1998). Though never formally codified
as its own school of thought, the trait that unifies thinkers in this tradition might be
described as an overriding concern with mastery of, and connection to, one’s work.
For the purposes of the present work, that concept will denoted by its historical label:
craft.

4

As a concept, craft has been a preoccupation chiefly of sociologists,
historians, and philosophers. LIS job satisfaction studies have meanwhile been more
apt to look at the related concept, borrowed from scientific management, of “intrinsic
rewards.” The present study employs craft because it describes a much more
specific relationship to work than “intrinsic rewards.” The latter suggests only that
one finds one’s work enjoyable. Some workers may, perversely, enjoy tedious work
at which they are incompetent, and such enjoyment would fall under the umbrella of
intrinsic rewards. Craft, on the other hand, implies that one enjoys work because he
or she is good at it and because the final product is a quality one. Even when the
research questions in this dissertation are not explicitly about craft, they are implicitly
so. When the dissertation addresses job satisfaction, it does so in the context of a
more precarious economic situation than Americans have known, perhaps, since the
early 1940s, one in which connection to one’s work assumes a new importance as
job stability declines. The discussion of librarianship’s new place in the information
work system of professions is likewise informed by consideration of craft, which may
simultaneously be one of librarians’ best defenses against professional incursions
into traditionally safe areas of professional practice and one of their most promising
future sources of continuing satisfaction in a changing professional marketplace.

1.5

Organization of the Dissertation
This dissertation will unfold across five chapters. This first chapter provides

the problem statement, research questions, and conceptual frame. Chapter Two will
situate the project in the context of three scholarly literatures. Chapter Three will

5

describe the data set and methodology used in the study. Chapter Four is the data
analysis chapter. It (a) examines the job satisfaction of the study’s dataset,
graduates of North Carolina’s six LIS programs; (b) explores the results of
regression analyses designed to isolate the variables which most accounted for
satisfaction; (c) looks at the impact of household dynamics on librarian job
satisfaction; and (d) analyzes the role played by craft in librarian job satisfaction.
Chapter Five will discuss conclusions of the study as a whole, what they suggest for
the LIS in terms of how the field has and continues to change.

6

Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1

Introduction
This review surveys three literatures that frame the present dissertation: job

satisfaction and LIS; craft in work; and the evolution of professions with an emphasis
on librarianship and the information professions.
2.2

Job Satisfaction and LIS
In their 2005 book, The New American Workplace, anthropologists James

O’Toole and Edward E. Lawler III neatly summed up the major findings of more than
50 years of job satisfaction studies. The key findings included overall lower levels of
satisfaction and high turnover and absenteeism. Job satisfaction did not beget
better job performance but quality performance was a huge predictor of satisfaction.
Satisfaction tended determined by whether workers felt like they are being
adequately rewarded for their work. There existed a direct correlation between
worker and customer satisfaction. Also happy workers are less likely to want to
unionize (2005). There were some persistent demographic features of the job
satisfaction literature. First, there was a small but consistent correlation between
advancing age and job satisfaction. Women reported being happier in their work
despite having had, on balance, objectively worse jobs than men by any metric

7

(Hodson, 1989; Clark, 1997). Much of this makes a great deal of intuitive sense.
More to the point for the present study, it makes sense in the context of a deskilled
work world described by critics of the decline of craft in modern work.
Traditional ideas about career development often do not correspond to the
reality of work in the current economy. They are, in truth, not even all that traditional.
In the mid-20th century, career development was tied closely to internal labor
markets. Employees entered an organization at or near the bottom and worked their
way through a succession of job titles meant to indicate upward movement through
the organization (Doeringer and Piore, 1985). Ultimately, as global competition
required companies to make their workforces more flexible, organizations found it
easier and more cost-effective to go with a managerial core supplemented by a
periphery of temporary and/or marginally skilled workers (Ellig, 2005; Barley and
Kunda, 2006). This allowed them to downsize more quickly when times got lean and,
conversely, to add workers in flush times without taking on the risk of adding
employees who stayed on their employment rolls for the next 30 years and earned
pensions.
In the new economy, firms—and particularly the small IT firms that have
proliferated in the new economy—tended to grow cautiously. They attempted to
foster job satisfaction through more open communication practices and less
hierarchical company structures in the manner described by management scholars
such as Douglas McGregor. Findings of the WANE (Workforce Aging in the New
Economy) project reinforced the emergence of a “risk society,” in which work is more

8

fluid, piecemeal, and ephemeral than in the recent past. A bare majority of the IT
workers in WANE suggested they had a “clear sense” of how they wished for their
careers would unfold, and few expressed a high level of confidence in their careers
playing out as they hope. All of this suggests a fairly fraught employment situation in
which new economy workers—despite more communication and more collaborative
working arrangements—would seem to experience an unusually high level of career
anxiety when contrasted with their old economy counterparts (McMullin and
Marshall, 2010).
Until very recently, librarians would appear to have experienced relatively little
of the anxiety that other new economy workers have. For decades, they have been
subject to dozens of job satisfaction studies, which suggest that they are “happy
enough” in the words of Eva and McCormick (2008). Librarians most often
expressed satisfaction about the importance of their work and the pleasure they took
in performing it. Factors that most often weighed against satisfaction included low
salaries and a perceived lack of opportunities. According to the results of three
nationwide surveys published by Library Journal since 1994, reference librarians,
librarians in smaller libraries, professional librarians (i.e., those holding a graduate
LIS degree), and librarians working with new technologies were all more likely to
express satisfaction with their careers/jobs (St. Lifer, 1994; Gordon and Nesbeitt,
1999; Berry, 2007). Another general librarian job satisfaction survey found that the
happiest librarians were those who were older and had more professional
experience, those who held an MLS, and those who worked directly with the public
including, notably, reference librarians. Interestingly, the same study found that
9

librarian job satisfaction compared unfavorably with the national average, which
makes it an outlier in the wider literature (Van Reenan, 1998). So obviously this
dissertation hardly represents the first time that librarian job satisfaction has been
placed under the microscope.
Aside from the Library Journal surveys, LIS scholars have come at the topic of
librarian job satisfaction from several angles since at least the 1970s. Academic
librarians have been a particular focus of job satisfaction studies. This is perhaps
due to the fact that, among librarians, those working in university settings feel a
unique pressure to publish (discussion of which will follow in Chapter 5). Among the
more notable works from this diffuse literature, Chwe (1978) showed reference
librarians in university settings happier in their work than their peers in technical
services. Glasgow’s survey of American academic librarians (1982) found that
librarians’ “perception of their work”—the constellation of factors other job
satisfaction scholars have termed “intrinsic rewards”—to be the most accurate
predictor of satisfaction. Predictably, salary, rank, and opportunities for advancement
also correlated with a positive view of one’s job. Examining the same population
roughly a decade later, Mirfakhrai (1991) found that, while opportunities to move up
within the organization remained important, other key factors promoting job
satisfaction were the size of the library (the smaller the better) and co-worker
relationships. Meanwhile, perceived supervisor incompetence and career immobility
ranked first among variables predicting dissatisfaction. Lim (2008) showed that, for
IT workers in academic libraries, the principal correlates for job satisfaction were
“salary, an MLS degree, a sense of belonging, faith in wanting to belong, a feeling of

10

acceptance, job autonomy and promotion opportunities.” Together, these studies
paint a remarkably consistent picture of the factors contributing to academic
librarians’ job satisfaction over the course of several decades.
The other setting to attract the attention of LIS job satisfaction researchers
has been the public library. Schneider (1991) compared the stress levels of “public
service” and technical services workers at a large urban public library and found
them noticeably lower among the former. Bartlett (1998) specifically looked at how
supervisor activity related to worker satisfaction in Wake County, North Carolina and
concluded, unsurprisingly, that when bosses “self-disclosed,” offered assistance to
those working under them, and provided frequent feedback, they were better able to
cultivate happy workers. A pair of articles by Goulding (1991, 1995) isolated factors
contributing to satisfaction on the part of public library support staff and
paraprofessionals. These included frequent interaction with the public, having a
stake in the organization’s success, and other strictly work-related factors typically
grouped under the “intrinsic rewards” label. As this brief survey suggests, public
librarian job satisfaction studies tend to focus more or less narrowly on one aspect of
satisfaction, whether that be a single aspect of the job or one sector of the
workforce. Similarly, these studies tend to focus on a single public library or library
system. On balance, though, their results jibed with what was found about academic
librarians and LIS workers generally.

11

2.3

Craft and Information Work
The use of craft—defined as “intellectual power; skill; art”—in English dates

back at least to 808 AD per the OED. Its close cousin craftsmanship—“The
performance or occupation of a craftsman; skill in clever or artistic work; skilled
workmanship”—is a relative neophyte having come into use only circa 1652. As
befits their vintage the words evoke the world of pre-industrial artisans, of smiths,
coopers, wheelwrights, glaziers, braziers, cobblers, and the whole cast of skilled
workers who made things before machines did. Craft and craftsmanship, terms
used synonymously here, did not go by the boards with the introduction of the
spinning jenny. For present purposes, Richard Sennett’s flexible definition of those
terms is used. (See Appendix I for this and all definitions.) “‘Craftsmanship’ may
suggest a way of life that waned with the advent of industrial society—but this is
misleading,” Sennett wrote. “Craftsmanship names an enduring, basic human
impulse, the desire to do a job well for its own sake” (2008). This definition is notable
for a couple reasons. First, Sennett’s identification of craft as “an enduring, basic
human impulse” frees the concept from its etymologically imposed cage. Craft is not
some dusty relic of the pre-industrial past (the Guilded Age?) but part of what it
means to be human, and it is timeless. “Craftsmanship cuts a far wider swath than
manual labor,” he elaborates. “It serves the computer programmer, the doctor, and
the artist; parenting improves when it is practiced as a skilled craft, as does
citizenship.” This is a sweeping claim but not, as will hopefully become clear, one
without supporting evidence. People define themselves and are defined by their
work. Being able to take pride in one’s work would therefore seem to be a fairly

12

universal need. But, as Sennett is careful to point out, craft properly understood
doesn’t allow for airy, personal standards of success. Rather, “craftsmanship
focuses on objective standards, on the thing in itself” (2008). There are no green
participant ribbons in the world of craft. Either the wheel fits the axle or it does not.
Either the patient is cured or he is not. Either the program works or it does not.
The idea that happiness in work is intimately related to the results of one’s work
did not, of course, originate with Sennett. The first critic of the declining
craftsmanship to place the phenomenon in a full-fledged theoretical framework was
Marx, who propounded his theory of worker alienation in the 1840s. It held, in brief,
that alienation of the industrial worker was two-fold. First, unlike artisans and
craftsmen, industrial workers did not own the means of production. They had to do
as directed by capital; they had little job autonomy in the parlance of 20th and 21st
century job satisfaction researchers. Second, industrial workers were alienated from
the products of their work; they only performed a part of the process and they left the
finished product with the employer.
Among actual workers, in contrast to theorists, the sense of something having
been lost with the decline of craft dates to the 18th century and the beginnings of the
Industrial Revolution. This first alienation is outlined in E. P. Thompson’s seminal
The Making of the English Working Class (1966), which traced the rise of English
labor radicalism from the 1790s through the Chartist movement of the 1830s and
1840s. Unlike Marx and traditional Marxist historians, Thompson was not a historical
determinist, and he did not view the formation of a self-conscious working class as
inevitable. He emphasized the agency of workers in creating labor radicalism. In

13

Thompson’s view, the crucial development was the formation of class
consciousness—not the objective fact of social class as it had been for Marx. That is
to say that Thompson emphasized the development of the working class’s
awareness of itself as a class and the recognition of its discrete class interests as
the point at which class could become a motor for history. In a complex world, there
are a lot of potential sources of identity; nationality, religion, race, ethnicity, and
gender foremost among them. There was nothing inevitable and, taking the long
view, something quite rare about class being the defining issue in society. It
transpired that Marx happened to have lived and written during one of those rare
times, and he projected his experience backward (and forward) across the entirety of
human experience. Seen through Thompson’s lens, Marx was a great scholar, yes,
but very much a peculiar product of his particular place and time.
In the U.S., the New Labor Historians of 1970s and 1980s likewise went
somewhat beyond the traditional Marxist critique of de-skilling and the alienation of
the workers from the products of their labor. Drawing on Thompson, they took as
their subject changing work habits and the culture of work. Nor, per this new school,
was class consciousness the lens through which to view most workers’ lived
experience. Recall that Thompson documented one of the relatively few episodes in
all history in which class can be said to have had primacy. The New Labor Historians
suggested that small-c culture—the complex of norms, values, and customs all
internalize mostly without realizing it—defined workers’ existence more than
anything as high-minded as labor relations. This was particularly the case in a nation
that never really developed a politically powerful radical labor tradition. In the U.S.,

14

workers found satisfaction within rich ethnocultural communities and the various
cultural practices therein: religion, song, sport, cuisine, extensive kin networks, etc.
One of the myriad cultural expressions through which workers located identity and
meaning was pride in craft. In short, the New Labor History took a much more
inclusive view of working people’s experience. They found that workers created
meaning for themselves in any number of ways that had nothing to do with class
warfare. This was Thompson with a twist: the agency of working people still took
center stage but that agency was not always, or even usually, exercised to advance
class interests conventionally understood. The key works in this tradition are
Gutman’s Work Culture and Society in Industrializing America (1976), a collection of
essays from over a decade’s worth of work which promoted the idea that working
lives were far too complex to be understood solely through the lens of labor
relations. Wilentz explored the political dimension of artisans’ lives in Jacksonian
New York (1983), arguing that workers expressed their anger at industrialization and
the decline of craft—and, by the way, having to complete with free black and slave
craftsmen, a point often elided by white liberal historians—through the vehicle of
radical Jacksonian Democratic activism. In a Southern context, the New Labor
History is most associated with Hall et al.’s Like a Family (1988), which documented
the relationships and folkways which sustained southern millworkers in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Beginning in the 1930s and continuing over the following two decades, AT&T
executive and management thinker Chester Barnard consistently emphasized both
monetary and non-monetary incentives for workers, including pride in one’s work, to

15

improve organizational efficiency (Mahoney, 2002). For the psychologist Abraham
Maslow, who influenced a generation of management thought beginning in the
1940s, self-actualization rested atop his famous pyramid of human needs (1997).
Other leading lights of twentieth century management thought have followed up on
this central insight. McGregor sought to instill a new set of assumptions about
workers which he termed Theory Y, stressing workers’ capacity to assume
responsibility and initiative in their jobs so long as they understood their stake in the
organization and were able to work toward goals they understood (2005). Over a
long and mind-numbingly productive career as a management scholar and
consultant, Peter Drucker advocated for managers bringing workers into the
decision-making and goal-setting processes. Among other things, workers often
knew as much or more about the workings of an organization than managers.
Moreover, Drucker’s thinking went, giving employees a stake in the planning and
outcomes of an organization would naturally make them more motivated workers
(1967; 1977; 1998). Someone of a Marxian bent could, with a minimum of
intellectual contortion, characterize much management thought of the twentieth
century as seeking to re-connect alienated workers with the products of their labor
without having management relinquish fundamental control of the process.
Such a reconnection became necessary because of the rise and the uniquely
alienated circumstances of the modern information professional. According to
communications scholar Beniger (1986), information work went from accounting for
less than one percent of the US civilian labor force 1800 to roughly half of it in 1980.
Since that time, this increase has continued apace although the percentage would

16

vary according to one’s definition of information work. It may be more accurate to
say that while people who work with their hands continue to make up over 30
percent of the U.S. workforce at a conservative estimate, information work has
constituted a larger and larger part of their job or, alternatively, that the lines
between information and other kinds of work have increasingly blurred. Workers
with an information-work component to their job would approach 100 percent in the
developed world. This point will emerge more fully later in the review. For now, it is
enough to note that the problem of having more information workers in a society,
from a job satisfaction perspective, is a problem precisely to the extent that such
work tends to be more abstract in nature than most kinds of manual labor, and its
results commensurately less observable. When information work really began to
take root in the nineteenth century, it did so in large corporations. Once companies
reached a certain critical mass, in order to keep track of large and complex
operations, they required dedicated workers for this task; bean counters just count,
do not actually produce, beans. Information work is thus “born” alienated in the
Marxist sense. And as corporate/governmental operations grew ever more
distended, the information professionals charged with managing them tracked ever
smaller pieces of the overall operation. Not only, then, were they alienated from any
sort of productive labor in the traditional sense but as organizations grew, like deskilled industrial workers, their contribution often grew increasingly smaller to the
point of being imperceptible.
More recently, Crawford (2005) has placed information workers’ alienation in a
new context. A fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture at the

17

University of Virginia and owner of a small motorcycle repair concern in Richmond,
Crawford counsels that one answer to the problems posed by information work is to
leave the office altogether and learn a manual trade. Become a mechanic or a
plumber. Enter careers which cannot be outsourced, which will always be around,
and which, lastly, pay better than the typical cubicle-track job. He posits a kind of
localistic resistance to globalizing tendencies akin to the setting up of farmer’s
markets and co-ops. According to Crawford, only an irrational cultural prejudice
against blue-collar work prevents people who would be better served learning a
trade from doing so. There is one not-insubstantial roadblock to the fulfillment
Crawford’s vision of a virtuous, neo-Jeffersonian republic of small craftsmen.
Namely, unless the world adopts Crawford’s and the anti-globalists’ call to halt
globalization in its tracks—and there is no indication this is happening in any
meaningful way—his book amounts to an unusually erudite self-help manual. Some
small number of office drones may be able to learn a craft and find happiness that
way. Since the majority of jobs being created in the global economy are for
information work, what good does Crawford’s advice do all the people who must fill
those positions? Crawford’s advice, in other words, may be taken by this or that
individual, but it is hardly good advice for society as a whole. Or as Kelefa Sanneh
asked in her New Yorker review of Crawford’s polemic, “if the demand for mechanics
is basically inelastic, how can [the mass migration of former office workers into the
trades] offset other trends?”
Modern information workers would thus seem caught in a tightening vise of
malaise for which there is no precedent. Unlike Thompson’s nineteenth-century

18

English workers, the modern information worker cannot find solace in class solidarity
(most wear white or off-white collars). And unlike American industrial workers of the
19th and 20th centuries, the deracinated workers of the new economy are less likely
to take comfort or find meaning in close-knit ethnocultural communities. Sennett has
been particularly pointed in his criticism of the new economy, and he is especially
keen on this point: i.e., the absence of community, traditionally defined, and the
implications that has for modern work. In The Corrosion of Character, he tracks the
decline of a Boston bakery. Formerly an exclusively Greek bakery, specializing in
Greek baked goods and with Greek employees, it had expanded and now made
what the market required: 100 bagels today, 100 loaves of French bread tomorrow.
The workforce was no longer even nominally Greek. And yes, this was not one’s
traditional information work job. Except that it was. The process of baking bread was
broken down into tens of timed components, Ray Kroc-style. The “bakers”
themselves manipulated screens to do their work but they did not have the skills
actually to fix the machines, let alone any concrete understanding of how to make
bread. The problem, as Sennett saw it, was not that the machines are hostile to
them and are taking away their craft in the sense that 19th-century workers were
rendered redundant by industrial technology. The problem was that the machines
were too user-friendly. They did all the work. Task difficulty is anathema in a world
where a flexible workforce is the rule. Employers need their transient workforce to be
able to pick up the skills to bake bread (or perform whatever task) quickly, and that
means having a user-friendly system in place where machines do most of the work
and employees are interchangeable. Sennett: “When we diminish difficulty and

19

resistance, we create the very conditions of uncritical and indifferent activity on the
part of the users.” In other words, the needs of our global, dynamic, informationcentric society demand that work be simplified. And this militates against the any
real self-actualization in work. Here Sennett seems to channel American historian
Christopher Lasch who made an almost tiresome habit of excoriating Frederick
Winslow Taylor and scientific managers generally for their “expropriation of craft
knowledge formerly controlled by the workers” (1987).
Another aspect of a flexible, polyglot workforce always in flux is that it weighs
against the growth of the kinds of cultural communities that made life meaningful for
many nineteenth-century industrial workers. Even though they may not have found
meaning in their work, they were able to find meaning in their culture, their
community. With satisfaction at work on the wane and no similarly robust traditional
communities to tap into, the question becomes how information workers will find
meaning or identity. Florida (2003) has provided something of a counterweight to the
doom and gloom of Marx, Sennett, Crawford, et al. Citing the growth of “knowledgebased professionals,” he argues that “The numbers of people doing creative work
has increased vastly over the past century and especially over the past decade.”
This rise will continue, Florida predicts, and those cities, regions, nations who do the
most to attract the creative classes will benefit commensurately.
There is some evidence for Florida’s optimism in the LIS literature. Indiana
University librarian Mark Tyler Day wrote as early as the mid-1990s about the need
to “humanize information technology” and how his library tried to do this with
electronic texts. This effort has eventuated in the increasingly vital digital humanities

20

project. The project obviously picked up considerable momentum since then with
the establishment and growth of countless online cultural repositories. In “The
Knowledge Smiths: Librarianship as Craftship of Knowledge,” Yonathan Mizrachi
(1998) made the connection between a new kind of librarianship and craft explicit.
He argued that the growth of the internet and more complex information
environments meant that “librarians and information specialists can no longer
maintain their traditional, relatively passive role, and should aspire to become active
participants in knowledge seeking.” Instead, they will “be called to intervene and
assist users in context of higher levels of information processing (knowledge,
understanding, reflection, and application).” He modestly concluded that the “main,
and perhaps the somewhat revolutionary, implication” of his article was that “the
centre of gravity in the information professional’s practice and training should move
from data and information retrieval and mediation to nothing short of acting as
knowledge seekers, editors, and interpreters.” Computer Scientist William Waite
similarly invoked an element of craft as essential to “the design, construction and
operation of efficient and economical structures, equipment and systems” (1996).
And of course, craft is assumed by the metaphor of information architecture.
Whether and to what extent librarians see themselves as practicing a craft and
whether the more “active” role for librarians posited by Mizrachi has materialized in
the years since his article is one of the central questions addressed by this
dissertation.

21

2.4

The Development of Professions
Although some professions like medicine and law trace their origins `to medieval

times or even antiquity, it was really only in the nineteenth century that professions
developed as they are constituted today, with formal associations, licensure, codes
of ethics, and the other barriers to practice. According to Bledstein (1977),
professionalization occurred in the U.S. first with the establishment of scientific
medicine over its folksier competitors and then with the creation of the first
university-level professional schools, notably in accounting, architecture, various
branches of the professoriate, and the law. The formal study of professionalization
began in the 20th century with the full emergence of various flavors of social
science, especially sociology. There exist four major schools of thought on the
subject: Functionalism, Monopolism, what may be termed the “Professions as
Embodiment of Pre-Modern Values” school, and “System-ism.”
Early studies of professionalism from the 1930s and 1940s tended to focus on
case studies of individual professions and on the enumeration of professional
characteristics such as education, organization, and ethics. According to the
Functionalists, the most prominent being Talcott Parsons, professions were the
logical upshot of the emergence of experts in various fields. The very fact that
scientifically trained experts now existed, in contrast to pre-modern specialists
whose knowledge was grounded in trial-and-error and folk wisdom, required
patients/clients to recognize this expertise and defer to it. And it required
professionals to recognize one another in a spirit of collegiality and collaboration.

22

Professions, in other words, were the logical conclusion of the emergence of the first
real experts.
A product of the politically radicalized atmosphere of the 1960s and 1970s,
Monopolists argued that professions emerged not as a natural consequence of
expertise but because groups of “experts” aggressively tried to claim for themselves
pieces of the emerging white-collar work landscape for themselves and to control
them. According to Larson (1977), professions were first and foremost creatures of
the market, created to exercise control over, and derive profits from, given areas of
practice. This line of thinking was taken to its logical, endearingly nutty extreme by
Collins in his 1979 book The Credential Society. Collins posited the growth of a
“sinecure sector” dedicated to “political” (i.e., non-productive) labor as more and
more actual work was done by machines. Since all these sinecures by definition did
not perform meaningful work, there was no way to determine the best fit for a given
professional job. Credentialing bodies and systems emerged to determine which
nonentity got to occupy which superfluous post.
In a similar vein, the historian Samuel Haber argued that the rise of
professionalism represented something of an anti-meritocratic backlash to modern
work culture. According to Haber, the professions occupy a singular place in the
universe of modern work. Unlike the functionalists and the monopolists, Haber saw
professions not as forward-looking exemplars of modernity nor as cynical faux-guilds
but as throwbacks to the pre-modern values of authority, honor, and duty. That is to
say that in an increasingly impersonal world in which labor is debased,
professionalism was an attempt to rescue work from rationalization and imbue it with

23

meaning. In this sense, Haber sounds very like the critics who decry the decline of
craft in modern work and seems to see in professionalism a response to the same
processes that deskilled artisans. While professions freed their members up from
some of the more vexing aspects of supervision and protected them from the
vagaries of the market, they also provided them with a sense of community and
purpose. Haber likewise opposed the view of professions as constituting a system
(more about which below). He instead portrayed the world as a place where people
are not always rational actors, where they act on mixed motives, and where they
sometimes adopt values that may not seem to accord with the world in which they
live.
Propounded by sociologist Andrew Abbott in the late 1980s, “system-ism”
represents the most widely accepted model of how professions rise and evolve.
Although diametrically opposed, Abbott pointed out, functionalists and monopolists
shared some basic assumptions: They saw professions as an occupational group,
and they saw them as mostly exclusive. By contrast, Abbott emphasized the
interrelation and competition between professions; professions cannot be
understood by isolated case studies of given professions, but must be understood in
relation to one another. It is true, Abbott thought, that professions are formed to
control an area or, more accurately, areas of practices. What previous
interpretations missed, though, was that professions are constantly at war with other
professions at the edge of their expertise. Only within the context of this struggle
does the growth of professions make sense. Cast another way: Why would doctors

24

feel the need to create the AMA if their expertise was sufficient to ensure their
status?
The particular focus of this dissertation, of course, is the information
professions. Abbott defined them as those professions which sought to “help clients
overburdened with material from which they cannot retrieve usable information”
(1988). According to Beniger in The Control Revolution (1988), the advent of large
numbers of information professionals (in what Abbot calls the “quantitative task
area”) is the logical outcome of the industrial revolution. Only once industrialists and
corporations were producing a certain number of widgets did it become incumbent
on them to hire armies of clerks, accountants, and middle managers. According to
Abbott, information work can be divided into two mostly distinct categories: the
qualitative and quantitative task areas.
The qualitative task area comprises, effectively, librarians. Or at least it did
when The System of Professions came out in 1988. Another example of a
profession in this area is journalism. Although there are schools of journalism,
professional associations, etc. it is not particularly successful as a profession
because it is highly permeable. The historically larger and more market-oriented of
the two branches of information work, the quantitative work task area has also had
the more contested history. Accounting is the anchor profession of the quantitative
task work area, which also encompasses economists, statisticians, and business
consultants.
In the US, librarians originally carved out the niche of handling the printed
resources of colleges, schools, cultural institutions, corporations, and communities

25

(Garrison, 1979). Librarians made attempts to expand their function to include
education and outreach in the 19th century, but were rebuffed by teachers and
subject specialists. Under the leadership of Melvil Dewey, in the late nineteenth
century the profession began to take the shape it would retain for over a century. It is
rare to be able to claim that individuals have much agency in shaping history. But
one has to say that Dewey’s decisions, personality, and organizational zeal in the
late nineteenth century did a lot to shape the profession over the course of following
century and more (Wiegand, 1986). Special librarianship was one of the few
attempts by librarians to expand their purview. It was an example of librarians trying
to stake out professional space for themselves within private companies, and it met
with limited success.
The emergence of librarianship in the late nineteenth century makes perfect
sense in the context of the US’s unprecedented transformation during this period.
According to the historian Robert Wiebe in his historical synthesis of the Gilded Age
and Progressive-Era U.S., “America during the nineteenth century was a society of
island communities,” characterized by poor communication, limited knowledge
accumulation, intense localism, close kinship, and community ties. Transportation
and market revolutions upset this deeply parochial scheme. In island communities,
“power was personal.” Interested parties could easily discern the power brokers in
their locality, and make sense of their small cosmos. Increasingly, though,
knowledge of the local community was insufficient to account fully for one’s situation.
For the first time, state and national authorities and global markets began to impinge
on local lives in meaningful and sometimes ruinous ways. While fence laws

26

emanating from state capitals made subsistence farming lifestyles—which had
characterized settled human existence since the invention of agriculture—
impracticable for most, fluctuations in grain and cotton prices based on production of
the same goods in Africa or Asia rendered farm production for the market
increasingly problematic. All the while, urbanization, mass immigration, and mass
communication contributed to a more and more “distended society,” which could no
longer be understood in local terms. There were two responses to this. One could
resist centralizing forces as in the cases of the populist movement and radical labor
unionism. Alternatively, one could try to order a world made incomprehensible by illunderstood forces in the manner of the Progressive reformers of the early 20th
century. Librarianship was of a piece with the efforts of Progressives to introduce
order into a radically disordered society.
The literature on Southern librarianship specifically resembles the literature on
professions during its functionalist phase: i.e., there are many case studies but very
few attempts at synthesis as yet. Still, there is a lot material, much of it quite good.
For North Carolina alone, the selection is rich. To begin, there are the superb
biographical studies of Louis Round Wilson by Robert S. Martin and Maurice F.
Tauber. Noteworthy, too, are articles by Patrick Valentine, which variously explore
antebellum print culture in North Carolina, the state’s public library movement in the
first half of the 20th century, and the story of Raleigh’s first black public library. A
series penned by Elizabeth H. Smith for North Carolina Libraries ably laid out the
major milestones for the state’s libraries from 1905 forward. When one casts his or
her net for books and articles about the history of southern librarianship generally,

27

the number of useful works multiplies. Much of the focus has been on ways in which
libraries and library schools served as loci of early integration (Churchwell, 1998;
Graham, 1998; Lipscomb, 2004) or as centers of learning for underserved AfricanAmerican populations (Albritton, 1998; Graham,, 1998; Spooner, 2001; Valentine,
1998; Wheeler, 2004). This literature also includes an article on libraries as an
expression of the South’s “Culture of Resentment” (Carmichael, 2005), which, while
a real enough phenomenon, does not really pass muster as an explanation of library
expansion. Beyond that, there have been few efforts to venture a unified theory of
“Southern librarianship” as such. The fact is, the South has always been more
diverse than has been generally supposed and libraries in the upper South have
always had as much in common with those in lower tier northern states as with those
in the Deep South. For an extended meditation on the evolution of librarianship in
the state of North Carolina, please see Appendix II.

28

Chapter 3
Research Design and Methodology

3.1

Data Source
This study used survey data collected by the Workforce Issues in Library and

Information Science (WILIS) study funded by the Institute of Museum and Library
Services (IMLS) between 2005 and 2012 (http://www.wilis.unc.edu/). The purpose
of WILIS 1 was to “to build an in-depth understanding of educational, workplace,
career and retention issues faced by LIS graduates” (Marshall et al., 2009). More
broadly, it was to discern patterns in the careers of LIS graduates over time and
across programs.
A collaborative effort on the part of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill’s School of Information and Library Science and UNC Institute on Aging, WILIS
is a study in three phases. The first phase, WILIS 1, was an in-depth retrospective
career study that included all graduates of five LIS master’s degree programs and
one paraprofessional program in the state from 1964 to 2005. Programs included in
the survey were the Appalachian State University Library Science Program; the East
Carolina University Department of Library Science and Instructional Technology; the
North Carolina Central University School of Library and Information Sciences; the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Information and Library

29

Science; the University of North Carolina at Greensboro Department of Library and
Information Studies; and the paraprofessional Central Carolina Community College
Library and Information Technology Program. Graduates of UNC-Chapel Hill SILS
up to 2007 were also surveyed. The diversity of the programs studied is one of the
signal strengths of the WILIS 1 data. They ranged from programs at Research I
universities rated among the best iSchools in the nation to ALA-accredited programs
with significant online, night, and weekend offerings to accommodate working adults
to departments in larger schools tasked with training school librarians to the
community college paraprofessional program. The diversity of types of LIS schools
in one state is one of the rare if not unique advantages to setting the study in North
Carolina.
The second phase, WILIS 2, used the recent graduates’ portion of the WILIS
1 survey to create and test an alumni tracking system that all LIS master’s programs
could conceivably use in the future. WILIS 3 is preparing and archiving the WILIS 1
and two datasets in the Dataverse Network system maintained by the Odum Institute
for Research in Social Sciences at UNC Chapel Hill (http://arc.irss.unc.edu/dvn/).
The present work makes use only of the data from the original WILIS 1
survey. The first step in building the census was to have the six participating
programs furnish alumni lists. From there, the study staff attempted to confirm
contact information utilizing web searches, the AlumniFinder Search Service, and
postcards advertising the study and requesting subject replies. In addition, the staff
posted announcements of the study to potential subjects on relevant discussion
boards and listservs. The population for this project totaled roughly 9,000 subjects.

30

The WILIS 1 survey instrument was modeled after that of the WANE
(Workforce Aging in the New Economy) study and used many of the same career
questions, making it ideal for comparative purposes. WANE was a three-phase
international comparative study of information technology employment carried out by
academic researchers in Australia, Canada, the European Union, and the United
States. It attempted to determine what counted as work in the IT industry; whether IT
firms were cognizant of aging workforces; if so, how and if they accommodated
aging workers; what barriers existed to entry into IT work; and how companies
fostered new skills (http://www.wane.ca/overview.htm). Since WANE was something
of the model for WILIS1 particularly and since it speaks to a lot of the concerns
addressed herein in a different but related context, the corpus of work produced by
the WANE team since 2002 will be something of a measuring stick against which the
results of the present study may be profitably compared. WANE provides, in other
words, valuable context for this dissertation across national and professional
borders. Since it deals specifically with IT workers, it also offered opportunities for
comparison with the WILIS data (McMullin and Marshall, 2010).
The WILIS one survey came in two versions: one for professionals and one
with wording changes for paraprofessionals. Both versions were available to
respondents online but could be physically mailed to them upon request. The survey
combined closed- and open-ended questions. It asked respondents about up to six
jobs: one’s job before entering an LIS program, first job after the LIS degree, current
job, last job, longest job, and highest-achieving job. For each job the survey asked

31

respondents about several potential sources of job satisfaction including pay,
benefits, mobility, intrinsic rewards, nature of work, autonomy, and co-workers.
The WILIS team took preliminary measures to ensure the validity of the
survey instrument and an adequate response rate. In the first instance, a pilot study
was conducted in March 2007 with 750 random subjects from the population. In the
second, the WILIS team carried out a survey of 400 random non-responders to
ascertain causes of non-response and to try to adapt the framing of the study
accordingly to potential subjects. One-hundred forty-four non-responders took the
time to take this second survey. The most important common reason cited for failure
to participate in the pilot study (33%) was lack of time. One upshot of these efforts
was that the WILIS team concluded the respondent pool to be representative of the
population they wished to study. Another was a general “tightening-up” of the survey
in which researchers validated the survey skip logic and edited the document to
render it as concise as was consistent with getting a reasonably complete overview
of subjects’ LIS careers. As a result of these efforts, the final research instrument is
simultaneously exhaustive and taut. In printed form, the full survey stretches to some
93 pages and provides a solid impression of subjects’ education, career trajectory,
and sources of job satisfaction as LIS workers. One respondent pointed out a
potential difficulty with the long format. “This is a very, very long survey that took a
long time to complete,” she wrote. “I wonder how that fact will affect the final results.
Will it mostly describe the situations of the extremely passionate and the extremely
disgruntled? I hope not. I hope you get a broader response.”

32

WILIS researchers made special efforts to guard against that possibility. In
September 2007, they made the survey available to the 7,563 subjects whose
contact information they could confirm. They sent subjects notifications via mail and
email with log-in instructions and a two-dollar bill incentive. The survey was taken
down in December. In that time, 2,653 of the 7,563 completed surveys resulting in
an approximate participation rate of 35%. The survey yielded 1,700 variables for
potential analysis. Fully three quarters of respondents were from the southeastern
United States with 57 percent from North Carolina, and respondents’ average age
was 32.7 years. Nonwhite respondents constituted only 11 percent of the sample.
Seventy-six percent were employed fulltime, and 20 percent were retired.

3.2

Data Subset
In section B of the survey, there were questions that asked (a) whether the

subject is currently employed and (b) whether she or he considers her/himself a
librarian, an information professional, neither, or both. The current project analyzed
the data of subjects identifying themselves as librarians only and not of those who
identifying primarily as an “information worker” or by another label. The reason for
this, on the one hand, was a wish on my part to place a manageable limit on the
data needing to be analyzed. It also represented an effort to make the study
population as comparable to those of previous studies of librarianship as possible for
comparison’s sake. Since one of the central aims of the study is to view an oftstudied topic through a different theoretical lens, it seemed advisable to confine my
focus primarily to librarians in order to see how the application of craft to the

33

question of librarian job satisfaction changed the existing, well-established portrait.
Still, this dissertation will of necessity touch on the subject of librarians’ relationship
to other information workers as professional boundaries shift and settle and shift
again. There is also the fact that those indicating that they considered themselves
both librarians and information were part of the sample. Information workers who
happen not to work in a library setting will therefore not be escaping scrutiny
altogether, but neither will they be the focus of the study. Having chosen to focus on
librarians, several subjects were eliminated based on non-response to one or
another question corresponding to variables such as income, supervisory status, or
co-workers. This process eventuated in a data set of 1,883 working librarians. No
further data were collected.

3.3 Data Analysis Plan
Most of the data analysis for this dissertation was quantitative, and SPSS
version 15.0 was used to analyze that data. Each research question examined
several variables among the more than 1,700 in the WILIS 1 dataset as they applied
to the study sample. Variables were selected from sections A (Demographics and
Education);B (Job History); F (Current Job); G (Last Job); H (Longest Job); and J
(Breaks in Employment) of the survey.
The first research question asks how variables that represented one or more
of the nine facets of the Job Satisfaction Survey interacted with job satisfaction. The
Job Satisfaction Survey was chosen as a reasonably objective means of selecting
variables to correlate with job satisfaction for two reasons. In the first place it was

34

comprehensive, with its nine facets covering most conceivable workplace-related
sources of job satisfaction. The second reason the JSS was chosen was that it could
be freely used and modified for noncommercial research and educational purposes.
The job satisfaction variable used comprised the survey questions F36C, F36D, F36;
this scale was arrived at in a process described in Chapter 4.
The variables analyzed in relation of job satisfaction for the first question
(“How do job satisfaction levels vary across age, sex, job level, job type, length of
career, and other factors?”) were: age (question A17); sex (A20); race (A19); income
(A22); benefits (F26-F28h); organization type (F1a); organization size (F1c); job
level (F15); opportunity for advancement (F35c); and two co-workers variables (G14
and G15). Three discrete regression analyses were run. In the first, only traditional
workplace-related variables that have correlated with job satisfaction in past studies
were considered. The reason this tack was taken was to gauge how closely this
population resembled those surveyed in previous LIS job satisfaction studies. With
this baseline in place, some judgment could be made regarding the typicality of this
group before moving onto the analysis of less-studied variables. Initially, only two
regressions were planned, but another regression—which became the second of the
three—was run because of an unexpected finding with regard to older workers
(Chapter 4). In the third regression, all the variables related to family dynamics and
craft and professional achievement were entered. In other words, the first two
regressions represent mostly an attempt to answer research question one while the
third regression’s aim is to answer questions two and three.

35

Variables analyzed for research question number two (“How do librarians
accommodate life/work balance? How does the balance vary between male and
female librarians and how has it shifted over time and across successive jobs? To
what extent do sex and household dynamics affect job satisfaction? Are
breadwinners more or less likely to be satisfied?”) were: sex; income; breadwinner
or not (F39); parenting responsibilities (J5); and job satisfaction (F36C, F36D,
F36E). Variables analyzed for research question number three (“What role does
craft play in job satisfaction? Does increased job instability result in a commensurate
increase in the importance of craft in work?”) were craft and job satisfaction. The
craft variable, like that for job satisfaction, was a summative scale comprising survey
questions F10A, F35A, F35B, F35E, and F35F. The creation of this measure is
described in Chapter 4.
In addition to the closed-ended questions, the survey provided several
opportunities for respondents to add texture to the strictly quantitative data. These
included, notably, a question near the outset of the survey asking subjects to give a
career overview. The survey likewise gave respondents chances to express, in their
own words, how they viewed their professional identity; why they entered the LIS
field; how they would describe their work setting(s); why they left given jobs or the
profession as a whole; what they would change about their jobs; and any other
information about their education or career that they felt was not captured by the
other survey questions. Several questions gave subjects the option of elaborating an
answer if they felt their response was not covered by the survey’s existing
categories.

36

I used these open-ended responses to two ends in Chapter 5. First, openended responses often summarized or otherwise bore out findings from the strictly
statistical analysis. The other way in which open-ended responses were used was to
highlight phenomena that did not show up as statistically significant. One of the
benefits of being able to work with this large a sample was that it gave me a lot of
latitude in terms of how many variables one could add to the model without
compromising it. But reading through the open-ended responses it struck me that
another way in which a large sample is useful is that it allows researchers a chance
not only to examine the central tendencies of their population but also to look at its
diversity of experience. Put another way, there were a lot of thoughtful and/or telling
responses in the data that bore no particular relation to the statistical data but which
were deemed worthy of consideration by virtue of the quality or even the uniqueness
of the response. In order to make the analysis manageable, its focus was narrowed
to responses to the 15 questions listed in Table 1. Questions were chosen either
because they spoke most directly to the questions of job satisfaction or professional
identity or because they seemed likely to evoke responses that testified to the
population’s breadth of professional experience. Although the author avoided the
use of block quotes, an attempt has been made, insofar as possible, to let the
subjects speak for themselves, adding only necessary contextualizing information to
their responses.

37

TABLE 1: OPEN-ENDED WILIS1 QUESTIONS ANALYZED
Question
No.
A8a

Question

Intro_B-Text

If you were going to provide someone with a brief overview of your career over time,
including both LIS and Non-LIS positions, what would you tell them?

F23

Why would you like to change the number of hours you work in a typical week?

F58

Please describe how your treatment has been affected by each of the following…

F58a

Race or ethnicity

F58b

Sex

F58c

Being considered too young

F58d

Being considered too old

F58e

Mental or physical disability

F58f

National origin

F58g

Family responsibilities

F58h

Sexual orientation

F58i

Religion or religious beliefs

F68

Why do you feel there is pressure for middle aged workers to retire early?

QEND

It is important to our study that we have an understanding of your entire career
history. If this survey did not give you the opportunity to address your most important
positions, gaps in your employment, or other issues you believe would be relevant to
a more accurate representation of your career, please share this information with us
now.

Please list them [other factors motivating the subject to enter an LIS program]

38

Chapter 4
Data Analysis
4.1

Introduction and First Research Question
This chapter begins by attempting to answer the dissertation’s first research

question: How do job satisfaction levels vary across age, sex, job level, job type,
length of career, and other factors? Key variables include job satisfaction, age, sex,
race, pay, benefits, organization type, organization size, job level, opportunity for
advancement, and co-workers. For this question, the study population will be
defined as currently working library professionals who have graduated from LIS
master’s programs in North Carolina. Respondents to the survey tended to remain in
the region but they also emigrated elsewhere, predominantly within the US, with
roughly three-quarters settling in the Southeast. The reason for focusing on this
population is that the study proceeds from the proposition that librarians have been
on balance very satisfied with their job (Albanese, 2008; Kuzyk, 2008). The study
does not look for change over time as much as it tries to identify the sources of
librarian job satisfaction. Factors to be assessed were selected because they fitted
under one of the Job Satisfaction Survey (JSS)’s nine facets (Spector, 1985). (For a
full listing of the 36 individual items in the JSS—four corresponding to each facet—
see Appendix III.) Using analysis of variance and ordinary least squares regression,
the present study looks at how these variables interact with each other along with

39

other personal characteristics such as age, sex, and race to produce satisfaction. As
the LIS literature has few studies of job satisfaction that include librarians across
settings, an inductive and exploratory approach was taken to building the analytic
strategy. Each piece of further analysis is aimed at applying theoretical insights that
emerge from my interpretation of the data. As such, the methodology is not laid out
in a traditional quantitative approach. Rather, insights gleaned from the literature,
qualitative findings and quantitative analyses are used to inform decision making
from one research question and one analysis strategy to the next.

4.2

Descriptive Results: Job Satisfaction
Questions were chosen from the WILIS1 survey to create a summative scale

to measure job satisfaction (henceforth, JOBSAT): F36C (“Overall, I am satisfied
with what I do in my job”); F36D (“I am generally happy with my CURRENT work
environment”); F36E (“I still like my job.”) and F37 (“Knowing what I know now, if I
had to decide all over again, I would still decide to take the job I now have”). These
questions were chosen because they spoke, or seemed to speak, most directly to
contentment with one’s job. Further, these questions have been used to measure job
satisfaction in several long standing surveys such as the Quality of Employment
Survey (Quinn and Staines, 1984).
In order to ensure that the summative scale worked and would lend itself to
analysis, a preliminary feasibility study was conducted. To increase the internal
consistency reliability of JOBSAT (in other words, to ensure that when respondents
answered the four selected questions they were speaking substantively about the

40

same thing), it was determined that F37 be dropped using the alpha if item deleted
statistic. The metric that was used for job satisfaction, then, was
F36C+F36D+F36E/3 (Cronbach’s alpha=.905). For this, as with the other questions,
qualitative data were utilized to support and complement the statistical findings.
Using listwise deletion, cases with missing data on the variables of interest
were removed from the final analytic sample. Subjects selected into the JOBSAT
analysis by indicating that they considered themselves librarians and that they were
currently employed. Subjects were then eliminated who did not answer one or more
questions that map to the 11 variables the researcher wanted to correlate to job
satisfaction. In doing so, the deliberate decision was made to keep the income
variable (which had the highest number of cases missing as it is a sensitive
measure) because it was deemed too central to be left out of the analysis. As it
developed, it proved significant in the model. One-thousand eight-hundred thirtythree subjects had no missing data on any of the variables for the first research
question, and this group constituted my data set. There was a minimum of one and a
maximum of four on the job satisfaction scale (from strongly disagree to strongly
agree on a four-point Likert scale). The mean was 3.2 with a standard deviation of
0.61, meaning subjects rated their level of job satisfaction slightly above “agree” on
the scale. This finding comported with those of most existing librarian job satisfaction
studies (Table 2).

41

TABLE 2: LIS GRADUATE JOB SATISFACTION
N
Jobsat

1833

Valid N (listwise)

1833

Minimum
1.00

Maximum
4.00

Mean
3.1973

Std. Deviation
.60699

In addition, the author conducted a one-way analysis of variance comparing
levels of satisfaction among various types of library and non-library workers. The
different categories of LIS workers used in the analysis were school librarians, public
librarians, academic librarians, special librarians, and non-librarians. The sorting of
subjects into one of five settings categories is discussed in detail in section 4.4. No
significant difference existed between the five categories in job satisfaction.

4.3

Analytic Strategy
In the initial JOBSAT regression, job settings were retained as predictors

because it remained possible that, while no differences emerged in the ANOVA,
there was still a relationship between setting and job satisfaction that was being
masked by other variables. In other words, these variables were included as control
variables. In addition to the five possible job settings, basic demographic information
and variables that corresponded to one of the nine aspects of Spector’s Job
Satisfaction Survey were included. Tables 3, 6, and 7 show the variables inserted
into the regression alongside the questions to which they corresponded on the
WILIS 1 Survey. Altogether 26 variables were used in this first regression, which
was well within the acceptable subject-to-variable ratio range for a sample of this
42

size. Using the recommended 15:1 subject-to-variable ratio for behavioral research,
a regression including 26 variables would have been acceptable with as few 390
subjects (Pedhazur, 1997). It is, however, a sufficiently large number of variables
that they will be addressed as three discrete groups—settings variables,
demographics, and conditions/benefits—for the sake of clarity.

4.4

Measurement: Type of Library Context
Job setting was included in the first analysis because it clearly corresponded

to one of the JSS’s facets, “type and size of organization.” Moreover, job setting has
served as a lens through which numerous LIS scholars have examined job
satisfaction, usually focusing on academic libraries (Glasgow, 1982; Mirfakhrai,
1991) or public libraries (Bartlett, 1998; Goulding, 1991, 1995; Schneider, 1991). In
spite of this, little has been written about the relative satisfaction of librarians working
in different settings. As one can see in the “job setting” question (Table 3),
respondents were given 11 options. For the purposes of data analysis and
coherence, 11 of these options were further sorted into five major settings: school
library, public library, academic library, special library, and non-library. Persons
indicating they worked in a “College/university library” or a “Community
college/technical institute library” were grouped together as “academic librarians.”
Those checking “Health/medical library,” “Law library,” “Corporate library,” or “Other,
special library” were deemed “special librarians.” Subjects who claimed to work for a
“Consortium,” “Federal, state, or local government,” and “Other please specify” were
classified as working in non-library settings. This scheme was not without its

43

drawbacks. One claiming to work for a “consortium,” for example, could plausibly be
said to work in any of three or four of the types of settings listed here, and it is not
clear in instances where respondents checking “federal, state, or local, government”
ought to be classified based on that information alone. But as a rough measure, the
scheme was adequate. It was determined that going into the open-ended responses
to “other, please specify” to determine where each of those respondents ought to be
classified could not be justified in any cost-benefit analysis.

TABLE 3: JOB SETTINGS VARIABLES
Variable
Job setting
(whether
school, public,
academic,
special, or
non-library)

Corresponding Question in WILIS 1
F1a. Which of the following best describes the TYPE OF LIBRARY OR
INFORMATION CENTER you work in: (Possible answers: School library/media
center; Public library; College/university library; Community college/technical
institute library; Consortium; Health/medical library; Law library; Corporate library;
Federal, state, or local government; Other, special library; Other, please specify)

Organization
size

F1c. How many people work at your company or institution (not just your
library/information center or department) at all locations? If self-employed, including
yourself, how many people do you employ? (Possible answers: One; 2-9; 10-24; 2599; 100-499; 500-999; 1000+)

As Table 4 shows, the number of respondents broke out remarkably evenly
among the five settings, with the largest number of subjects working in school library
and non-library settings and academic librarians coming in a close third. This
relatively even distribution simplified comparison by dispensing with small-samplesize concerns. A further reason for inclusion of the job setting variable in this
analysis was that, unlike most other variables in the initial regression analysis, there
is almost nothing written about how levels of job satisfaction vary between types of
library organizations. So unlike organization size, to take the conceptually closest

44

example, previous studies provided no clues as to which way the data would break.
These findings are discussed in detail in section 5.7.

TABLE 4: TYPE OF LIBRARY JOB SETTINGS
Setting Group
Academic library

Total number in Sample (Percent)
432
(23.6 %)

Non-library

442

(24.1%)

Public Library

285

(15.5%)

School Library

442

(24.1%)

Special Library
Total

232
1833

(12.7%)
(100%)

4.5

Measurement: Organization Size
Unlike job setting, there have been several studies addressing the issue of

how organization size affects job satisfaction, both in the LIS and the general job
satisfaction literature. These studies, by and large, say one thing: that working in a
smaller organization correlates with higher job satisfaction (Curry, Wakefield, Price,
and Mueller, 1986; Beer, 1964; O’Toole and Lawler, 2005; Glasgow, 1982). The
main reasons adduced for this were that workers in smaller settings can see more
clearly the ways in which their work contributes to the organization’s proper
functioning and that esprit de corps emerges more naturally in smaller groups.
These factors, in turn, tend to give workers more of a stake in their organization’s
success. This finding complements another common in job satisfaction studies:
namely, that positive co-worker relations are one of the best predictors of job

45

satisfaction. So it was with the WILIS 1 survey as working in larger-sized
organizations correlated negatively with JOBSAT.

4.6

Measurement: Age
Workplace studies going back to the mid-twentieth century have consistently

shown a small positive correlation between advancing age and job satisfaction
(O’Brien and Dowling, 1981; O’Toole and Lawler, 2005). One previous study has
shown the same relationship exists between age/experience and job satisfaction
among librarians (Van Reenan, 1998). This appears to indicate that employees’
satisfaction increases as they move up the career ladder and acquire more status,
control over their own work, and financial security. There could also be a “mellowing”
component to older workers’ reporting greater satisfaction. The expectation was for
there to be a corresponding small increase between age and satisfaction in my
sample. It therefore came as a surprise—one of the few to come out of the first
JOBSAT regression—that age had no significant effect on satisfaction. Since the
issue was not addressed in previous librarian job satisfaction surveys, three
operating theories were evolved for why older LIS graduates did not express greater
satisfaction with their jobs than their younger counterparts. Fortunately, there were
ways of validating all three.
The three theories formulated to explain older workers’ non-tendency toward
greater job satisfaction were as follow, in descending order of plausibility. The first
theory was that because librarianship was a relatively low-paying profession, the
benefits that made other aging workers happier including, notably, higher pay did not

46

accrue to librarians to the same extent. In this scenario, librarians were less likely to
earn the “happiness dividend” that other aging workers did. The case for operating
theory number one would be strengthened if the JOBSAT regression showed salary
to be a predictor of job dissatisfaction. It is worth noting briefly that previous librarian
job satisfaction studies to consider the question have indeed shown this to be the
case so preliminarily there was some reason to think this theory sound (Glasgow,
1982; Mirfakhrai, 1991).
The second operating theory was that the profession of librarianship had
changed so radically in recent years that older (and presumably, mostly longer
tenured) members of the profession felt professionally displaced. This theory made a
certain amount of intuitive sense to the extent that someone entering the profession
20 to 30 years ago would have arguably witnessed more technological change than
all the generations of librarians since the formal founding of the profession in the last
quarter of the nineteenth century. WILIS1 had two batteries of questions seemingly
specially made to test this proposition. Questions F52a-e asked subjects the extent
to which they agreed or disagreed with the statements “COMPARED TO FIVE
YEARS AGO, I am currently required… (a) To perform more new tasks; (b) To
perform more difficult tasks; (c) To perform more high tech tasks; (d) To perform a
wider variety of tasks; and (e) To delegate more of my tasks to assistants.”
Questions F53a-f asked the extent to which respondents agreed or disagreed with
the statements “COMPARED TO FIVE YEARS AGO, I am currently required… (a)
To perform more routine tasks; (b) To work harder; (c) To perform more managerial
functions; (d) To assume a greater leadership role; (e) To perform more financial

47

tasks; and (f) To perform more tasks once done by assistants.” These questions
were included in a second JOBSAT analysis specifically to test the second operating
theory. If it developed that increased workloads or the transformed nature of the
work itself correlated negatively with job satisfaction then that would help explain
why older LIS workers were not as content as previous studies suggested they
would be.
The third operating theory was also, in my view, the least probable. It went
thusly: In a feminized profession like librarianship where pay was low and flexibility
was prized, the “happiness dividend” from moving up in the profession may not be
as large as in other fields. That would be because, so the theory went, librarians
constructed their identity less around their careers than employees in other
professions and more around family or other non-career-related sources of identity.
The researcher developed this theory after having read a number of responses to
open-ended WILIS1 questions that suggested its possibility. Specifically, the theme
of the primacy of family, particularly in relation to one’s career, kept recurring in the
responses to question “Why would you like to change the number of hours you work
in a week?” (F23). “To allow more time for family,” went one representative
response. Another survey respondent confessed a desire “to spend more time with
my family and to enjoy personal interests.” A third complained of “work[ing] too long
and too hard; not enough balance in my life—need more time for self and family.”
These are just a few examples of the family theme, chosen virtually at random. It
would be hard to overstate how prevalent the family theme was in the open-ended
responses. As mentioned above, 14 open-ended questions were chosen for

48

analysis. The large majority of response spaces for these questions were left blank.
Yet there were fully 204 individual responses that mentioned family. This in itself
obviously offers no proof of my operating theory.
It was, though, enough evidence to beg the question: For people this familyfocused—and apparently willing to trade salary potential for flexibility—might jobbased achievement simply not be as rewarding as it is for others? The author will try
to determine whether there is additional support for this theory in the third JOBSAT
regression, which examines family and craft/professionals development variables. If
it happened, for example, that extrinsic rewards such as pay and benefits did not
predict job satisfaction in librarians to the extent they do in other professions, this
non-relationship would go toward supporting the theory.

4.7

Measurement: Sex
One of the most persistent and, for many scholars, bedeviling features of the

job satisfaction literature has been the fact that women report being happier than
men despite having objectively worse jobs. This fact has begotten several agitatedsounding article titles in sociological and economic journals that reverse the
traditional main concern of job satisfaction scholars, which might be stated as “Why
are workers not happier in their jobs?” With titles like “Gender Differences in Job
Satisfaction: Why Aren’t Women More Dissatisfied?” (Hodson, 1989) and “Job
Satisfaction and Gender: Why are Women so Happy at Work?” (Clark, 1997), these
articles make it sound like excessive job satisfaction was a problem wanting a

49

solution. To the extent that women were not given work or paid according to their
qualifications, of course it was.
One seeking a systemic explanation for librarians’ traditionally high levels of
satisfaction could do worse than citing the fact that the large majority of librarians
are, and always have been, women. If a profession is composed mostly of women
and women report being happier in their jobs, it just follows that the field as a whole
should be a fairly content one. But with larger numbers of men entering the LIS
workforce in recent decades, there is a real chance to learn something by comparing
their satisfaction relative to their female counterparts. If men reported being as
happy as women in LIS work, then we could conclude that there is something about
the nature of the work itself that makes workers happy. If, on the other hand, women
reported being happier, then we could reasonably conclude that the fact that
librarianship was a feminized profession accounted, in large measure, for
traditionally high levels of satisfaction. In that case there might be a dispositional
explanation for job satisfaction findings, along the lines of “women are just happier in
general and therefore also happier in their work.” What would seem more likely,
however, would be that women bring different expectations to their work. It turned
out that being a woman was one of the best predictors of job satisfaction in the
sample. This is an important finding the implications of which are explored in the
conclusions chapter (section 5.3).

50

4.8

Measurement: Race/Ethnicity
Race seems not to be much of a factor in the broader job satisfaction

literature. This is not to say that all races are equally happy with their work, only that,
per O’Toole and Lawler (1998), “the primary determining factor appears educational
attainment, not race,” with better-educated workers tending to be much more
satisfied. In other words, racial groups’ job satisfaction appears to be commensurate
with how much education they received. The issue of race’s effect on job satisfaction
is little explored in the LIS literature. To the extent that it has been studied, it seems
not to have impacted satisfaction significantly. Where it has been addressed, race
and library job satisfaction studies have focused on the experiences of AfricanAmericans. Having conducted a survey of African-American librarians, Preston
(1998) concluded that racism was not a significant factor in job satisfaction. A 2000
survey of librarians “of African descent” working in ARL libraries did not find a
statistical relationship between race and satisfaction, but enumerated several
sources of job satisfaction and dissatisfaction so as to help research libraries in their
efforts to recruit and retain persons of color.
This is not to dismiss the impact of race or to suggest that it has no impact on
the shape of minority librarians’ career paths. Given that African-American and other
minority groups have traditionally constituted a much smaller proportion of the LIS
profession than they have of the population at large, clearly there are some barrierto-entry issues that the profession could better address. Additionally, it may be said
that survey research as a research method may be a bit of a blunt instrument when
it comes to assessing the attitudes of special populations. Surveys, it is true, allow

51

researchers to gather a lot of information relatively easy, information that may then
be subjected to quantitative analysis. But there is something like an inverse
relationship between quantity of information gathered and, if not quality, then very
certainly its richness. All of which is to say that, although race appears not to impact
LIS job satisfaction, in cases where special populations are involved, researchers
generalizations should carry the caveat that some sort of qualitative research design
such as unstructured or semi-structured interviews may be more appropriate. The
need of another method to address the reality of special populations’ experience will
also be addressed in the “limitations” section of chapter five (section 5.14).

52

TABLE 5: CONDITIONS/BENEFITS VARIABLES
Variable
Fulltime
worker or not

Corresponding Question in WILIS 1
F8. Are you considered a full-time employee?

Family Income

A22. Roughly, what is the total yearly income before taxes of your immediate
family? This includes: your income, the wages of everyone else in the family who
works, and income from any other sources? (Possible answers: $0-$19,999;
$20,000-$29,999; $30,000-$30,999; $40,000-$49,999; $50,000-$59,999; $60,000$69,999; $70,000-$79,999; $80,000-$99,999; $100,000-$149,999; $150,000 or
more)

Employerprovided
health
insurance or
not
(“Hlthinsemp”
in the model)

F27a-f. Which of the following applies to you? (Possible answers: Purchase health
insurance through employer; Health insurance fully paid by employer; Health
insurance partially paid by employer; Covered by your spouse’s partner’s policy;
Have your own health insurance policy; Other insurance situation) (all respondents
indicating something other than “Health insurance fully paid by employer”=reference
category)

Other kinds of
employerprovided
insurance
(dental, life,
disability, etc.)
(“otherins” in
the model)

F28a-e. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answers: Life insurance;
Disability insurance; Drug plan; Extended health care plan; Dental plan)
(respondents marking none=reference category)

Retirement
Plan (f28fr in
model)

F28f. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer fully
or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Retirement pension plan)

Car
allowance/car
loans (f28hr)

F28h. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Car allowance/car
loans)

Vacation days
(f29fr)

F29f. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer fully
or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Vacation days)

Sick or
personal days
(f29gr)

F29f. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer fully
or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Sick or personal days)

53

TABLE 5: (CONT.): CONDITIONS/BENEFITS VARIABLES
Variable
Professional
membership
(f30dr)

Corresponding Question in WILIS 1
F30d. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Professional
membership)

Flexible hours
(f30er)

F30e. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Flexible working
hours)

Home computer
(f31br)

F31b. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Home computer)

Cellular phone
(f31cr)

F31c. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Cellular phone)

Work away from
office (f31dr)

F31d. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Possibility for work
away from office)

Organized
social activities
(f31fr)

F31f. Which of the following non-salary benefits/incentives does your employer
fully or partially pay for and provide to you? (Possible answer: Organized social
activities)

Supervisor or
not (Supervise
f9)

F9. Do you supervise (manage) other people in this job?

Career
opportunities
(Careeroppf35c)

F35c. Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following
(Possible response spectrum: Four-point Likert scale from “Strongly disagree” to
“Strongly agree”): I believe that I have opportunities for promotion within the field
given my education, skills and experience

Co-worker
cohesion
(coworker1 f13)

F13. I feel I am really a part of the group of people I work with. (Possible response
spectrum: Five-point Likert scale from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree.”)

Co-worker
support
(coworker2 f14)

F14. I have the support from co-workers that I need to do a good job. (Possible
response spectrum: Five-point Likert scale from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly
agree.”)

4.9 Measurement: Full-time Worker or Not
The first workplace variable in the regression was whether subjects claimed
to be full-time workers or not. Although this does not map to one of the 36 items in
the JSS, it could be said to fall under a couple of its nine facets such as benefits, job
54

level, and opportunities for advancement. In any case, there was room for a lot of
variables with a sample size of 1833, and the decision was made to put in anything
in the model that might plausibly affect job satisfaction.

4.10 Measurement: Income
An income variable had to be included because (a) it maps to an entire facet
of the JSS and (b) librarians had complained of poor pay in past job satisfaction
surveys. In the first instance, household income was used instead of annualized
individual income because so many of the respondents emphasized the primacy of
family in relation to work and also because it correlated more closely with job
satisfaction than individual income in a preliminary test. In the first JOBSAT
regression, family income proved to be one of the seven workplace variables to
correlate with job satisfaction. After the three primary regressions were run, a
separate regression was run in which annualized salary replaced family income to
verify that it did not predict job satisfaction. Indeed, it did not predict job satisfaction
in the new regression.
Subsequently, it was decided that the preliminary testing of individual income
versus family income was not sufficient to eliminate it from consideration when other
factors were added into the model. Annualized salary was therefore substituted for
family income in both a stepwise and a block model regression, which were run after
the third regression (Tables 18 and 19, pp. 104-06). In neither model did annualized
salary register as significant.

55

4.11 Measurement: Working Conditions and Benefits
Whether respondents’ employers provided health care or not was an obvious
choice for inclusion in the first JOBSAT regression. It mapped to the benefits facet of
the JSS and seemed obviously like it could have an impact on one’s job satisfaction.
There were six options in the health insurance survey question (F27a-f) covering a
corresponding number of possible coverage situations. For the purposes of the
regression, responses were sorted into two groups and made all responses other
than “Health insurance fully paid by employer” the reference category.
Questions F28 a-e asked respondents whether they received other forms of
insurance from their employer including life insurance, disability insurance, a drug
plan, an extended health care plan, or a dental plan. It was included in the
regression because it corresponded to the “benefits” facet of the JSS and because it
seemed an obvious candidate to affect job satisfaction. For the regression,
responses were sorted into two groups, those who received any kind of insurance
and those who received none, with the reference group being those with no
additional employer-provided insurance.
Question F28f asked respondents whether their employer provided them a
“retirement pension plan.” Although this was part of the same battery of questions as
various insurance plans included in the “other kinds of employer-provided insurance”
variable, “retirement plan” was made its own separate variable for two reasons. The
first was intuitive: A retirement plan just seemed like it could be potentially more
important than the other kinds of insurance with which it was grouped and therefore
worthy of looking at on its own. The second reason was grounded in the literature

56

review. Since more and more employers—particularly in the tech sector where LIS
graduates might be expected to seek work if they left librarianship—were seeking to
shed benefits, it was thought that an employer-provided retirement plan might
constitute a much-valued hedge against financial uncertainty in the current
environment. Whether or not that kind of thinking factored in, the retirement plan was
the only benefit variable to correlate with job satisfaction in the descriptive results.
The problem was that it correlated negatively with JOBSAT. How to explain? One
possibility is that this result is somewhat fluky, to the extent that it barely registered
as significant and that it fell out of significance when other variables were
subsequently added to the model. But the researcher is inclined to think there is
more to it since, in a subsequent model, being a full-time worker also correlated
negatively with job satisfaction. It would develop that it this mild negative association
between having a retirement plan would make sense as a bigger picture emerged of
overtaxed LIS workers deprived of support staff and unable to perform their tasks as
well as they wished. In a context where the quality of work is paramount and pay
and benefits secondary, it made a kind of sense that being full-time worker with
benefits might actually be a slight negative.
The “fluky exception” referred to previously was the fact that, while health,
retirement, and other kinds of insurance failed to correlate positively with job
satisfaction, the one benefit to register in the regression was whether respondents
were given car allowances or car loans. The variable was included as something of
an afterthought. It is not something that would likely show up on a survey created
expressly to measure job satisfaction, and it was not on any of the job satisfaction-

57

measuring instruments examined in searching for a template on which to base
selection of variables. But it was a benefit and, as such, qualified for inclusion. Since
there was no concern about having too many variables in the model, it went into the
model. There was a reasonable explanation for its significance. First, it is a rather
rare benefit for LIS workers—only 83 (4.4%) respondents received it. Of these 83,
over 60 were either extremely senior management (directors of libraries, deans of
LIS schools, etc.) or persons whose jobs required a large amount of travel or field
work (extension librarians, sales staff for vendors, etc.). The fact that extremely highlevel executives would express higher satisfaction makes sense and squares with
findings in the general job satisfaction literature. It likewise computes that a car
allowance or car loans would contribute to the satisfaction of those whose work
requires extensive travel. One respondent did make mention of such an allowance,
saying that “if we used our cars to travel to a work site, we were paid mileage and if
we traveled to attend required courses we were paid mileage. For overnight stays to
attend required training, the state supplied an allowance for food/lodging.”
The Vacations Days and Sick Days variables are treated together here
because they were similar and because they are often dealt in concert within
organizations as “paid time off.” Both map to the benefits facet of the JSS. And while
neither have showed up in LIS job satisfaction studies, that may have been because
they were not asked about. It also occurred to me that both were related to another
factor that librarians had cited in past studies as contributing to their job satisfaction,
namely flexible hours. In the initial JOBSAT regression, however, neither correlated
with job satisfaction.

58

Employer-provided professional memberships was another variable included
in the initial regression because it was a benefit, because there was a question in
the survey about it, and because there was room in terms of how many variables
could be used without compromising the model. The author did not anticipate its
being significantly tied to librarian job satisfaction, and it was not.
Flexible Hours, by contrast, was a variable that might be expected to correlate
with librarian job satisfaction based on previous studies. My thinking was that its
importance was probably related to the priority many LIS workers placed on family
and outside interests. In the open-ended responses, many respondents made
remarks to this effect. A reasonably representative assortment of the more
thoughtful responses of this sort would include the subject who wanted more flexible
hours “[b]ecause I could then have a life outside my job, such as maintaining my
garden, helping my 88 yr. old mother, staying abreast of errands and chores”; the
woman who wrote “I'd like to have a real life—see my husband, work in my yard. I'd
like to be able to put in an actual 8 hour day and not take work home”; the tenured
librarian nearing retirement who cited being “tired” and wishing to have more “time to
do more reading and community work”; and the wonderfully frank soul who claimed
to need more flexible hours because “I'd like to sleep more. Seriously.” The wish to
maintain maximum flexibility so as to leave aside time for family and outside
interests could also play a role in which library environment LIS graduates elected to
work. “While I would have liked to work in a University setting, I have chosen to work
in a public school library because I could work and take classes at [redacted], take
care of my children because of the school schedule, and share summers and

59

weekend/night hours with my family,” one school media specialist reported. She
added: “It is meaningful work with great variety.”
Part of the reason LIS workers valued flexible hours are reasons that might
have been guessed at and that have been cited in previous studies: a wish to spend
time with family or pursue hobbies or to slow down a bit as retirement approached.
And in the model, flexible hours did correlate with job satisfaction as expected. What
was surprising—and constituted one of the major findings of this study—was that
flexible hours did not correlate in a subsequent model because it was, in part,
masking another source of job satisfaction. In other words, librarians and other LIS
workers valued flexible hours not for their own sake but because they allowed for
something else.
As with the Vacation Days and Sick Days, the Home Computer and Cell
Phone variables being treated together because they were included for the same
reason and garnered the same results. The survey asked respondents whether their
employers provided them home computers or cell phones (F31b and F31c,
respectively). The variables could be mapped to the JSS’s benefits facet and, given
the significance of Car Loans/Car Allowance (although this was obviously not known
at the time they were selected into the model), it seems plausible that such material
perks could correlate with job satisfaction. They did not. Given the importance
customarily accorded to flexible work hours and the fact that it could be mapped to a
facet of the JSS, the Work away from the Office variable was included in the model.
It was not significant either.

60

The importance of co-workers to one’s job satisfaction has been correlated
with job satisfaction in a number of previous studies. Because of this and because it
could fall under either the benefits or the communications facet of the JSS, the
Organized Social Activities variable was added into the model. It did not correlate
with job satisfaction.
In past studies, higher rank within one’s organization has correlated with
increased librarian job satisfaction. That and the fact that it mapped to the contingent
rewards facet of the JSS was sufficient to ensure the Supervisor or Not variable’s
inclusion in the model. It did not correlate with JOBSAT. There are a couple possible
reasons why. One is that it did not correlate because of the way the question was
posed. Depending on the size of the organization, being a supervisor may or may
not translate to being in a high place in the pecking order. Librarians in one-man and
one-woman shops supervise no one yet are responsible for their whole operation,
and there are armies of middle managers within larger libraries. A second theory for
why this variable did not register as significantly correlated with JOBSAT is that
something became more onerous in being a library supervisor in the recent past
before the WILIS1 survey was administered. This second theory will be tested by
variables being added into the second regression (Section 4.26).
Career Opportunities was another variable that had predicted job satisfaction
in several previous studies of librarians. Due to this and the fact that it had it fitted
easily onto the JSS’s contingent rewards facet, it was included in the initial model.
Unsurprisingly, given previous findings, it was found to be correlated with JOBSAT.

61

Supportive and useful co-workers have been found consistently to improve
job satisfaction both in general cross-occupational job satisfaction studies and in
LIS-specific ones. And they constitute their own facet in the JSS. The decision to
include both the Co-worker Cohesion and the Co-worker Support variables in the
model was an obvious one, therefore, and the expectation was for one or both to
correlate with JOBSAT. Both did.

4.12: Results: Conditions/Benefits Variables
From the initial JOBSAT regression, there were several notable takeaways.
What was most striking was the extent to which the WILIS population resembled
those in LIS job satisfaction surveys which came before them. They were, on
balance, very happy in their jobs. Those who worked in smaller organizations tended
to be happier in their posts. Women tended to be happier than men. Co-workers
were enormously important with both co-worker variables correlating with job
satisfaction and Co-worker Support having the largest beta of any variable in the
model by a large margin. Income, career opportunities, and flexible hours all moved
the job satisfaction needle as well. The only surprise among the significant variables
was that Retirement Plan correlated negatively with JOBSAT.
Meanwhile, race, other (non-health) kinds of insurance, and many of the less
essential benefits seem not to have impacted LIS workers of job satisfaction.
Surprisingly, whether LIS workers’ employers provided their healthcare did not
correlate with job satisfaction. One theory to account for this circumstance was that
health benefits may not be as important to LIS workers because they may not their

62

families’ primary breadwinner and may get their coverage elsewhere. That theory
could not be validated in subsequent regressions. What could be said was that, for a
large portion of the sample, the stresses of being a full-time worker in an
increasingly overworked profession were often not worth the benefits that accrued to
them as a full-time worker (Section 5.5).
It was slightly surprising that being a supervisor did not contribute to job
satisfaction more but, as mentioned in the discussion of the question, this could
have had to do with the way the question was posed. Overall, then, this seems to be
a remarkably typical group where conventional variables used to account for job
satisfaction were concerned.
In addition to the failure of Retirement Plan to register as significant, two other
findings gave pause. The first was women reporting being happier than men. It was
not that this was unexpected. This squares with the findings of most job satisfaction
surveys and could be attributed either to dispositional factors or the fact that it may
be less stressful to not be the primary breadwinner in a family. There is also the
possibility that women may feel more comfortable than men working in a traditionally
feminized profession. At least one man in the sample confessed that the feminized
nature of librarianship was a source of work-related tension. “I often feel a gender
bias from this field dominated by females,” he volunteered. Because of this fact
“teamwork and collaboration from coworkers is effected [sic] and misunderstandings
develop.” This finding introduced an element of ambiguity into what, to that point,
had been a mostly unsurprising analysis.

63

The other aspect of the first JOBSAT regression to concern me was more
problematic, even to the point that it caused me to run an unplanned regression to
account for it. Unlike most other job satisfaction surveys, in WILIS1, age was not a
factor in satisfaction. Typically, older workers are happier in their work than younger
workers but not in this case. The author previously outlined some potential
explanations for why they were not in the WILIS1 data, but in order to test those
theories, new variables would have to be introduced into the model.

4.13: Age and New Skills/Proliferating Tasks Variables
In the WILIS1 survey, there were three batteries of questions particularly wellsuited for ascertaining sources of anxiety for aging and experienced workers.
Questions F51a-F53f comprised 13 total questions which asked respondents how
they felt about changes in their jobs over the past five years. The questions
constituted variations on the theme of how much pressure subjects felt to acquire
new skills or perform more tasks. The one question that did not conform to this
formulation asked subjects whether they felt “more concerned about [their] job
security.” In order to determine their impact on aging workers specifically, each was
correlated with advancing age. The new variables were next inserted into the model
to see which of the variables correlated with job satisfaction for the whole sample.
The results may be glimpsed in Tables 9, 10, and 11, but the variables will be
addressed individually below.

64

TABLE 6: NEW SKILLS/PROLIFERATING TASKS VARIABLES
Question
No.

Question Text
Preface for F51 questions: “How much do you agree or disagree with the following
statements? COMPARED TO FIVE YEARS AGO…” (Possible response spectrum:
Four-point Likert Scale from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree.”)

F51a.
F51b.

I feel more pressure to continually learn new skills
I am more concerned about my job security
Preface for F52 and F53 questions: “How much do you agree or disagree with the
following statements? COMPARED TO FIVE YEARS AGO, I am currently
required…” (Possible response spectrum: Four-point Likert Scale from “Strongly
disagree” to “Strongly agree.”)

F52a.
F52b.
F52c.
F52d.
F52e.

To perform more new tasks
To perform more difficult tasks
To perform more high tech tasks
To perform a wider variety of tasks
To delegate more of my tasks to assistants

F53a.
F53b.
F53c.
F53d.
F53e.
F53f.

To perform more routine tasks
To work harder
To perform more managerial functions
To assume a greater leadership role
To perform more financial tasks
To perform more tasks once done by assistants

4.14 Measurement: Learn New Skills
Feeling “the pressure to continually learn new skills” (F51a) was unusual
among the new variables in that it neither correlated with advancing age nor with
JOBSAT in the second regression. Despite librarianship’s reputation as a rapidly
changing field, LIS workers, at least in this population, seemed not to be under
undue pressure to expand their skill sets. Either that or, what seems more likely,
being able to learn new skills was perceived to be one of the perquisites of the job.
And indeed, several subjects made remarks to this effect. One claimed that she
entered the field explicitly because it “allowed me to use my previous degrees and
65

offered the opportunity to build on these skills and develop new skills.” Another
entered LIS because it offered “greater opportunities for lifelong learning. I was
spending all my free time in libraries anyway. [It was] an opportunity to use my
previous career skills in a new profession.”

4.15 Measurement: Job Security
Unlike learning new skills, the job security variable had a lot of impact. A
perceived lack of job security correlated negatively with satisfaction overall, and
older workers were understandably more preoccupied with it than were their younger
counterparts. It was also the strongest correlate of all the new variables. Some midand late-career professionals confessed to feeling pressure to retire as their libraries
tried to update their images. One cited “statements by various coworkers that the
library needs a younger image” as a reason for feeling pressure to retire. “The
director is certainly promoting this in the new hires,” she added. This concern with
job security formed the first part of what became an emerging picture of an LIS
management class in crisis.

4.16 Measurement: New Tasks
While aging workers did not object to learning new skills, they were more
averse than younger workers to having to perform more new tasks. In the
regression, however, the new tasks variable did not correlate with JOBSAT. Several
librarians made the point that the diversity of tasks was one of the things they liked
most about their jobs. One cited the following reasons for entering LIS: “Enjoy linking

66

people with information solutions. Appreciate position of librarian within school
setting. Love of knowledge & research. Enjoy variety of tasks.” The fact that older
workers would be more anxious on this count makes sense, too, to the extent that
moving up the career ladder entails having to perform more new duties. And, it
would emerge, it may have not been new tasks per se that caused dissatisfaction so
much as it was having to take on new tasks without relinquishing old ones.

4.17 Measurement: More Difficult Tasks
Like having to perform new tasks, having to perform more difficult tasks was
another variable that afflicted older workers more than younger. And like the
previous variable, it did not correlate with job satisfaction. There are two possible
conclusions to draw from this. First, it could be the case that LIS workers are
assigned more difficult tasks and more onerous responsibilities as they are
promoted. So it would make sense that those who have been in the profession
longer would be more likely to complain of this. The second is that older workers
could be more set in their ways and more resistant to having to perform more difficult
tasks. The fact that the “learn new skills” variable did not disproportionately affect
older workers belies this second explanation. So would what emerged in the
analysis of the next variable. The fact that older workers are likelier to cite having to
do more difficult tasks, therefore, is likely the effect of career promotion.

67

4.18 Measurement: More High-Tech Tasks
This was one of only three of the new skills/proliferating tasks variables that
did not correlate with advancing age. Older workers were as keen to take on more
high-tech tasks as younger workers. Several were salty about the idea that they
were not perceived as such, in fact, with some claiming that this widely held
misperception adversely affected their career prospects. One complained that her
younger supervisors thought “that there is no chance of 'regular' employment after
50. Also there is an assumption that someone over 50 does not keep up with high
tech skills (which I do).” Another decried the lack of old-economy internal labor
markets that allowed for lifetime upward movement through an organization and
seemed to tie this development to the mistaken idea that older workers lacked neweconomy skills. “Changes in employment away from 'lifetime' company
relationships,” in her formulation corresponded to “making more room for younger
employees to advance [and the] perception that older workers lack the skills needed
for today's workplace.” Having to perform more high-tech tasks also did not correlate
with job satisfaction with, again, several LIS workers citing the chance to learn new
skills and perform an array of functions as one of the principal draws of the
profession. Some older workers cited the chance to work with technology as a
motivating factor for entering the LIS field. “Library science looked like it was about
to be revolutionized in the 1970s by the application of computer programs to the
field,” one recalled. “I wanted to be in on that revolution from the start.” Another
advised LIS workers to “Be prepared for constant change. No two days are the same
and there's always new technology to learn.”

68

There was some trepidation on part of older librarians not so much about
learning new technologies as about the deleterious effects of a web-based
information environment. “As a librarian… I'm worried about the influence of the
Internet and computer technology in general. It seems as if it is out of control,” on
retired librarian commented. Her objection was not so much about the fact of new
technology as the form it took. In her view, the internet and web 2.0 technologies, by
giving equal or nearly equal weight to everyone’s voice, debased public discourse
and complicated the finding of reliable information. “So much Internet information is
shallow and opinionated. We must, as a society, and as teachers, do more to stress
critical thinking, research skills, and the value of criticism and review.” The rapid
onset of new technologies and the pressure of LIS to adopt them without waiting
long enough to see how they affected information retrieval resided at the core of this
librarian’s complaint.
Many older librarians criticized their employers for not supporting technological
training for older workers “It is important that those of us who took our MLS degrees
prior to the present technology levels be afforded more free opportunities to increase
our level of understanding in how to use the newer technologies,” one such criticism
went. “Librarians are not paid at the level that would provide them sufficient funds
whereby to do such continuing education on their own. And employers do not offer
the level of incentives nor provide the time on the job which would make it possible
for their employees to do so.” The combined of a lack of technological skills, salaries
adequate to pursue continuing training independently, and employer-supported
training left older workers in an unenviable situation. Because they came along when

69

they did, they sometimes did not have the skills to keep up with an evolving
profession, but neither was the profession supporting their acquisition of new skills.
Given this bind, some older workers could do nothing other than continue to fall
further behind.

4.19 Measurement: Wider Variety of Tasks
Given the similarity of the Wider Variety of Tasks variable to New Tasks and
More Difficult Tasks variables, it is unsurprising that it should have yielded the same
results. Namely, it correlated with advancing age but not with job satisfaction. As
with the other two variables, older workers’ attitudes may be attributed to the
increasing workloads that accompany promotion. Wider Variety’s failure to correlate
with JOBSAT is also attributable, no doubt, to task variety being attractive to
librarians and LIS workers. As one respondent put it, “I liked the variety provided by
library work[;] I had previously worked in book stores.” Another mentioned going into
LIS because he “wanted a career with variety and some activity.” It was a recurring
theme.

4.20 Measurement: Organization of Task Work
Delegate More was another variable that correlated with advancing age but
not with job satisfaction. Like the others, the fact that older workers have to delegate
tasks more than younger workers is unsurprising because only employees working
in some sort of supervisory capacity—usually implying some significant time
served—are in a position to delegate work in the first place.

70

Having to perform more routine tasks was one of the four new
skills/proliferating tasks to correlate negatively with job satisfaction. When subjects
complained about having to do routine tasks in the open-ended answers, the nub of
their complaint was often that they were being disrespected for being asked to do
work that they thought beneath them. “[B]ecause I am one of the younger members
on the staff, I am sometimes relegated to tasks that are routinely performed by
secretaries despite my advanced degree,” one librarian sniffed. Another bristled that,
at her workplace, there was a gendered component to having to do planning work.
“As the highest ranking female in my office, I'm expected to be the office 'mama' and
social planner. The men routinely refuse to take responsibility. There is an unspoken
'that's women's work' culture in the larger unit within which I work.” This basic theme
was echoed by another woman who noted that “Males outside of the library but
within the larger institution tend to assume a leadership role in group activities; I end
up doing a great deal of the work, though.”
It is worth noting that More Routine Tasks also correlated with advancing age.
It seemed likely, too, that LIS workers resented routine tasks because it was
unrewarding work in the craft sense and because it took time away from performing
what they thought of as their “real” work. This theory, if true, would be lent support if
the craft and professional achievement variable proved significant in the final
regression analysis.
As with More Routine Tasks, having to work harder both correlated negatively
with JOBSAT and positively with advancing age. This may be another case where
moving up the career ladder is actually one source of dissatisfaction to the extent

71

that increased responsibility means having to work harder. As with the previous
variable, there may be an element of craft at work here if working harder or too much
is getting in the way of doing the job properly in one’s eyes. And as with the previous
variable, this theory will either be supported or refuted by the final regression.
Having to perform more managerial functions was one more variable that did
not correlate with JOBSAT but did with advancing age. This does not surprise as
one would expect workers moving up in an organization to be reasonably satisfied in
their job and because, again, assuming a more managerial role usually follows some
time and experience.
Greater Leadership Role was the only one of the new variables added to this
version of the model to correlate positively with job satisfaction, which makes sense
for obvious reasons. It also correlated with advancing age, which is likewise no
mystery.
That More Tasks Done by Assistants should correlate negatively with job
satisfaction alongside the Work Harder and More Routine Tasks variables
computes, since all point to a situation in which LIS workers are being asked to do
more. The benefit of having added this variable into the model is that, as opposed to
the others, it suggests a cause of LIS graduates having to work harder. It certainly
sheds light on why they might be having to perform more routine tasks. What is most
interesting, though, is that this is one of only three new skills/proliferating tasks
variables not to correlate with advancing age, suggesting that a dearth of support
staff is affecting LIS graduates at all levels and not only managers.

72

School librarians registered a disproportionate number of the complaints in
the open-ended responses relating to lack of support staff. This too makes a certain
amount of sense as they are disproportionately likely to be running one-person
operations. “A big concern for school library media specialists is the lack of full-time
clerical support. [T]hat is not shared with other offices in the school,” one reported. “I
spent time doing clerical jobs that took me away from teaching information retrieval
skills and reading appreciation because there is no understanding of the need for
full-time uninterrupted clerical support.” In this librarian’s telling, the problem of lack
of support staff was exacerbated by administrators with no understanding of the
problems facing media specialists, which could be an unusually large problem for
school librarians and media specialists to the extent that they are more likely than
other librarians to report to superiors with no LIS background. The same librarian
confirmed that, in her view, this was increasingly the case. “There is also a
disturbing trend of hiring people with no LIS (sometimes even without any
educational) training as district supervisors, or putting media specialists under the
supervision of an administrator whose primary responsibility is not school media
programs. This leaves media specialists out on their own unless they are fortunate
enough to have a strong district media association.” What was more, in this
respondent’s opinion, there appeared to be precious little official response from
professional organizations to this distressing tendency. “There seems to be no
concern at the national level to the implications of this disturbing trend. How can a
supervisor who has no training or experience in our field possibly conduct or
construct appropriate district support or inservice experiences? How can they

73

understand the needs of our programs and represent us at the district level?” she
concluded. Because of school administrators’ fundamental incomprehension of the
challenges that school media centers confronted, another respondent confessed that
she was not hopeful that this circumstance would improve. “There is a shortage of
funding for many public agencies and schools is in the center of that shortage,” she
lamented. “To save money in the future, because schools will continue to grow, I
envision more cuts in ‘libraries’ but more expectations that the Media Specialist can
do it all.” Other school media specialists echoed the concern over the expectation
that they could “do it all.” “In too many school libraries, there is not enough clerical
help for all the responsibilities that are required of the library/media coordinator,” one
reported. “School library/media coordinators are expected to collaborate and teach
more and more, yet all the work in a library is their responsibility, consequently more
clerical help is needed.”

4.21 Results: Age and New Skills/Proliferating Tasks Variables
The main takeaway from the second regression was that, as a general
matter, older workers felt they were having to take on more and more tasks, a
phenomenon that may be attributed in part to moving up in their organizations and
acquiring more responsibility. And yet librarians felt that more work was not solely
the result of upward mobility, a theme that will be addressed in detail in the
conclusions chapter (section 5.6). Job Security, More Tasks Once Done by
Assistants, Work Harder, and More Routine Tasks all correlated negatively with
JOBSAT, pointing up to a situation in which LIS workers simultaneously felt less

74

stability and more pressure to perform tasks that might have formerly been
considered “staff work.” Two variables that were significant in the first regression—
Family Income and Retirement Plan—fell out of significance in the second
regression. What to make of this? One perspective would be that both were barely
significant in the first regression and just fell to the other side of the threshold in the
second regression, and that certainly is the case. But given that job security was far
and away the most significant of the new variables added in, one could also say that
these variables were masking an overriding concern with the latter.

TABLE 7: CORRELATIONS: AGE AND NEW SKILLS/PROLIFERATING TASKS
Correlated with advancing age
Job security

Age had no effect
Learn new skills

New tasks

More high tech tasks

More difficult tasks

More tasks done by assistants

Wider variety of tasks
Delegate more
More routine tasks
Work harder
More managerial functions
Greater leadership role
More tasks once done by assistants

4.22 Family Dynamics and Craft/Professional Achievement Variables
Through two regressions, the WILIS sample looked like those studied in past
LIS job satisfaction studies. It showed that librarians were on balance rather pleased
75

with their work, and the same factors tended to correspond with job satisfaction as in
past studies. With the notable exception of having to perform more tasks and more
routine tasks than their predecessors, the WILIS group conformed to the overall
pattern of LIS job satisfaction studies with regards to traditional work-related
variables, which are the very factors that most job satisfaction surveys examine.
There is a reason for that job satisfaction scholars have heretofore focused on workrelated source of job satisfaction. Originating as it does from the wish of
organizations to make their workers happy (and, it is hoped, more productive
because of that), the job satisfaction literature tends to study those factors which
employers can control. But of course factors outside the workplace could affect
one’s job satisfaction and the final regression’s purpose was to concentrate on how
family dynamics impacted the job satisfaction of a reasonably typical group where
job satisfaction was concerned. Another purpose was to determine what impact a
craft and professional achievement variable would have when added to the model.

76

TABLE 8: FAMILY AND CRAFT VARIABLES
Variable
Marital
Status

Corresponding Question in WILIS I Survey
A21. What is your current relationship status? (Possible answers: Single (never
married); Married or living with a partner; Divorced/Separated; Widowed)

Children

J1. How many living children do you have? Please include all children by birth,
adoption, marriage, or partner.

Breadwinner

F39. Which of the following BEST describes your financial situation? (Possible
answers: 1. I and/or my family depend completely on my paycheck; 2. I and/or my
family can live better because of my paycheck; 3. I and/or my family do not depend on
my paycheck to maintain desired standard of living) (Reference
category=respondents indicating either answer number 2 or 3)

Livebetter

Same question (F39) except the reference category comprised only those
respondents indicating answer number 3.

Craft and
Professional
Achievement

Summative variable comprising five questions:
F10a. I have a lot of say about what happens on my job (Possible response spectrum
for all five questions: Four-point Likert scale from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly
agree”)
F35a. I have the opportunity to develop and apply the skills I need to enhance my
career
F35b. My employer does a good job of helping develop my career
F35e. I generally have opportunities for creative input and innovation in my work
F35f. I have opportunities to develop leadership skills

4.23 Family Dynamics Variables: Marital Status, Children, Breadwinner,
Livebetter
All the family dynamics variables were treated together here because the
results for each were the same: none correlated in any significant way with job
satisfaction. This is a noteworthy but an unexpected finding. The reason for wanting
to analyze these variables was sound. The impact of household dynamics on
librarian job satisfaction has been little studied. In a traditionally feminized

77

profession, the thinking went, family factors might be likely more likely to factor in
significantly. They did not.
The first family dynamics variable added into the model was marital status.
Previous long-term studies of the phenomenon have found that marital quality has a
significant impact on job satisfaction. Job satisfaction was also found to have some
influence on marital quality although the latter was far more predictive of the former
than vice versa, and this was equally true for men and women (Rogers and May,
2003). Another study found that factors contributing to married women’s job
satisfaction have been found to include age, income, and a variable termed “life
satisfaction” (van Sell, Brief, and Aldag, 1979). My analysis was rather simpler than
these studies and would seek only to answer whether one’s marital status correlated
with JOBSAT. It turned out not to have any discernible impact on the sample’s job
satisfaction.
The second family dynamics variable examined was how many children
respondents had, including those from marriage, partnering, and adoption. Here,
also, it may have been expected that a feminized workforce would have had its job
satisfaction adversely affected given the stress that inheres in “second shift”
situations in which some women take on a disproportionate share of childcare in
addition to their paid work. Existing literature on this topic suggested the data could
break either way. On the one hand, Clark, Oswald, and Warr have shown that,
among some workers, job satisfaction is “U-shaped in age.” In other words, among
their sample of British employees across economic sectors, mid-career workers
reported the lowest levels of job satisfaction, a phenomenon the authors speculated

78

may be attributable to stresses associated with having to juggle career and children
(1996). And yet the one study to evaluate directly the impact of young children on
job satisfaction indicated that it had no measurable effect on either men or women
(Hanson and Sloane, 1992). Having children likewise had no measurable impact on
the job satisfaction of the workers in my sample.
The final aspect of family dynamics examined was whether and how being a
breadwinner impacted job satisfaction. Because there were three possible ways to
answer the question—one indicating one’s family “completely depended” on one’s
paycheck; a second which said that one’s family was able to “live better” because of
their contribution; and a final choice that corresponded to one’s pay being
nonessential to the maintenance of the family’s standard of living—this aspect was
measured with two different variables. The first, “breadwinner,” might more
accurately have been labeled “primary winner”; for it, the first response the reference
category while grouping the second and third responses together. The second,
“livebetter,” made the third response the reference category, thus bracketing
respondents indicating one of the first two choices together. The point of this
strategy was to tease out the effects of various levels of breadwinning on job
satisfaction. Isolating primary breadwinners in the first variable would determine
whether being the main source of income for the family had an impact on job
satisfaction. The second variable could determine whether simply needing one’s
paycheck to maintain the family’s standard of living factored in.
Existing studies on breadwinning and job satisfaction gave reason to think that
it might have an impact. Witt (1988) found a pronounced positive correlation

79

between breadwinning and levels of satisfaction regarding pay and career
opportunities among married women working in one private sector firm. Aryee
reported that, among 255 Hong Kong professional and managerial employees, there
was a significant relationship between pay and life satisfaction among “low
breadwinners” while no such correlation existed among “high breadwinners.” At all
events, the third regression indicated no significant relationship between
breadwinning at any level and job satisfaction for my sample.

4.24

Measurement: Craft and Professional Achievement
Given the WANE study results that show small IT firms concentrating on the

intrinsic rewards with the erosion of stability, one might assume that craft might
make up a larger part of librarians' job satisfaction in what would appear to be a less
stable, more fraught jobs climate.. Job satisfaction studies have shown traditionally
that good performance factored heavily in job satisfaction although job satisfaction
seems to have little effect in motivating workers to perform better (O’Toole and
Lawler, 2005).
At this point, it must be acknowledged that the author could just as easily
have used other concepts, well-known among job satisfaction scholars, that could
have stood in for craft. In particular organizational psychologists and management
scholars Herzberg and Maslow wrote, separately, over decades about the
importance of personal fulfillment to job satisfaction. In particular, Herzberg’s twofactor theory expressed the idea that, in addition to satisfactory pay and sanitary
working conditions, outside validation and the nature of “the work itself” were central

80

to job satisfaction (2008). Both two-factor theory and Maslow’s idea of selfactualization could have stood in for craft without invalidating the results of the study.
As with job satisfaction, a summative scale was created to measure craft.
There were initially nine questions in the WILIS1 study that seemed to highlight this
quality best. They were chosen because, among the questions in the survey, they
seemed to speak most directly to the issues of happiness derived from good job
performance and the connection LIS workers felt to the products of their work. They
were: F10A (“I have a lot of say about what happens on my job”); F10B (“I have too
much work to do everything well”); F10D (“I never seem to have enough time to get
everything done on my job”); F35A (“I have the opportunity to develop and apply the
skills I need to enhance my career”); F35D (“It is basically my own responsibility to
decide how my job gets done”); F35E (“I generally have opportunities for creative
input and innovation in my work”); F35F (“I have opportunities to develop leadership
skills”); F36A (“The daily choices I make on my job require little thought”); F36B
(“There is not enough time to get required work done”). For reliability-optimizing
reasons, F10B, F10D, F36A and F36B were subsequently dropped. The resulting
measure (F10A+F35A+F35B+F35E+F35F)/5 had a Cronbach’s alpha of .838.
As constituted, the resulting variable measured something more than just
craft as defined here. LIS workers who agreed with these statements were saying
more than that they just wanted to perform their job well for its own sake; they
expected to be rewarded for doing so. They were not careerist, or not primarily, but
in addition to wanting to perform their job well, they wanted to continually add new
skills and were concerned with upward mobility in a way not covered by the concept

81

of craft as defined here. In the craft-careerism continuum (Table 14), persons
agreeing with the five statements making up the craft variable were certainly situated
somewhere on the craft end of the continuum, but they were not necessarily only
concerned with doing their job well for its own sake. They were also concerned with
professional achievement. The researcher therefore decided to term this
measurement the craft and professional achievement variable. One respondent
offered a good summation of this view of rewarding work: “Advancement and
promotion is not always represented by a specific position,” she wrote, implicitly
allowing it sometimes was. In addition to advancement, though, “[s]uccess in
services and teaching techniques and creation of a unique library space may also be
considered as indicators for being successful at one's job.”

TABLE 9: THE CRAFT-CAREERISM CONTINUUM

Craft
• Performs work well
for its own sake
• Requires objective
standards of
excellence (i.e., the
final product
performs its
function, looks
beautiful, etc.)

Professional
Achievement
• Concerned with
doing work well
• Unlike the pure
craftsmen, expects
upward mobility as
reward for jobs
well done

Careerism
• Concerned with
personal
advancement
above all else
• Quality
performance
incidental to the
main goal of
moving up ladder

Of the five new variables added into the final regression, only Craft and
Professional Achievement correlated with job satisfaction (Table 15). More to the
82

point, Craft and Professional Achievement’s beta was over three times as large as
the variable that had the second greatest correlation with JOBSAT (Table 16). In
short, Craft and Professional Achievement was far and away the surest predictor of
job satisfaction for the sample.

4.25 Results: Family Dynamics and Craft/Professional Achievement Variables
There were two major new findings in the final JOBSAT regression. The first
was the strong relationship of Craft and Professional Achievement with JOBSAT.
The second was the failure of any of the family dynamics variables to correlate.
Curiously, with the introduction of Craft and Professional Achievement into the
model, three variables became significant which had been in the model all long but
which had failed to correlate with job satisfaction in two previous regressions. They
were Full Time, Work outside Office, and Professional Memberships. Although in
each case the newly significant variables’ betas were a fraction of that of Craft and
Professional Achievement, there was concern that they were multicollinear with it.
To ensure multicollinearity did not threaten the validity of the model, correlations
were run between Craft and Professional Achievement, on the one hand, and the
three newly significant variables (Appendix IX). They each correlated but not closely
enough that the model as a whole would fail to give valid results about any individual
predictor.
The importance of participation in professional organizations when Craft and
Professional Achievement were added into the model also pointed up to an overlap
between the two variables. One of the respondents’ remarks best illuminates this
83

connection. “Although I have worked 30 of my 32 professional years for the same
organization, I have stayed here largely because of the opportunities to grow and
advance with my organization,” she woman wrote by way of explaining the sources
of her job satisfaction. The opportunity to “grow and advance” was in her case
connected to activity in professional organizations. “I have had the opportunity to be
innovative and implement changes to information services, so there has actually
been quite a bit of variety to my job. Also, it has been extremely important that I have
had support to be active in professional associations.”
Just as interestingly, four variables which had registered as significant in the
second regression became insignificant when Craft and Professional Achievement
were added to the mix (Table 17). Those four variables were: Organization Size,
Flexible Hours, Career Opportunities, and More Routine Tasks. This is interesting
because it suggests that the variables significance in the previous regression(s) was
masking an overriding concern with craft. Put another way, working in smaller
organizations, having flexible hours, receiving opportunities for career advancement,
and being relatively free of having to perform routine tasks contributed to librarians’
job satisfaction in large measure because it allowed them to do their jobs better and
see more clearly the results of their work. The fact that the first three of these
variables have consistently predicted LIS job satisfaction in past studies suggests
that librarians likely have been concerned with those issues to the extent that they
interfered with the work itself. The fact that what appears most irksome about having
to perform more routine tasks is that it gets in the way of craftsmanship sheds

84

considerable light on the real cost of lack of administrative support for the LIS
management class.

4.26 Stepwise and Block Model Regressions
Two regressions were run to further test the strength and significance of the
relationship between the independent variables and job satisfaction. The first of
these two was a stepwise regression (Table 10) which was meant to remove all
extraneous variables that did not contribute to the predictive ability of the models.
Stepwise regressions allow the researcher to discern the most parsimonious model,
removing all variables that are not significant predictors of the outcome. The second
model is a block nested model which allows the researcher to discern the
decomposition of effects between increasingly complex models. There were minor
differences between what variables were significant in the stepwise model and in the
third JOBSAT regression, but this appeared to mostly be a case of marginally
significant variables in the third JOBSAT regression falling out of significance in the
stepwise (work outside office, professional membership, car allowance/car loans) or,
conversely, of previously marginally insignificant variables becoming significant
(more high-tech tasks, more managerial functions). The majority of the predictors
were confirmed as significant in both models including the major variable of interest
– craft and professional achievement. Of note also is the fact that annualized salary,
used in place here of family income, did not register as significant in the final model.

85

TABLE 10: STEPWISE REGRESSION PREDICTING JOB SATISFACTION
Standardized
Coefficient
Job Satisfaction
Constant
Craft and Professional Achievement
Job Security
Coworker Support
Full-time Work
Female
Delegate More
Organizational Size
Coworker Cohesion
More Managerial Functions
More High-Tech Tasks
2
R =.365
Excluded variables: Job setting, Salary, age,
minority race, employer provided health insurance,
other health insurance, Conditions/Benefits (see
measurement section), Supervise or not, Career
Opportunities, Age and New Skills/Proliferating
Tasks, Marital Status, Children, Breadwinner,
Livebetter (Paycheck)
2
R =.363
*p<0.05, p<0.01,***p<0.001

1.353
.522***
-.109***
.101***
-.099***
.058**
-.045*
-.051*
.054*
-.052*
.045*

Std. Err.
.096
.024
.028
.049
.043
.030
.027
.008
.048
.028
.030

Sig.
.000
.000
.000
.000
.004
.045
.011
.034
.021
.027

The block model regression (Table 11) helps test constructs that have been
deemed important conceptually or empirically in previous studies. This analytic
strategy allows one to look at different sets of variables to see the strength and
significance of each thematically organized set of indicators on the dependent
variable. Like the stepwise, the block model jibed generally with the findings from the
third regression. One notable feature of the block model was that it showed that,
despite the feminization of the profession, or perhaps because of it, the family
dynamic variables did not have the impact that they may have been expected to
have. Further, the coworker support variables were shown to have an an impact on
job satisfaction independent of the craft and professional achievement measure.
Finally, the majority of the age and new skills/proliferating task (save job security)
86

were made non-significant in the final model when the craft and professional
achievement measure was entered. Here, again, annualized salary did not register
as significant.

87

TABLE 11: BLOCK MODEL REGRESSION PREDICTING JOB SATISFACTION

Job Satisfaction
Constant
(Std. Error)
Personal Characteristics
Age
Female
Minority
Married
Children
Breadwinner
Livebetter
Organizational
Characteristics
School
Public
Academic
Special
Organization Size
Compensation

N=1833
2
R =.015
Model 1
Standard
ized
Coef.
(Std.
Error)
3.177
(.105)

R =.020
Model 2
Standard
ized
Coef.
(Std.
Error)
3.307
(.116)

R =.049
Model 3
Standard
ized
Coef.
(Std.
Error)
3.096
(.126)

R =.147
Model 4
Standard
ized
Coef.
(Std.
Error)
2.604
(.125)

R =.205
Model 5
Standardi
zed Coef.
(Std.
Error)

R =.381
Model 6
Standardi
zed Coef.
(Std.
Error)

2.720
(.126)

1.326
(.129)

-.008
(.001)
.056*
(.037)
-.046
(.049)
.067*
(.038)
.037
(034)
-.087
(.062)
-.099*
(.061)

-.011
(.001)
.054*
(.038)
-.043
(.049)
.071*
(.039)
.036
(.034)
-.062
(.063)
-.081
(.061)

-.024
(.002)
.076**
(.039)
-.039
(.051)
.064*
(.039)
.034
(.035)
-.061
(.076)
-.081
(.072)

.007
(.001)
.079*
(.048)
-.029
(.048)
.043
(.037)
.024
(.033)
-.049
(.072)
-.084
(.069)

.001
(.001)
.077**
(.036)
-.011
(.047)
.036
(.036)
.024
(.032)
-.001
(.071)
-.042
(.068)

-.003
(.001)
.062**
(.032)
.004
(.042)
.007
(.032)
.026
(.029)
-.001
(.063)
-.023
(.060)

-.032
(.043)
-.006
(.024)
-.026
(.043)
-.016
(.052)
-.060*
(.010)

.095*
(.054)
.057
(.027)
.028
(.047)
.002
(.055)
-.070*
(.011)

.110*
(.053)
.010
(.026)
.005
(.046)
.000
(.052)
-.087**
(.010)

.089**
(.052)
.009
(.026)
-.014
(.045)
.006
(.051)
-.075**
(.010)

.025
(.046)
-.014
(.023)
-.041
(.040)
-.002
(.045)
-.039
(.009)

.053*
(.000)
-.060
(.074)
.043
(.054)

.037
(.000)
-.067
(.071)
.023
(.051)

.037
(.000)
-.075*
(.070)
.022
(.050)

.023
(.000)
-.084**
(.062)
.020
(.044)

.028
(.048)
-.037
(.057)
.068*
(.076)

.023
(.045)
-.031
(.054)
.057*
(.072)

.029
(.044)
-.027
(.053)
.053*
(.070)

.011
(.039)
-.030
(.047)
.043*
(.062)

2

Annualized Salary
Fulltime
Employer sponsored
health insurance
At least one other
insurance (e.g. dental,
life, disability)
Retirement plan
Car Allowance/Car loans

88

2

2

2

2

.014
(.067)
.019
(.090)
.021
(.036)
.110**
(037)
.018
(.064)
.054*
(.057)
.002
(.041)
.052*
(.032)

Vacation days
Sick or personal days
Professional membership
Flexible hours
Home computer
Cellular phone
Work away from office
Organized social activities
Working Conditions
Supervise
Career opportunities
Coworker cohesion
Coworker support
Age and New
Skills/Proliferating Task
Learn new skills
Job security
New tasks
More difficult tasks
More high tech tasks
Wider variety of tasks
Delegate more
More routine tasks
Work harder
More managerial
functions
Greater leadership role
More financial tasks
More tasks once done by
assistants
Craft
Craft/Professional

.004
(.063)
-.002
(.085)
.009
(.035)
.096**
(.035)
.027
(.061)
.042
(.055)
-.012
(.039)
.035
(.031)

.005
(.062)
-.007
(.083)
.002
(.034)
.085**
(.035)
.021
(.060)
.035
(.054)
-.011
(.038)
.034
(.030)

.018
(.054)
-.012
(.073)
-.039
(.030)
.020
(.031)
.010
(.053)
.030
(.047)
-.045
(.033)
.016
(.026)

-.003
(.032)
.179**
(.032)
.095**
(.056)
.182**
(.057)

-.021
(.035)
.138**
(.031)
.069*
(.055)
.171**
(.056)

-.028
(.031)
-.023
(.029)
.053*
(.049)
.099**
(.050)

-.027
(.032)
-.160**
(.033)
.046
(.046)
-.004
(.036)
.038
(.039)
.005
(.046)
-.029
(.034)
-.058*
(.031)
-.078**
(.033)
-.028
(.041)
.073*
(.042)
.050
(.032)
-.062*
(.035)

-.037
(.028)
-.093*
(.030)
.035
(.040)
-.006
(.031)
.040
(.034)
.016
(.041)
-.045
(.030)
-.029
(.028)
-.044
(.029)
-.029
(.036)
-.009
(.038)
-.019
(.028)
-.031
(.031)
.523**

89

Achievement

(.027)

*p<0.05, *p<0.01

The researcher also used the two new models to ascertain more fully the
effect of age, job duration, and job setting on both job satisfaction and, especially,
craft. This shed some, though not much, new light on both variables. There was, for
example, a moderate correlation between age and duration of current job (.44) so
that the older a librarian is, the more likely they were to have been in their current job
longer. Although this does not necessarily translate to the proposition that age
correlates with cohorts, it suggests that it is at least probable. This lends some small
bit of credibility to the idea that older librarians are not as satisfied as expected
because of changes in working conditions over the previous five years. In both
stepwise and the block models, duration of current job does not have a significant
impact on job satisfaction, however. Looking at age cohorts, there is no significant
differences based on the craft variable (per oneway ANOVA); there is a trend. The
researcher ran a pearson correlation coefficient; no correlations emerged between
craft and age or craft and current job duration. Looking at job duration (0-2, 3-10,
11+), there is no significant difference in craft/professional achievement. Again, the
correlation coefficient is not significant. The only significant finding about craft was
that academic librarians report higher craft scores than school librarians. Academic
librarians and school librarians were not significantly different than public or special.
Unfortunately, this additional information does not get the researcher very much
closer to the answer to the question of what craft looks like in terms of specific tasks

90

or functions in LIS work. A more qualitative research approach likely will be required
to tease out the nuances of that answer.

91

Chapter 5
Conclusions
5.1 Introduction
Work in the last half of twentieth-century America was radically different than
what had it had been before. It was, for one thing, extremely stable. The late
twentieth century was the era of the Company Man; workers could, if they chose,
expect to enter employment with a given organization at or near the bottom, work
their way through a succession of job titles carrying increasing authority and
responsibility, and retire after thirty or so years with a generous pension to see them
through their golden years. Simultaneously, these years witnessed increasingly
specialization in all kinds of work. Whether in the factory or the office, workers
performed one step or several in large productions the full extent of which they often
did not see. In the circumstance, job satisfaction for the average worker declined.
The tradeoffs for loss of control over and satisfaction in one’s work were historically
high levels of pay and security (O’Toole and Lawler, 2005).
The old model does still exist and works for some people. One case in point
came from a public librarian in the WILIS1 sample. “I have actually only ‘left’ a
professional position with one organization prior to accepting a position with my
current employer,” he wrote. “I have been with my current employer 11 years and
during that time I have advanced through 3 positions upward within the organization

92

to an associate director position. Over time my responsibilities in the organization
have changed and grown more complex.” Having a career that was both stable and
fulfilling, this subject represented, increasingly, an exceptional case among
respondents to job satisfaction surveys.
In some sense, though, that response was emblematic of LIS more generally.
During the entire period stretching from the mid-20th century to the present,
librarianship itself represented something of a happy aberration in an increasingly
grim workplace landscape. Most notably, librarians were extraordinarily satisfied in
their jobs, especially compared with other professions. What was more, their
happiness might be attributed, in large measure, to the ways in which librarians were
different from other professionals. They tended to work in small organizations, to
enjoy their work, and to believe in its importance. Librarians also tended,
overwhelmingly, to be women (Eva and McCormick, 2008).
The question asked here is why. Why have librarians constituted an anomaly in
an otherwise steadily deteriorating situation? And what, if anything, can be gleaned
from librarianship to make information work a more meaningful, more satisfying
experience. The data analysis yielded twelve notable conclusions that help explain
the current state of librarians’ attitudes toward their jobs and that may suggest ways
in which information work in general can be more profitably approached. They are as
follows:

93

5.2

Craft and Professional Achievement
Craft and Professional Achievement emerged as the variable that most

correlated with job satisfaction by a large margin. Not only that, but it was found that
factors which had previously been found to best predict job satisfaction in this study
actually masked Craft and Professional Achievement. In other words, “the work
itself” has a primacy for librarians that supersedes all other factors. The fact that
Craft and Professional Achievement kicked out More Routine Tasks—which had
been significant in the second regression but not in the third—goes further to the
point that librarians are concerned more with the work itself than with just
advancement. So, too, does the fact that the Career Opportunities masked Craft and
Professional Achievement.
This bore out something that had first come up in the looking at responses to
open-ended questions on the importance of flexible hours. Respondents repeatedly
claimed that flexible or reduced hours were crucial not primarily because they made
it possible to set aside time for family and pursuits outside of one’s job but precisely
because they helped a librarian do her or his job better. Asked why she desired
flexible hours, one respondent replied that “[i]n order to get the work done in an
acceptable manner, there is very little time for an outside life.” This is an extremely
telling quote because it encapsulates the findings of the final model so well. The
emphasis is on doing one’s job well, but the subject claims that in order to do so, she
needs flexible hours or her “outside life” will suffer. In this formulation, the need for
flexible hours was about the worker’s “outside life” secondarily. But what flexible
hours primarily provided was the opportunity “to get the work done in an acceptable

94

manner” without compromising one’s personal life. The work was going to be done
right one way or the other; the question was whether doing so would permit sufficient
free time for “outside life.”
Other responses supporting this basic point abound in response to survey
question F23, which asked “Why would you like to change the number of hours you
work in a typical week?” A telling but by no means exhaustive sampling of such
responses would include “Because I am getting tired but there is alot to do and I
need to keep this Library integrated with the constant changes in our environment”;
“Because it's very difficult to maintain the concentration needed for indexing, but to
make money I have to work as much as possible”; “I am responsible to get the job
done, not to work a 40 hour week, which in reality is usually 50 or 60 hours. There is
simply too much to do”; “I would like to be able to finish all my responsibilities during
the regular school day which is 7:45-2:45”; “We are expected to work whatever time
is needed to complete assigned tasks but this routinely exceeds the hours we are
scheduled and paid to work. There are inadequate staffing levels to support the
desired level of services and the available”; and “I would like to have more time for
exercise and family life and community service. But I like the work and I can live with
these hours. It would be nice to have more help so we could do more of what needs
to get done and do it better.”
In each of these responses the emphasis is on the inability of LIS workers to
get the work done well in the time allotted to them. In these quotes and others,
respondents cite family and/or outside life as reasons for wishing for reduced hours.
But an overriding concern was that there were insufficient time and resources to “do

95

more of what needs to be done and do it better.” This squares with the fact that the
Work Harder, Greater Leadership Role, and More Work Done by Assistants
variables stayed significant in the final regression. LIS workers felt as if they were
being asked to do too much and that this situation had changed for the worse over
the previous five years. But they were not dissatisfied because their work was not
being rewarded enough in the form of pay and benefits so much as they were put
out by the fact that they could no longer do their work as well as they wished.
Organization Size likewise masked Craft and Professional Achievement.
Large organizations can tend to obscure one’s contribution, to change exceedingly
slowly, and not to register quality of work as precisely as smaller ones. These
tendencies do not, obviously, prevail in all large organization but they do in enough
of them to have an impact. Nevertheless, the ways in which large organizations can
disrupt work came through in several individual responses as in the case of the
public librarian exasperated that her employer, owing to organization size, was
neither lean enough to respond to the rapid changes confronting it nor sensitive
enough to reward her for having performed her job well. “I'm frustrated with the slow
pace of change in large organizations and the inability to impact my compensation,”
she wrote. “I can work really hard or not so hard and I would still get paid the same.”
For another librarian, working in a large library system meant being too frequently
shuffled around to work in different branches, which in turn thwarted her forming a
strong bond with any single patron base. “Restructuring in districts within large
library system meant too much moving around for professional staff...wanted a
position where I would work with the same patron-base on a long-term basis.”

96

Another respondent provided an instance of libraries stymieing innovation and
individual initiative, a circumstance that caused her to leave the profession
temporarily. “The voluntary time off was largely caused by my frustration with the
lack of innovation and resources devoted to innovation in libraries,” she maintained.
“This was largely caused by my frustration at how organizational structures moves
too slowly to allow librarians to be innovators on the web.”
What to make of the fact that the three variables—Full Time, Work outside
Office, and Professional Memberships—correlated with Craft and Professional
Achievement to a sufficient extent to become significant in the final analysis is an
interesting question. At first blush, the fact that not being a full-time worker correlates
with Craft and Professional Achievement appears counterintuitive. If one were
committed to doing one’s job well, it seems almost natural to assume that one would
want to be able to do it more of the time. But the strong negative correlation between
Full-Time Worker and Job Satisfaction when Craft and Professional Achievement
are factored in—it had the third highest beta of any variable in the regression—does
make sense in the context of librarians finding it increasingly hard put to complete all
their work. A number of subjects made the connection between working fewer hours
and doing a better job explicit. One claimed that, in addition to “provid[ing] a
healthier home/work balance,” working less would also “improve my overall job
performance.” The theme of having to work more hours as a detriment to
satisfactory performance cropped up time and again. “Although formal overtime is
not required, I nearly always work more than 40 hours a week,” one librarian
lamented. “I do this because I enjoy my job and want to get the work done, but I wish

97

I had more time for non-work activities.” In this account, the wish to do a good job
led to more hours. That, in its turn, meant that the job began to impinge on “nonwork activities.”
For these reasons, some respondents found more satisfaction in
paraprofessional or part-time work. “I decided to stay in my Paraprofessional job. I
prefer doing nuts and bolts work to endless meetings,” one wrote. “I also have many
outside interests such a Mass Communications and have a Real Estate License.”
This remark had the virtue of combining two oft-repeated concerns: that moving up
in an organization takes one away from the work they were originally trained to do
and that increasing job demands diminished the flexibility that made an LIS career
desirable in the first place. Echoing these themes, one librarian claimed that she
was only able to find fulfillment in librarianship upon taking it up part-time
employment in retirement.
Since taking early retirement in 1999, I have enjoyed my part-time libraryrelated pursuits much more than I ever enjoyed full-time academic
librarianship with its paperwork, personnel issues, education-related goalsetting and assessment, budget cuts, hiring freezes, administrative
indifference, and other institutional realities. I have been able to explore new
areas (children's literature, distance ed., contract cataloging of special
collections, reference service, archival work), balance different jobs, enjoy
new colleagues and surroundings, while still having time for family and
personal interests. None of this was possible until I attained that magic
combination of age and years of service necessary to retire with full State
benefits, but I feel fortunate in having survived those 33 years of full-time
work to reach this much more rewarding stage of my career. In my
experience, at least, less is truly more!

Still former academic librarian, admittedly exceptional in many ways and
occasionally incoherent, nevertheless reflected the surprisingly widespread wish to

98

work part time rather than full time. “Sometimes I feel like my responses to this
survey have been a bit contradictory. I really like my work, and still enjoy research,
helping patrons, learning new things and working with technology,” she began.
“However, I did not like the pressure of my former academic library work
environment and the exceptionally poor management and working conditions I have
experienced. (The nasty physical working conditions have led to a decided decline in
health.)” Because of the pressure and her declining health, she was beginning to
think about “changing careers, and have even considered retail work, in order to
finally be able to get some experience in management.” Ultimately, too, the lack of
flexibility in her job factored in as well. “I had hoped that there would be more parttime (with benefit) professional opportunities, but I have not seen many at all where I
have been working. The flexibility I thought was available just hasn't been there.”
The problem in this case and others was that full-time work often amounted to more
than full-time work with no overtime pay. One respondent put this basic point
succinctly. “I would like to be able to do my job within the number of hours of week
that I am paid. I do not receive pay for overtime.” Another was even more to the
point: She wanted fewer hours “Because I work way more than I get paid for!!”

5.3 Technology and Craft
Even as new (and some not so new) pressures threatened to diminish craft in
libraries, the fact remained that librarians in the WILIS1 sample were reporting high
levels of satisfaction and that craft and professional achievement were largely
determining those results. How had librarianship avoided the pitfalls of other

99

professions? This circumstance was, in part, the result of technology fundamentally
affecting librarianship differently than it did other professions such as architecture.
Although the researcher has taken pains to define what craft is, it may at times
remain a maddeningly vague and diffuse concept. What does it mean to practice
craft in an LIS setting? How, precisely, are librarians deriving satisfaction through
craft and professional achievement? What follows is an attempt to unpack that
unwieldy idea further and to give it more precise meaning and to spell out how in
librarianship technology served as an aid to craft rather than deskilling workers.
It is a common misconception that industrialization and the putting to work of
machines meant the end, or at the least, the beginning of the end for craft. And in a
certain narrow sense, there is a kernel of truth in this. In a couple of generations,
machine production had rendered trades which had existed since ancient times
obsolete. No longer was there widespread need, for example, for shoemakers,
blacksmiths, or weavers. But this represented an elimination not of craft itself but of
specific expressions of craft—in this example, the manual fabrication of shoes, metal
wares, and cloth. At the same time that industrialization eliminated these traditional
expressions of craft, it made possible new expressions, such as the mechanics who
now practiced the repair of the new machines. It is telling that during this time, the
word “mechanic” began it journey from its original meaning, someone who worked in
a traditional trade, to its more common modern usage, which is someone who
repairs machines.
Similarly, the advent of computers has eliminated the need for millions of office
workers (themselves made possible by nineteenth and early-twentieth-century

100

advances in corporate structure and communication technology). But it replaced it
with the need for armies of IT people. The point is that although there is some
tension between mechanization and craft, the two are by no means mutually
exclusive and they can be complementary; few would argue that today’s computer
technicians are less skilled than their Eisenhower-era office counterparts.
It is not, therefore, mechanization itself which threatens craft but rather a
specific type of mechanization. One of the central threats to craft in the modern
workplace is what Sennett describes as the “misuse” of machinery, by which he
means machines which prevent workers from honing their skills through repetition.
The example he uses to make this point is of the introduction of Computer-Assisted
Design (CAD) into architecture in the decades since the 1960s. Sennett describes
CAD, endearingly, as “the software program that allows engineers to design physical
objects and architects to generate images of buildings on-screen.” The problem was
that CAD also served to de-skill architects. The repetition that inhered in an older
mode of architecture demanded architects learn their trade inside and out. Here
Sennett quotes the architect Renzo Piano to illustrate what was lost in the
changeover to CAD. ”You start by sketching, then you do a drawing, then you make
a model, and then you go to reality—you go to the site—and then you go back to
drawing. You build up a kind of circularity between drawing and making and then
back again,” Piano wrote by way of describing how architects worked before CAD.
“This is very typical of the craftsman’s approach. You think and you do at the same
time. You draw and you make…. You do it, you redo it, and you redo it again.” Piano
despaired of younger generations of architects who had never known a world

101

without CAD because they were not craftsmen. They had not learned the trade
through endless repletion. Much like the bakers in the Greek bakery Sennett cited in
an earlier iteration of this argument, they manipulated an extremely user-friendly
machine that effectively did the work for them. They had no skills (Sennett, 2008).
One way of understanding the importance of craft to librarians is to look at the
way that technology has changed the profession. Unlike architecture, which was
diminished by technology, librarianship has been enhanced and transformed by it.
CAD effectively took over many of the functions formerly performed by architects,
but the arrival of electronic databases and internet search engines has meant that
librarians had access to whole universes of information previously unavailable (or
only theoretically available) to them. Not only that, but the skills required to navigate
the new universe of electronic information represented an expansion of the
librarian’s role. Many WILIS1 subjects made the point that learning new
technological skills was a draw for deciding to enter LIS. One cited, as her reason,
that she “[w]anted more computer knowledge and skills in the area of information
research, data collection, statistics and reports.” Another reported that she had
“always enjoyed the process of research and helping others conduct research and
wanted a position that matched my skills.” A third described “want[ing] to work in
school setting in Instructional Technology” as her impetus for choosing LIS. “At the
time (1990) [there were] no jobs in the area. This was a good way to combine my
interests with a paying job.” I think it unlikely that architects would cite the chance to
use CAD as a reason for choosing to enter that profession.

102

It is similarly telling that the types of librarians who have traditionally reported
being happiest in their work are often those whose work one would expect to be
augmented by technology. This makes sense of the fact that LIS workers whose job
involves working with new technologies have traditionally had high rates of job
satisfaction. It likewise computes that reference librarians’ role would have been
expanded by technology. After all, databases and the web have made possible the
answering of all manner of previously difficult questions. Neither has technology
robbed them of the repetition crucial to the honing of craft as they continue to have
to conduct reference interviews.
On male librarian provided a particularly thoughtful response to the question
of how librarianship was transformed by technology and how the latter contributed to
his professional growth. “Being 58, I have seen information technology go from old
main frames requiring hours of lead time to get an answer and move to the current
'instant' answer scenario,” he began. “And I was able to grow with the technological
changes which has enhanced my own professional growth.” What made work
meaningful for him and what defined librarianship was not what he did at a given
point in his career. Instead, it was that librarianship, in this case special librarianship,
constantly threw up new challenges to him and provided variety in his work. “In my
30 years in special libraries, no two days have ever been the same. Every day has
offered new questions, projects, and challenges -- I have never been bored.”
Matters were not always thus, he hastened to point out. “When I first received
my BA-LS in 1971, I envisioned working in a school library forever.” But the
technology revolution that overtook librarianship over the course of his career had

103

given him opportunities to perform any number of different functions over the course
of a 30-year career, and his specific job at the time of the survey was to write
“specialized programs for library needs in several computer languages… [a]
knowledge base has also enabled me to develop special programs for my clients to
handle large bodies of information they must manage—one of the things I am able to
do more of in my consulting capacity.”
A reference librarian shared a similar experience of feeling her work measurably
augmented by the “technology revolution” that started to change librarianship in the
1970s. “I feel I stretched my training and education in library science to the upmost
during my career. I began my career when computers in libraries were rare,” she
wrote. Because of computers, she “had to continually learn new things and ways of
doing library work due to the technology revolution that was manifest during the
years I worked. I feel that I participated in the computer revolution in libraries and
struggled to learn how to use new technology and databases for reference work.”
Other challenges occasioned for her by the increasing use of computers in library
work included “automat[ing] a large card file of periodical article indexing and
assisted in helping move from that card file to automated data entry for current
indexing.” In all, she reckoned that “[k]eeping up with automation as a tool to be
used in the library during the years I worked took on a life of its own.”
For some, then, technology expanded what the field could be while they were
working as librarians. For others, going to an LIS program was a means of acquiring
a more craft-oriented job. One recalled a pre-MSLS employment history than was
“spotty,” including “many part time jobs, many jobs that were not as interesting as i

104

[sic] would have liked, many clerical jobs, working below my level of education and
training and competence.” Before entering librarianship, “almost all of the jobs i [sic]
held were boring and uninteresting and poorly paid.”

5.4

Professional Achievement
Librarianship’s technological transformation has not been an unmixed blessing.

One untoward consequence has been that some supervisors who entered the
profession under a different dispensation are insufficiently familiar with new
technology. “Those that entered the field who are not able to retrain to use
technology do not have the skills to do the basic jobs in some cases,” one WILIS1
respondent complained. To another, it seemed that “More responsibility goes to
older employees with less skills or abilities.” This makes sense to some extent. In a
profession as changed by technology as LIS has been, one would expect that
employees who had been in the field long enough to ascend to management would
not necessarily have to skills of a freshly minted MLS. And a certain amount of this
difference between skills of managers and lower-level employees is necessary—
they perform different jobs, after all, and it would hardly be a sign of a healthily
functioning organization for a large library director to be generating cataloging
records or updating the library website. But from a strict traditional craft perspective,
a too-great variance between the skills of those higher and lower in an
organizational hierarchy is problematic to the extent that part of the boss’s job is
knowledge transfer. Drawing on the metaphor of the medieval workshop, Sennett
emphasized the need of authority grounded in skill. “In craftsmanship, there must be

105

a superior who sets standards and who trains. In the workshop, inequalities of skill
and experience become face-to-face issues,” he wrote. “The successful workshop
will establish legitimate authority in the flesh, not in rights or duties set on paper.” To
illustrate what happened with the erosion of face-to-face authority based in skill,
Sennett pointed to a study that attributed demoralization of British nurses to their
having to report to National Health Service bureaucrats with no training in nursing.
One could see a similar demoralization at work in the words of the respondents who
complained that school librarians were being supervised by officials with no library
training.
Most modern workplaces cannot aspire to the mentorship experience of a
medieval workshop, of course; they are too large and heterogeneous. But that does
that mean that organizations can ignore the need for skills acquisition and
competent and attentive supervision on the part of their employees. This is one of
the reasons that professions exist. In the absence of a master craftsman working in
the same physical space as his or her charge, modern LIS workers must seek new
skills in professional achievement opportunities with colleagues who likely work
elsewhere. This was another reason for yoking craft and professional achievement
together in one variable. In a modern work environment, they are inseparable as
very few workers can hone their skills with just the tools they have on hand at their
own workplace. The final regression testifies to the importance of professional
achievement to librarian job satisfaction.
This finding was borne out by comments made in the survey. Most often, these
remarks took the form of regrets that for some reason they were unable to get the

106

professional achievement they needed to improve their skills and advance their
career. One subject deemed as crucial to performing her job well the “[n]eed more
time to plan, market, project, network. And for professional achievement.” Another
rued the fact that a “[b]usy family life hinders or prevents me from devoting nonoffice hours to professional development.” Elsewhere, an older respondent
expressed dismay that the “best training [was being given] to younger coworkers
with same position.”
Yet to hear Sennett tell it, craft is not merely technical proficiency, although that
is essential. In addition to making the best urn, bicycle, bomb, or cataloging record
possible, the true craftsman in Sennett’s formulation must concern himself with ends
as well as means. “”[T]he craftman’s ethos contains countervailing currents, as in the
principle of using minimal force in physical effort,” Sennett writes, expanding on his
definition of craft. “The good craftsman, moreover, uses solutions to uncover new
territory; problem solving and problem finding are intimately related in his or her
mind. For this reason, curiosity can ask ‘Why?’ as well as ‘How?’” Sennett has to
expand his definition of craft to include ends in The Craftsmen because it is related
to his larger philosophical argument that “making is thinking” and that the creation of
things—the atomic bomb, for example—must not be divorced from consideration of
their consequences. The author did not expand his definition of craft
correspondingly, thinking the narrower, more circumscribed notion of concept more
appropriate to a work of this scope. But both Sennett’s expansion of his definition
and my bracketing of professional achievement with craft point suggest something
about just how difficult it is to separate craft out from other considerations. Of course

107

one must consider ends at some point in the making of anything; when one
undertakes to create something in the first instance, it must be because it will have
an application even if it is just so that it may be aesthetically admired.

5.5 Sex and Job Satisfaction
While the finding that women were happier in work than men might have been
expected based on previous findings in the job satisfaction literature, it complicated
the narrative of the dissertation. One of the assumptions of this study had been that,
if LIS workers were more satisfied in their jobs than other information workers and,
further, that if most new work being created was going to be information work of one
stripe or another, then LIS work or librarianship may have something to teach other
kinds of information work fields. But if a good portion of librarians’ consistent job
satisfaction can be put down to the fact that most librarians are women and women
tend to report higher job satisfaction regardless of field, then whatever work-based
lessons LIS has for other kinds of information work may be limited.
At least one female respondent tied her decision to enter the field to the fact
that opportunities for advancement existed in a traditionally feminized profession that
might not have been found elsewhere. Asked why she was drawn to LIS, she
answered “Love of books and reading, liked public service aspect of previous work
in a library, saw opportunities for women in the management of libraries, anticipated
opportunities to work in training and professional development within libraries.” And
at least one subject professed feeling more comfortable working in the field because

108

there were so many women librarians: “I believe being a female has also added to
feelings of camaraderie among myself and co-workers.”
Despite the overall high level of satisfaction, respondents still reported cases of
arrant sexism against women. One recounted having a “promotion postponed due to
a male employee who was view needed it more than I since he was recently married
and had a family to provide for” and claimed to have been “denied a
recommendation for graduate school because ‘I might get pregnant and leave.’”
Another recalled having been “passed over for a new position which was given to a
male co-worker, although I had much more experience in the area - job was not a
posted one, it was created and bestowed on my co-worker.” One woman stated that
working in information technology, which is much more populated by men than
librarianship generally, contained its own problems. “As part of the Information
Technology Division, I was a rare female with a huge budget, and therefore often
suspect,” she wrote and then allowed that it “took awhile and a very supportive boss
to get a comparable salary to others with similar responsibilities.”

5.6

Older Workers
As stated in section 4.6, the most surprising finding of the first JOBSAT

regression was that older workers did not report being happier than their younger
colleagues as they had consistently done in other job satisfaction surveys. This led
me to conduct a second regression to try to figure out why. The second regression
attempted to isolate what may have changed about the profession in the previous
five years. This it did admirably.

109

Together, the New Skills/Proliferating Tasks age correlations and the second
regression paint a clear picture of older librarians moving into management positions
in which they are not as well supported as their predecessors were (or a least as
they perceived them to be). The fact that managers, at apparently all levels, were
having to do more work once performed by assistants was of a piece with the fact
that two of the other four factors negatively correlated with job satisfaction were
“work harder” and “more routine tasks.” That the “greater leadership role” variable
was the only of the thirteen job satisfaction variables to correlate positively with job
satisfaction showed that upward mobility per se was not the problem. Rather, it was
that they were promoted and still had to perform tasks they associated with positions
further down the chain of command. In the same way that previous generations of
North Carolina textile mill owners introduced the “stretch-out” system to increase the
number of tasks workers were expected to do, it would appear that circumstances—
be they uncertain public funds or unsympathetic/incompetent superiors—were now
forcing library managers to assume a greater workload. The result is a kind of
managerial “stretch-out,” wherein older librarians were being asked to take on new
management functions even as they continued to perform other types of tasks.
This grievance was seen everywhere in the open-ended responses. But one
respondent put the basic complaint most succinctly when he wrote that “due to the
demands of the goals of the library, I wear too many hats, and that is what
contributes to the number of hours I work. If we had adequate staffing, I would have
fewer responsibilities.” As in other areas, school librarians were particularly vocal on
this point. Representative complaints of the “stretch-out” variety usually made a point

110

of the need for more support staff. “I was in the public school system for my entire
career,” one recently retired school librarian wrote. “As a media coordinator in an
elementary school, my time was consumed by technology issues for the last 12
years or so. There is a great need for certified or support staff to help with the
expanding area of technology. I didn't feel as if I were doing the job for which I had
been hired and it was very frustrating.” Part of the difficulty with too few support staff
was that librarians were not only being asked to do more but also different kinds of
tasks than the ones for which they felt they had been trained.
Some of the sources of work overload were surprising. Although in some
respects automation was a boon for librarians, it also contributed to the stretch-out to
the extent that it was used to justify the elimination of support staff positions. “I
basically had the same job over the years. The titles just changed,” one academic
librarian commented, although subsequent remarks made it clear that it was not the
same job quite. “The last title change to Coordinator was done to all middle
managers since they thought budget cuts would cause those positions to be cut. As
we became more automated we lost positions as people left.” This eventuated in a
situation in which she “was basically doing the cataloging of books, handling serials
with non-professional help, and acquisitions.” For one public librarian, the stress of
moving into management was augmented by the fact that nothing in her education
or training much prepared her for it. “I had all the right courses, including human
resources management and library management, in library school, but nothing really
prepared me to be a director.” Ultimately she would enjoy success as a manger
because, in her words, “I had common sense and knew how to get along with

111

people. There were about 30 full-time and 10 part-time people on the staff and I
cared about them. I tried to be the sort of manager I would have liked to have
myself.”
Several librarians made a point of mentioning that they decided to opt out of
management altogether. For the most part, interestingly, they did not cite work
overload. For those deciding to forego management positions, the key concern was
that they simply appeared not to enjoy management work. “After many years in
library management, I realized I that, although I was respected and rewarded as a
manager,” a special librarian claimed, “my heart was really with information
technology in a hands-on position so I left management and am very glad my last 10
years in the profession” have been free of any supervisory work. “My 2nd position
provided me with ample opportunity to explore the management side of library work,”
another respondent reported, noting that “[f]or 4 years I was principle cataloger and
head of cataloging, supervising 0.5 FTE professional cataloger, 4 FTE
paraprofessional catalogers, and 4 FTE library clerks. I did not enjoy being a
supervisor, and do not plan to seek out such responsibility again.” A final refugee
from management who worked as a part-time aide in a school library found that
although that position “may be considered below my education and qualifications,…
at my present stage of life it is perfect for me.” In that capacity, she was able to “to
put all my skills to good use. I especially enjoy recommending books to students and
helping them find what they're looking for which is what led me to become a librarian
in the first place. I enjoy this job much more than I did my manager position!”

112

5.7

Academic and School Librarians
One other curious fact emerged in the second regression which was worthy of

mention. Namely, one of the work settings, academic libraries, emerged as
significantly negatively correlated with job satisfaction. This, too, makes sense in the
emerging picture. The kinds of librarians who might be most impacted by a stretchout and have to take on more tasks would be those working in large organizations,
since they have more support staff and therefore more potential for staff cuts. And
an academic library is more likely to have a lot of employees than any of the other
job settings in the model. In a model where larger organizations correlate with job
dissatisfaction, the largest types of organization likewise did so.
There were several qualitative responses which illuminated the source of job
stress that afflicted academic librarians uniquely, or at least disproportionately. “I
enjoyed the first 10 years or so that I worked as a librarian. Cataloging was
challenging and interesting, especially when as in my first position I was able to
catalog German titles,” went one answer to the final survey question, which asked
respondents to voice any concerns or features of their careers not otherwise
addressed in the survey. Soon enough, she found that she was being asked to
perform functions other than those for which she had been hired. But in an academic
setting, this included pressure to publish, acquire even more educational credentials,
and otherwise become something of a quasi-academic to the detriment of her LIS
role. “With the introduction of OCLC there was more flexibility in work hours.
However, I think that with the continuing emphasis in college and university libraries
on second masters, publishing, participation in professional organizations, etc. the

113

job responsibilities that librarians are supposedly hired to do are being deemphazied
or ignored altogether. These responsibilities/jobs are left to the staff while librarians
attend professional meetings, write articles, conduct studies (which actually would
help improve library service, if anyone, especially administrators, read them and
could apply the recommendations).” While the specific pressures mentioned in this
account are peculiar to academic libraries, this trend crops up in other settings; as
librarians take on more responsibilities, many of the core librarian responsibilities are
taken over by persons without formal LIS education. She highlights where this is a
bad idea. “Cataloging is extremely important in creating access to a library's
collection. Yet most library administrators and many reference librarians seem to
have little understanding of its importance or how to use it…. The last 10 years of
cataloging in a university library were extremely frustrating and depressing. I was
constantly correcting the poor cataloging records I found on OCLC.”
As a balance to this last thought, it is worth pausing briefly to note that, for
some academic librarians, the chance to use content knowledge contributed to their
satisfaction. “My last position in the Art and Architecture Library was very satisfying,”
one wrote, claiming that it gave her a chance to work as an adjunct professor in a
field in which she had expertise. “I was treated as an academic because I had both
the information technology skill and my academic subject expertise. I really enjoyed
my career.”
Another part of the problem for academic libraries, though, was that there was
often not adequate training to perform the more specialized tasks libraries are asking
their workers to perform. “What I see going on in librarianship is more demand for

114

librarians with specialized skills,” another academic librarian wrote. “There are very
few pure ‘reference librarian’ positions out there anymore. Almost every library wants
librarians who not only have the MLS degree, but librarians that have a specialized
skill, such as instruction, or electronic access, or collection development, or technical
skills. However, not many libraries are providing the training, or opportunities to train,
in new jobs.” The problem, in this librarian’s view, was a systemic one. “Most
libraries that I see have very formal, very rigid personnel structures, giving librarians
few opportunities to develop new skills. Personally, one of the problems that I face is
that I am at a small liberal arts university library with little turnover.” This particular
stress can be especially acute in small college libraries with limited staff but the
same pressure to evolve with the profession.
Although the library has increased demands on it in terms of usage
and services, there is [sic] almost no opportunities for continuing
education or advancement. People stay in positions here for years. I
am having to seek educational opportunities elsewhere, on my own
time. One of the things that really bothers me is that although I can
take classes at my institution at no cost to myself, I have to make up
the time that I will miss work.
A further challenge peculiar to academic librarians is that their jobs are just not
as common, and are therefore not as transferrable, as those of school and public
librarians. For academic librarians, one of the key selling points of the field, its
flexibility, is considerably diminished. “I think the important thing to take from my
narrative is that in the academic library field specialization can be very rewarding but
also severely limits one's flexibility as to location,” another academic librarian
confessed. “My husband and I moved across country so I could take my dream
library job, but when he finished his PhD we had to move (to Canada in fact) for the
115

tenure-track professorship he got.” This caused anxiety because her highly
specialized academic library skills were not likely to be in demand in her family’s
new location. “Now I'm not sure what my opportunities for employment will be there's certainly no similar Arabic cataloging position anywhere nearby and in fact
only the largest university libraries employ more than one full-time monographic
catalog librarian, so there may be no chance to even work in technical services after
my current part-time telecommuting position ends. I may have to try to get back into
the profession from another angle, by volunteering in reference at a public library, for
instance.”
A final characteristic that often distinguishes academic from other types of
librarianship is that college and university librarians were asked to collaborate with
other units on campus. This could conceivably be either a net positive or a negative;
in any case, it goes to the point that, in academic librarianship perhaps more than
anywhere else, LIS graduates are called upon to do non-LIS jobs. “The one thing
that I could not capture in the questions about my work history is the relatively new
development represented by my appointment as the Associate Director of the
university's new Center for Teaching and Learning,” one former academic librarian
reported. “This is not a library project—it reports directly to the Provost. I think it
represents a trend in academic libraries to form collaborative partnerships or joint
projects with other units on campus (such as Centers of teaching or information
technology centers). I'm finding this responsibility requires both existing skills I have
as a librarian and the development of new skills and abilities.”

116

Academic librarians were thus subject to a number of pressures that other
kinds of librarians are not, including the pressure to publish, to learn increasingly
specialized new skills, and to collaborate with other university units. Further, their
more highly specialized skill sets tend to limit their career flexibility. Finally, there is
the fact that, in the academy generally, the tendencies of men and women are the
reverse of what they are in the larger job satisfaction literature. That is to say that
men working in academe consistently report higher levels of satisfaction than
women. These factors would appear to be the best explanations for why academic
librarianship alone correlated negatively with job satisfaction.
No negative correlation existed between being a school librarian and job
satisfaction. But because job-related complaints were so much more prevalent from
school librarians in the open-ended responses, I thought many of those grievances
worthy of inclusion here. School librarians and media specialists were particularly
vocal on having too many obligations to fit into a standard eight-hour work day, and
feeling pressure to work more hours than required by their full-time jobs. Some felt
unduly taxed by the extracurricular activities they supervised or otherwise worked
with in addition to their proper jobs. “Some weeks I work five 12 to 15 hour days
trying to catch up with my work because of clubs I work with,” one wrote. “While
these are not hours required by administrators, I feel that they are expected by some
in my workplace and the parents of my students.” Along these same lines, another
respondent cited “[t]oo many other duties at school, such as bus duty, that are after
school.” Extended hours could result from the wish to be able to perform one’s work
better. “Even though it is my choice to stay later, I would like to go home on time

117

instead of working after normal school employee time,” another lamented. “I get
more of my work done after everyone else leaves for the day (less interruptions.)”
Here is another instance where the links between craft, “full-time” work, and job
satisfaction are laid bare.
5.8

Pay
Income did not show up as significantly correlated with job satisfaction in any of

the three regressions. That pay should not figure unusually prominently into LIS
workers’ job satisfaction ought not to surprise to the extent that persons selecting
into the field are presumably not those for whom money is among the most
important career criteria. This tendency was borne out by open-ended responses
that, while not typical, seemed to be the work of people who were impervious to
material rewards to the point of perversity. “The school system pays librarians more
than public libraries,” one such response began. “I took a $8,000 cut in pay to return
to public library work. (The school system was going to cut 300
teachers/librarians/employees; and I was one. I had 12 years experience in the
system. I could have bumped another librarian at the elementary level with fewer
years of experience.)” Despite the considerable pay cut, this respondent felt called to
public librarianship by a sense of mission. “I chose to return to public library work
because I like the diversity of the public library. The people who come to the public
library need help and frequently do not know who else to consult. (Call me stupid if
salary is the only criteria to judge success.)” Along these same lines, another subject
conceded that while “Salaries are terribly low,” she “believe[d] wholeheartedly in the
field and plan[ned] to spend my career in it anyway.”
118

It is useful to note that this was far from a unanimous view and that, for each
respondent who professed relative indifference to low pay, there was another to
whom it constituted a major problem. One located the source of salary woes in the
decision libraries had made to concentrate on technical resources to the exclusion of
human ones. “Libraries are becoming TOO tech-centric. They need to remember the
human element in who uses the library, and who STAFFS the library,” she
complained. “Part of recognizing the human element in staff is FIGHTING FOR, not
just giving lip service to, pay equity. It's a sorry state of affairs when somebody with
an associate's degree (physical plant manager) is paid more than MSL degreed
librarians.” For some, the problem of low pay was significant enough to cause them
to leave the profession altogether. “From the time I started library school till today I
believe librarians have failed to market themselves very well,” another wrote. “They
allow themselves to be underpaid, undervalued and overlooked. I love libraries-using
them as a patron, what they provide for the community, especially public libraries.
But when I see what librarians are paid, I get sick. No more of that for me.” So there
is the distinct likelihood that those who most disliked the profession’s relatively poor
pay largely selected out of my sample of self-identified librarians.

5.9

Coworkers
Co-Worker Support correlated more closely JOBSAT in the final regression

than any other variable save Craft and Professional Achievement. Meanwhile, CoWorker Cohesion had the fifth largest beta. That librarians’ relationship to their coworkers is vital to their satisfaction came through time and again in the open-ended
119

responses. Asked why she or he entered the LIS field, one subject responded “the
atmosphere, the camaraderie, the variety of responsibilities.” Others expressed the
idea that one’s relationship to one’s library co-workers was substantively different
from those in other fields. One subject entered the profession because, as she
wrote, “[l]ibrarians worked collaboratively rather than competitively.” The theme of
librarians’ collegiality contributing to a healthy work “atmosphere”—the exact word
used in no fewer than nine open-ended responses—recurred often. Librarianship
“affords opportunities to learn continuously,” one offered. “Pleasant, challenging,
intellectual atmosphere. Work with motivated, intelligent, warm, funny, and generous
colleagues.” One respondent even cited having observed collegial working
relationships among librarians as a motivation for deciding to attend LIS school. “I
liked the librarians that I met,” she remembered “and I thought that they would be
excellent coworkers. Also, I found the library to be a nurturing environment for a new
career.”
One aspect of craft in the modern work life is teamwork because it takes place
mostly within organizations. Per Sennett in The Corrosion of Character, “The
modern work ethic focuses on teamwork. It celebrates sensitivity to others; it
requires such ‘soft skills’ as being a good listener and being cooperative; most of all,
teamwork emphasizes team adaptability to circumstances.” The Sennett of 1998
took a dim view of the emphasis on teamwork. It was anathema to craft with its
stress on the finished product. Teamwork was “an ethos of work which remains on
the surface of experience. Teamwork is the group practice of demeaning
superficiality.” In contrast, “the old work ethic was founded on self-disciplined use of

120

one’s time, with an emphasis laid on self-imposed, voluntary practice rather than
merely passive submission to schedules or routine.” The modern workplace
devalued this self-discipline, which was among the best guarantors pre-modern
societies had against social instability and chaos. Organizations replaced the sturdy
craftsmen of yore with clock watchers who answered to the timesheet rather than to
objective standards of quality. Discussing the modern workforce of the formerly
Greek bakery discussed in my literature review, Sennett put the matter succinctly:
“The work is no longer legible to them, in terms of knowing what they are doing”
(Sennett, 1998).
But if, as Sennett also wrote in The Corrosion of Character, almost everything
is made better when practiced as craft, could not the same also be said of
teamwork? Could work within organizations with high turnover rates not be
organized in a way that made the work more “legible” to its employees? LIS job
satisfaction studies, including this one, have testified to the importance of coworkers. And while the co-worker support and co-worker cohesion variables may not
map directly to “teamwork,” I do not think it is an unwarranted logical leap to suggest
that there is likely to be significant overlap between the categories. Librarians relish
their co-workers, and it makes their working life happier and more meaningful. Part
of the answer to what makes librarians less alienated than the Boston bakery
workers is, of course, that they are members of a profession which has to certify that
they are qualified to perform their jobs. Professions ensure that, in a high-turnover
modern work environment, organizations can determine who is qualified to work for

121

them. Professional workers therefore do not have to be deskilled to the extent of
their non-professional counterparts.
It is worth noting, too, that Sennett seemed to soften his stance toward
teamwork 10 years after The Corrosion of Character in The Craftsmen. Without
invoking “teamwork” specifically, Sennett did make a point of “the superiority of
cooperation to competition in getting good work done.” But cooperation had to be
structured appropriately in order to be effective. Citing the work of economists
Richard Lester and Michael Piore, Sennett argued that companies who succeeded
in the race to become players in the initial mobile phone boom of the early 2000s did
so because they adopted relatively unstructured collaborative spaces. Motorola, for
example, created a “technical shelf,” an open-access area where engineers could
leave possible technical solutions that other teams or units might find useful in the
future. It allowed these engineers to work on tools “whose immediate value was not
clear” but which would be made available to everyone in the event that they did
become useful. Similarly, Nokia fostered useful collaboration by holding something
resembling focus groups that brought together engineers, designers, and
salespeople. In contrast, a company like Ericsson, which maintained more rigid
divisions between offices, had a harder time making the transition to mobile
technologies as different units vied to protect professional turf. This circumstance
naturally weighed against meaningful collaboration (Sennett, 2008). Sennett does
not address how his veneration of collaboration jibes with his previous denigration of
teamwork, or if he thinks a distinction exists between the two. One way of squaring
the circle, it seems to me, is through reference to Sennett’s expansive definition of

122

craft in which everything from parenthood to citizenship is improved when practiced
as craft. In the same way that there are better and worse ways of repairing an
engine, there would seem to be better and worse ways of running an organization—
a vindication of management studies. It is not so much that teamwork is an innately
pernicious idea as it is that it works better when organizations address specifically
how units and individuals can best work with together than it does when they
concern themselves with so-called soft skills.
But without having those soft skills being in place, Sennett seems to concede in
another example, it can be difficult to promote fruitful collaborations. “Listeners may
sometimes imagine that working with a superstar conductor or soloist inspires
orchestral players, the virtuoso setting a standard that lift’s everyone’s game, but this
depends on how the star behaves,” Sennett writes in The Craftsmen. “A soloist
withdrawn from collegiality can actually diminish the will of orchestra players to
perform well.” So in the case of the star soloist, it would appear that the structural
components are in place for a productive collaboration. All the principals are in the
room together and the work of the soloist is unimpeachably workmanlike but,
because he or she cannot or will not deign to be an integral part of the larger unit,
the optimal result does not obtain. It may be said then that soft skills are a necessary
but not sufficient condition for teamwork. A charitable reading of Sennett in this case
would say that what he objected to in the first book was not soft skills in themselves
but an emphasis on them to the near exclusion of more structural concerns.
In the WILIS1 data, there were examples bearing out the importance of both
sound soft skills and structural thinking to the proper functioning of LIS workplaces.

123

“Skills in working with people are as important as the technical or subject areas of
one’s job,” one respondent commented, adding that “COMMUNICATION and more
COMMUNICATION” were essential to her library’s effective operation. Another
added that “tech skills etc are seen as the most important thing, when in fact
reliability and people skills are just as important.”
“People skills” were not all that good co-workers brought to the table. Coworker help was often indispensable to being able to do one’s own job well as was
the case for a youth services librarian in a rural public library system. After a brief
career layoff, she needed to re-skill. “If it had not been for the on-the-job training and
mentoring there, I would not have the job I do today, “she claimed. “In 1993, the
online catalog hadn't come to our system; by the time I wanted to return to public
service in 1997, it was in full swing. So my co-workers in my on-call job were
invaluable in assisting my searching skills and familiarity with the software.” But the
value of good co-workers could be effectively canceled by an unfairly demanding
boss. “Co-workers in and outside department were fine,” wrote an academic
librarian. “Department Head was a tyrant who intimidated all of her staff. Not a team
environment at all.”
Lack of supportive co-workers who could aid librarians in their everyday work
could beget problems. One librarian spoke to the problem of being a “lone wolf” in
her department/skill area, and how the lack of effective teammates alienated her
from her work. “I disliked being pigeonholed as a cataloger and I disliked
supposedly being the tech person who knew all the cutting edge stuff,” she wrote.
“One of my projects was to put together an image database. This was 1994 and

124

software was just coming out for this. I was supposed to spearhead this, but I just
didn't know how to make it happen. I liked my co-workers, my boss (on a personal
level), and the organization that I worked for. But I felt isolated, without good support
and direction from my boss, and lonely.” There were aspects of the job that she liked
she conceded but they could not make up for the isolation she felt. “I hated going
into my office (no windows in the middle of an office building) and facing a day of just
me and the computer. I worked on committees and really liked training people on
Internet, but that was a small part of my time. I hoped at one time to share some of
the reference duties, but my boss wasn't open to that. I did what I could in the job,
but in the end, it wasn't the right place for me.”
The “lone wolf” problem seemed especially widespread among school
librarians whose supervisors often do not understand their work. “I have found my
major problem as a school librarian is that I have been and am supervised by a
principal who is ill informed of my training and skill set, and who has many
expectations unrelated to my job description,” one explained. This situation had
untoward consequences as the respondent “received my first below standard rating
on an appraisal and was, as a result, denied tenure and forced to resign. The
principal had never been trained on the appraisal instrument and did not perform all
the observations or the interview the instrument requires.” She was, fortunately, able
to find new employment “I was able to find a new position” but, she added, “with a
fully fixed schedule and no media assistant for over 400 students at a Title I school,”
which she described as an “untenable situation.” In the end, the overall lack of
effective support offered school media positions eroded her commitment to the

125

profession. “ In both districts the central office personnel in media services have
been supportive but able to actually do very little. The need for school librarians to
do so much site-based advocacy on top of what is already a demanding job may
very well drive me out of the school setting.”
Finally, there were several complaints of prejudice or lack of respect on the
part of co-workers, leading to adverse work situations. These included: “I have
experienced anti-gay bigotry in the form of comments by co-workers”; “problems
with co-workers- left the position”; “Don't get respect from co-workers when I am the
librarian-in-charge”; and “My religious beliefs are often attacked by co-workers. I do
not volunteer conversations about religion, but am drawn into them by questions.”

5.10

Family Dynamics
One of the aspects of this study to set it apart was to be that, unlike previous

LIS job satisfaction studies, it would also focus on the effect of non-work-related
variables on job satisfaction. For that reason I added the four family dynamics
variables in the final regression. It developed that, although respondents frequently
spoke of family-related stresses and issues in the open-ended data, neither marital
status, having children, nor one’s breadwinner status had any impact on job
satisfaction.
Nevertheless, since one of the advantages of so large a data set is the ability to
portray diversity as well as central tendencies, I thought it worth exploring the ways
in which family dynamics impacted LIS workers’ career choice and work life. In the
first instance, there were numerous respondents for whom the decision to enter LIS

126

was predicated on the fact that it allowed more time for family. Typical of these types
of responses were the librarians claiming the profession “allowed time to pursue
other interests and care for family” and “provide[d] flexibility for me and my family.”
A couple former teachers mentioned having made the room from the classroom to
the library for this same reason. “Teaching made it difficult to spend time with my
own family because I was always correcting papers,” one explained. “I wanted to
work where grades were not the driving force of my job and where I could really
affect a change by helping children find great books and learn to read for a life time!”
The other noted that “[l]eaving the classroom allowed me to have more time for my
family and I had different responsibilities in the media center that allowed me to be
less controlled by classroom structure.” In fact, there may be a historical component
to librarianship’s accommodation of family since the profession must have evolved to
accommodate the needs of its female workforce. As one subject explained, she
opted to enter librarianship because “[i]n the 70's few options for women, esp w/ a
family.”
With its plentiful opportunities for part-time and contingent work, librarianship
also seems to have offered a chance for workers who wanted to take some time off
to raise their family to keep their toe in the field so that they could come back to it
later. In this respect, librarianship offered something different from most other
professions. It would be a far more difficult trick to, for example, wangle a 20-hour
nursing, teaching, or attorney job while one’s children were young than to get a parttime librarian job. This fact was reflected in the plans of one recent mother: “I have
JUST gone back to work part time almost exactly 6 months after the birth of my son.

127

I currently plan to have another child within the next two years, and I will likely take
another break from employment at that time,” she wrote. She further “envision[ed]
working part time for the indefinite future, as my husband's salary is enough to
support us and my family is more important to me than a career,” and she expressed
a wish “to continue working part time, though, both because I enjoy it and because it
keeps my foot in the door in case I should need to go back to work full time down the
road.”
Of course the abundance of part-time work available to those with families
could be cast in a less charitable light. “I chose to become a librarian because I
thought it would fit my family's lifestyle,” one-part-timer explained. That lifestyle
included not only children but also moving “every 2-4 years for the last 23 years.”
While claiming “never [to have had] trouble finding a job when we move,” she also
noted that there was “less flexibility in moving from one type of library to another
than I had imagined.” Frequent moves also meant the respondent was never able to
bank enough years in one place to advance her career and the part-time positions
she could find offered pay rates not at all commensurate with her experience:
I am also frustrated that with my years of experience, I can only
convince employers to pay me an entry-level wage. In my experience,
they will not pay permanent part-timer librarians a wage that is
consistent with years of experience. They get a real bargain by not
having to give me benefits. Employers seem to think it's a fair trade
when I get part-time hours. However, as an example, I signed on with
my current employer for 15 hours/week. That quickly became 18, then
20, then 25, and now 29 hours per week to accommodate their needs.
It is very difficult to get the work done in fewer hours. They won't pay
for more people and I can't keep the job if I don't raise my hours.
For all the benefits that librarianship offered workers with families, there were
those for whom families represented an impediment to their advancement or on-the128

job performance. “Because I set aside evening family time, I am not material for
upper management,” one respondent wrote. “Family responsibilities were assumed
to limit my availability for some professional activities,” another cautioned. A third
admitted that “[a]lthough I had good positions early and mid-career, in hindsight, I
was distracted from setting and achieving clear career goals and professional
certifications by a difficult family situation.”
There is the possibility as well that the picture of librarianship’s family
friendliness that mostly prevails in the WILIS1 data is partly illusory. Some portion of
those for whom work would interfere with their family life may be selecting out of my
sample. “I resigned my position when I had my first daughter because I did not feel
the hours and work level were compatible with family commitments,” one former
librarian wrote. “Currently I am not employed but volunteer in a tutoring program.”
And there were others whose experience belied the idea that libraries
accommodated working parents. One problem in this respect could be irregular
working hours. “It was not so much the number of hours, but that you were expected
to work two or more nights a week, alternate Saturdays, and one Sunday a month,
one former employee of a large East Coast urban public library system complained.
“This destroyed a lot of family time.” Along these same lines, another former librarian
griped that “I don't know how it is in the field now -- but there needs to be more
compassion for hours, days, and weeks for leave for caring for family, for aging and
dying relatives, for having a ‘life’ and not being owned by the library itself; for
allowing you to disagree without feeling you will lose your job.” Clearly, librarianship

129

enjoys in some quarters a reputation for being a family-friendly career choice; just as
clearly, there are significant exceptions that complicate that image.
5.11

Tensions between Age Groups
The fact that fully nine of the 12 New Skills/Proliferating Tasks variables

correlated with advancing age more than suggested that older workers experienced
a fair amount of tension and anxiety surrounding the issue of changes to the field. As
stated before, one of the sources of anxiety appeared to be that many older workers
were entering management at a time when libraries were being asked to stretch their
resources. The theme of libraries being asked to do more with less, especially as
concerns staff, also makes sense of the fact that a perceived lack of job security
correlated negatively with satisfaction. As with most of the New Skills/Proliferating
Tasks variables, older workers were more concerned about job security than
younger ones. Some of this was due to the feeling that they were being put out to
pasture. Some mid- and late-career professionals confessed to feeling pressure to
retire as their libraries tried to update their images. One cited “statements by various
coworkers that the library needs a younger image” as a reason for feeling pressure
to retire. “The director is certainly promoting this in the new hires,” she added. At all
events, there did appear to be some disconnect, and some significant antipathy,
between older and younger librarians.
Part of it had to do with disillusion with the broader trend of diminishing
obligations of organizations to employees. There is some suspicion that the focus on
younger workers has to do with a wish not to pay more experienced workers who

130

command higher salaries. “My organization in particular values younger workers
more highly on the basis of the enthusiasm, new skills and knowledge they bring
from library school over the experience of older workers (and perhaps the expense
of covering their retirement costs),” one librarian commented. Another decried
“[c]hanges in employment away from ‘lifetime’ company relationships; making more
room for younger employees to advance; perception that older workers lack the
skills needed for today's workplace”
A certain amount of this age-based antipathy cut both ways. While older
workers in particular admitted to being asked to perform more work than they could
reasonably be asked to do well, certain of their younger coworkers complained of
being dismissed for their youth and lack of experience. “Early in this job some
coworkers assumed I couldn't possibly know what I was talking about because I was
much younger than they were,” one exasperated academic librarian wrote. Another
complained of coworkers who were “reticent to trust me with large tasks,” and
claimed she “needed to work three times as hard to prove that I could do as good a
job as a 40 year old.” Still another thought that her “youth was interpreted as lack of
experience; a few of my direct reports would go over my head to consult with the UL
on some matters.” Meanwhile, one of the younger cohort chimed in with this
complaint that seemed to fly in the face of stereotypes about the tension between
the generations: “Older co-workers can take on a condescending or mocking tone
when addressing technology-related topics. I find it inappropriate and
unprofessional.”

131

But as a general matter, older and experienced workers were not more anxious
because they feared not being sufficiently skilled to work in new-economy
information environments. Fear of technology did not figure prominently at all in
older workers’ stated reasons for being dissatisfied in their position. Two of the only
three new skills/proliferating tasks variables not to correlate with advancing age were
“Learn New Skills” and “More High Tech Tasks.” Bottom line: Nothing in the data
indicated aging workers feared technological change, as I admittedly had suspected,
and a there was rather a lot that suggested they greeted it enthusiastically. If this
data suggests anything about why older LIS workers did not express the satisfaction
levels that previous studies indicated, it is that they have sunk years into a
profession which is changing structurally in unwelcome ways. After investing years
in LIS, both for education and as professionals, many were still unsure of their job
security. And in cases where they were moving up in the profession, it was not at all
clear that the field would look remotely like the one that they were initially attracted
to and in which they had often worked decades. They were ascending to
management positions at a moment when support staff were disappearing and
managers were newly encumbered with more mundane tasks. And just maybe, they
were finding that with the crush of new tasks, they were not able to do what they saw
as their main job as well as they would have liked. If this last theory were true, one
would expect it to have been confirmed by the third regression. And indeed it was
when the Craft and Professional Achievement variable registered as the surest
predictor of job satisfaction.

132

Where older workers did express suspicion of technology, they did so
because they feared it was debasing research or because an overweening focus on
technological resources obscured a former focus on customer service, not because
they feared learning new high tech tasks. “It saddens me to realize that libraries are
no longer valued for book and print collections, and true research seems to
relegated only to searching the Internet without attention given to the reliability of
Internet sources,” one complained. “I enjoy curling up with a good book--from
computer use, I do not enjoy carpal tunnel syndrome and eyestrain. My age is
shining through.” Other older workers felt that the rush to ensure new hires had good
technical skills tended to shortchange the value of customer service. “Many libraries
want to appeal to and attract younger customers,” another said. This resulted in
a move toward placing younger professionals in public service desk
positions, and then moving these workers into managerial roles as
technology increases. While some mature workers show reluctance to
learn new technologies, I don't believe all older workers should be
categorized in this way and passed over for advancement. Great
customer service takes patience and wisdom along with technical skills
these days in reference work. These are more likely to be qualities that
mature reference professionals have.
Other older librarians expressed frustration that being labeled “old” in some
instances seemed to disqualify them from working more closely with technology.
“Sometimes my ideas concerning uses of technology or new ways to go about
outreach are overlooked, until a ‘young’ person (ie, usually not much younger and
could even be the same age, just a more recent graduate) is able to present the
same idea and gain support.” In this subject’s case, the problem was exacerbated,
he said, by having just moved to a new job in an area with more recent LIS
graduates and an apparently concomitant emphasis on tech. “I seem to be
133

considered ‘too old’ to do such things in my new position, but I personally believe
this situation is the result of living in an area with many new LIS graduates and an
emphasis on already knowing the latest technology skills before employment, not
training after employment.”
One mid-career librarian felt that pressure on Boomers to retire combined with
a tight job market for freshly minted LIS graduates combined to create a potentially
toxic situation. “I read more about pressure to retire in the library literature and on
the blogs; I think there is a very large Gen Y generation coming up who will need
jobs and I think the library leaders have really overestimated the financial ability of
the boomer generation to actually be able to retire ‘on time,’” she wrote. Adding to
this tension was the fact that “technology skills have also changed, and some older
librarians are trying to keep up and some aren't. I don't actually see much of that
pressure at work, but older coworkers tell me that they have experienced pressure
from management when they are just a few years (5 or so) away from retirement.” In
such a situation with older and younger workers competing for diminishing
resources, some tension between generations of librarians appears inevitable.

5.12

Task Variety and Continuous Learning

Another theme to emerge in reading through individual written responses within
the WILIS1 survey was that LIS workers were very keen on task variety and learning
new skills on the job. As a result of these characteristics, their skills were highly
transferrable to other careers.

134

One librarian’s account of her career testified to the varied nature of her work.
“I have done everything from typing and filing catalog cards to telling a story at story
time,” she wrote. “I have helped researchers find their family history and assisted
health care professionals find needed information to help patients.” The diversity
within her career extended to the library settings in which she worked. “I have
worked in special, academic and public libraries as both a paraprofessional and
professional, and also for a[n] integrated library system company.” Another
characterized his variegated career history thusly: “Two years were spent teaching
social studies and English in a jr. high school, one year teaching speech and drama
in high school. Following a period of a year working in a small college library, I got
my MSLS and worked in many different libraries - public, elementary, university,
boys' preparatory.” He then added that the “last 25 years were spent as media
specialist in an elementary school. I never met a job I didn't like.”
Yet task variety did not necessitate having worked in a variety of different
settings. “My professional positions have all been in the same library, I have worked
managing the Circulation Dept., as Reference/Govt. Documents Librarian, as Head
of Cataloging and now as Assoc. Univ. Librarian for Tech. Services,” an academic
librarian attested. “Although my entire professional career has been in the same
library, the changes in technology, especially the rapid changes in the past 10 years,
have given me a wide range of experience and has kept the work challenging and
interesting.” Similarly, a former marketing executive found that “[l]ibrarianship
challenges me daily to expand my knowledge and skills. I have learned to manage

135

people, facilities and budgets and to provide reference services and assistance with
technology in a branch library setting.”
Task variety seems to have been one reason why workers preferred small
settings. It allowed to perform different functions within the library and gave them
time and space to figure out in which direction they wanted to go if and when they
specialized. One academic librarian wrote of spending “6 yrs in a small rural
community college library; except for lack of technology, was great experience
because we did both public and technical services; was a great chance to learn
which side of the library we preferred to work.”
Many of the librarians in the sample, and those professing an affinity for lifelong
and on-the-job learning especially, were able to use their LIS skills in other
professions after they left the field. “A degree in library and information science
prepares individuals for many opportunities outside traditional libraries,” one career
information professional wrote. “I have been able to move into three separate but
related fields -- organizational development, teaching and learning within universities
(with emphasis on use of technology in teaching), and consulting (within & outside
libraries). I have also been able to take a long period (15 yrs) to do part-time paid
work and to spend a large amount of time in various civic volunteer positions while
being the primary care-giver for our three children.”
Others went into greater detail on the issue of how their LIS training had fed
into a new career. “When I founded and ran the non-profit group (and later
developed a web site) I used what I had learned in lib. school on documenting
everything, researching facts, networking, etc.,” wrote one former Virginia public

136

librarian. “When I became a writer and editor for various things including the
Almanac of Virginia Politics (and put it on the web until my retirement), again I drew
on what I had learned about reference work, documentation, organization.” A career
military intelligence officer was likewise able to adapt his LIS skills for use in that
field. “My MSIS education has greatly aided me as I worked in highly decentralized
operations which required optimum information organization and the application of
decisive technologies to communicate across disparate locations,” he wrote.
Another former librarian explained in some detail the specific LIS skills he was able
to apply to tasks in his research job. “I also use my Computer Interface Design (IS
class) methods in creating slide decks to present my research results, he explained.
“Client interviewing skills (the reference interview training) are vital in developing
good surveys for our customers.” Finally, a woman who enjoyed a long legal career
after having left librarianship because of lack of opportunities for advancement
claimed to “often tell people that the information management skills I got in my
MSLS program, including experience with old-time mainframe programming, have
been as important to my success as anything else I've done -- so much of work is
about understanding, evaluating, organizing and effectively using critical
information.”
LIS skills could not only be applied to other careers but also to non-workrelated aspects of life. “My most important accomplishment has been my family, but
I feel my LIS training really honed my skills in information and data management,”
one public librarian winningly remarked. “I became more of a ‘detail person’ through
the program. I use these skills today in all aspects of my life. And, of course, I love to

137

read more than ever and am always visiting the public libraries. Thank goodness for
them!” In this she seemed to echo what Sennett said about craft being applicable not
only to work but to other areas of life such as parenthood and citizenship. And she
raises the intriguing possibility that the practice of craft at work may aid one in
deploying it elsewhere in one’s life. Certainly, that would dovetail nicely with the
finding that job satisfaction positively impacts life satisfaction.

5.13

The LIS Risk Economy
In all of the discussion of managerial stretch-outs, one potential source of

stress for aging librarians went unmentioned. Namely, while most of the data
collection for WILIS1 took place prior to the onset of the 2008 financial crisis, much
of it did not. More to the point, there were no shortages of signs of future trouble in
the economy at large when the data were collected, and this fact certainly may have
played some role in the apprehension managers felt about having sunk so many
years into the field at a time that it and the economy seemed to be entering a
precarious phase. In other words, the fact that the LIS field appeared to be entering
a risk economy after they had essentially wed themselves to this career may have
represented a source of dissatisfaction for managers because they had no
professional fall back plan.
An unaccustomed lack of stability within the profession manifested itself in a
couple other ways in the WILIS1 data. One way was when anxiety over job security
registered as the fifth largest determinant of job satisfaction. Another was in the way
subjects talked about an emergent risk economy in words reminiscent of the findings

138

of the WANE study. Written comments were peppered with subjects bemoaning the
state of the job market upon leaving LIS school, the difficulty of finding new jobs after
a move, and the need to work multiple part-time jobs to make ends meet.
One recent graduate bemoaned the grim reality of post-program job market
folding in a complaint about the lack of job placement aid from her program. “I just
wish that my program would've been active in finding me (and other graduates)
employment upon graduation, instead of just cutting us loose to find employment on
our own,” she wrote. “I also wish active recruitment would've been performed within
my LSIS program. I'm happy with my education, but highly disappointed with the job
market and employment opportunities in North Carolina for information science /
technology job-seekers.” Another respondent maintained that it was “very difficult
for me to find a job after graduating, especially since I moved to a different area. I
was unemployed for almost a year.” Here again, an LIS school’s lack of a good job
placement program was partly to blame. “The resources offered by my school were
not very helpful—I eventually found a job by networking with students and alumni
from another library school where I live now,” but ultimately it proved not quite a fit.
“My current job is mostly satisfactory and I am glad to at least be working in the field
in which I have a degree, but it is not what I really wanted as a library professional
and it is not something that really suits my talents--I am adequate at it, but not really
good.”
Confronting an unpromising job market was not a burden new graduates bore
alone. Notably, for those who have to move for family reasons, finding a new
position could be tough. “I moved 2 times to follow my spouse's career path, since

139

his career pays significantly more than mine,” one trailing spouse wrote, further
explaining that she had chosen to stay home with children for some years.
Unfortunately, she found that, for a profession with a reputation for accommodating
family commitments and which further was expecting a large number of its older
workers to retire in coming years, there was not a lot on offer for her, and that even
the part-time, “substitute” position she landed was not flexible enough.
I would gladly work a few (5-10) hours a week in a professional
librarian capacity if that seemed to be an option. Unfortunately even
public library professional-level part-time positions tend to be
'substitute' positions that require availability at a moment's notice (not
an option for many stay-at-home-moms). In my prior substitute position
you it was frowned upon to block off too much time each week as
'unavailable', if you really only wanted to work on a couple specific
days of the week. For a profession that has been afraid of the bulk of
the workforce retiring I don't understand why there aren't more
opportunities for people like me and also for people who want to retire
but still assist others for a certain number of fixed hours per week.
Also, although I didn't feel I was treated badly when I became a mom,
there was definitely an awareness that I was different. 3 out of 4 of the
other librarians were either unmarried/no children, or married/not
having children. The 4th had adult children / no grandchildren. Out of
the entire library staff of about 20 people I was the only person with a
small child. One other person had a child around 10; all others had
children who were close to college age or older. Before my son was
born I would often work 10-13 hour days during heavy instruction times
of the year, sometimes working both weekend days as well. Other
librarians did this as well. I was not able to keep these hours once my
son was born, especially with a commute (and my husband's lack of
flexibility in his higher-paying job). My co-workers were understanding,
but there was definitely a divide.
Those who do find jobs were often entering into a fraught financial situation. “I
was without a full-time paying job for nearly 3 years. During most of this time, I was a
full-time student which working as a graduate assistant or at a part-time job,” one
respondent began, by way of describing the trajectory of her career. But she found

140

that, even with a job, paying down the loans she incurred to pay for her LIS
education was problematic at best. “It is unfortunate that LIS careers do not pay
better because I am now struggling to pay back the loans that I relied upon to live
during my graduate program. It is also unfortunate that grants and other types of
financial aid that do not have to be paid back for LIS students are not readily
available.” One reason for situations like this one seems to be that LIS students are
eligible for student loans that are out of proportion to the entry-level jobs they are
likely to enter into upon graduation. “My financial aid seemed to be based on the
salary that I made at the job that I left to go to school and therefore was not nearly
enough on which to survive. The interest alone on my loans is approximately 20% of
my monthly take-home pay.”
One upshot of the combination of a grim job market is that, like many of the IT
employees surveyed in the WANE study, increasingly LIS graduates are forced to
cobble together their livelihood with numerous provisional and freelance jobs. One
former public librarian spoke of a professional period in the wilderness that lasted for
two years before landing another full0-time job “I also worked part time for an
educational video and film distributor but that was short lived since it was strictly a
commission only job. I settled for hourly wage employment for the two years before I
joined the world of special libraries and served as a circuit librarian for small
hospitals who needed a librarian for JCAHO compliance.” Another noted that “[f]or a
period of 9 months, I held two part time jobs, one of which I still have (my Librarian 1
position in the public library). The other part time job I had was in a small corporate
library where I did serials work (checkin, ordering, weeding), copy cataloging,

141

acquisitions work, and some archives work for 15 hours per week.” However, the
corporate “position was temporary” and she “was eventually let go.” Another
confessed that she “work[ed] at three part-time positions cataloging for two libraries
and one library network, I do some of this from home. I didn't see any question
addressing if you work at more than one job.” This represented another case in a
wish to spend more time raising a family contributed to a more provisional work
situation. “I originally started working full-time at the cataloging job I answered
questions about in this survey and then after 7 years had a baby and went to parttime, so basically continued my same job there but in less time and more
dependence on volunteers to help get the work done."
In general, there is a sense among some that, while LIS skills are valuable
and readily adaptable to other fields, much of what attracted librarians to LIS work in
the first place is going by the boards. As workplace flexibility erodes, the job market
grows more specialized, and provisional jobs become more prevalent, librarians are
looking for employment in other information fields. This represents, conceivably, an
existential threat to the profession.
To combat this threat, some librarians expressed the opinion the profession
needs to define professional boundaries and generally make the case for itself more
actively. One public librarian in a rural library system felt the profession in general
and herself in particular ill-served by the lack of a more formal division of labor
between paraprofessionals and support staff, on the one hand, and holders of the
MLS, on the other. “My current position was once held by someone without an MLS.
The job description was re-written so it would require the MLS and so that I could be

142

hired.” But even then the job description was not re-written, in her view, in a way to
reflect her status as an LIS graduate. “[T]he primary duties” remained “those of a
technician. My boss at the time actually did me a disservice as a result. I have been
unable to progress in my career or find employment elsewhere because I lack the
experience required by MLS positions, unless I take an entry-level position. This
would mean a significant salary decrease.” Lack of a clear boundary between work
appropriate to support staff and that suitable to those with formal LIS training led to a
situation in which she had not been able to re-skill to keep up with developments in
the profession.
As a result her possibilities for advancement had been severely limited. “In
my current work environment, some professional responsibilities are given to those
with no degree at all, such as cataloging and bibliographic instruction. I feel that
roles are reversed. The only opportunity I will have for advancement is when my
director retires in another three years, and I have already been waiting for that
position for eight years. However, I feel unprepared to step into the position since I
have had no opportunity to gain any supervisory experience.” This situation was not
the fault, or not only the fault of this librarian’s particular context; the profession also
bore a responsibility for not insisting on a more rigorous definition of what it meant to
be a holder of an LIS degree, especially in terms of which workplace tasks that
qualified one to perform (and which tasks from which it ought to provide exemption).
“I feel that the profession should more clearly define job roles, specifying which
duties should be performed by someone with an MLS, and which duties should be
performed by paraprofessionals and support staff without degrees.” She concluded

143

by saying that “Otherwise, it hurts those of us with an MLS who can't progress in
their careers if we are doing work that should be done by support staff. We also
have a problem in our area of not finding qualified staff if we have a job opening.
Very few people in my area have an MLS.”

5.14

Limitations/Future Research Opportunities
The power of this study’s central insight that craft is of central importance to

librarian job satisfaction is undercut somewhat by the fact that what constitutes craft
in LIS work remains something of a black box. Some conditions which encourage
craft are known, such as smaller organization size, having flexible hours, and having
to perform fewer routine tasks. This fact can be instructive in providing specific
recommendations to augment librarian worker satisfaction. And this and previous
LIS job satisfaction studies do provide some insight as to the kinds of work that have
a greater craft component. That reference librarians would make on balance for
happier workers than their counterparts in technical services makes sense from a
craft perspective. Whereas reference librarians often work on discrete, whole
problems (patron questions) the resolution of which may be readily seen,
cataloguers are working on a much smaller piece of a much larger project, and their
contribution to the whole must be harder to discern. Similarly, craft makes sense of
why working with new technologies might correlate with job satisfaction as it has in
previous studies. As with Sennett’s Greek bakery parable, when machines are
constructed to remove task difficulty, craft work migrates from rank-and-file workers
to those workers who design and repair the machines.

144

But in terms of being able to describe the specific types of work that librarians
find most “craft-like” and rewarding, it is difficult to be more specific and craft
remains something of a black box. Similarly, the ways in which technologies displace
of librarians does not emerge clearly from the WILIS data and could be the topic of
future qualitative research. is sufficiently This research has shown that craft and
professional achievement is the single most important factor in librarian job
satisfaction, but craft work in an LIS setting appears only in outline. This is largely a
consequence of the use of survey research, the author would contend, and it
represents a blind spot of the study, but also a significant opportunity for future
research. Statistical analysis was necessary to establish the importance of craft, and
that fact almost necessitated a survey. That accomplished, future studies with more
appropriate qualitative research methods, such as semi-structured interviews and
focus groups, may be undertaken to drill down and answer the question of what craft
work looks like in an LIS context. In addition, future research should include a more
rigorous breakdown of craft by function/setting/job title as a way of better isolating
sources of craft in LIS work. The researcher very much views this dissertation as a
first step in a larger project examining craft in LIS.
The bluntness of the survey as a research tool is likewise responsible for
another shortcoming of the present study, alluded to in the race/ethnicity section of
the data analysis chapter (4.8) Namely, with LIS having a problem attracting ethnic
minorities to the field, more research needs to be done into their experience in LIS.
And a job satisfaction survey with 1,700 variables cannot go very deep into the

145

specific concerns of special populations. This represents another major opportunity
for future qualitative research efforts.
The study is necessarily geographically limited as well. Although North
Carolina LIS graduates scattered around the country and the world, three-quarters
settled in the southeastern United States with fully 57 percent working in North
Carolina and nine percent in Virginia (which boasts no ALA-accredited LIS graduate
program). One could not, therefore, generalize nationally from this sample.

5.15

Discussion
This study built on previous LIS job satisfaction by examining both work-

related and non-work-related variables impact on job satisfaction and by the
introduction of craft into the conversation. The overall picture that emerged was
simultaneously encouraging and disconcerting. It was familiar to the extent that
librarians, by and large, remain a very satisfied in their jobs. It was disconcerting to
the extent that it showed a profession very much in transition and librarians’
increasingly anxious about their future. On the one hand, increasing workloads
including more niggling administrative tasks appeared to be keeping librarians away
from the higher order tasks they thought of as their real work. The overwork problem
was real enough that full-time work actually correlated negatively with job
satisfaction. Worse than being overworked was the prospect of having to eke out a
living with part-time or contingent jobs.
In a study with so many variables and findings, it can be hard to isolate a
central theme or themes. In this case, however, the primacy of the work itself to

146

librarians had so much explanatory power that it could not be ignored. Starting with
the fact that Craft and professional Achievement was the best predictor of job
satisfaction, this basic fact could also go a long way toward explaining such diverse
phenomena as why full-time work contributed to unhappiness with work; why pay did
not register as significant; why academic librarians reported being uniquely
alienated; and even why co-workers mattered to the extent that they did. If there is
any lesson to be taken from this study for the future of LIS workplaces, then, it is
this: Librarians are happy in their work almost precisely to the extent that they are
connected to it and can see its results. Anything that takes away from this outcome
threatens to deprive librarians of what made them enter the profession in the first
place and what has constituted contentment in their work.
The central insight of this dissertation that craft is the best predictor of job
satisfaction suggests some practical measures that LIS managers can take to
improve their worker’s happiness in their work. The first among these is that
managers need to make sure librarians know how they are contributing to the overall
operation of the organization. This appears to be easier to do in smaller libraries, in
which workers are performing a larger part of a smaller operation and are therefore
better able to discern their contribution. In larger organizations, it may be necessary
for managers to make explicit—say in a semi-annual informal meeting—to individual
units and workers on a regular basis why exactly the work they are doing is
important and how it contributes the organization’s overall goals. It is likely that this
exercise would be useful to managers for other reasons since spelling out exactly
why and how a given worker is useful could be helpful in eliminating slack and

147

providing workers with more meaningful roles in instances where their usefulness to
operations was not readily apparent. Such a strategy, it seems, would make an
organization more efficient in addition to making workers more satisfied.
One situation in which workers seem especially prone to feel disconnected
from their work is when they feel their immediate supervisors do not adequately
understand what they do and cannot provide useful direction. This problem was
especially acute in primary and secondary schools where librarians are rarely
supervised directly by other LIS professionals. In a situation in which an LIS
professional finds him or herself supervised by a non-LIS professional, or by an LIS
professional unfamiliar with their particular area of practice, it may be well for the
librarian to take the initiative. In the case of the school librarian, such action could
take the form of spelling out how specific tasks contribute to their fulfilling their role in
the school and proposing to one’s superiors concentrating on those tasks. In such a
case, of course, there would need to be evidence, either in the form of scholarly
literature or an ad hoc study conducted at the library, that the proposed tasks
actually performed the function they are supposed to.
Another typical instance in which LIS graduates report a sense of
disconnection from work is when they feel they are unable to perform the job for
which they were trained/signed on for. This is a particularly acute problem in the
cases of academic librarians who have very specific training they feel is not put to
use and of library managers who feel they must keep performing routine tasks even
as they move up the career ladder. In the case of librarians who feel removed from
their area of expertise, there would appear to be no easy solution beyond either

148

seeking a more suitable fit or retooling with new skills more suitable for their present
job. In the case of managers, it does seem that a more meaningful distinction could
be made profession-wide for what constitutes professional versus paraprofessional
work. Although given the exigencies of work in large and small organizations alike, it
is hard to see how such a rigid distinction could be enforced.
There is, truthfully, no end to the number of more or less practical
recommendations one could make for librarians based on just the conclusions found
here. But given the diversity of LIS workplaces, experiences, and practices, it is hard
seeing any of them implemented in any kind of systematic way. In the end, what
seems most important in this study is the fact that information workers need not all
become mechanics, per Crawford, in order to realize their potential in their work.
Information work can be practiced as a craft, and librarians apparently do so all the
time. And loath though the researcher is to suggest that those LIS workers who are
dissatisfied with their job take responsibility for their happiness, it does seem like the
best recommendations that could come from this study are those that could be made
at the individual rather than at the organizational level. One need not become a
plumber. One can find meaning in information work. This is great news. And it can
be a useful exercise, if not a cure-all, for individual librarians to take stock of where
they see the results of their work most clearly and to communicate to superiors what
would make their work more meaningful. It is hoped, meanwhile, that further
research into what constitutes craft in an LIS context should make such
assessments easier in the future.

149

APPENDIX I: KEY DEFINITIONS
Academic Librarian: Librarians working in a university setting.

Breadwinner: One whose earnings contribute to the maintenance of her or his
family’s desired standard of living.

Craft: The definition of craft employed here comprises two parts. The first is the
wish to perform one’s work well independent of extrinsic factors or influences. The
second defining feature of craft is the desire of the worker to create a quality final
outcome or product which can be certified as such by objective standards.

Information Worker: One whose primary job is to create, edit, write, retrieve, or
otherwise process data.

LIS: The field of Library and Information Science, inclusive of archival science.

Job Satisfaction: The level of contentment with one’s employment. As a way of
organizing thinking about job satisfaction, this dissertation follows the widely used
Job Satisfaction Survey (JSS) devised by Industrial/Organizational Psychologist
Paul E. Spector. The JSS recognizes nine discrete components of job satisfaction:
pay, promotion, supervision, fringe benefits, contingent rewards, operating
procedures, co-workers, nature of work, and communication (Spector, 1985).

150

Professional achievement: The realization of one’s potential in one’s work career. A
concept related to craft but one which also encompasses career advancement and
continuing education. The distinction with craft is that craft relates to mastering a
specific skill or trade whereas professional achievement also emphasizes upward
mobility through a profession or organization.

Primary Breadwinner: One whose earnings are the main source of support for their
dependents.

School Librarians/Media Coordinators: Librarians working in primary or secondary
schools.

Special Librarians: Those librarians who do not work in university, school, or public
libraries; especially those working in legal, business, museum, or cultural heritage
settings.

151

APPENDIX II: BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF
LIBRARIANSHIP IN NORTH CAROLINA
A unified theory of North Carolina librarianship—one that explains the state’s
high numbers of library schools, libraries, and acknowledged library leaders–seems
more likely. And this is certainly relevant to this dissertation insofar as it is based on
data generated by the alumni of North Carolina library schools. The components of
this theory would include, first, a state self-image as the “progressive” southern
state. Through no virtue of its own, North Carolina was not as heavily implicated in
the plantation economy as its neighbors, South Carolina and Virginia. Poor soils,
poor ports, and impassible rivers rendered the eastern half of the state a swamp
until the 20th century. Having few physical advantages, NC placed an early premium
on “internal improvements,” early republic parlance for roads, canals, railroads,
swamp drainings, etc., and state-funded economic development.
This approach paid dividends in the late 19th and early 20th centuries as North
Carolina became an industrial powerhouse. It was the worldwide center for textile,
tobacco and, to a lesser extent, furniture manufacture (Hall et al., 1988). In the
1920’s, North Carolina became the Good Roads state, which it remains: Lavishly
paved and maintained road brought the market to every corner of the state.
From the 1880s to the 1920s, the state undertook a graded-school revolution
which transformed the state’s education system into a petit bourgeois incubator.
What had prevailed in North Carolina, and indeed the rest of the nation, prior to 1880
was the so-called common school, the sort of one-room schoolhouse made familiar
to later generations of Americans by television shows such as Little House on the

152

Prairie. As their name suggested, common schools were very much schools created
for and by their communities. In the first place, it was the local townsfolk who
contracted the schoolmaster. Furthermore, the rhythms of the school day and year
were those of the community. Inconsistent attendance was less of a hindrance to
education because what schools taught was different then. There was no progress
from one grade to the next. Children of every age shared the same room. And the
emphasis was less on the acquisition of critical faculties than on rote memorization
and moral lessons. Basic literacy and numeracy aside, the central purpose of
common schools was the formation of upstanding members for the community. In
the words of one common-school advocate, their goal was to make good citizens.
Unhappily for its advocates, such a program was not exactly designed with the New
South man in mind. If the New South were to realize the promise of its name, it
needed to build different types schools to turn out a different type of Southerner, one
geared toward acquisition and focused on the main chance. The schools that
evolved to fill this need were so-called graded schools. Several hundred such
schools were built in North Carolina from 1880 to 1920, and they inculcated students
with a whole different range of values. First, there was the notion that a student is
supposed to advance through the grades in the same way that an ideal New South
man was to advance through the ranks of society. The skills that one acquired were
different, too. Gone were the moralistic teachings of the old primer. In their place
came new lessons emphasizing math and “real life” skills. Corn and tomato clubs
within the schools taught students how to turn a profit and become “business
farmers.” And home demonstration clubs taught boys and girls the virtues of canning

153

foods, digging latrines, and wearing shoes to avoid ringworm. Whereas common
schools had been about duty to kin and community, the new schools were all about
personal advancement and individual self-sufficiency (Leloudis, 1996).
Public and school libraries are part and parcel of the Progressive political
program, the manifest success of which gave generations of North Carolina
policymakers an approach that could be described as “Build it and they will come.”
Got a backwards region? Build a road into it, give them some schools. Give people
the means by which they may pull themselves out. The people who ruled the nation
and the state were a group radically different from their fathers. This was a
generation that had an unshakable belief in the possibility of progress, a generation
with an almost scary confidence in their power to bring about something close to a
utopia. Having been educated in graded schools and at the reorganized UNC to
believe in individuals’ power to shape their own destiny as well as that of the world in
which they lived, Louis Round Wilson, patron saint of North Carolina librarianship,
perfectly embodied this ethos. In Wilson’s conception, libraries were no mere
repositories of knowledge. They were forces for change. Public libraries were the
“people’s university,” in Wilson’s phrase. Through their proliferation, “the people,”
through dint of sheer will, could better their existence. Today, one still sees this kind
of exuberant optimism from the more strident information-age evangelicals, but most
people with any understanding of twentieth century history are more wary of the
unintended consequences of “progress” in its various guises. Wilson and his
generation had not been infected with that cynicism. In libraries, Wilson saw
people’s universities which would free the masses from ignorance and give them the

154

means to conquer their circumstances. In this context, the need to establish libraries
and therefore library schools became a moral imperative.
The inadequacy of such solutions for more intractable problems like ending Jim
Crow became evident as the state tried to integrate in the 1960s and seventies.
Throwing people a lifeline a la the Pupil Assignment Act and the Pearsall Plan was
not, to say the least, equal to the task of leveling the playing field for people who
have been systematically and historically excluded from access to the perquisites of
citizenship for centuries (Chafe, 1981).
If the Progressive impulse defined southern librarianship, so too did race and
sex in obvious and non-obvious ways. First, because of Jim Crow, black libraries
and librarianship unfolded on a parallel track to white libraries and librarianship. One
unintended consequence of this exclusion was that it allowed cultural space for
African-American librarianship to develop that might not have been there had
librarianship been monopolized by whites (Cecelski, 1994).
White supremacy also played a critical role in the origins of Southern state
archives. Counterintuitively, perhaps—given a nearly unblemished centuries-long
record of not doing things first—southern states were the first to establish state
archives. What was more, Alabama (!) led the way in 1902. North Carolina followed
four years later. How could this be? According to Fitzhugh Brundage in The
Southern Past, it was because white southerners wanted to put the imprimatur of the
state on a specific version of southern states’ pasts which included but was not
limited to: A view of slavery as (at worst) a necessary evil, of the Civil War as a
noble anti-imperialist struggle, and of Reconstruction governments as hopelessly

155

correct and ineffective (rationale for Jim Crowism). Happily, the archives have
outgrown their original function. But their evolution points up to the (always relative)
blessing of African-American librarians being able to enshrine their own narratives of
the past (Brundage, 2005).
It is no secret that librarianship has been a feminized profession in the South
and elsewhere. As with teachers, there were economic reasons for this. North
Carolina, needing an army of teachers to run the thousands of new state schools
constructed at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries yet short of
funds, settled on women teacher in part because they could be paid less. School
and public libraries followed the same logic. Likewise, state-funded hospitals in need
of nurses. Nevertheless, libraries were often an avenue of empowerment for women
and not just a feminized professional ghetto. Anastasia Sims in the Power of
Femininity in the New South argued that in North Carolina, clubwomen were often
the prime movers behind the establishment of community libraries. An affinity for
literature, arts, and what Sims terms (for reasons unclear to me) “Culture with a
capital ‘C,’” moreover, comported with Progressive-Era ideals of womanhood, which
deemed the stewardship of civilization—usually through the proper raising of future
(male) leaders but it also extending to librarianship—women’s work. So it
comported with the mores of the day, and it allowed women who might otherwise not
to play a public role (Sims, 1997).

156

APPENDIX III: JOB SATISFACTION SURVEY ITEMS
JOB SATISFACTION SURVEY
Paul E. Spector
Department of Psychology
University of South Florida

1

I feel I am being paid a fair amount for the work I do.

2

There is really too little chance for promotion on my
job.

3

My supervisor is quite competent in doing his/her job.

4

I am not satisfied with the benefits I receive.

5

When I do a good job, I receive the recognition for it
that I should receive.

6

Many of our rules and procedures make doing a good
job difficult.

7

I like the people I work with.

8

I sometimes feel my job is meaningless.

9

Communications seem good within this organization.

10

Raises are too few and far between.

11

Those who do well on the job stand a fair chance of
being promoted.

12

My supervisor is unfair to me.

13

The benefits we receive are as good as most other
organizations offer.

14

I do not feel that the work I do is appreciated.

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6

157

6

Agree very

Agree
moderately

Agree slightly

Disagree
slightly

PLEASE CIRCLE THE ONE NUMBER FOR EACH
QUESTION THAT COMES CLOSEST TO
REFLECTING YOUR OPINION
ABOUT IT.

Disagree
moderately

Disagree very
much

Copyright Paul E. Spector 1994, All rights reserved.

6
15

My efforts to do a good job are seldom blocked by
red tape.

6

16

I find I have to work harder at my job because of the
incompetence of people I work with.

6

17

I like doing the things I do at work.

18

The goals of this organization are not clear to me.

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

6

19

I feel unappreciated by the organization when I think
about what they pay me.

20

People get ahead as fast here as they do in other
places.

21

My supervisor shows too little interest in the feelings
of subordinates.

22

The benefit package we have is equitable.

23

There are few rewards for those who work here.

24

I have too much to do at work.

25

I enjoy my coworkers.

26

I often feel that I do not know what is going on with
the organization.

27

I feel a sense of pride in doing my job.

28

I feel satisfied with my chances for salary increases.

29

There are benefits we do not have which we should
have.

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

6
6
6
6
6
6
6

158

6
6
6
6

Agree very much

Agree moderately

Agree slightly

Disagree slightly

Disagree very
much

PLEASE CIRCLE THE ONE NUMBER FOR EACH
QUESTION THAT COMES CLOSEST TO
REFLECTING YOUR OPINION
ABOUT IT.
Copyright Paul E. Spector 1994, All rights
reserved.

Disagree
moderately

6

30

I like my supervisor.

31

I have too much paperwork.

32

I don't feel my efforts are rewarded the way they
should be.

33

I am satisfied with my chances for promotion.

34

There is too much bickering and fighting at work.

35

My job is enjoyable.

36

Work assignments are not fully explained.

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

6
6
6
6
6
6

159

6

APPENDIX IV: PEARSON CORRELATIONS: JOB SATISFACTION AND
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
Correlations
jobsat

Pearson

jobsat

school

public

academic special

1

.009

-.002

-.040

-.017

.700

.942

.082

.456

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
school

N

1899

1899

1899

1899

1899

Pearson

.009

1

-.173

-.221

-.153

.000

.000

.000

Correlation

public

Sig. (2-tailed)

.700

N

1899

2638

2638

2638

2638

Pearson

-.002

-.173

1

-.166

-.115

Sig. (2-tailed)

.942

.000

.000

.000

N

1899

2638

2638

2638

2638

-.040

-.221

-.166

1

-.146

Sig. (2-tailed)

.082

.000

.000

N

1899

2638

2638

2638

2638

Pearson

-.017

-.153

-.115

-.146

1

Sig. (2-tailed)

.456

.000

.000

.000

N

1899

2638

2638

2638

Correlation

academic Pearson
Correlation

special

.000

Correlation

160

2638

Correlations
F1c. How
many
people work
at your
company or
institution

Annualized

Pearson

Salary

Correlation

A19.2: What

Annualized

(not just

Salary

your library
1

Sig. (2-tailed)

Duration of
Age

Current Job

femal is your race:
e

minority?

.037

.071

.139

-.170

.012

.111

.002

.000

.000

.618

N

1859

1856

1854

1249

1859

1851

F1c. How

Pearson

.037

1

-.109

-.012

-.109

.057

many people

Correlation

work at your

Sig. (2-tailed)

.111

.000

.657

.000

.012

company or

N

1856

1985

1979

1336

1985

1976

Pearson

.071

-.109

1

.435

.066

-.116

Sig. (2-tailed)

.002

.000

.000

.001

.000

N

1854

1979

2597

1378

2596

2585

Duration of

Pearson

.139

-.012

.435

1

.022

-.050

Current Job

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.657

.000

.412

.066

N

1249

1336

1378

1384

1384

1376

Pearson

-.170

-.109

.066

.022

1

-.028

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.001

.412

N

1859

1985

2596

1384

2612

2600

.012

.057

-.116

-.050

-.028

1

institution (not
just your library
Age

Correlation

female

Correlation

A19.2: What is Pearson

.151

your race:

Correlation

minority?

Sig. (2-tailed)

.618

.012

.000

.066

.151

N

1851

1976

2585

1376

2600

161

2602

Correlations
fulltime hlthinsemp otherins
fulltime

Pearson

1

f28fr

f28hr

f29fr

.526

.457

.511

-.014

.532

.000

.000

.000

.549

.000

1983

1983

1983

1931

1916

1929

.526

1

.743

.496

.014

.440

.000

.000

.538

.000

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
N
hlthinsemp Pearson
Correlation

otherins

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

N

1983

2638

2638

1931

1916

1929

Pearson

.457

.743

1

.493

.006

.428

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.807

.000

N

1983

2638

2638

1931

1916

1929

Pearson

.511

.496

.493

1

-.033

.485

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.151

.000

N

1931

1931

1931

1931

1916

1927

Pearson

-.014

.014

.006

-.033

1

-.009

Sig. (2-tailed)

.549

.538

.807

.151

N

1916

1916

1916

1916

1916

1914

Pearson

.532

.440

.428

.485

-.009

1

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

.710

N

1929

1929

1929

1927

1914

Correlation

f28fr

Correlation

f28hr

Correlation

f29fr

.710

Correlation

162

1929

Correlations
f29gr
f29gr

Pearson

1

f30dr

f30er

f31br

f31cr

f31dr

.114

-.121

-.064

-.065

-.080

.000

.000

.005

.005

.000

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
f30dr

N

1930

1925

1924

1919

1919

1919

Pearson

.114

1

.129

.124

.164

.112

.000

.000

.000

.000

Correlation

f30er

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

N

1925

1925

1923

1918

1917

1918

Pearson

-.121

.129

1

.173

.183

.521

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

N

1924

1923

1924

1917

1917

1917

Pearson

-.064

.124

.173

1

.293

.246

Sig. (2-tailed)

.005

.000

.000

.000

.000

N

1919

1918

1917

1919

1918

1919

Pearson

-.065

.164

.183

.293

1

.274

Sig. (2-tailed)

.005

.000

.000

.000

N

1919

1917

1917

1918

1919

1918

Pearson

-.080

.112

.521

.246

.274

1

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

N

1919

1918

1917

1919

1918

Correlation

f31br

Correlation

f31cr

Correlation

f31dr

.000

Correlation

163

1919

Correlations
F51A: I feel
more
pressure to
continually
supervis
f31fr
f31fr

Pearson

1

e

learn new
careeropp coworker1

coworker2

skills

.008

.118

.056

.076

.010

.716

.000

.015

.001

.668

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
supervise

N

1919

1919

1890

1918

1918

1887

Pearson

.008

1

.064

.121

.092

.095

.005

.000

.000

.000

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)

.716

N

1919

1983

1895

1978

1978

1893

Pearson

.118

.064

1

.133

.148

-.001

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.005

.000

.000

.970

N

1890

1895

1895

1895

1895

1880

Pearson

.056

.121

.133

1

.653

.038

Sig. (2-tailed)

.015

.000

.000

.000

.096

N

1918

1978

1895

1978

1978

1893

Pearson

.076

.092

.148

.653

1

.015

Sig. (2-tailed)

.001

.000

.000

.000

N

1918

1978

1895

1978

1978

1893

F51A: I feel

Pearson

.010

.095

-.001

.038

.015

1

more pressure

Correlation

to continually

Sig. (2-tailed)

.668

.000

.970

.096

.501

1887

1893

1880

1893

1893

careeropp

Correlation

coworker1

Correlation

coworker2

Correlation

learn new skills N

164

.501

1893

Correlations
F51B: I am
more

F51B: I am

Pearson

more

Correlation

concerned

Sig. (2-tailed)

F52B: To

F52D: To

F52E: To

concerned

F52A: To

perform

F52C: To

perform a

delegate

about my

perform

more

perform

wider

more of my

job

more new

difficult

more high

variety of

tasks to

security

tasks

tasks

tech tasks

tasks

assistants

1

.099

.127

.067

.076

-.031

.000

.000

.003

.001

.173

about my job N
security

1893

1886

1886

1885

1885

1882

F52A: To

Pearson

.099

1

.521

.397

.522

.190

perform

Correlation

more new

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

tasks

N

1886

1886

1886

1885

1885

1882

F52B: To

Pearson

.127

.521

1

.353

.393

.185

perform

Correlation

more difficult Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

tasks

N

1886

1886

1886

1885

1885

1882

F52C: To

Pearson

.067

.397

.353

1

.421

.119

perform

Correlation

more high

Sig. (2-tailed)

.003

.000

.000

.000

.000

tech tasks

N

1885

1885

1885

1885

1885

1882

F52D: To

Pearson

.076

.522

.393

.421

1

.192

perform a

Correlation

wider variety Sig. (2-tailed)

.001

.000

.000

.000

of tasks

N

1885

1885

1885

1885

1885

1882

F52E: To

Pearson

-.031

.190

.185

.119

.192

1

delegate

Correlation

more of my

Sig. (2-tailed)

.173

.000

.000

.000

.000

tasks to

N

1882

1882

1882

1882

1882

assistants

165

.000

1882

Correlations
F53F: To

F53A: To

Pearson

perform

Correlation

F53A: To

F53C: To

F53D: To

F53E: To

perform

perform

perform

assume a

perform

more tasks

more

greater

more

once done

financial

by

tasks

assistants

more

F53B: To

routine

work

tasks

harder
1

more routine Sig. (2-tailed)

managerial leadership
functions

role

.151

.023

-.079

.054

.369

.000

.312

.001

.019

.000

tasks

N

1871

1870

1869

1869

1869

1869

F53B: To

Pearson

.151

1

.297

.273

.234

.160

work harder

Correlation
.000

.000

.000

.000

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

N

1870

1871

1869

1869

1869

1869

F53C: To

Pearson

.023

.297

1

.623

.428

.050

perform

Correlation

more

Sig. (2-tailed)

.312

.000

.000

.000

.030

managerial

N

1869

1869

1870

1869

1869

1869

F53D: To

Pearson

-.079

.273

.623

1

.384

-.001

assume a

Correlation

greater

Sig. (2-tailed)

.001

.000

.000

.000

.972

leadership

N

1869

1869

1869

1870

1870

1870

F53E: To

Pearson

.054

.234

.428

.384

1

.103

perform

Correlation

more

Sig. (2-tailed)

.019

.000

.000

.000

financial

N

1869

1869

1869

1870

1870

1870

F53F: To

Pearson

.369

.160

.050

-.001

.103

1

perform

Correlation

more tasks

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.030

.972

.000

once done

N

1869

1869

1869

1870

1870

functions

role

.000

tasks

by assistants

166

1870

Correlations
married children
married

Pearson

1

breadwinner

livebetter

craft

.377

-.490

.457

.101

.000

.000

.000

.000

Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
children

N

2605

2223

1894

1894

1894

Pearson

.377

1

-.282

.231

.016

.000

.000

.511

Correlation

breadwinner

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

N

2223

2226

1804

1804

1799

Pearson

-.490

-.282

1

-.865

-.009

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.680

N

1894

1804

1898

1898

1888

Pearson

.457

.231

-.865

1

.031

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

N

1894

1804

1898

1898

1888

Pearson

.101

.016

-.009

.031

1

Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.511

.680

.181

N

1894

1799

1888

1888

Correlation

livebetter

Correlation

craft

.181

Correlation

167

1898

APPENDIX V: ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE: JOB SATISFACTION WITH TYPE OF
LIBRARY, AGE CATEGORIES, AND CURRENT TENURE CATEGORIES

Descriptives: Job Satisfaction by Age Categories
95% Confidence Interval
for Mean
N

Std.

Std.

Lower

Upper

Minimu

Maximu

Deviation

Error

Bound

Bound

m

m

years of age

Mean
3.187
937
1

between 50-

837 3.1920

.60020

.02075

3.1512

3.2327

1.00

4.00

119 3.2969

.55369

.05076

3.1964

3.3974

1.00

4.00

1893 3.1962

.60867

.01399

3.1687

3.2236

1.00

4.00

under 50

.62215

.02032

3.1472

3.2270

1.00

4.00

62
over 62 years
of age
Total

Analysis of Variance (oneway): Job Satisfaction and Age Categories
Sum of
Squares
Between Groups

df

Mean Square

1.299

2

.650

Within Groups

699.637

1890

.370

Total

700.937

1892

F

Sig.

1.755

.173

Multiple Comparisons
Dependent Variable:jobsat
95% Confidence Interval

Mean
Difference
(I) agecat

(J) agecat

Tukey HSD under 50 years between 50-62
of age

over 62 years

(I-J)

Std. Error Sig.

Lower

Upper

Bound

Bound

-.00483

.02894

.985

-.0727

.0630

-.10980

.05921

.152

-.2487

.0291

.00483

.02894

.985

-.0630

.0727

of age
between 50-62 under 50 years
of age

168

over 62 years

-.10496

.05961

.183

-.2448

.0348

.10980

.05921

.152

-.0291

.2487

between 50-62

.10496

.05961

.183

-.0348

.2448

under 50 years between 50-62

-.00483

.02894

.867

-.0616

.0519

of age

-.10980

.05921

.064

-.2259

.0063

.00483

.02894

.867

-.0519

.0616

-.10496

.05961

.078

-.2219

.0119

.10980

.05921

.064

-.0063

.2259

.10496

.05961

.078

-.0119

.2219

of age

LSD

over 62 years

under 50 years

of age

of age

over 62 years
of age

between 50-62 under 50 years
of age
over 62 years
of age
over 62 years

under 50 years

of age

of age
between 50-62

Descriptives: Job Satisfaction by Current Job Tenure
95% Confidence Interval
for Mean
N
less than 5

Mean

Std.

Std.

Lower

Upper

Minimu

Maximu

Deviation

Error

Bound

Bound

m

m

653 3.2190

.62459

.02444

3.1710

3.2670

1.00

4.00

5-10 years

368 3.1540

.62287

.03247

3.0901

3.2178

1.00

4.00

10-15 years

124 3.1882

.63508

.05703

3.0753

3.3011

1.00

4.00

15-20 years

72 3.2083

.51712

.06094

3.0868

3.3298

2.00

4.00

20 or more

83 3.2610

.61606

.06762

3.1265

3.3956

1.00

4.00

1300 3.1997

.61905

.01717

3.1661

3.2334

1.00

4.00

years

years
Total

Analysis of Variance (one way) Job Satisfaction and Current Job
Tenure
jobsat
Sum of
Squares
Between Groups

1.346

df

Mean Square
4

.337

169

F

Sig.

.878

.476

Within Groups

496.454

1295

Total

497.800

1299

.383

Multiple Comparisons
Dependent Variable:jobsat
95% Confidence Interval

Mean
Difference

Std.

(I-J)

Error

Sig.

Lower

Upper

Bound

Bound

(I) tenurecat

(J) tenurecat

Tukey

less than 5

5-10 years

.06500

.04036

.491

-.0452

.1752

HSD

years

10-15 years

.03082

.06065

.987

-.1349

.1965

15-20 years

.01066

.07689 1.000

-.1994

.2207

20 or more

-.04205

.07215

.978

-.2391

.1550

-.06500

.04036

.491

-.1752

.0452

10-15 years

-.03419

.06429

.984

-.2098

.1414

15-20 years

-.05435

.07979

.961

-.2723

.1636

20 or more

-.10706

.07524

.613

-.3126

.0985

-.03082

.06065

.987

-.1965

.1349

5-10 years

.03419

.06429

.984

-.1414

.2098

15-20 years

-.02016

.09174

.999

-.2708

.2304

20 or more

-.07287

.08781

.921

-.3127

.1670

-.01066

.07689 1.000

-.2207

.1994

years
5-10 years

less than 5
years

years
10-15 years

less than 5
years

years
15-20 years

less than 5
years
5-10 years

.05435

.07979

.961

-.1636

.2723

10-15 years

.02016

.09174

.999

-.2304

.2708

20 or more

-.05271

.09972

.984

-.3251

.2197

.04205

.07215

.978

-.1550

.2391

5-10 years

.10706

.07524

.613

-.0985

.3126

10-15 years

.07287

.08781

.921

-.1670

.3127

15-20 years

.05271

.09972

.984

-.2197

.3251

5-10 years

.06500

.04036

.107

-.0142

.1442

years

LSD

20 or more

less than 5

years

years

less than 5

170

years

10-15 years

.03082

.06065

.611

-.0882

.1498

15-20 years

.01066

.07689

.890

-.1402

.1615

20 or more

-.04205

.07215

.560

-.1836

.0995

-.06500

.04036

.107

-.1442

.0142

10-15 years

-.03419

.06429

.595

-.1603

.0919

15-20 years

-.05435

.07979

.496

-.2109

.1022

20 or more

-.10706

.07524

.155

-.2547

.0405

-.03082

.06065

.611

-.1498

.0882

5-10 years

.03419

.06429

.595

-.0919

.1603

15-20 years

-.02016

.09174

.826

-.2001

.1598

20 or more

-.07287

.08781

.407

-.2451

.0994

-.01066

.07689

.890

-.1615

.1402

5-10 years

.05435

.07979

.496

-.1022

.2109

10-15 years

.02016

.09174

.826

-.1598

.2001

20 or more

-.05271

.09972

.597

-.2483

.1429

.04205

.07215

.560

-.0995

.1836

5-10 years

.10706

.07524

.155

-.0405

.2547

10-15 years

.07287

.08781

.407

-.0994

.2451

15-20 years

.05271

.09972

.597

-.1429

.2483

years
5-10 years

less than 5
years

years
10-15 years

less than 5
years

years
15-20 years

less than 5
years

years
20 or more

less than 5

years

years

171

APPENDIX VI:COLLINEARITY DIAGNOSTICS: JOB SATISFACTION AND
CRAFT AND PROFESSIONAL ACHIEVEMENT( FINAL STEPWISE MODEL
DIMENSIONS

Collinearity Diagnostics
Condition
Eigenvalue

Index

Craft (Variance

Model

Dimension

10

1

8.743

1.000

.00

.00

2

.765

3.380

.00

.00

3

.579

3.886

.00

.00

4

.245

5.980

.00

.00

5

.197

6.666

.00

.00

6

.188

6.825

.00

.00

7

.120

8.519

.00

.00

8

.068

11.315

.00

.00

9

.043

14.195

.03

.18

10

.040

14.733

.03

.12

11

.011

28.420

.93

.70

172

(Constant)

Proportions)

REFERENCES
Abbott, Andrew. The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert
Labor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
---------------. “Professionalization and the Future of Librarianship,” Library Trends 46
(Winter 1998): 430-43.
Albritton, Rosie L. " The Founding and Prevalence of African-American Social
Libraries and Historical Societies, 1828-1918.” M.T. Tucker (Ed.), Untold Stories:
Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship. Champaign-Urbana: University of
Illinois Graduate School, 1998.
Aryee, Samuel. “An Examination of the Moderating Influence of Breadwinner Role
Salience on the Pay-Life Satisfaction Relationship.” Human Relations 52 (1999):
1279-90.
Bartlett, C. 1998. “The relationship between superiors' self-disclosure, offers of help,
offers of cooperation, frequency of contact, trust, and subordinates' job satisfaction”
[study at Wake County Public Library]. North Carolina Libraries v. 56 no. 4 (Winter):
155-7.
Barley, S. R. and G. Kunda. “Itinerant professionals: Technical contractors in a
knowledge economy.” in J. O’Toole and E. E. Lawler, Eds. America at Work:
Choices and Challenges, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Beer, Michael. “Organizational Size and Job Satisfaction.” Academy of Management
Journal 7 (1964): 34-44.
Beniger, James R. The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of
the Information Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989.
Berry, John N., III, “Great Work, Genuine Problems,” Library Journal 26 (October
2007).
Bledstein, Burton J. The Culture of Professionalism: The Middle Class and the
Development of Higher Education in America. New York: Norton, 1976.
Braverman, Harry. Labor and Monopoly Capitalism: The Degradation of Work in the
Twentieth Century. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1998.
Brooks, Terrence A. “The Model of Science and Scientific Models in Librarianship.”
Library Trends (Fall 1989):237-49.

173

Brundage, W. Fitzhugh. The Southern Past: A Clash of Race and Memory.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005. Chapter 3, “Archiving White
Memory,” 105-137.
Carmichael, James V., Jr. “Southern Librarianship and the Culture of Resentment,”
Libraries & Culture 40 (Summer 2005): 324-52.
Cecelski, David. Along Freedom Road: Hyde County, North Carolina, and the Fate
of Black Schools in the South. UNC Press, 1994.
Chafe, William. Civilities and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and the Black
Struggle for Freedom. Oxford Press, 1981.
Churchwell Charles. "Racial Integration at the University of Houston: A Personal
Perspective, II," in John Mark Tucker, ed. Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and
Black Librarianship (Champaign: Graduate School of Library and Information
Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1998), pp. 1136-140.
Chwe, Steven S. “A comparative Study of Librarians’ Job Satisfaction: Cataloguers
and Reference Librarians in University Libraries.” The Journal of Academic
Librarianship 4 (1978): 139-43.
Clark, Andrew E. “Job Satisfaction and Gender: Why are Women so Happy at
Work?” Labour Economics 4 (1997): 341-372.
Clark, Andrew, Andrew Oswald, and Peter Warr. “Is Job Satisfaction U-Shaped in
Age?” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 69 (1996): 57-81.
Collins, R. The Credential Society. New York: The Academic Press, 1979.
Crawford, Matthew B. Shop Class as Soulcraft: An Inquiry into the Value of Work.
New York: The Penguin Press, 2009.
Crowley, Bill. Rethinking Professional Librarianship: A Fundamental Rethinking.
Westport, Conn., 2008.
Curry, James P., Douglas S. Wakefield, James L. Price and Charles W. Mueller. “On
the Causal Ordering of Job Satisfaction and Organizational Commitment.” Academy
of Management Journal 29 (1986): 847-858
Day, Mark Tyler. “Humanizing Information Technology: Cultural Evolution and the
Institutionalization of Electronic Text Publishing.” In B. Sutton (ed) Literary texts in an
electronic age: Scholarly implications and library services [papers presented at the
1994 Clinic on Library applications of Data Processing, April 10-12, 1994]: 67-92.

174

Doeringer, Peter B. and Michael J. Piore. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower
Analysis. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 1985.
Drucker, Peter. . People and Performance: The Best of Peter Drucker on
Management. Harper and Row, 1977.
-----------. Peter Drucker on the Profession of Management. Boston: Harvard
Business School Publishing, 1998.
----------. The Effective Executive. New York: Harper, 1967.
Ellig, Bruce R. The Evolution of Employee Pay and Benefits in the United States.
Arlington, Va.: Kirby Lithographic Co., 2005.
Eva, Nicole and Nancy McCormack, “How Happy are You?” White paper, 2008.
Florida, Richard. The Rise of the Creative Class: And How it’s Transforming Work,
Community and Everyday Life. New York: Basic Books, 2003.
Garrison, Dee. Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society,
1876-1920 2nd ed. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2003.
Glasgow, Bonnie Jean Loyd. “Job Satisfaction among Academic Librarians” Ph.D.
dissertation. North Texas State University, 1982.
Gordon, Rachel Singer, and Sarah Nesbeitt, “Who We Are, Where We’re Going: A
Report from the Front,” Library Journal 36 (15 May 1999).
Goulding, A. 1991. Managing the job satisfaction of public library paraprofessionals
in a
changing climate [bibliographical essay]. Public Library Journal v. 6 (July/August):
93-9.
_____. 1995. I want to work with books and people: the job satisfaction of public
library support staff [survey in nine public libraries]. Public Library Journal v. 10
(May/June): 71-4.
Graham, Patterson Toby. "Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama's Public
Libraries, 1918-1965," (Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Alabama),
1998, 309 pp.
Gutman, Herbert. Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America: Essays in
American Working-Class and Social History. New York: Vintage, 1977.
Haber, Samuel. The Quest for Authority and Honor in the American Professions,
1750-1900. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
175

Hanson, Sandra L., and Douglas M. Sloane. “Young Children and Job Satisfaction.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 54 (1992): 799-811.
Herzberg, Frederick. "One more time: how do you motivate employees?" Harvard
Business Review, vol. 46, iss. 1, pp. 53–62: 1968.
-----------. One More Time: How do You Motivate Employees. Cambridge: Harvard
Business School Classics, 2008.
Hodson, Randy. “Gender Differences in Job Satisfaction: Why Aren’t Women More
Dissatisfied?” The Sociological Quarterly 20 (1989): 385-99.
Huseman, R., Hatfield, J., and Miles, E. “A New Perspective on Equity Theory: The
Equity Sensitivity Construct. Academy of Management Review. 1987. 12(2). pp.
232-234
Judge, T. A., Locke, E. A., & Durham, C. C. (1997). The dispositional causes of job
satisfaction: A core evaluations approach. Research in Organizational Behavior, 19,
151–188.
Kimball, Bruce A. The True Professional Idea in America: A History. New York:
Rowman and Littlefield, 1996.
Kuo, Y.-F., & Chen, L.-S. “Individual demographic differences and job
satisfaction among information technology personnel: An empirical study in Taiwan.”
International Journal of Management, 21(2004): 221-231.
Lasch, Christopher. “Technology and its Critics: The Degradation of the Practical
Arts,” in S.E. Goldberg and C.R. Strain, eds., Technological Change and the
Transformation of America. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1987.
Lim, Sook. “Job Satisfaction of Information Technology Workers in Academic
Libraries.” Library & Information Science Research 30 (2008): 115-21.
Lipscomb, Carolyn E. "Race and Librarianship," Journal of the Medical Library
Association 92 (July 2004): 299-301.
Mahoney, Joseph T. “The Relevance of Chester I. Barnard’s Teaching to
Contemporary Management Education.” Integrated Journal of Organizational Theory
and Behavior 5 (2002): 159-72.
Maslow, Abraham. Motivation and Personality. New York: Pearson, 1997.
McGregor, Douglas. The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.

176

McMullin, Julie Ann, and Victor W. Marshall (Eds.) Aging and Working in the New
Economy: Changing Career Structures in Small IT Firms. Cheltenham, UK and
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2010.
Mirfakhrai, Mohammad. “Correlates of Job Satisfaction among Academic Librarians
in the United States,” Journal of Library Administration 14, no. 1 (1991): 117.
Mizrachi, Y. "The knowledge smiths: librarianship as craftsmanship of knowledge."
New Library World, 99 (43) (1998): 176-84.
O’Brien, Gordon E., and Peter Dowling. “Age and Job Satisfaction.” Australian
Psychologist 16 (1981): 49-61.
O’Toole, James and Edward E. Lawler III. The New American Workplace. Palgrave
McMillan: New York, 2005.
Parsons, Talcott. “The Professions and Social Structure,” Social Forces 17 (May
1939): 457-67.
Pedhazur, E.J. Multiple Regression in Behavioral Research: Explanation and
Prediction. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1997.
van Reenan, J. (1998). “Librarians at Work: Are We as Satisfied as other Workers?”
Information Outlook, 2(7) (1998): 18-27
Rogers, Frank Bradway. “Down on the Farm.” Bulletin of the Medical Library
Association 73 (January 1985): 15-20.
Rogers, Stacy J., and Dee C. May. “Spillover between Marital Quality and Job
Satisfaction: Long Term Patterns and Gender Differences.” Journal of Marriage and
Family 65 (May 2003): 482-95.
St. Lifer, Evan. “Are You Happy in Your Job? LJ’s Exclusive Report," Library Journal
44 (1 November 1994).
Schneider, M.S. 1991. “Stress and job satisfaction among employees in a public
library system with a focus on public service.” Library & Information Science
Research v. 13 (October-December): 385-404.
Sennett, Richard. The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work
in the New Capitalism. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2000.
----------. The Craftsman. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008.

177

Sims, Anastasia. The Power of Femininity in the New South: women’s Organizations
and Politics in North Carolina , 1880-1930. Columbia, S.C.: University of South
Carolina Press, 1997.
Spector, P. E. “Measurement of human service staff satisfaction: Development of the
Job Satisfaction Survey.” American Journal of Community Psychology, 13 (1985):
693-713.
Spooner, G. "Establishment of African American Public Library Service in
Louisiana," Louisiana Libraries 63 (Winter 2001): 23-25.
Thompson, E.P. The Making of the English Working Class. New York: Vintage,
1966.
Valentine, Patrick. "Mollie Huston Lee: Founder of Raleigh's Public Black Library,"
North Carolina Libraries 56 (Spring 1998): 23-26.
Van Sell, Mary, Arthur P. Brief, and Ramon J. Aldag. “Job Satisfaction among
Married Working Women.” Journal of Employment Counseling 16 (March 1979): 3842.
Waite, William. “Compiler Construction: Craftsmanship or Engineering.” Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 1060 (1996): 151-59.
Wheeler, Maurice and Debbie Johnson-Houston. "A Brief History of Library Service
to African Americans," American Libraries 35 (February 2004): 42-45.
Wiegand, Wayne. Politics of an Emerging Profession: The American Library
Association, 1876-1917 (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1986).
Wilentz, Sean. Chants Democratic: New York City and the Rise of the American
Working Class, 1788-1850. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Witt, L. Alan. “Breadwinner vs. Non-Breadwinner Differences in Married Women’s
Job Satisfaction and Perceptions of Organizational Climate.” Human Relations 41
(1988): 483-91.

178

