PRESERVING LEGACY:
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DESIGN WORKSHOP ARCHIVES
AND DIGITAL COLLECTION AT UTAH STATE UNIVERSITY
by
Amanda J. Dunlap
A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment
of the requirements for the degree
of
MASTER OF LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE

Approved:

Michael L. Timmons
Major Professor

Sean E. Michael, PhD
Committee Member

Bradford R. Cole
Committee Member

Mark R. McLellan, PhD
Vice President for Research and
Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
UTAH STATE UNIVERSITY
Logan, Utah
2014

UMI Number: 1584301

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1584301
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ii

Copyright © Amanda J. Dunlap 2014
All Rights Reserved

iii
ABSTRACT
Preserving Legacy: The Development of the Design Workshop Archives
and Digital Collection at Utah State University
by
Amanda J. Dunlap, Master of Landscape Architecture
Utah State University, 2014
Major Professor: Michael L. Timmons
Department: Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning
The Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection offer a unique opportunity
for analysis of the archival process for landscape architecture collections. The goal of
this project was to analyze the format of landscape architecture archive collections and
design protocol for the creation of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection.
A review of best practices and experimentation has guided the appraisal and accessioning
of four of Design Workshop’s Legacy Projects. The integration of a digital collection
gathered from physical drawings, paper manuscripts, and computer files offers unique
opportunities to establish standards and procedures for the creation of an archive at a
university campus. The collaboration of professionals, archivists, and landscape
architecture staff to create the archives has proven to be useful in many ways. The result
is a manual composed of a review of best practices along with an account of the
accessioning process undertaken in the creation of this new collection. Scholarly review

iv
of the archives evidenced the need for an altered approach to the archiving process in
order to support the creation of the digital collection and the quantity of project material.
Additional measures were created to appropriately represent and preserve the unique
visual components of the works.
(190 pages)

v
PUBLIC ABSTRACT
Preserving Legacy: The Development of the Design Workshop Archives
and Digital Collection at Utah State University
by
Amanda J. Dunlap

Though magazines, books, and slideshows have attempted to share glimpses of
landscape architecture, its fixed geographic location inherently limits who can experience
it. In a move to address this dilemma, Design Workshop has partnered with Utah State
University’s Merrill-Cazier Library Special Collections and the Landscape Architecture
and Environmental Planning Department to capture the firm’s definitive works. The
creation of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection conveys the firm’s
story, sharing it with a broad and diverse audience through the use of physical archives, a
digitally accessible partner, oral histories, and online learning objects to be utilized in the
classroom. In a move to preserve the quality and history of this work, best practices for
archive development have been reviewed and utilized in the creation of the physical and
digital archives. Evaluation of the archives and best practices has enlightened the
requirement for an altered approach to archive accessioning to support the digital
collection and the enormity of project material. Documentation of the pilot year of
archive creation has emphasized the discovery process for sorting, processing, and
presentation of four apogee projects.

vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Design Workshop, especially Joe Porter and Kurt
Culbertson, for their desire to preserve the legacy of their work. Their guidance, funding,
attention, and enthusiasm for educating future students made this work possible. I
appreciate the talents shared by landscape architects and supporting staff who created the
amazing works comprised in the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection.
Thank you, Michael Timmons, for your generous tutelage. I owe a great deal of
who I become as a professional to you. Your encouragement, direction, enthusiasm, and
perseverance have been invaluable assets to my education. I appreciate Sean Michael,
Elizabeth Tofte, and Carlos Licón for their support of this thesis and desire to integrate its
contents into their curriculum. I value the assistance and expertise of Bradford Cole in
the research and writing of this thesis. His care for and acquisition of the Design
Workshop Archives and Digital Collection is greatly appreciated.
Thanks to my family for their interest in my education. I am especially grateful to
my husband, Austin, for his desire to see me succeed. His support in my interests gives
my imagination substance. His persistence helps drive my ambitions. Thank you to my
daughter Oakley for inspiring me to continue attaining my goals.
Finally, thank you to those who will continue this legacy of the Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection. Their creation and utilization will be a valuable asset to
the education of future landscape architects. Efforts to continue the growth of these
archives will undoubtedly augment its quality for future landscape architects.
Amanda J. Dunlap

vii
CONTENTS
Page
ABSTRACT

............................................................................................................... iii

PUBLIC ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................v
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .............................................................................................. vi
LIST OF FIGURES ........................................................................................................ ix
CHAPTER
I.

INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................1

II.

ARCHIVAL PRECEDENTS AND THE PROFESSION OF
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE............................................................7

III.

ACCESSIONING AND THE APPRAISAL PROCESS........................13

IV.

COLLECTION EVALUATION AND RETENTION DECISIONS .....25

V.

ARRANGEMENT AND DESCRIPTION .............................................37

VI.

MANAGEMENT AND STORAGE OF ITEMS ...................................47

VII.

CREATING A DIGITAL COLLECTION .............................................50

VIII.

LEARNING OBJECTS AS AN OUTCOME OF THE ARCHIVE .......60

IX.

RESULTS AND CONCLUSION ...........................................................66

REFERENCES ...............................................................................................................75
APPENDICES ...............................................................................................................80
A.

DECISION TREE ...................................................................................80

B.

KANANASKIS.......................................................................................82

C.

HIGH DESERT ....................................................................................113

viii
D.

ASPCOL ...............................................................................................165

E.

PROPOSED TEACHING MODULE...................................................176

ix
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

2.1

Map of landscape architecture archives within the United States ............8

3.1

Illustration of Kananaskis Village .........................................................16

3.2

Image of ASPCOL after completion.......................................................19

3.3

Image of High Desert after completion ..................................................20

3.4

Image of High Desert after completion ..................................................20

4.1

Image of archival team discussing oversized drawings ..........................28

4.2

Comparison of drawings retained and purged from the collection .........30

7.1

Image of Joe Porter during the recording of an oral history ...................57

9.1

Image of DesignWorkshop Archives & Digital Collection exhibit ........66

1
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
The profession of landscape architecture is facing a new dilemma. Since World
War II, the vocation has grown exponentially. Now, with an aging population of
landscape architects preparing to retire and storage rooms packed with a wealth of their
past works, there is a renewed interest in the professional world and in academia to
preserve their contributions to the field. Professional practice offices are encumbered
with providing space for the storage of these documents. While for a time they are
required to store the projects for legal reasons, once that time has lapsed, the documents
become a taxing burden for the office. The documents often then present challenging
legal and ethical dilemmas pitting retention against disposal. The documents typically sit
in dormancy without offering their inherent benefits to the profession, academia, and the
public.
The study of landscape architecture has an inherent dilemma as well. Because of
the fixed location of built projects and drawings, students and professionals alike face the
issue of costly and time-consuming travel to experience designed places. Often academic
settings are not within traveling distance of significant concentrations of landscape
architecture firms and offices; the student experience can suffer from a disconnection of
professional and academic realms. Over thirty of the some seventy accredited landscape
architecture programs in North America are situated in rural or non-metropolitan
communities that lack significant concentrations of design professionals. While firms
host a wealth of information, drawings, history, technology, and details of their

2
processes, it can easily remain out of reach to their co-professionals and students who
lack access to their storage rooms. Archives have the potential to help bridge this gap of
knowledge-sharing between academics and professionals, particularly if made accessible
through means that extend access beyond the site where paper documents are stored.
Examples of previously completed work that show the process and outcomes of
effective design can provide valuable assets to the learning environment for landscape
architecture students. Currently, students use previous students’ work to set the bar for
their own projects. These examples often lack real world application and create an
artificial ceiling for students’ expectations. Professional examples of the design process
and its outcomes provide students with more effective examples. Oral histories of those
projects and images of the projects taken years after completion can help students link the
design process to final outcomes and add rich contextual information bringing
professional works of landscape architecture into the classroom.
Design Workshop exemplifies the archiving dilemma faced by numerous
landscape architectural firms of the post-World War II era. Design Workshop was
founded by Don Ensign and Joe Porter, undergraduate classmates at Utah State
University in 1963. Founded six years later, while Ensign and Porter were professors at
North Carolina State University, the firm is now world renowned for its efforts to
incorporate “artistic vision, environmental sensitivity, community values and sound
economics to create distinctive places that stand the test of time” (Lapides, 2011). The
union of these four elements has evolved into a theory known as Legacy Design.
Growing from academic origins, the goal of their theory is to unite form, composition,

3
and problem-solving through the overarching elements of art, environment, society, and
economy (Design Workshop, 2011). Their aim was to create a connection between high
purpose and form. One of the aspirations of the firm from its outset at North Carolina
State was to create a “workshop” environment, emphasizing the collaborative process.
Design Workshop encourages diversity and continual personal development within the
parameters of Legacy Design. Their work ranges from small private residences to
regional plans and everything in between (Design Workshop, 2007). The firm now
boasts over 200 prestigious awards for their contributions to the field of landscape
architecture. Founders of the firm have recognized the significance of their contributions
and wish to make their process available to others, particularly students of the profession.
Their academic motives of Legacy Design are now coming full circle.
Design Workshop has made efforts to have their work accessible to professionals,
students, and the public through the publishing of their book Toward Legacy, which
documents key aspects of some of their most prestigious projects. In their next effort to
preserve these legacy works, the development of the Design Workshop Archives and
Digital Collection at Utah State University makes their final work as well as their process
accessible in digital and physical form. This innovative collaboration captures the firm’s
philosophy of creating enduring places by advancing the education of professionals, the
public, and students. Instructors will be able to access the collection for use in the
classroom to detail the design process and final installation of professional efforts. The
documents from Design Workshop provided for Utah State University’s use offer a
unique opportunity for students to learn from professional practice while preserving the

4
valuable information housed therein. Combining the valuable assets of oral histories,
documents, and drawings into learning objects to be used in the classroom setting within
the Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning Department at Utah State
University will help students to approach their projects with a new perspective,
incorporating real world solutions and techniques to improve quality and understanding
of work. Integrating the archives into a digital format with the availability for students
and professionals alike will augment the impact these projects provide. The complete
archives contain over a thousand projects held in more than five thousand tubes of
drawings, the majority of which are currently housed in Design Workshop facilities. The
purpose of this pilot project was to develop a methodology for determining importance,
best practices for creating an inventory, retention value, catalogue methodology,
preservation needs, and a system for providing access to the collection.
In a new endeavor to continue preservation efforts and secure their use, Design
Workshop and Utah State University collaborated in 2010 to initiate an archive and
digital collection with the goals of preserving Legacy Projects and enriching academic
pursuits for the students at Utah State University. The archival collection began with
four Design Workshop projects, selected as a pilot study, completed in 2012. Through
careful selection of materials, vibrant visuals, and engaging audio, the four projects
selected for the pilot year highlight the wealth of knowledge the Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection will continue to foster. These projects span a period of
time in which Design Workshop transitioned from their formative years into what they
refer to as their “break-out” years, a period of rapid growth during which the values of

5
the firm solidified in the Legacy Design process. Both design approach and reprographic
media show immense transitions during this time. In order to provide the most
comprehensive approach to the creation of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital
Collection, the pilot year focused on preserving the legacy of planning and design
projects produced by Design Workshop; profiling the firm’s history and leaders;
articulating the firm’s development relating to design and planning; and connecting
students, scholars, and practitioners of related disciplines to the firm’s work. The pilot
year sought to emphasize the establishment of collection sorting, budget development,
personnel structuring, travel demands, timelines, web design, and full proposal
development.
Labors during the first year included the review of archival best practices for
similar collections, a test of established key processes, the development of new protocols
as necessary, the establishment of learning object creation requirements, and the
measurement of the feasibility of the archival process for subsequent years. A decision
tree, as seen in Appendix A, illustrates this process of project integration into the Design
Workshop Archives and Digital Collection. The pilot year helped to establish workflows,
best practices, costs, and processing times for the archiving of future selected Design
Workshop Legacy Projects. Within the first year, the archival process, digital collection,
learning objects, integration into the classroom, and oral histories commenced. The
successful accomplishment of these tasks has helped inspire a closeout checklist Design
Workshop project managers use when undergoing end-of-project purging and archiving,
effective processing of the archives at Utah State University, the creation of a finding aid

6
for the collection, best practices established for archiving and digitizing documents, and
the installation of a Digital Collection Exhibit for the archives.
In light of the uniqueness of this endeavor, this thesis documents the process in
written form and compares it to the best practices historically utilized in landscape
architecture archival development. It is anticipated that the groundwork laid in this first
phase will be further refined in subsequent efforts, as Utah State University and Design
Workshop continue to work collectively through projects in storage to expand the
archival collection.

7
CHAPTER II
ARCHIVAL PRECEDENTS AND THE
PROFESSION OF LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Efforts to collect the work of landscape architects, while not common, do have
precedent in several collections. In a review of the Landscape Architecture Archives
Collection recognized by the American Society of Landscape Architects, over fifty
collections exist at thirteen different locations. Among the existing archives are those of
such notables as Garret Eckbo, Roberto Burle Marx, and Beatrix Farrand (American
Society of Landscape Architects, 2014). Perusal of the Landscape Architecture Archives
Collection reveals that it includes only a narrow segment of firms, with the Rocky
Mountain region having no listed archives. Also readily apparent is the very small
selection of professional firms whose work is preserved in academic archives. The
majority of landscape architecture collections highlight the work of an individual rather
than a firm. The value of these archives is limited to the familiarity that users have with
their existence and contents. Moreover, few are available for viewing in digital format,
thus drastically complicating their use and effectively making them inaccessible to all but
the most committed or proximate patron. Given institution restrictions on public access,
an additional hurdle is presented for non-academics.
In efforts to share the importance and process of archiving landscape architecture
works, Theodora Kimball, a librarian and early landscape architecture historian at
Harvard University, published City Planning: A Comprehensive Analysis of the Subject
Arranged for the Classification of Books, Plans, Photographs, Notes and Other Collected

8

Figure 2.1. Locations of Landscape Architecture archive facilities based on information
from the American Society of Landscape Architects and additional locations from the
knowledge of the archiving committee.
Material in 1913 with James Sturgis Pray, the Chairman of the School of Landscape
Architecture for twenty years at Harvard University. In 1920, Kimball produced
Landscape Architecture: A Comprehensive Classification Scheme for Books, Plans,
Photographs, Notes and Other Collected Material with Henry Vincent Hubbard, a
landscape architect and colleague at Harvard University (Hohmann, 2006). Kimball’s
work helped to institutionalize the best practices for the establishment of landscape
architecture collections. Anthony Alofsin, an award-winning author, architect, and

9
exhibit curator has pointed out the contributions she and other design librarians have
made in helping to elevate design into a more rigorous and thoughtful pursuit. Kimball
expected the efforts of library collections to be used by students in three ways: for design
inspiration; assigned and collateral reading; and for research. Her efforts were based on
the desire to organize existing information so others could identify and create new
information.
Several universities have created archiving collections from numerous individual
landscape architects and firms. Thorough collections exist at Harvard, University of
California at Berkeley, University of Texas at Austin, and the University of Georgia,
among others. The most pressing issues with these archives continue to be space, size,
funding, and access. Limited space is available to host collections like these. Storage of
the collections is generally an amalgamation of manuscript boxes, tubes, folders of
photographs, slide boxes, drawers of flat files, and files of folded drawings. Optimal
conditions for storage also demand dark, climate-controlled facilities. Preservation efforts
may reflect the donating landscape architect’s storage methods, modified based on spatial
capacity of the archive facility.
The archives at the University of California Berkeley Environmental Design
Library were reorganized at the turn of the 21st century by library employees and were
documented to create a best practices manual (Shepherd & Lowell, 2000). This manual
is effective in providing guidelines for the development of a traditional landscape
architecture archives, but does not provide some of the vital perspectives of the archival

10
process nor does it provide far-reaching suggestions for future utilization of the
collections.
Access to collections proves to be very limited. Most collections, like those at
University of California at Berkeley, are available by appointment only and require an
hourly fee for usage for those not affiliated with the university. At University of Texas at
Austin, appointments must be made three days in advance to provide time for rolled
drawings to be flattened. Access is subsequently limited to physical presence, time,
money, and familiarity with the collection’s contents.
As a result of this lack of access and facilitated by our entry into a digital age,
some organizations are attempting to provide digital availability of archives. In the
University of California at Berkeley’s Environmental Design Archives, the Geraldine
Knight Scott Landscape Architecture Fund has funded the digitization of the Gertrude
Jekyll Collection. The digital portion of this collection is minimal, offering one or up to
as many as seven digital images for review per project.
Other organizations are pursuing complementary venues for preserving important
landscape architecture collections. The Cultural Landscapes Foundation, founded in
1998 by Charles Birnbaum, seeks to preserve oral histories, create a record of lost
landscapes, and inspire activism and awareness in saving important landscapes. The
Cultural Landscapes Foundation has opened up a network of opportunities for sharing the
history of landscape architecture and its preservation. Through the efforts to create
archive collections and provide subsequent access, the field of landscape architecture is
working not only to preserve the past, but ensure its future as well.

11
Traditional design archives concentrate on preserving a hard copy of the design
work, office business records, correspondence, and photographs, with the occasional
voice recording, and are categorized by project type or chronology. These archives
typically offer a refined, sterile representation of projects lacking the impromptu, natural
emotions of oral histories. Oral histories, lacking from most extant collections, offer the
opportunity to add a critical dimension to the history of a project. They can enrich a
project history with emotion and spontaneity typically filtered out with the written word
(Grele & Terkel, 1991). Capturing experiences and reactions in the voice of those
involved in a project, and having that personality describe to students the value of efforts
made within a project to address a given aspect may aid in learning. Integrating the voice
and related documents and drawings into an interactive learning object for the classroom
will further enhance the learning experience and quality therein. While designed
landscapes may not always last a lifetime, their impact can be captured as evidence of
their design, process, construction, and use within archival documents.
This begins by solidifying some of the terminology that will be used, specifically
for archives and digital collections. The definition for archives to be used in this research
will follow that described by Frederic Miller (1990) and approved by the Society of
American Archivists as “the noncurrent but still useful records of an organization or
institution preserved by that organization or institution. The term ‘archives’ refers to the
repository containing the records as well as to the records themselves” (p. 3). While
Miller suggested that the conventional title of the archives should be called “records” or
“papers,” Kelcy Shepherd and Waverly Lowell (2000), the head of digital programs at

12
Amherst College and a curator at the Environmental Design Archives of University of
California at Berkeley respectively, suggested using the term “collection” instead because
a collection would hold both records and papers. As this is the case with the Design
Workshop Archives and Digital Collection, the term “collection” will be used as a
standard to refer to its contents.
The value of documents and drawings in the archivist’s point of view is often
defined by the existing and future use of the collection items. Lowell suggested the most
frequent use of archived design documents is by current owners of the landscape
(Shepherd & Lowell, 2000). Other uses include research, efforts to learn drawing
technique, restoration/adaptive reuse, design inspiration, examples of land use planning,
environmental historian interests, future design development, comprehension of the
design process, and design philosophy.

13
CHAPTER III
ACCESSIONING AND THE APPRAISAL PROCESS
The accessioning and appraisal of a Landscape Architecture archive relies greatly
on its potential uses, the efforts the donating firm has pursued in preserving
documentation, and the types of projects being considered. Based on these key aspects,
future project selection criteria for Design Workshop have been developed to ensure
quality projects are preserved.
Appraisal is always in some way based on what objects are being considered, why
they are being considered, and their potential future use. Richard J. Cox (1996), a
professor at the University of Pittsburgh in the School of Information Sciences, discussed
the need to pay attention to who would use the collection in order to determine what is
preserved and in what format. Miller (1990) urged the importance of creating an
evaluation plan before beginning the archiving process. His documentation strategy
advocated for an analytical approach to appraisal for retention purposes. Lowell
discussed the factors affecting appraisal in Architectural Records. She recommended that
“appraisal reflects the function of the records and their intended, present, and future uses”
(Lowell & Nelb, 2006, p. 69). Within the appraisal process, the users and uses can be
identified to help guide the archival process. In arguing for the importance of knowing
future users and uses of the collection, Cox (1996) noted “merely examining architectural
records as interesting in their own right is to have extremely limited aims that may in fact
minimize the value of architectural records for subsequent users” (p. 146). Terry Cook
(1996), Director of the Records Disposition Division at the National Archives of Canada,

14
extended his view of archiving beyond the efforts of appraisal theorists in which
“archivists should be active, probing how society records, uses, stores, and disposes of
information and, even more importantly, determining what larger functions these acts of
recording were meant to serve” (p. 139). Cook argued that considering the users and uses
limits the scope of the archives and weakens the effect the archives can have on future
research. It is valuable to consider Cox’s (1996) view that archiving “is not an effort to
determine objectives as we interact with or react to architectural records, but as a lens by
which we can examine such records on the basis of broad documentary objectives formed
before such examination. It is a manner in which we can determine what evidence
offered by architectural records we want to preserve and even how such preservation
might take place” (p. 149). Oftentimes, these decisions are made subconsciously at the
landscape architecture firm, before the archives and future uses are considered.
Design firms often begin this appraisal process driven by legal considerations
rather than by the value of record preservation and future use. Many states require firms
to retain documents beyond a set statute of limitations, during which time the firm is
legally bound by the impacts of the design. After the allotted time passes, general
practices allow a firm to retain, donate, sell, or destroy the documents and drawings
according to their choosing. For instance, Design Workshop’s attorneys suggested
destroying the documents and records because of the legal and security issues that could
arise. However, Design Workshop determined the historical importance of the material
outweighed the legal considerations and resolved to retain most of the material. Despite
this awareness of the potential value of their work, it is apparent that many of the early

15
concept sketches and schematic diagrams which help tell the story of the creative process
were purged from the outset. Most likely, though, this is a result of project management
rather than legal constraints. Lowell urged that “it is essential that the individuals who
are responsible for managing records in design firms consult with archivists to
collaboratively develop records-management programs that reflect and distinguish
between long-term and permanent records following their period of active use by the firm
that created them” (Lowell & Nelb, 2006, p. 70). In the case of Design Workshop, the
active partnership between the firm and Utah State University will help ascertain constant
communication on what is necessary on the firm’s part to preserve projects in the future.
The time taken to archive and sort these documents has the potential to be of significant
value in the future. Establishing archival guidelines for professionals to incorporate into
their business practices will be of great benefit in coordinating the filing and archive
management systems of the office. The successful accomplishment of these tasks helped
create a closeout checklist for Design Workshop project managers to use when
undergoing end-of-project purging and archiving, as well as effective processing of the
archives at Utah State University.
Creating a landscape architecture or other design-based archive requires a
collaborative effort. Because of this overwhelming need to value and sort the collection
of projects according to the potential uses and users, the nature of design work is
understandably foreign and makes it difficult for archivists alone to appraise a design
collection. To ease the efforts and confusion, it is beneficial to have landscape architects
oversee the culling process. Combining the knowledge of design experts, the donating

16
professionals, as well as library and landscape architecture staff is invaluable in the
preservation of these records. Each party brings to the table unique insight and
understanding for the task. Together, they can train advanced students to find a balance
between documentation value and potential use for the proposed archival material. As a
group, they can combine their expertise to select projects for the continuation of the
collection.
Project selection for the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection
required significant pre-acquisition planning. Meetings with DW Principal Kurt
Culbertson, Chief Operating Officer Doug Parker, and Hillary Osborne, Associate in
charge of records management, highlighted the need for the collection to focus both on

Figure 3.1. Artistic rendition of proposed site for Kananaskis. Image courtesy of Design
Workshop Archives & Digital Collection.

17
apogee projects as well as progenitor projects in future selections of the archive
development. Apogee projects are those which demonstrated a high point, whereas
progenitor projects are those transitional projects which are valuable for their influence
but may not stand alone on their own merit. Special attention would be paid to projects
with award applications because these would already have the strong supporting graphics
and the project’s important details. Depending on space and future interests, the
archiving efforts could also consider unrealized projects. These often provide insight into
the designer’s thought process, values, and design development. Lowell cited the unbuilt
designs of Frank Lloyd Wright, whose exhibition tours nationally, as a prime example
(Lowell & Nelb, 2006). Considering the quality and quantity of award winning projects
that Design Workshop maintains, it is not likely that unbuilt projects would be chosen
over built projects, unless they are integral in the evolution of the firm.
For the pilot year of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection, four
projects were selected. All award winning projects, these highlight the development of
the firm’s Legacy Design approach over a variety of scales. Kananaskis, ASPCOL, High
Desert, and Summerlin each highlight a different period of time in the firm’s forty year
history, while embracing unique challenges, varying scales, numerous stakeholders, and
emerging technological innovation. Kananaskis Village was a formative project for
Design Workshop. Begun in 1978 with the Calgary Olympics just ten years away and a
desire to boost future year-round tourism, the firm was charged with the development of
a master plan for this planned resort community. Design Workshop started with a broad
environmental analysis of the 51,000 acre site, creating over 40 hand-drawn analyses

18
including wind, views, slope, and aspect, weighted according to stakeholders’ objectives
and values. The analysis helped convince project proponents to concentrate development
into a single, pedestrian-centric village core hosting a plethora of accommodations,
recreational opportunities, and commercial amenities, rather than creating a sprawl of
development scattered throughout the pristine valley. They created revenue and viability
analyses to enhance their findings. Design Workshop managed the construction process
in adherence to their design, coordinating amongst the four separate developers and
architects in the process. Now a destination located 20 miles east of Banff, their plan for
a wilderness village has hosted numerous prominent events, including the 2003 G-8
conference of the world’s leaders. This project helped prove the firm’s goals would work
on a large scale, complex project as long as they were managed through public process,
design development, and construction.
A residential project, ASPCOL is a 120 acre mountain estate located in Pitkin
County, Colorado. Originally part of a high altitude ranch, the residence owner wanted
to maintain the existing ranch pastures and hay fields, placing the home on the hillside.
This project included congruent designs for equestrian trails, stables, ranch operations,
and natural gardens. Efforts to connect the viewshed of the residence’s upper story to a
quiet garden space inspired the design of reflecting pools, an interior courtyard, and
hillside gardens. Environmental sensitivity was embraced through the use of minimal
turf, drip irrigation, native plants, and stone from local quarries. This project embraced
the local and regional context and sensitively interwove the owner’s needs.

19

Figure 3.2. Post-construction image of ASPCOL landscape. Image courtesy of Design
Workshop Archives and Digital Collection.

A 1,000 acre master planned community in Albuquerque hosting a variety of
residential land use densities, High Desert was the first major master planned community
in New Mexico. This project embraced sustainable design principles including water
conservation, arroyo preservation, native plant use, air quality protectors, and night sky
protection. Approximately 30% of the site was preserved for open space and a system of
trails along the arroyos. As part of the design efforts in this project, Design Workshop
created A Guideline for Sustainability, which antedated the United States Green Building
Council’s LEED standards by almost four years. Funded by the Albuquerque Academy,

20

Figures 3.3 &4. Post-construction images of High Desert community. Images courtesy of
Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection.

a private school for grades 4-12, the project enabled Design Workshop to engage students
and faculty in design development. This both engaged the school with interactive
educational activities and bolstered support for the plan. The objectives of the project to
conserve water, use native plants, enhance habitat, and provide varying residential
densities have been very successful. The lack of pre-development condition records has
since inspired Design Workshop to emphasize metrics and performance based design.
A 1,000 acre master planned community in Albuquerque hosting a variety of
residential land use densities, High Desert was the first major master planned community
in New Mexico. This project embraced sustainable design principles including water
conservation, arroyo preservation, native plant use, air quality protectors, and night sky
protection. Approximately 30% of the site was preserved for open space and a system of
trails along the arroyos. As part of the design efforts in this project, Design Workshop
created A Guideline for Sustainability, which antedated the United States Green Building

21
Council’s LEED standards by almost four years. Funded by the Albuquerque Academy,
a private school for grades 4-12, the project enabled Design Workshop to engage students
and faculty in design development. This both engaged the school with interactive
educational activities and bolstered support for the plan. The objectives of the project to
conserve water, use native plants, enhance habitat, and provide varying residential
densities have been very successful. The lack of pre-development condition records has
since inspired Design Workshop to emphasize metrics and performance based design.
Summerlin, a master planned community in Las Vegas, Nevada, captures an
approach utilized by Principals Don Ensign and Joe Porter that foreshadowed the firm’s
growing focus on sustainable practices. The concept for Summerlin reflects their earlier
work in Columbia, Maryland and the Woodlands of Houston, Texas. It employs a series
of neighborhoods grouped in villages, connected by a network of roadways, trails, and
open spaces. At the center of each neighborhood are a school and park, with high schools
and larger parks being the focus of the villages. Design Workshop created the designs for
several villages within the Summerlin development. The community has proven to be an
economic success, inspiring high quality housing. Rather than the entertainment and
recreational genre that many of their earlier works exhibited, Summerlin became a
primary home community. Specific attention was centered on existing and potential
habitat for the threatened desert tortoise. Through this design, Summerlin is considered a
project of national significance as a result of its scale, its execution, and its place in the
American West.

22
These four projects were selected for the pilot year of the Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection based on their impact on the profession, ingenuity, and
significance. They illustrate some of the transformations that the firm’s ideology
underwent during its formative years; represent a variety of project types and scales; and
demonstrate the innovative design thinking of the firm. Their inclusion in the pilot year
of the creation of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection provides
opportunities for utilizing best practices in archive creation as well as chances to develop
criteria pertinent to their unique future uses.
For future accessioning, recognition of the various names of a single project and
communicating all project numbers pertinent to a single project will help to speed up the
process. During the processing of Kananaskis, it was discovered that the project had
previously been referred to as Ribbon Creek and Ribbon Valley. Because of the varying
names, project drawings were sent in two different shipments. Midway through the
processing it was discovered that there was another large collection of drawings stored in
one of the earlier names still housed in the basement storage facility in Denver. Drawing
tube labels separated the three names as separate projects, although they shared many of
the same base plans. The integration of the three names and their inclusive parts was
necessary for completing Kananaskis as a whole project. Similar issues occurred in other
pilot year projects. ASPCOL was also known as Starwood, Starwood Ranch, Starwood
Main, and Mountain Retreat. High Desert was filed under many project numbers and
was sometimes referred to as Albuquerque Academy or Academy Lands East.
Summerlin was also known as the Howard Hughes Land Company project and contained

23
several different project numbers. Knowing that a single project may carry many names
should help in accessioning by helping both Design Workshop and Utah State University
know if they have the entirety of the project.
Future projects for the archives should be based on their potential use, the depth
of project material remaining intact, variety of scope, and the proven merit of the project.
While not all future uses of the archives can be determined, Utah State University and
Design Workshop have outlined some intended purposes. These include learning objects
modules; a digital collection which can be accessed by students, professional landscape
architects, and the general public; and exhibitions, among other things. Some of the
Design Workshop projects have been thoroughly culled after the finish of a project,
retaining few of the original records and a limited number of the working documents.
Although the projects may show merit, part of the purpose of the archives is to show
process. Without representative documents to detail the process, the collection will be
less effective in accomplishing the existing goals. Because of the quality of work that
Design Workshop has created over the years and the limited space in the Merrill-Cazier
Library’s Special Collections and Archives facility, those apogee and progenitor projects
that have been categorized by the firm as legacy projects should be prioritized for
accession. Award and legacy projects contain narratives, project descriptions, award
entry photographs and images, and have already been reviewed by the firm and third
parties as having merit. A variety of projects should be chosen to detail the breadth of
work that Design Workshop has procured. Expertise of the firm ranges from large-scale
community master plan development and resort planning to residential site planning and

24
design. The archives should highlight the extensiveness of their work and expertise.
Attention to these criteria should help ensure that the Design Workshop Archives and
Digital Collection maintains a high level of use and preserves their quality of work.
The accessioning and appraisal of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital
Collection is strongly based on intended uses, a desire to preserve project integrity,
preserve the work included in their award winning projects, and enhancing preservation
decisions already exhibited by the firm. Accession and appraisal of the four pilot year
projects will inform the methods for subsequent project selection. Enlightened by the
firm’s use of various naming methods for a single project assures a comprehensive
gathering of the records in a cohesive archive. Selection of the material based on these
criteria will help build a thorough collection based on the attributes Design Workshop has
sought to engage in every aspect of their work.

25
CHAPTER IV
COLLECTION EVALUATION AND RETENTION DECISIONS
Once the decisions have been made concerning what projects to archive, the next
step involves the evaluation of what to retain within each project. The condition of files
encountered will often determine the manner in which they should be archived and the
efforts that will be required to store them. Regardless of whether the project is large or
small, stringent retention guidelines should be applied equally. While it may be easier to
keep smaller collections, they too add up in space and effort. The anticipated role of the
archival collection, its future value, archival costs, and application will be reflected in a
hierarchical protocol for the culling of objects.
Smaller archival items such as photographs, legal files, marketing brochures,
catalogues, and other records of business are typically transferred from office filing
cabinets into box files for archiving. It is important to retain order as they are moved
from office files to transfer boxes. These are important to retain wherein they help to
define the procedures, structure, and operations of the firm or individual. The most
difficult aspect of the appraisal process may prove to be within the project records. Key
efforts to define retention of the projects should be based on context and content issues.
Among these, Lowell listed long term potential use, stability of the image, redundancy,
quantity of records, location of originals, and permanence of retention (Lowell & Nelb,
2006). This last aspect, permanence, refers to the recordkeeping requirements, in which
an archive collection considers only keeping the project files for the physical life of the
design’s existence or according to the obligations of law in reference to the creation,

26
maintenance, and nature of records; if the site is redesigned or removed, the project files
are purged as well. Lowell emphasized that the most important project records to
preserve are those of the design process, final construction, and photographs. Whether
these files are retained for legal purposes, educational value, or construction/maintenance
information, they are important to keep. The systematic efforts of the design firm at the
end of a project to weed out duplicates, field sets, sepias, and other documents of lesser
value helps alleviate much of the archival effort. Still, the team of archivists, landscape
architects, and landscape architecture faculty should help to develop this plan for the
firm. It would also help to eliminate a lot of storage space and time when trying to search
through the documents later. For the archivist, if a firm is practicing these purging
procedures, it is important to review their management plan to understand the story they
are telling through their own efforts.
Within the Design Workshop Archives are collections of box files, tubes of
drawings, computer files, tapes, disks, photographs, and slides. The collection was
processed according to Special Collections and Archives procedures at the Merrill-Cazier
Library. Because of the enormity of the accession, items were sorted according to value
of retention. Duplicates, documents from other firms and consultant works not necessary
to convey the project story were purged from the tubes. In addition, documents that are
not intellectual property (including unrelated magazine articles, brochures, and product
catalogs), memos from vendors, dead-end correspondence, and sensitive information that
might divulge secure data or violate privacy were eliminated from the box files.

27
Reprographic processes have changed significantly over time, especially during
the four decade span of the Design Workshop archives. Many of the reprographic
processes encountered in the pilot year of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital
Collection are no longer used because of their instability and the cost-effectiveness of
more modern print methods. Diazo, ozalid, and sepia prints are some of the reprographic
media which proved issues with stability and preservation. Many of the print media are
notably unstable, and show signs of degradation. Diazo and ozalid prints use chemical
processes to create a positive print on opaque media. The subsequent linework is black,
blue, or brown. These are used most often when making revisions and proofs because
they preserve the original document, are cost effective, and the linework is maintained
similar to the original document. Sepia prints are usually positive prints on translucent
paper which allow intermediate “originals” to be altered without harming the original.
These are often referred to as the “poor man’s” mylar or acetate copy. With time, sepia
prints fade, yellow, become brittle, and off-gas sulfurous compounds. Markers used on
some paper mediums allow images to bleed, obscuring original intentions or transferring
to adjacent papers. Of the duplication processes used, Lowell suggested that blueprints
are the most stable prints of the 1900s (Lowell & Nelb, 2006). In review of the Design
Workshop collection, the most stable documents have proven to be the film, acetate, and
Mylar documents. Reverse image prints and paper negatives are unstable. They are not
used by archival institutions for replications, and thus less desirable for retention when
other options exist. Beyond the ability of a medium to hold up over time, the initial
condition of the records is also important. Because of the printing methods used to create

28
design documents, they are very susceptible to humidity, light, and other environmental
conditions. Their existing condition and stability upon receipt by the archivist will help
to determine archival efforts necessary for preservation and retention.
In discussing image formats, slides and photographs can involve access and use
issues. Many slides were taken by professional photographers hired by Design
Workshop. Those would be stamped or labeled with the photographer’s name in order to
provide credit. For those images taken by a member of the project team, no label will be

Figure 4.1. Michael Timmons, Bradford Cole, Kurt Culbertson, and Amanda Dunlap
reviewing Kananaskis drawings.

29
included, and the images are acceptable to use, because Design Workshop tends to have
their photographers sign off on the copyright. Additionally, employee work paid through
salary becomes the property of the company. Some of the photographs and slides journal
mundane topics such as the moving of rocks. In cases of this sort, representative images
could be selected if the archive facility felt the space requirement became an issue. Most
important were the images which captured the original site and the site after installation.
These could prove to be valuable for any restoration efforts in the future. For those
images which duplicate original drawings, the images should be saved especially when
the originals are not available. The forty hand-drawn analyses in Kananaskis were an
example of this, as the originals were no longer with the collection but photographs in the
collection showed their purpose and content.
Several weeks into the appraisal process for Kananaskis, Design Workshop
Principal Kurt Culbertson visited the Utah State University campus to review progress of
the project. During the visit, retention efforts were reviewed and solidified between the
University and Design Workshop staff. One of the biggest questions was what to focus
on for preservation and what should be removed from the collection. While future
projects would require intense culling because of limited space availability in the library,
it was originally determined that Kananaskis would be retained as a nearly complete
collection. After delving into the project, it was discovered that nearly half of the
drawing tubes were filled with duplicates printed on transparencies for printing. Those
transparencies posed issues with preservation because they contained large amounts of
tape and gummy residue. The majority of those transparencies were removed from the

30
collection, with the exception of a few to demonstrate reprographic material. Their
duplicates on stable mediums were preserved. Numerous duplicates in unstable formats
would be removed from the collection because of their more stable counterparts.
Kananaskis was preserved in its entirety after the removal of duplicates and
transparencies. Figure 4.2 shows the final percentage breakdown of full-scale drawings
which were purged and retained from Kananaskis, High Desert, and ASPCOL.
A few reasons for the decision to retain Kananskis as a nearly complete collection
included the role that Design Workshop played in the project, the variety of reprographic
mediums exhibited, the design process, the size and significance of the project, and the
lack of supporting records. Design Workshop led the Kananaskis project as a type of
project leader or coordinator, organizing financial projection teams, architects, investors,
the local government, and, of course, the landscape. Selection criteria for the archives
were consequently established based on the goal to preserve most of the Kananaskis
project. The drawings to purge were duplicates on the same print medium, prints when
the original existed, documents from other firms not relevant in telling the project story,

11%

19%
45%

Kananaskis
55%

High Desert
81%

ASPCOL
89%

Figure 4.2. Comparison of drawings retained (in blue) versus purged (in red) from
each project after receipt at USU.

31
other items which were not intellectual property (like transmittals), memos and
catalogues from vendors, and dead-end correspondence. Items specifically retained
included ink drawings on Mylar (because of their stability), building elevations and
ground floor plans for each building, copy prints with notes preferred over clean copy
prints (because these show process and intent), design standards, submittals to the city
with critiques, significant letters, slides and pictures that may be used in the future for
restoration efforts, and the original contracts. The contracts would show what the firm
initially set out to accomplish in the project. Culbertson expressed his desires for Utah
State University’s focus in the archives to capture the essence of each project, providing a
descriptive understanding of the problems; linking key elements of site analysis; tracing
the design from market studies and the clients’ ideas; client interactions and impacts on
the design; and financial influences which altered the plan.
In the subsequent weeks, the drawings were sorted according to retention value
and placed in four piles: retain; purge; scan and retain; and scan and purge. Retention
was determined according to the guidelines decided in the meetings with Kurt
Culbertson. Documents to be scanned fell into three categories: (1) those drawings which
were showing signs of aging, fading, fragility, image bleeding, or showing other forms of
degradation were prepared for scanning to capture their current state; (2) the final
illustrative plans, drawings which detailed the design process, and images which showed
the integration of technologically advanced computer generated images with hand
rendering techniques were also included in the scanning (this group was considered to
contain documents most likely to be utilized in the creation of learning objects); and (3)

32
those documents which were scanned prior to being purged. Fragile, heavily damaged,
with bleeding line work and hosting information easily gained from a digital duplicate,
these documents offered very limited reasons for retention. For example, identification
of drawings to be scanned for Summerlin was dictated more by the permanency of the
images than the other projects. Many of the color rendered site illustrative plans are
drawn on sepia prints. The paper is showing intense signs of aging and deterioration; the
ink is lifting off of the paper and smearing in spots. Because of the intense signs of
decline, these will hold a priority in the scanning process to capture their current
condition in digital form before further degradation occurs. Those drawings which were
put into the purge pile were removed from the rest of the sorting process and boxed for
removal. It was agreed by Design Workshop, the Merrill-Cazier Library’s Special
Collections and Archives, and the Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning
Department that the purged items would be stamped as discarded, and made available for
display in the University’s landscape architecture studios. The display of discarded items
can help to inspire students, add visual interest to the studios, and serve as a constant
reminder of the valuable asset the full collection provides to the department.
During the collection evaluation, a formidable challenge for archivists of the
Kananaskis project involved the working space. Several drawings were larger than 4’x5’,
making them difficult to roll out in tight quarters. The Fife Room of the Special
Collections and Archives Division of the library was converted to an ephemeral
workshop for unrolling, measuring, describing, and cataloging the documents. With
limited space and the need for the room to be used by other parties, the drawings had to

33
be rerolled daily and stored after use. The height of the tables was another problem for
workers—they were a normal table height, but the workers were almost always standing,
causing them to bend over to reach the drawings for hours at a time. This slowed the
process quite a bit, suggesting the need for an alternative location. Criteria for the new
location included a large space with several tall tables, limited access, dim lighting, cool
temperatures, and within close proximity to the library. Temporary use of the LAEP
graduate studio for the summer semester afforded ample secured space in a quiet setting.
When classes started for the school year again, a spare office that was being used as
storage space for the Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning Department
suited the bill. It held four tables with adequate lighting and plenty of space to hold all of
the drawing tubes for a single project. This area solved the problem of having to roll up
all of the drawings after each use, whether the task was completed or not. Drawings
could be unrolled and weighted down, allowing them to lose some of the deep-set curls
they had inherited after years of being bound in the tubes. The documents, once flat,
were much easier to manipulate during sorting, labeling, and description. Lead-filled
sacks were used as weights to hold the documents down. They were small, manageable
objects that would not damage the drawings. The environmental conditions and
familiarity with processing helped to further streamline the sorting of High Desert,
ASPCOL, and Summerlin.
An important aspect in archiving the Summerlin project was the level of filtering
required. While the previous projects had been thoroughly culled before Utah State
University’s involvement, Summerlin held many more sketches and records intact. The

34
Summerlin project is comprised of numerous high quality original drawings and other
information. This added to the quality, depth, and time necessary to process. More than
130 tubes hold the collection, each densely packed with drawings. This is far more than
all of the other three projects combined. Because of the extent of this project, review of
the selection criteria for retention is important. The enormity of the drawing collection
requires stringent efforts to remove unnecessary content. Shepherd and Lowell (2000)
suggest creating a hierarchy of the original drawings preceding secondary drawings, or
those that are duplications. Whatever the organization, consistency is preferable
throughout the collection. For the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection,
duplicates were all removed. Sepias with highlighting and no keys to define their use
were purged when other matching drawings on more sound mediums existed. Only the
most complete construction document print packages (90% or 100% are preferable) were
retained when multiple copies were found. Print packages were preferred over the sepia
packages as well, due to the fragility of sepias, problems with off-gassing, and the
clouding of the paper as it ages, impeding the legibility of the image. Even though the
amount of drawings to process required intense effort, the original order of the drawings
was much more functional than some of the previous projects. This helped greatly speed
up the processing of Summerlin.
In addition to the selection criteria already discussed, a few office organization
tools altered the retention condition of some drawings. Tape adhesive generally exhibits
a shorter lifespan than the documents it attaches. This creates a conservation issue. If the
drawing is valuable enough, then measures can be taken to remove the tape. This process

35
is expensive and time consuming. Many of the drawings in all four projects had tape
whose adhesive had melted out from under the binding. It often attached numerous
drawings together inadvertently and was challenging to remove without damaging the
images. Complete removal of gummy residue is impossible and efforts are very time
consuming. When the document is vital to keep, the tape is often left on to try to block
the adhesive from sticking to additional objects, but when there is another copy of the
drawing, the one with tape is removed from the collection. Staples and metal paperclips
are removed to protect documents and drawings from tearing. When the staple or
paperclip is used to connect a group of documents in the box files, a plastic paperclip can
be used to bind the group. For drawings, the naming system replaces the staple to
indicate their connection. This will be discussed further in the next chapter. Often,
sticky notes were attached to the drawings, but because their archival stability is not yet
established, they were removed from the documents. The information the note contained
is recorded in the finding aid’s narrative and description. These foreign elements which
are not an integral part of the collection can have detrimental effects on document
condition and subsequent retention decisions.
Collection evaluation and retention decisions were based heavily on the condition
in which the records arrived at Utah State University. Stability of the mediums greatly
influenced digital preservation criteria. Retention was heavily weighted toward
preserving originals. Specific efforts were made to ensure the viability of the documents
and the information housed therein. Final retention criteria were influenced by facility

36
storage space, value of the documents, condition, and pertinence in relating the
importance of the project.

37
CHAPTER V
ARRANGEMENT AND DESCRIPTION
The accurate arrangement and description of the records are imperative to their
use and function. Logical arrangement of the archives will aid in their integration for
research and classroom use. Descriptions help highlight important traits within the
archives, making a search through their contents easy to the layman and inviting to the
researcher. Through effective arrangement and description, the archives should
experience frequent use.
The arrangement of the records should reflect the original order of the documents.
This is why it is important to carefully transfer files. If there is a no clear order the
archivist must impose a system of order on the records. The imposed order should reflect
best practices, be based on their likely creation, and facilitate future use. The
determination of whether to cultivate the original order or impose a new order over the
documents will largely be based on the condition in which they are received. Moving,
boxing, use at the firm, and shipping the files all may have altered their organization.
When possible, it would be valuable to consult the donor’s records-management system.
This proved invaluable with Design Workshop as archivists referred often to the firm’s
filing system for the box files. This arrangement, or the assessment of original order,
should be determined during content analysis, before processing begins. If order is
imposed, it should attempt to reflect the way the records would have been created and
used. Organization should reflect past use rather than future use to preserve the original
logic of the creator. The drawings from Design Workshop showed less order than the

38
records in the box files. Understanding the processing at the firm’s level helped
enlighten the archive efforts. Working drawings are kept in flat files in the studios at
Design Workshop. These are pulled and replaced in no particular order during their use.
When a project reaches completion, the drawings are culled and rolled by the project
manager. Specific organization of the drawings was more the exception than the rule.
Many duplicate drawings were kept in efforts to save printing costs later on rather than
for the inherent merit of the drawings. Recognition of the firm’s protocol helped to direct
the drawing order based on past use and design evolution.
Institutions should maintain a consistent system of arranging collections and
records. Adjusting the system according to volume and typology becomes burdensome
and confusing. Generally organization of records begins with the identification of
existing series and subseries. Miller (1990) defined series as “a body of file units or
documents arranged in accordance with a unified filing system or maintained as a unit by
the organization or individual that created them because of some other relationship
arising out of their creation, function, receipt, physical form, or use” (p. 7). Series titles
should be flexible enough to accommodate needs. Miller has suggested only four series
titles, which entail personal papers, professional papers, officer records, and project
records. Shepherd and Lowell expanded on Miller’s suggestion with the additional series
to include faculty papers; major projects; art and artifacts; additional donations; and
unique series holding those collections which do not organize themselves in any of the
existing series. This last series should be malleable, but the initial titles should remain
fairly consistent, regardless of contents. If original order for the collection exists, though,

39
the series and subseries should be used more flexibly as they apply. In considering the
organization of series and subseries, Shepherd and Lowell (2000) recommended
considering how the architect would have arranged and used the archives. Regardless of
whether the original order is maintained or a new order is imposed, series descriptions
will be the key to transferring information to the researcher about what the order is and
how it can be used. Portions of the collection such as photographs, magazine articles,
and presentation boards which may be retained by the firm for on-going marketing
purposes, can be connected digitally/intellectually to the archival files. Nelb advised
“project files are the fundamental unit for arrangement and description of design and
construction records” (Lowell & Nelb, 2006, p. 95). The original order of the project
files is often ordered alphabetically by project name or numerically by project number,
based on the project’s start year and a consecutive number. Most commonly, if an order
must be assigned it is alphabetical according to project name.
Textual records, photographs, and drawings, are generally included within the
project records. Beyond this, presentation drawings, CDs, disks, models, and videos can
also be included. The format in which these objects and documents arrive should be
respected. If files come in boxes and drawings come in tubes, their separation can and
should be protected as a part of the efforts to observe the original order. Shepherd and
Lowell (2000) suggested that separating documents and records according to their
specific storage needs is more important. Intellectual links to their original organization
with a finding guide maintains the correlation. Separation within this collection can
occur when folded drawings are found in the project box files. They should be removed

40
for humidification, allowed to flatten, and stored separately. This is similar to the
practice of removing photographs in a manuscript collection as well. Photographs are
usually housed separately because of specific storage needs but linked to the original
collection with the finding guide. It should thus be determined in the record management
plans of the institution how to manage these, whether they should be placed with the
contents of the tubes or separated into their own area.
The organization of the tubes according to the tube names was analyzed for
congruency. While the tubes were titled, their contents often did not match the label.
Based on the local practice of the archive appraisal, processors determined whether it was
better to maintain the integrity of the tubes, the original organization that is generally
preferred in archival work, or create a new system. In situations where a mixture of
drawings had been grouped in a single tube or where identical drawings had been placed
in different tubes, it was decided to reorganize the drawing, and place a reference number
to the original tube on each document.
Filing categories determined to be appropriate for Kananaskis were site inventory
and analysis; studies and schematics; master plans; illustrative plans; graphic process;
timelines; grading and topography; construction details and specifications; day lodge;
parcel a; parcel b; parcel c; Fortress Junction Service Centre; maintenance building; staff
housing; illustrations; document packages; and Banff Downtown Enhancement. The
clusters were labeled one (1) through eighteen (18). Within the clusters, each drawing
received a number as well. Thus, the labeling system evolved into which the project
number (Kananaskis was 1), cluster number (Studies and Schematics were 3), and

41
drawing number were listed on the back corner of each drawing and recorded on the
spreadsheet. Appendices B, C, and D contain a copy of the final spreadsheets. A letter
was sometimes attached at the end of the code when a drawing was part of an inseparable
package or two drawings were secured together. The number system becomes an code
which titles each drawing by listing project number, cluster number, drawing number,
and a letter which would indicate if it was part of a set, all in descending order. The
drawing labeled 1.3.31.A. is one part of a study or schematic described as a concept
drawing of the village core including hardscape and grading. Tube numbers for their
archival housing in the final coding system were not encouraged, because their location
may change with time. Thus, the code 1.3.31.A. does not reference the tube number, only
the cluster number because of the possibility of their housing changing. A unique cluster
that was created for the Kananaskis project was entitled graphic process. This cluster
includes documents and drawings that show some of the unique reprographic media no
longer prominently used by design firms. The printing processes and techniques that
have since been lost were specifically retained as examples in this project.
The arrangement and description of High Desert went a lot smoother after the
lessons learned from Kananaskis. The initial review of the tubes showed that some were
organized according to tube names, but some of the descriptive labels did not tell what
was really contained in the tube. One tube in particular held only a note reading
“Transferred to Santa Fe for CF archive.” The original contents of that tube have not
been determined, but drawings matching the tube name were not found during
processing. Because of the only partial order of the drawings, it was decided that as

42
much of the order would be preserved as possible, but cluster divisions for parcels or
tracts like in Kananaskis would be followed to finish the organization. The final cluster
titles are as follows: High Desert Trailhead; Parcel 2; Parcel 3; Site Analysis and
Inventory; High Desert Office; Planting Plans; Parcel 7 (Apartments); Parks at High
Desert; Century Theaters; Streetscapes; Topography and Grading; Studies & Schematics;
High Desert Master Plan; Illustrations & Imagery; Parcel 15; Parcel 16 (The Trailhead);
Master Development Schedule; Consultant Works; and Engineering/Utility Packages.
The last two clusters were not drawing clusters that are planned for constant retention in
each project, but they best address Design Workshop’s role in this project. They are
placed at the end of the series, in case future needs warrant their removal. Some of the
planting plans did not seem to match any of the parcel plans, and were not labeled,
making it difficult to ascertain where they should be organized. They received their own
unique cluster.
ASPCOL is a collection of construction documents and master plans with only
slight variations. Most are not original drawings. The drawings that would be considered
part of the design process are minimal. The quantity of drawings that came from the
ASPCOL project was very few in number. Kananaskis and High Desert had required
months to process, whereas ASPCOL took a couple days. It is a small collection, which
indicated that intense culling had occurred before it was donated to the University. The
only items removed from the project were a couple duplicates, which were purged to
follow protocol. The original order of this project was maintained because it was
understandable and already followed the organization assigned to the other Design

43
Workshop projects. The clusters were titled after the tubes they arrived in: Topography
& Grading; Master Plan; Planting & Irrigation Plans; Equestrian Center; Tennis Court;
and Pond. The drawings were almost all dated, allowing call numbers for the finding aid
to follow chronologic order. The arrangement of each of these projects is then
supplemented by the descriptions created for the finding guide.
The International Council on Archives (1999) has determined that “the purpose of
archival description is to identify and explain the context and content of archival
materials in order to promote its accessibility” (p. 7). Nelb wrote that “description is the
method by which the archivist conveys information about the records to those who need
them” (Lowell & Nelb, 2006, p. 98). The availability and utility of archives is
determined by the descriptions assigned by the archivist, because if they are not effective,
understanding is lost. The quality and depth of descriptions reflect the institution’s intent
for the use of the collection. Shepherd and Lowell (2000) proposed the creation of
miniature scope notes which help identify the contents of the collection series can prove
to be the most effective finding aid. These are provided within the finding aid for the
DWADC. Whether the collection contains detailed lists of contents or stop at the series
level, the narrative will ensure use of the archives. Shepherd and Lowell (2000)
suggested the content of the descriptive paragraphs will “typically contain information
relating to the types of records (unless this information is obvious from the subseries list),
the subjects or activities documented in the series, and any strengths or weaknesses in the
records. Names of significant correspondents, clients, collaborators, or projects may also
be pointed out here” (p. 10).

44
Scope and content notes are a narrative description which help guide the user
through the collection. With the dependence on digital media and internet access to the
digital collection, it is important to include series and often subseries descriptions to help
increase navigability. While scope and content notes are important, they should be fairly
brief. Details including size, title, and medium of the drawings are not necessary to
record. Nelb noted “an item-level description model is appropriate for managing
holdings of unique single items, but is poor archival practice for large design collections”
(Lowell & Nelb, 2006, p. 100). In a review of the Environmental Design Archives’
process at University of California at Berkley, many of their archives contained detailed
item-level lists while others lacked any description at all. The efforts to conduct a
thorough analysis of some of the drawings to a level more in keeping with a collection of
fine art had apparently caused the neglect of other collections. They found that it would
be more effective with the quantity of archives they were dealing with to lessen the depth
and increase the breadth of their archival descriptions. By limiting their arrangement and
description to the series level, archivists were able to manage the quantity of collections.
They suggest, above all, creating a set of standards to enhance the consistency throughout
the collection with a common set of terminology and arrangement. This consistency
benefits both the archivist and the future researcher. One of the difficulties the
Environmental Design Archives at the University of California at Berkeley faced in their
collections is the unique mixture of both tube drawings and box files within an
architectural or landscape project. They suggest creating both a folder list and a project
index. Shepherd and Lowell (2000) explained that “the folder list follows the standard

45
format, listing the folders within the context of series and subseries and including the box
and folder numbers, folder title, and dates of the records. It is used to describe the
records that are not project-related, such as personal and professional papers, faculty
records, and some office records” (p. 11). They continued, “The project index is an
alphabetical list of projects, with additional descriptive data and pointers to any existing
textual records, photographs, and drawings relating to that project.” The combination of
the two systems helps orient the researcher and ease use of the collections.
The files that contain the design proposals, client correspondence, and office
meeting minutes help to create context for the project. Even when the drawings used to
document the design process have been discarded, these textual records help to illustrate
the timeline and efforts that went into the project. While some of the textual records are
not necessary to retain, many assist in understanding the depth and breadth of design
efforts. The box files also help to define the role the firm played in the project. Above
all, Lowell suggested “knowledge of the history of design and the built environment will
enhance the appraisal process” (Lowell & Nelb, 2006, p. 83).
Kananaskis highlights the need for communication between the storage facility
and the firm. Before time is spent processing, preparing, and storing a project, there
should be a detailed discussion of project importance. The initial process of collection
evaluation included a cursory perusal of the drawings in an attempt to gain an overview
perspective of acquisition contents. Reading through the contract, bid proposal, and final
submission documents helped to determine what to keep and guided suggestions for
learning object material. The narrative descriptions provided in the book Toward Legacy

46
along with their own project detail and narrative capture of each project shed light on
Design Workshop’s efforts, including their role in the project, the underlying motivations
of the efforts shown, and the chronology of the project. Knowledge of project
significance will help in arranging and describing the projects.
Through careful coordination with the firm and examination of existing project
narratives, the arrangement and description of the projects is fairly straightforward.
Original order should be maintained whenever possible. When order is imposed on the
project, it should be sensitive to the way the firm would have used the records and lend
itself to future use. Organization within the pilot year maintained original order when it
was feasible to do so, grouping series and subseries accordingly. The organization helps
to highlight the steps of the design process. Descriptions should highlight the important
aspects of the project; providing a clear, concise description will reduce confusion and
enhance the utility of the finding guide. Thoughtful arrangement and description will aid
in the usability and help to encourage frequent use of the archive content.

47
CHAPTER VI
MANAGEMENT AND STORAGE OF ITEMS
In a review of long-term maintenance standard best practices, temperature,
humidity, mold, pollutants, and light can have some of the most detrimental impacts on
archival records. Archival storage entails strict climate management, including
temperature, humidity, and lighting. Existing physical space to be dedicated to the
collection, financial resources for the storage format (whether flattened in drawers,
framed for display, or rolled in tubes), and potential for future additions to the collection
all influence retention plans. The control of climatic effects can augment the life of the
archives.
A few storage facility standards will also help preserve drawings before they are
given to an institution for archiving. High temperature and high humidity can quickly
deteriorate records. Light can be very damaging because it can both fade images and
darken the medium they are on. Ultraviolet light is detrimental and should always be
avoided to ensure a viable lifespan for the records. When drawings are stored in tubes,
they should be stored in low light areas with no natural light. When drawings are stored
in tubes, those tubes should be laid on their side rather than on end to maintain the
integrity of the paper. Following standard practice for humidity and temperature within
storage facilities is very important. Keeping the temperature of the facility at the very
warmest at 75˚ F, but preferably 65˚ F, slows deterioration of the drawings (Lowell &
Nelb, 2006). Relative humidity should be kept below 45%, with new standards
recommending 35%. This helps protect the drawings from mold and rapid degradation.

48
The Utah State University’s archive facility remains at 63˚ F and has a humidity level of
less than 35%.
In storage efforts, flat storage drawers are preferred, but cost, space, condition,
and quality of the drawings are often the determining factor. If drawings are less
valuable, more durable, or if cost and space become an issue, they can be rolled around
an acid-free tube, tied with flat cotton “tape,” and stored in tubes with caps to keep out
the dust. The mediums in the Design Workshop drawings are stored without rolling them
around a tube, as they prove to be sturdy without the additional support. Within the
storage element of the archives, equilibrium must be struck between balancing the budget
and conservation (Lowell & Nelb, 2006). In creating more digital objects and storing
fewer originals as a way to afford archiving these types of collections, this is one of the
problems to overcome with the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection.
After labeling all of the Kananaskis drawings, they were rolled into bundles of
manageable size, which often were about twenty drawings per roll. The rolls were
wrapped with archival quality Mylar to protect corners and edges during storage and
retrieval. The Mylar rolls were labeled with a project number, cluster number, and
drawing numbers before storage in archival tubes. The inside of the archival tube was
labeled according to what rolls were housed therein, and a corresponding label was
placed on the outside of the tube top as well. The other projects are stored in the same
manner. The box files, photographs, slides, and other items were transferred to archival
folders and stored in archival boxes. Through attentive control of environment and

49
storage factors, the life of these drawings, documents, photographs, and slides are
preserved.

50
CHAPTER VII
CREATING A DIGITAL COLLECTION
The creation of a digital collection to work in partnership with a traditional
archive presents a variety of challenges. Enabling easy access to a digital collection
requires reformatting of physical documents, acquiring access to facilities which can
create a digital copy of a physical document, acclimating to constantly update digital file
programs, obtaining substantial digital storage, and providing the depth of information to
make the collection useful. Daunting as this may be, the value of a digital collection is
immeasurable. A thorough digital collection can enable a much larger user group to have
access to the collection. The creation of the digital portion of the Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection helps in the development of learning objects,
preservation of key documents, and extended lifespan of the materials.
Reformatting a traditional archive increases accessibility, preserves records from
deterioration, and protects originals from overuse. Reformatting is generally used in
efforts to preserve drawings or records when the original document shows signs of
deterioration. It can also be preferred when a drawing is in high use to preserve the
original and allow the surrogate to receive the wear and tear. Digital scanning,
electrostatic copies, microfilm, and photography are the four means to reformat physical
drawings suggested by Tawny Nelb, a private archival consultant and member of the
Society of American Archivists (Lowell & Nelb, 2006). Small drawings can be scanned
with a flatbed scanner but for larger documents, photographs or large format scanners
have to be utilized. Protection of the drawing when using any of these methods is vitally

51
important. For large format roll-through scanners, Nelb suggests using a clear, two-sided
carrier. Miller (1990) specified using 6 mil clear polyester to protect the drawing. In this
method, one sheet of the polyester is folded in half and creased along one edge. The
drawing is placed within the polyester envelope and the folded edge is fed through the
scanner first. This keeps the document flat, protecting damaged edges from additional
wear, and shields sensitive media such as graphite from rubbing on mechanical parts.
About an inch of overlap on every side helps to hold down rolled edges and protects the
drawing during the scanning process. With the Design Workshop drawings, this method
obscured colors and created overexposed light streaks in the digital copy. Placement of a
blank sheet of bond paper behind drawings on trace and other semi-transparent mediums
during scanning helps increase the contrast and quality of the scan. Images needing to be
photographed are placed on a vacuum board to hold down rolled corners during capture.
While digital images will all require upgrades with time, they do open the use of the
archives to a much larger audience than the delicate and often unwieldy originals would
permit.
A flatbed scanner was used in the Digital Initiatives Department of the Library for
smaller documents up to 11” by 17”. The Landscape Architecture and Environmental
Planning Department has a roll-through large format scanner for larger documents up to
36” wide. Still, many of the drawings for Kananaskis were too large even for the rollthrough scanner. For these larger documents, a Hasselblad overhead digital camera
owned by the Library was utilized. Drawings would be mounted and photographed,
requiring very high selection standards because of the cost and tediousness of the task.

52
Many of the drawings, because of the selection criteria, were also incredibly delicate. A
roll-through scanner could damage the drawings if they were sent through unprotected.
A document sandwich idea was proposed in which the drawings would be placed
between two sheets of a clear material and sent through the scanner, protecting the
document from tears and jamming. Acetate holds the documents well, but reflects the
light from the scanner and created large blue streaks in the scanned image. Mylar and
matte acetate were too opaque and discolored the scans. Reformatting images using
digital scanning, electrostatic copies, microfilm, and photography provides access to
physical drawings and records. Beyond these digital surrogates, the born-digital records
also host a plethora of valuable information that needs to be preserved. Creating a digital
surrogate is another form of appraisal. Because of the expense involved in managing
digital material one must weigh consideration of cost versus access in selecting digital
objects.
A digital collection entails more than just scans and photographs. The adoption of
computer-aided design (CAD), computerized geographic information systems (GIS), and
other “born-digital” technologies as standard office practice add to both the depth and
challenge of digital archive collections. The amount of digital records, the instability of
storage media, and the shortening lifespan of programs and computers which can
interpret the information create a real stumbling block for digital archives. Recording
and storage technologies are constantly changing, and the longevity of digital formats is
still unknown. New operating systems will not process the old data, and old systems
which helped to create the data are increasingly difficult to find. Converting 3.5” and

53
5.25” floppy disks, tape drives, and proprietary media such as Iomega disks to a viable
archival medium is challenging (Mitchell, 1996). More ominously, Dale Flecker (2003),
Associate Director for Planning and Systems at Harvard University Library, noted the
grave issues facing digital archive collections currently in his discussion that “changes in
technology will ensure that over relatively short periods of time, both the media and the
technical format of old digital materials will become unusable. Keeping digital resources
usable by future generations requires conscious effort and continual investment” (p. 10).
There are two generally accepted methods of preserving born-digital objects. Migration
is the system in which a document from an old format is moved to a new format as
standards evolve and new formats are created. This would include the upgrading of an
Adobe Portable Document Format (pdf) file from the Version 1.0 to Version 10.0,
released in 1993 and 2010, respectively. This allows the document or file to be
constantly accessible to the general user. While this sounds simple, it is time consuming
and reliant upon the software available for transfer. A single Adobe Reader would not be
able to read both a Version 1.0 file and one created in Version 10.0. The file would have
to be upgraded, or migrated, as the software became available. Some programs provide
for reading past versions, but limit the depth. Version 10.0 can only read pdf files from
Version 5.0 or newer. Program formats are constantly changing, and while text files are
not too difficult to bring into newer formats, design files are another story. Computer
generated geometric models contain intense formulas and information that can often only
be read by its creating software. Emulation, the second method, attempts to write old
software onto new computers. This effort has been pursued by people like Jeff

54
Rothenberg of RAND and companies like IBM for over 60 years. This is a very wellestablished method in computer science and engineering, but it is not perfect either. It
shows systematic flaws and can run into problems with storage. As Clifford Lynch
(2004) noted, “digital preservation is not accomplished through a single ‘right’ strategy,
but is ultimately a set of carefully considered choices in support of specific objectives”
(p. 617). The chosen process for archiving digital media should be determined by
potential uses, feasibility of storage, and the ability of the archivist to migrate or emulate
file data as necessary.
Conversion is not the only cause of problems in digital archive efforts. Firms
should be encouraged to create digital filing structures that can be followed and
understood by the archive. A lack of consistent filing at the firm can lead to very slow
processing at the institution. The tendency of offices to retain everything or create files
which lack a specific labeling system causes confusion for the archivist and are very time
consuming to review. File names often do not follow a recognizable pattern. It is a
challenging proposition for archivists to deal with the immense amount of digital records
being created and donated to archival collections. While memory and digital space may
seem endless, there are significant costs for storage space and access issues for digital
media at the institutional level.
Both storage space and storage devices can be costly and troublesome. As is seen
with compact discs and the floppy disks that preceded them, digital storage media once
considered stable and long-lasting, are proving unstable and short-lived. External hard
drives, the preferred method by many to manage their own digital records have

55
demonstrated short-comings. When a hard drive is not operated frequently enough, it can
lose its ability to store information and simply seize up. Efforts are desperately needed to
create efficient methods for dealing with digital media in archives. This current issue
threatens the permanency of the designs which have been created in the past few decades
(Mitchell, 1996).
While creating and storing digital archives may seem to be a daunting endeavor,
there are reasons to pursue their creation. Effective redundancy of important documents,
both in paper and digital format, provides some insurance against loss or destruction
(Flecker, 2003). The creation of digital surrogates has created a new safeguard in
document preservation, and has immeasurably opened up access to otherwise seemingly
inaccessible physical documents. The difference between digital surrogates and borndigital material is that digital surrogates generally are scanned or photographed with
archiving in mind. The methods used to create the digital copy and the format used to
preserve it generally follow a systematic approach that is supported by library staff and
facilities. Because of the well-developed best practices of format and resolution, digital
replications of physical documents are much easier to archive from the outset.
For the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection, one of the concerns
with the creation of the digital collection was the temporary nature of digital media. The
images could be migrated periodically as software upgrades occur in order for them to be
continually readable. Existing digital media could be converted from program files like
AutoCAD into unalterable, readable pdf or TIFF files. This was reviewed by Design

56
Workshop. They concluded that for some of the E files the content was not worth the
cost of migration.
Along with the reformatting of the large scale drawings and born digital design
files, the box files and records are also incorporated into the digital collection. Staff in
the Digital Initiatives Department scans all of the box file contents for access through the
Utah State University Digital Library. A few drawings were scanned initially to
determine best practices for the available facilities. The drawings were scanned at 300
dpi and 400 dpi to see how large the digital files would be and to test the image quality
they would provide. The 300 dpi scans showed plenty of detail because of the size of the
originals. TIFF is an archival format for digital images, and although it creates much
larger file sizes, it preserves the highest quality image. TIFFs also ensure future
migration of the data. It was an obvious choice for the archives. From the TIFF files,
JPEGs could be created later for online access. Digital images were labeled according to
the label assigned to their paper original. Also, the scanned images would be temporarily
stored on a large portable hard drive, which offers its own problems. There was a need to
find a central storage system. While the collection of digital files is small the library is
able to provide sufficient memory space on the existing servers. As the number and size
of digital files grows, there will be a need to purchase more digital media storage space as
it surpasses the capacity on the Merrill-Cazier Library’s current system.

57
In meetings
with Design
Workshop and Utah
State University
libraries, it was
proposed that an
electronic interface
be used as the most
viable
dissemination of
information about
the inner workings
of the firm. This
would include
design business practices
that are not thoroughly

Figure 7.1. Joe Porter during the recording of an oral
history.

addressed by the project
files, media blurbs, and a capture of the big ideas as they evolved across individual and
multiple projects. This would enable project organization to remain intact while
highlighting connections. It was also proposed that pictures of key Design Workshop
staff involved in each project could be captured along with a sample of their hand

58
lettering, a unique record of their own work and influence. The addition of this
information would help tie the digital collection together as a cohesive whole.
One of the features of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection is
the oral history portion of the digital collection. Preparation for the oral history portion
of the archives included the review of project narratives and interview questions. Some
things that were important to Culbertson to address included key features of the site that
shaped the plan; program development; the big idea which married the site and program
together; unusual tales or client characteristics (motives or desires) which altered the
plan; critical economic or financial objectives which shaped the plan; forces of change
within the plan; the existence and influence of other affiliates on the project (this would
include documenting the connection with any key people or firms of significance); any
project lineage that involves this project; and overall successes (what worked, what did
not, and what can be learned from the efforts). A valuable model for the development of
the oral histories is The Cultural Landscapes Foundation. Creating a connection with the
Foundation will prove to both help inform Utah State University’s own process, but could
also connect the two groups and increase web traffic between them. Oral histories will
help highlight the importance of project methodology to casual users of the archives as
well as help dictate learning objects for the Landscape Architecture and Environmental
Planning Department.
The digital portion of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection
provides access to a large audience and preserves many different design formats. Digital
scanning and photography will help to protect documents currently in poor condition and

59
shield important records from too much handling. Migration and emulation efforts will
help ensure continued access to the archives. Extending access to the Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection through the web will help encourage use, enhance
learning opportunities, and begin to overcome the gap between students and the built
landscapes which inspire them. Despite the challenges inherent in maintaining a digital
collection, the collection will prove to enhance learning, preserve the past, and inspire the
future.

60
CHAPTER VIII
LEARNING OBJECTS AS AN OUTCOME OF THE ARCHIVE
Mogharreban and Guggenheim (2008) defined learning objects as “objectoriented programming, a paradigm of software engineering where software programs are
built using modules that are interoperable, reusable, and easier to maintain than their
monolithic counterparts. In a similar fashion, an academic course can be broken up into
computer-mediated instructional units that possess these same qualities—portability,
adaptability, reusability, and ease of maintenance.” In a study of high school students
studying engineering and architecture in 2006 and 2007, two-thirds of the students in the
classroom reported benefits in understanding through this pedagogical tool known as
learning objects (Kay, 2006). First credited to Wayne Gerard in 1994 (Polsani, 2003),
learning objects gained broad recognition from Hodgins’ (Wiley, 2000) application to a
working group within the Computer Education Management Association in that same
year. These learning objects provide motivational, interactive, and visual qualities that
help increase attention and aid in understanding (Nugent, 2006). Learning objects are
often used and reused in partial form for teaching material (Bannan-Ritland, Dabbagh, &
Murphy, 2002; Rehak & Mason, 2003; Boyle, 2003; El Saddik, Fischer, & Steinmetz,
2001). “Instead of constantly re-inventing the wheel, educators can access shared online
libraries of quality interactive Learning Objects to enhance the delivery of their courses
and the quality of the learning experience for their students” (Cochrane, 2005). Learning
objects are valuable as learner guided tools (Bannan-Ritland, et al., 2002). As part of the
learning orientations theory, personalizing learning based on a whole-person perspective,

61
including emotion and intentions on learning, learning objects help to increase the depth
of knowledge students gain (Martinez, 2002). Oral histories, timelines, and final
products can help address different learning methods for students. With computers
becoming an inseparable part of the student environment, the importance of learning
objects is inextricably linked to education (McGreal, 2004).
One specific goal of the Design Workshop pilot year involved experimentation
with the creation of learning objects. During the collection appraisal process, a running
list of potential learning object themes was compiled. Numerous topics were identified
within the Kananaskis project alone, including large-scale issues such as the evolution of
a master plan and the design process. At a more focused level, possible topics ranged
from grading to graphics. There were evident evolutions in the site plan, which could
inform a study of the progression from the earliest to the final design. Showing time
lapse evolution of the design through sequential schematics, developed as the plan
matured, could be used to illustrate changes. Employing “voice-over” from the firm,
information could be shared about reasons for changes and allow students to explore the
differences. Studies from a redesign of the Banff Downtown, a spin-off project from
Kananaskis, demonstrate the production of numerous concepts in a short amount of time.
A study of the design constraints that were faced and their impacts on the final design
would be valuable to understand. Looking at the unique design process exhibited by
Sergio Santana, a frequent collaborator on Design Workshop projects, and his subtractive
design method could help students see variations in the design process. A significant
potential learning object identified by Design Workshop principal and co-founder Joe

62
Porter might portray the project’s site analysis. A conglomeration of more than forty
hand-drawn maps including site inventory, attractiveness studies, and vulnerability
studies led to alternative plans representing the feasibility for the resort. This analysis
was a landmark effort in site analysis and planning, an ideal focus for a learning object.
One of the stories of the Kananaskis project which really stands out in the site illustrative
plans, the perspectives, elevations, and site photographs is the respect paid to the genius
loci, or spirit of the place, through siting and design expression. The quality of the
renderings really helps users understand what it feels like to be in the place and what
Design Workshop had in mind in its creation. While these drawings may not fit into a
learning object on their own, their integration into the display for the archives really
captures the attention.
During the time that learning objects were being considered using the Kananaskis
project, the accessioning and processing of the High Desert project began. It was
immediately evident that High Desert’s quantity of drawings detailed the design process
much more comprehensively than the Kananaskis project. Because Landscape
Architecture and Environmental Planning Department faculty were interested in
employing a digital learning module in the spring semester of the pilot year, the course
offerings were examined to find where a learning object from Kananaskis or High Desert
could enhance the classroom curriculum. Within the High Desert project, a particularly
rich group of drawings had been retained portraying the multiple phases of the design
process for a portion of the development known as Parcel 7, depicting numerous aspects
of analysis, adaptation, and creativity. Because of the quantity, quality, and subject matter

63
of these drawings, High Desert Parcel 7 was selected as the pilot learning module
developed by the Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning Department.
Professor Carlos Licón developed the creation and storyline of the module to fit the needs
of his Residential Planning and Design course, which focuses on introducing theory and
methods of neighborhood and community planning. The potential for immediate
application in this classroom setting helped expedite the creation of the learning module.
A copy of this learning module is contained in Appendix E.
High Desert contains a large collection of illustrations and details that had been
produced for the sustainability guidelines document. Samples of arches, columns, and
chimneys, among others features, were drawn in ink on trace. There was also a collection
of building and landscape perspectives for approved and unapproved styles. The graphic
quality and techniques exhibited in the drawings are wonderful additions to the archives.
Beyond the illustrations, High Desert contained numerous other stories to tell.
Computer-created line work was used to lay out wire-frame perspectives of the
development. These were then traced and enhanced by hand. These computer drafting
techniques were revolutionary for the time, and have since been superseded by other
computer programs. Processes that students use to render perspectives today often use
new computer program such as Google Sketch-Up, AutoCAD, and VectorWorks to
create three-dimensional images much more efficiently.
Other landscape architecture faculty initiated use of archive drawings and prints
in the classroom for object lessons. The students respectfully cared for the drawings and
were enriched by the experience. During the archiving of High Desert, one of the

64
graduate research assistants was enrolled in a construction document class. Recognizing
the value of the construction documents and the current subject matter of the class, with
the teacher’s supportive interest a set of construction documents were brought into the
classroom to help explain the title page of a package. Students did not stop at the
examination of the front page of the construction document package, but delved into
many of the other lessons they could learn from the print set. Several times after the
original showing of the package, students requested their return to the classroom for
additional study. This instance helps show the value the archives hold for the landscape
architecture students and the eagerness students have to incorporate them into classroom
learning.
High Desert was the first project to really be integrated into classroom learning
and has proven to be a success. Students are eager to review the drawings and professors
are willing to incorporate the material into their lessons. An alumnus of the program who
is currently studying information technology is eager to help the program incorporate the
archives into distance learning opportunities. The work with High Desert has really
propelled the educational pursuits of the archives.
As sorting and cataloguing of the Design Workshop collection proceeded,
selected drawings were scanned for possible use in learning objects based on the preidentification of potential themes. The learning object probing the design process of High
Desert Parcel 7, having been clearly outlined, greatly facilitated the scanning efforts for
that project. Results from the pilot year emphasize the value of “mining” the collection
for its educational benefits. The involvement of landscape architecture faculty members

65
in the collection to enhance across-the-board awareness of its value as a classroom
resource is critical. Project narratives, descriptions, box file contents, and the finding aid
should be available to faculty as new projects are added to the collection. This should
help inspire professors to work directly with processors to generate ideas for additional
learning objects. Because of the interest that students have already exhibited in the
collection, it would be beneficial to incorporate them in the selection of those learning
objects. Advanced students are often very aware of the topics which could use more
attention and support in the classroom. Compiling a list of their interests may also help
in the selection of learning modules and their subsequent success. This could be
accomplished through classroom assignments to use the archives, mid- and end-ofsemester course reviews, and general polling. Whether the drawings have been
reformatted into digital media or are only available in their original form, their use in the
classroom will help stimulate interest in the archives and augment learning opportunities.

66
CHAPTER IX
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
The Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection provides a unique
opportunity for Utah State University Libraries and the LAEP Department to partner with
one of the top landscape architecture firms in the United States. It is a chance to place an
emphasis on “the coordination and collaboration of records creators, custodians such as
archivists, and the users of records” (Cox, 1996, p. 146). The Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection are built around the goal of melding professional and
academic endeavors, preserving history while bridging the gap between academia and the
profession. The archives reach far beyond that scope, though, by telling the story of the
development of the modern western United States. With the digital collection available,
students, scholars, and designers throughout the world will have access to this
monumental compilation of work. The collection offers an opportunity for professionals
to preserve their work in a way which will allow students and other professionals to
access it from a distance or work with the actual documents. Within the collaboration
between Design Workshop, the Merrill-Cazier Library, and the Landscape Architecture
and Environmental Planning Department, each participant has a unique interest in the
preservation of the collection, helping to insure its use and vitality.
The pilot year of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection was a
year of new experiences, experimentation with techniques, and an intensive review of
best practices. As a result of hours in dim rooms amidst the fumes of deteriorating sepia
prints, the archival process for the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection has

67
developed principles that can be applied flexibly according to a plethora of scenarios.
While Kananaskis, High Desert, ASPCOL, and Summerlin each offered new challenges
to the archiving methodology, their variations have helped create principles by which the
archives can be appraised and processed. Additional learning opportunities will continue
to surface with the archiving efforts, but the lessons that have been learned should prove
beneficial for further endeavors to archive the work of landscape architecture firms and
enhance their relationship with academia.
Through various additions and outlets for the collection, the digital collection is of
high interest and utility for its users. A mixture of oral histories to enhance the archives,
an exhibition of its contents for key interests groups, and integration into learning objects
secure utility of the collection. The digital collection is an important effort within the
field of landscape architecture, opening up opportunities for learning and exploration of
remote locations. Classroom learning modules are already being created by the
Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning Department to utilize the archives.
Digital access will also afford opportunities for teaching satellite and internet courses in a
field that currently lacks that ability. Professionals can interact with the archives from
the desk at their office to gain design inspiration and improve techniques. Property
owners can enjoy access to the plans for their own sites and reference the archives for
restoration efforts. The possible applications of the digital collection are endless. With a
variety of uses and users eager to utilize the Design Workshop Archives and Digital
Collection, the archiving of the four pilot projects portends a useful future.

68
The digital portion of the archives should increase use of the collection, help in
disseminating content, and provide additional access to those interested in the contents.
As a component of the digital archives, oral histories, project story interviews, site
retrospective visits, and other materials will be filmed and preserved within the
collection. These will provide the possibility for researchers to examine the thread
connecting projects from design inception through post-construction occupancy, as well
as link with the underlying philosophies of the designers.
One of the efforts at Utah State University to familiarize potential users with the
creation of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection was the installment of
a large exhibit in the foyer of the Merrill-Cazier Library. During the entire archival

Figure 9.1. Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection exhibit in the MerrillCazier Library on March 25, 2011.

69
assessment and appraisal, possibilities for stories to tell and interesting images to display
were tracked for use in the display. When it was time to select items for the display, the
list of possible drawings was first scrutinized by the landscape architecture department
faculty, and then presented to the library staff. Final selections of the images were often
determined by feasibility for framing based on size and condition. To help visualize the
space and the arrangement of the panels for the display, computerized three-dimensional
Google Sketch Up models of the library foyer were created. Library and landscape
architecture staff decided to pursue a theme throughout the display focusing on the
people, projects, and process at Design Workshop. Kananaskis drawings were used to
show site analysis and the sense of place. Trace paper drawings from High Desert were
fastened behind Plexiglas to illustrate the design process, show hand rendered graphics,
and emulate the pin-up board in a design office. A computer was set up for visitors to
peruse the digital collection. Another set of panels held photographs and framed
documents of the founders and key people of the Design Workshop firm, tying their
professional lives back to their educational roots at Utah State University.
The Utah Chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects hosted their
annual meeting at the University on March 25, 2011 surrounding the grand opening of
the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection. The display for the archives and
digital collection was the centerpiece for the morning breaks in the conference. Design
Workshop founders Joe Porter and Don Ensign, along with current partner and principal
Kurt Culbertson gave presentations during the morning session of the conference at the
library about the archives and the importance of preserving the past for the future.

70
With rising interest in the archives, numerous discussions have begun about the
future impacts of the collection and its direction. Learning objects and modules will
continue to be created based on the digital collection. Oral histories are being gathered as
accessioning is completed and time allows. The general process of accessioning is laid
out by principles which will help to inform future work and aid in decision-making.
Implications
There was not a model available which outlined the specific issues involved in the
creation of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collections. Accessioning the
collection proved that the materials being addressed will dictate to some extent how the
archives will be defined and the processes that will be involved. The system of checks
and balances which were utilized by a collaborative team of landscape architects, library
staff, landscape architecture faculty, and students helped mold the Design Workshop
Archives and Digital Collection into its current format. As the processing of the archives
continues to evolve, the roles within the collaborative team may change as well. Design
Workshop has modified their in-house analysis of the records which will be sent to Utah
State University for archiving. Because of the quantity of drawings encompassing the
individual projects, the time required processing each project, and the cost of shipping the
entirety of work, Design Workshop has begun to use the lead designer on each project to
filter what is sent to the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection at Utah State
University. After reevaluation of their own methodology in selecting documents for
preservation, Design Workshop created a decision tree and guidelines to direct the lead

71
designers in culling the projects before the collection is sent to Utah State University.
The shareholders want to limit the archives to specific key images which illustrate the
essence of each project. The lead designer for each project at the firm decides what to
keep after they have reviewed the firm’s Records Retention Guidelines. Their retention
guidelines are fairly vague, and it is left up to the lead designer to filter through the
drawings to preserve the drawings which tell the story of the project. This helps in so
many ways. People intimately aware and informed of the project choose what is
preserved, determining the story that is told. They are able to preserve drawings that may
have gone unnoticed to uninformed archive staff. It saves on the expense of shipping. It
takes much less time and expense for archive staff to prepare the drawings for the
collection since they do not have to make as many value judgments on the drawings and
their potential retention. Many of the benefits of Design Workshop filtering through the
collection before it is sent to the University are also drawbacks. Limiting the amount of
drawings by culling the collection before it is sent to the University limits the stories that
can be told by the collection. Many working drawings may be purged from the collection
by the firm when those may hold more educational impact for the students.
Communication is still vital. Reviews should be conducted to insure that the depth of
information remains intact despite the reduction in quantity of drawings. Having an
informed lead designer preprocessing the collection will limit the work required to
accession the archives, possibly removing the need for landscape architecture students
and faculty to review the collection. It may remove the need for archivists informed of
the design process. This may also highlight the need for landscape architecture faculty to

72
communicate with Design Workshop shareholders to specify their needs of which records
should be kept.
In the pilot year of the archives, Design Workshop has been very involved. They
have helped to streamline the filing system, provided project narratives, and
communicated actively with the others on the collaborative team. They have endeavored
to assist in problem solving and implementation of new protocol at the firm for future
projects. The accessioning of the four initial projects has helped clarify the process for
enlarging the collection. Because of space constraints, it was decided in the proposal
phase of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection that not every project
would be acquisitioned. Original estimates limit the collection that would be donated to
between fifty and seventy projects.
In light of the interest generated by this collection, it is likely that other firms or
individuals may approach the University seeking a repository for their works. In
anticipation of this future demand, a thoughtful and well-articulated collection policy was
created by the Merrill-Cazier Library Archives Department. Whether beginning a new
archive or continuing work on an existing collection, challenges will arise in the
preparation, accessioning, and processing. Waverly Lowell has created the seminal work
on archiving design records and should be referenced as an important guide. Retiring
professional landscape architects are noticing the archives, aware of their own desires to
preserve their work. Those interested in preserving their own work in an institution’s
archives should consider self-funding and where their work can have the most beneficial
effect. Project selection is often based on the archiving institution’s interests. Institutions

73
can define what is held or maintained in the archives. For example, when Design
Workshop approached the Colorado Library in Denver to archive their collection, the
library was only interested in the projects done in Colorado. Most institutions have
specific interests or stories they want to tell, and will often pursue collections that work
with their theme. At Utah State University, there is an interest in hosting a Western
Environmental Collection. Of their collection, approximately 20% is work that has been
sought after by USU, and 80% is reactive. Each entity will want to reflect their own
interests, and so it is important that when starting an archive, all interests are clarified.
Self-funding the collection at an institution that has similar interests will guarantee the
collection’s use and magnify its value.
Conclusion
The Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection have the potential to
become a vital part of the learning environment at Utah State University. This collection
will play a vital role because of the depth of knowledge it conveys, the influence it
preserves from throughout the western United States, and the access it provides to
students, the profession, and the general public to great works of landscape architecture.
The pilot year endeavored to accession and process Kananaskis, High Desert, ASPCOL,
and Summerlin for the archive collection. The integration of a digital collection gathered
from physical drawings, paper manuscripts, and computer files offers exclusive
opportunities to establish standards and procedures for the creation of the archives at
Utah State University. Scholarly review of the archives evidenced the need for an altered

74
approach to the archiving process in order to support the creation of the digital collection
and the quantity of project material. Additional measures were created to appropriately
represent and preserve the unique visual components of the works. Processing protocol,
classroom learning objects, an exhibition, and oral histories have been developed to
enhance the collection based on best practices. The collaboration of professionals,
archivists, and landscape architecture staff to create the archives has proven to be very
useful. The further growth and development of the collection will capitalize on the
lessons learned in the pilot year while undoubtedly inspiring new protocol as its uses
augment. The history of Design Workshop, portrayed through the contents and further
development of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection, will help to
enrich the field of landscape architecture and the comingling educational pursuits.

75
REFERENCES
American Society of Landscape Architects. (2014). Landscape architecture archives
collection. Retrieved from http://www.asla.org/ContentDetail.aspx?id=22682
Bannan-Ritland, B., Dabbagh, N., & Murphy, K. (2002). Learning object systems as
constructivist learning environments. Bloomington, IN: Association for
Educational Communications and Technology.
Boyle, T. (2003). Design principles for authoring dynamic, reusable learning objects.
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 19(1), 46-58.
Cochrane, T. (2005). Interactive QuickTime: Developing and evaluating multimedia
learning objects to enhance both face-to-face and distance e-learning
environments. Interdisciplinary Journal of Knowledge and Learning
Objects, 1(1), 33-54.
Cook, T. (1996). Building an archives: Appraisal theory for architectural records.
American Archivist, 59(2), 136-143.
Cox, R. J. (1996). The archival documentation strategy and its implications for the
appraisal of architectural records. American Archivist, 59(2), 144-154.
Cultural Landscape Foundation. (2009). Cultural Landscapes. Retrieved
http://tclf.org/classrooms
Design Workshop. (2007). The history of Design Workshop. Retrieved from
http://www.asla.org/uploadedFiles/CMS/About__Join/Honors_and_Awards/The_
Landscape_Architecture_Firm_Award/History.pdf

76
Design Workshop. (2011). Design Workshop. Retrieved from
http://www.designworkshop.com/legacy-design-history.html
El Saddik, A., Fischer, S., & Steinmetz, R. (2001). Reusability and adaptability of
interactive resources in web-based educational systems. ACM Journal on
Educational Resources in Computing, 1(4), 18-38.
Flecker, D. (2003). Digital archiving: What is involved? Educause Review, 38(1), 10-11.
Grele, R. J., & Terkel, S. (1991). Envelopes of sound: The art of oral history. Chicago,
IL: Greenwood Publishing Group.
Hohmann, H. (2006). Theodora Kimball Hubbard and the "intellectualization" of
landscape architecture. Landscape Journal, 25(2), 169-186.
International Council on Archives. (1999). ISAD (G): General International Standard
Archival Description, Second Edition. Ottawa: ICA.
Kay, R. (2006). A systematic evaluation of learning objects for secondary school
students. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 35(4), 411-448.
Lapides, J. (2011). Five members of Design Workshop to speak at ASLA Annual Meeting
& EXPO October 30-November 2. Retrieved from
http://www.designworkshop.com/press-releases/2011/asla-conferencespeakers.html
Lowell, W., & Nelb, T. R. (2006). Architectural records: Managing design and
construction records. Chicago, IL: Society of American Archivists.
Lynch, C. (2004). Preserving digital documents: Choices, approaches, and standards. Law
Library Journal, 96(4), 609-618.

77
Martinez, M. (2002). Designing learning objects to personalize learning. In D. Wiley
(Ed.), The instructional use of learning objects (pp. 151-173). Bloomington, IN:
Agency for Instructional Technology.
McGreal, R. (2004). Learning objects: A practical definition. International Journal of
Instructional Technology, 9(1), 21-32.
Miller, F. M. (1990). Arranging and describing archives and manuscripts. Chicago, IL:
The Society of American Archivists.
Mitchell, W. J. (1996). Architectural archives in the digital era. American Archivist,
59(2), 200-204.
Mogharreban, N., & Guggenheim, D. (2008). Learning pod: A new paradigm for
reusability of learning objects. Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and
Learning Objects, 4(1), 303-315.
Nugent, G. (2006). Design, development, and validation of learning objects. Journal of
Educational Technology, 34(3), 271-281.
Polsani, P. R. (2003). Use and abuse of reusable learning objects. Journal of Digital
Information, 3(4), 3-4.
Rehak, D., & Mason, R. (2003). Keeping the learning in learning objects. In A. Littlejohn
(Ed.), Reusing online resources: A sustainable approach to e-learning (pp. 2230). London, UK: Kogan Page.
Shepherd, K., & Lowell, W. (2000). Standard series for architecture and landscape
design records: A tool for the arrangement and description of archival
collections. Berkeley, CA: Regents, University of California.

78
Wiley, D. (2000) Connecting learning objects to instructional design theory: A definition,
a metaphor, and a taxonomy. In D. Wiley (Ed.), The instructional use of learning
objects: Online version. Retrieved from
http://www.reusability.org/read/chapters/wiley.doc

79

APPENDICES

80

APPENDIX A
DECISION TREE

81
establish
acquisition
hierarchy

Decide which order of preservation based on intended uses, a desire to preserve project
integrity, preserve the work included in award winning projects, and enhancing preservation
decisions already exhibited by the firm.

acquire
collection

Attain complete set of drawings and informational spreadsheet

research project
background

Research information to inform the archivist of the essence of the project, including its
importance and the key aspects as outlined by Design Workshop. Information could be
resourced from Design Workshop’s Legacy, project narratives provided by the firm,
independent internet research, award applications, and conversations with Design Workshop
representatives.

record
document info
in spreadsheet

Record drawing name and supplemental information, including the date the drawing was
created, the scale, and any information about who the drawing is attributed to, in project
spreadsheet

label item

Inscribe using pencil the origination tube number on the back of the drawing in the bottom
right-hand corner as well as the number in which it was processed to preserve original order.

remove obvious
items

Remove articles that will definitely not be included in the archive: documents with severe tears,
sepia prints, duplicates, staples, paperclips, sticky notes after recording content, and other
objects which may compromise the structural integrity of the documents.

restore /
preserve items
as needed

For those driawings with inherent value despite their existing condition, it may benecessary to
take additional measures for their preservation. This could include removing compromising
materials such as gummy residue or preparing the drawing for digital replication. Scanning or
photographing the drawing will preserve its current condition since marker lines may continue
to bleed and the material will continue to degrade.

sort items by
category

Organize drawings into clusters following the design process with additional project-specific
drawings at the end. Cluster titles could include Site Inventory & Analysis, Construction
Documents, Illustrative Plans, Studies & Schematics, Project Timelines, Construction Details &
Specifications, Topography & Grading, Planting & Irrigation, Illustrations & Imagery, and
Master Plans.

purge items of
lesser
importance

Futher culling can be conducted on individual clusters when they are dividied, laid out, and
examined in smaller number. At this time it is easier to recognize duplicates and recognize
chronological order.

record and file

Assign a call number to each document, inscribing the call number on the reverse side of the
drawing in the lower righthand corner in pencil. Record the call number with document details
on spreadsheet following the call number protocol:
Project #. Cluster #. Document #.

82

APPENDIX B
KANANASKIS

83
Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 1: Illustrative Plans
1.1.1.

Pen & Ink on Mylar

1.1.2.

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
Pencil on Mylar

1.1.3.

Pencil on Mylar

1.1.4.

Print on Acetate

1.1.5.

Pen & Ink on Mylar

1.1.6.

Pen & Ink on Mylar

1.1.7.

Print on Mylar

1.1.8.

Ozalid on Bond

1.1.9.

Ozalid on Bond

1.1.10.

Print splices on Mylar

1.1.11.

Print & Ink on Mylar

1.1.12.

Print on Vellum

1.1.13.

Print on Vellum

1.1.14.

Print on Acetate

1.1.15.

Print & Marker on Photo Paper

1.1.16.

Print on Photo Paper

1.1.17.

Print, Ink, & Pencil on Mylar

Illustrative landscape plan of the
Village core

Illustrative landscape plan of the
Village core
Illustrative landscape plan of the
Village core
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative landscape plan of staff
housing
Illustrative landscape plan of
Kananaskis with staff housing
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative landscape plan of Village
core
Luis design dated 29 January 1986;
Illustrative plan Village core
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Illustrative plan stressing buildings,
hardscape, and vegetation
Illustrative landscape plan of Village
core
Illustrative plan of Village core and
surroundings

84
1.1.18.

Ozalid on Bond

1.1.19.

Print, Marker, & Pencil on Bond

1.1.20.

Print, Marker, & Pencil on Bond

Illustrative landscape plan with
building uses and spot elevations
Color illustrative landscape plan of
Kananaskis and staff housing
Color illustrative landscape plan of
Kananaskis Village core

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 2: Site Analysis & Inventory
1.2.1.

Print & Pencil on Mylar

1.2.2.

Ozalid on Bond

1.2.3.

Reduction on Acetate

1.2.4.

Print on Mylar

1.2.5.

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
Print on Mylar

1.2.6.

Ozalid on Bond

1.2.7.

Print on Mylar

1.2.8.

Print on Bond

1.2.9.

Print on Mylar

Canmore Corridor Sub-Region:
Recreation Facilities Map
Site plan with existing features
labeled
Nakiska/Mount Allan map of ski
runs/routes and chairlifts
Survey map of topography compiled
by Walter E. Bright A.L.S. 1979

Survey map of topography with
Village footprint added 5 May 1982
compiled byWalter E. Bright A.L.S.
Survey map of topography with
Village footprint added 5 May 1982
compiled by Walter E. Bright
A.L.S.; includes handwritten notes
Regional contour map with 5 meter
intervals
Regional contour map with 5 meter
intervals containing vegetated
boundaries, roads, poles, etc; Scale
1:5000
Filed plan of survey of Parcel 1 in
Section 35, Twp. 22, Rge. 9, W. 5th
M. & Section 2, Twp. 23, Rge. 9,
W 5th M. and intervening road
allowance; Scale 1:2000; 2 January
1987

85
1.2.10.

Print on Mylar

1.2.11.

Print on Mylar

1.2.12.

Ozalid on Bond

1.2.13.

Print on Acetate

1.2.14.

Print on Acetate

1.2.15.

Sepia Print

1.2.16.

Print on Acetate

1.2.17.

Ozalid on Bond

1.2.18.

Ozalid on Bond

1.2.19.

Ozalid Package

Schedule A Property Subject to
Common Area Lease; Scale 1:2000;
3 May 1985
Schedule A Property Subject to
Common Area Lease; Scale 1:2000;
7 October1986
Pan of Survey of Subdivision of a
Portion of Parcel 1, Plan 851 0413
within Section 35, Twp. 22, Rge. 9,
W 5th M. and Section 2, Twp. 23,
Rge. 9, W 5th M. and Intervening
Closed Road Allowance; Scale
1:2000; April 1, 1986
Evan Thomas Development Area
Outline Plan Alternatives
Alternative 1
Evan Thomas Development Area
Outline Plan Alternatives
Alternative 2
Evan Thomas Development Area
Outline Plan Alternatives
Alternative 3
Evan Thomas Development Area
Outline Plan Alternatives
Alternative 4
Plan showing location of select trees
and access road cross sections
compiled by D.R. McWilliam,
A.L.S.; Scale 1:1000; 1982
Plan showing control monuments
established access road existing
clearings and utilities; D.R.
McWilliam, A.L.S.; Scale 1:1000;
1982
Kananaskis Country Recreation Plan
Regional Utilities (Evan Thomas
Regional Utilities Underground
Utilities) compiled by Reid,

86
Crowther & Partners Limited;
January 1981

1.2.20.

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
C. Sheet 3
D. Sheet 4
E. Sheet 5
F. Sheet 6
G. Sheet 7
H. Sheet 8
I. Sheet 9
J. Sheet 10
K. Sheet 11
L. Sheet 12
M. Sheet 13
Print & Ink on Mylar

1.2.21.

Print & Marker on Bond

1.2.22.

Print & Colored Pencil on Bond

1.2.23.

Print & Marker on Bond

Ribbon Creek Village Regional Plan;
Scale 1:10,000; July 1985
Ribbon Creek Village Regional Plan;
Scale 1:10,000; July 1985
Developable land summary;
Scale 1:500; 19 May 1986
Analysis of slopes, critical wildlife
area, and sun points

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 3: Studies & Schematics
1.3.1.
1.3.2.
1.3.3.

Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace
Ozalid on Bond

1.3.4.

Pencil on Trace

1.3.5.

Pencil on Trace

1.3.6.

Pencil on Trace

1.3.7.

Print on Mylar

Parcel C: Roof height calculations
Day Lodge: Roof height calculations
Day Lodge: Ground floor plan
designed by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine; Scale 1:100; 1 June 1985
Calculations for support, parking,
and vehicular circulation
Calculations for food and beverage,
parking, and support
Calculations for circulation, storage,
and bay windows
Site plan circulation study

87
1.3.8.
1.3.9.
1.3.10.

Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Marker on Ozalid

1.3.11.
1.3.12.

Marker on Trace
Marker on Ozalid

1.3.13.

Ink on Trace

1.3.14.

Sepia on Mylar

1.3.15.

Ink & Marker on Trace

1.3.16.

Ink & Marker on Trace

1.3.17.

Ink on Mylar

1.3.18.

Print & Marker on Bond

1.3.19.

Pencil on Trace

1.3.20.

Ink on Mylar

1.3.21.

Pencil & Ink on Mylar

1.3.22.

Ink on Vellum

1.3.23.

Ink on Vellum

Site plan circulation study
Site plan circulation study
Design constraints including paving,
water features, open space, fire
lanes, and pedestrian circulation
Circulation study
Landscape plan with limit of
irrigation highlighted
Concept drawing of Village and
surroundings; Scale 1:2000
Concept drawing of Village and
surroundings; Scale 1:2000
Concept drawing of Village and
surroundings
Concept drawing of Village and
surroundings
Vegetation layer for proposed entry
revisions Parcels B & C; Scale 1:
200m
Proposed entry revisions for Parcel B
& C; Scale 1:200m; 27 October
1986
Proposed entry revisions for Parcel B
& C; Scale 1:200m; 25 September
1986
Vegetation layer for Proposed Entry
Revision for Parcels B & C; Scale
1:200 m
Hardscape and Grading Layer for
Proposed Entry Revision for
Parcels B & C; Scale 1:200m
Study for service and parking entry
for Parcel B: Scale 1:200; 12
August 1985
Study for entry, lobby, and service
for Parcel B; Scale 1:200; 12
August 1985

88
1.3.24.

Pencil on Trace

1.3.25.

Ink & Marker on Trace

1.3.26.

Marker on Ozalid

1.3.27.

Ink on Trace

1.3.28.
1.3.29.

Pencil on Trace
Pencil & Marker on Trace

1.3.30.

Ink & Pencil on Trace

1.3.31.

Pencil on Mylar

Proposed entry revisions for Parcels
B & C attributed to Don Ensign;
Scale 1:200; 25 September 1986
Concept drawing for Village core
attributed to Sergio Santana
Concept drawing for proposed entry
for Parcels B & C attributed to Don
Ensign
Pool level and lobby level plan
transferred into site section; Scale
1:500
Constraint map
Concept drawing of Village core
with spot elevations
Proposed entry revisions for Parcels
B & C attributed to Richard Shaw;
Scale 1:200m; 14 January 1986
Concept drawing of Village core
including hardscape & Grading

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 4: Graphic Process
1.4.1.
1.4.2.
1.4.3.

Print on Photo Paper
Print on Photo Paper
Red Contact Paper on Mylar

1.4.4.
1.4.5.
1.4.6.
1.4.7.

Red Contact Paper on Mylar
Negative for Printing
Negative for Printing
Negative for Printing

1.4.8.

Negative for Printing

Spot enlargements of contour map
Spot enlargements of contour map
Limit of irrigation throughout
Kananaskis
Limit of irrigation
Landscape plan of Village core
Illustrative Plan title block
Illustrative plan of Kananaskis with
staff housing
Parcel A Master Plan elevations and
unit plans

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 5: Timelines
1.5.1.

Print on Acetate

Proposed Work Program –
Kananaskis Country

89

1.5.2.

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
Print on Mylar

1.5.3.

Print on Mylar

1.5.4.
1.5.5.
1.5.6.

1.5.7.

Print on Mylar
Ink on Vellum
Pencil on Mylar
A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
C. Sheet 3
Pencil on Mylar

1.5.8.

Ink on Mylar

1.5.9.

Print on Acetate

1.5.10.
1.5.11.
1.5.12.
1.5.13.

1.5.14.
1.5.15.

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
Print on Acetate
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Photo Paper
A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
Negative for Printing
Negative for Printing

Proposed Work Program –
Kananaskis Country
Proposed Work Program –
Kananaskis Country
Master Development Schedule
Master Development Schedule
Kananaskis Work Schedule

Tentative Schedule for Resort
Related Operations
Draft resort association activity
schedule resort resources
Summary Plan Evaluation: Outline
Plan Alternatives

Conceptual Design Process
Conceptual Design Process
Conceptual Design Process
Conceptual Design Process

Conceptual Design Process
Conceptual Design Process

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 6: Grading & Topography
1.6.1.
1.6.2.

Print & Ink on Bond
Print & Pencil on Mylar

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
C. Sheet 3
1.6.3.
Pencil on Mylar
1.6.4.
Pencil & Ink on Ozalid on Bond

Grading plan surrounding Parcel A
Visual simulation material of old
Kananaskis with spot elevations

Spot Elevations
Spot elevations; Scale 1:500 metric

90
1.6.5.

Ink on Mylar

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
1.6.6.
Ink on Mylar
A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
1.6.7.
Ink on Mylar
1.6.8.
Ink on Mylar
1.6.9.

Ink on Mylar

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
C. Sheet 3
1.6.10.
Print on Mylar
1.6.11.
Print on Mylar
1.6.12.

Print on Mylar

1.6.13.

Print on Mylar

1.6.14.
1.6.15.

Sepia on Mylar
Sepia print

1.6.16.
1.6.17.

Ozalid on Bond
Print on Diazo Mylar

Road ROW and recommended 40
meter setback; Scale 1:500

Road ROW and recommended 40
meter setback revision; Scale 1:500

Site grading plan; January 1985
Road ROW and recommended 40
meter setback; Sheet 2; Scale 1:500
Existing site topography; Scale
1:500; January 1986

Existing site topography
Existing site topography; January
1985
Existing site topography; revised
June 1985
Existing site topography; Scale
1:500; January 1986
Regional topography map
Regional topography map; Scale
1:10,000
Site Grading Plan
Phase One Master Plan with spot
elevations and site grading; January
1985

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 7: Construction Details & Specifications
1.7.1.

Ozalid on Bond

1.7.2.

Ozalid on Bond

1.7.3.

Ozalid on Bond

South Play Structure Layout; Scale
1:200; 19 February 1988
North Play Structure Layout; Scale
1:200; February 1988
Play Structure Details; 19 February
1988

91
1.7.4.

Ozalid on Bond

Tennis court layout and fencing

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 8: Master Plans
1.8.1.
1.8.2.
1.8.3.

Print on Mylar
Splices on Mylar
Print and Ink on Mylar

1.8.4.

Print on Mylar

1.8.5.
1.8.6.

Print and Ink on Mylar
Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.8.7.

Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.8.8.

Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.8.9.

Print on Diazo Mylar

Master Plan; 31 July 1985
Signage Master Plan; January 1986
Village Master Plan; Scale 1:1000;
January 1985
Master Plan; Scale 1:1000; January
1985 revised June 1985
Master Plan; January 1985
Village Master Plan; Scale 1:1000;
January 1985 revised June 1985
Master Plan; January 1985 revised
June 1985 revised August 1985
revised 15 October 1985
Master Plan; January 1985 revised
June 1985 revised August 1985
revised 15 October 1985
Landscape Master Plan; Scale 1:200;
January 1986

A. Sheet 1
B. Sheet 2
1.8.10.
Print, Ink, & Pencil on Diazo Mylar Master Plan, January 1985
1.8.11.
Print, Ink, & Pencil on Diazo Mylar Master Plan, January 1985
1.8.12.
Print and Splices on Diazo Mylar
Master Plan with snow maintenance
provided by Alberta Transportation
added to drawing on 29 October
1987; Scale 1:500
1.8.13.
Print and Splices on Diazo Mylar
Lighting Master Plan; Fall 1985
1.8.14.
Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar
Master Plan with building ground
floor plans; January 1985
1.8.15.
Print on Mylar
Master Plan; January 1985
1.8.16.
Print and Ink on Mylar
Master Plan; Scale 1:500
1.8.17.
Print and Ink on Mylar
Master Plan drawn by Gin and Bon;
January 1986
1.8.18.
Pencil on Mylar
Site Plan
1.8.19.
Pencil on Mylar
Site Plan
1.8.20.
Print and Ink on Spliced Mylar
Use Allocation Plan

92
1.8.21.

Print and Pencil on Diazo Mylar

1.8.22.

Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.8.23.
1.8.24.

Print on Mylar
Print on Acetate

1.8.25.

Ink and Pencil on Mylar

1.8.26.
1.8.27.
1.8.28.

Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar

1.8.29.
1.8.30.

Ink and Pencil on Mylar
Sepia Print

1.8.31.

Ink on Sepia Print

1.8.32.

Print on Acetate

1.8.33.
1.8.34.

Ozalid on Bond
Print on Bond

1.8.35.

Print, Ink, & Pencil on Mylar

1.8.36.

Master Plan; Scale 1:500; 19
February 1986
Master Plan; Scale 1:500; January
1986
Use Allocation Site Plan
Village Master Plan; Scale 1:1000;
30 June 1982
Village Master Plan; Scale 1:1000;
30 June 1982
Limit of Irrigation
Landscape Master Plan
Phase One Master Plan attributed to
Sergio Santana; January 1985
Use Allocation Site Plan
Master Plan; January 1985 revised
June 1985
Landscape Master Plan; Scale 1:500;
January 1986
Master Plan; January 1985 revised
June 1985
Master Plan; January 1985
Phase One Master Plan with Parcel
A view analysis
Phase One Master Plan; January
1985
Pin Bar Master Plan Documents

Ink on Mylar
A. Landscape
B. Buildings and Surrounding Vegetation
1.8.37.
Print on Mylar
Village Core Hardscape Pin Bar
Document
1.8.38.
Ink on Mylar
Master Plan; Scale 1:200; January
1986
1.8.39.
Ink on Mylar
Landscape Plan Pin Bar Document
1.8.40.
Ink on Mylar
Site Lighting Plan Pin Bar Document
1.8.41.
Ink on Mylar
Fire Access Plan Pin Bar Document
1.8.42.
Ink on Mylar
Grading Plan Pin Bar Document
1.8.43.
Ink on Mylar
Landscape Master Plan Pin Bar
Document
1.8.44.
Ink on Mylar
Master Plan Pin Bar Document

93
1.8.45.
1.8.46.

Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

1.8.47.

Ink on Mylar

Landscape Vegetation Plan
Landscape Vegetation Plan Pin Bar
Document
Monuments and Markers

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 9: Day Lodge
1.9.1.

Ozalid Package

A.
B.
C.
D.
1.9.2.

Site Plan and Drawing Index
Ground Floor Plan
Ground Floor Plan
Site Plan and Legend
Ozalid on Bond

1.9.3.

Ozalid on Bond

1.9.4.

Ozalid Package

A. Site Plan and Drawing Index
B. Ground Floor Plan
1.9.5.
Ozalid Package
A. Site Plan
B. Ground Floor Plan
1.9.6.
Ozalid Package
A. Site Plan
B. Ground Floor Plan
1.9.7.
Print on Bond

Cook, Culham, Montgomery,
Pedersen, & Valentine Architects &
Engineers; October 1985

Ground Floor Plan by Cook,
Culham, Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:100m; 15 & 17 April 1985
Site Plan by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:500; 8 May 1985
Cook, Culham, Montgomery,
Pedersen, & Valentine Architects &
Engineers; 4 October 1985

J.H. Cook Architects and Engineers;
8 July 1982

J.H. Cook Architects and Engineers;
2 June 1982

Ground Floor Plan by Cook,
Culham, Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
10 June 1985

94
1.9.8.

Print on Acetate Spliced on Mylar

1.9.9.

Print on Acetate Spliced on Mylar

1.9.10.
1.9.11.

Print on Diazo Mylar Spliced
Print on Acetate Spliced on Mylar

1.9.12.

Ink on Ozalid

1.9.13.

Ink on Ozalid

1.9.14.

Ink on Ozalid

1.9.15.

Ink on Ozalid

1.9.16.

Print on Bond

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.9.17.
1.9.18.

Site Plan
Ground Floor Plan
Elevation
Elevation
Elevation
Elevation
Pencil on Mylar
Pencil on Mylar

Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Day Lodge Use Allocation
Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Day Lodge Use Allocation; Scale
1:100m; 10 November 1986
Cook, Culham, Montgomery,
Pedersen, & Valentine Architects &
Engineers; 23 July 1985

Day Lodge Facility at Ribbon Creek
Day Lodge Facility at Ribbon Creek

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 10: Parcel A
1.10.1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

Ink on Mylar
Parking Level Floor Plan
Lobby Level Floor Plan
Level Two Floor Plan
Level Three Floor Plan
Loft Level Floor Plan
Roof Plan
Sections
Unit Plans
Detail Elevations

Parcel A Master Plan

95
1.10.2.

1.10.7.

Ink on Mylar
Lower Level
Ground Level
2nd Level
3rd Level
Ink on Mylar
Lower Level
Ground Level
2nd Level
3rd Level
4th Level
Ink on Mylar
Lower Level
Ground Level
2nd Level
3rd Level
Print and Ink on Bond
Lower Level
Ground Level
2nd Level
3rd Level
Print and Ink on Bond
Ground Level
2nd Level
3rd Level
Lower Level
Pencil on Mylar

1.10.8.

Pencil on Vellum

1.10.9.
1.10.10.

Ozalid on Bond
Pencil on Ozalid

1.10.11.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.12.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.13.

Ink on Ozalid

A.
B.
C.
D.
1.10.3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.10.4.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.10.5.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.10.6.
A.
B.
C.
D.

Parcel A Program Summary

Parcel A Program Summary

Parcel A Program Summary

Parcel A Program Summary

Parcel A Program Summary

Parcel A Program Summary 3rd
Level
Parcel A Program Summary Ground
Level
Master Plan by Rick Balbi Architect
Main Floor Plan by Rick Balbi
Architect
Main Floor Plan by Rick Balbi
Architect
Site Plan and Main Floor Plan by
Balbi Architects; June 1985
Main Floor Plan by Balbi Architects;
29 May 1985

96
1.10.14.

Print on Acetate

1.10.15.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.16.

Ink on Ozalid

1.10.17.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.18.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.19.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.20.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.21.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.22.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.23.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.24.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.25.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.26.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.27.
1.10.28.

Marker on Ozalid
Marker on Ozalid

Main Floor Plan by Balbi Architects;
6 May 1985
Main Floor Plan by Balbi Architects;
25 May 1985
Main Floor Plan by Balbi Architects;
6 May 1985
Main Floor Plan by Balbi Archtiects;
August 1985
Main Floor Plan by Balbi Architects;
6 May 1985
Lobby Level by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:100
Section by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:100; 18 November 1985
Entrance and Exit Ramps by Cook,
Culham, Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:100; 5 December 1985
Loading Area by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
3 December 1985
Entrance Court Area by Cook,
Culham, Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
25 November 1985
Main Floor Plan by Proppe Architect
Ltd; 23 December 1985
Main Floor Plan by Proppe Architect
Ltd; 17 December 1985
Main Floor Plan by Proppe Architect
Ltd; Scale 1:200
Main Floor by Proppe Architect Ltd
Main Floor by Proppe Architect Ltd;
4 February 1986

97
1.10.29.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.30.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.31.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.32.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.33.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.34.

Ozalid on Bond

1.10.35.

Ink on Ozalid

A.
B.
C.
D.
1.10.36.
1.10.37.
1.10.38.
1.10.39.

Main Floor
Parking Level
Second Floor
Third Floor
Ink on Trace
Ink on Mylar
Ink and Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar

1.10.40.

Ozalid on Bond

A. Sheet 1

Paving at Front Entrance by Cook,
Culham, Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:200; 15 November 1985
Lobby Level by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:200; 22 November 1985
Nightclub/Bar Lobby Level by
Cook, Culham, Montgomery,
Pedersen, & Valentine Architects &
Engineers; Scale 1:200; revised 25
November 1985
Lobby Level by Cook, Culham,
Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:100; November 1985
Hotel at Parcel A Lobby Level; Scale
1:500; 25 October 1985
Lobby Level Floor Plan by Cook,
Culham, Montgomery, Pedersen, &
Valentine Architects & Engineers;
Scale 1:200; 11 November 1985
Ribbon Creek Hotel by B. James
Wensley; 29 March 1984

Parcel A area calculations; 1985
Schedule A Parcel A; + May 1985
Schedule A Parcel A
Plan of Survey of Parcel A in the
N.E. ¼ Sec. 15, Twp. 21, Rge. 9,
W. 5th M.; Scale 1:2000; 1983
Concept Plans by McKellar
Architects; Scale 1:500; October
1981

98
B. Sheet 2
1.10.41. Ink on Ozalid
A.
B.
C.
1.10.42.

Ground
2nd
3rd
Ink on Ozalid

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.10.43.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.10.44.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.10.45.
1.10.46.
1.10.47.
1.10.48.
1.10.49.
1.10.50.
1.10.51.
1.10.52.

Level 3
Ground Level
Ground Level
Level 2
Lower Level
Print on Acetate
Level One (Basement) Plan
Level Two (Ground Level) Plan
Level Three Plan
Level Four Plan
Level Five Plan
Print on Acetate
Level One (Basement) Plan
Level Two (Ground Level) Plan
Level Three Plan
Level Four Plan
Level Five Plan
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate

Program Calculation Sheets; 19 May
1985

Program Calculation Sheets; 19 May
1985

Use Location Diagram Package A

Design Concept Diagram Package A

Parcel A Floor Plan
Parcel A Floor Plan
Parcel A Floor Plan
Parcel A Floor Plan
Parcel A Floor Plan
Parcel A Second Floor
Parcel A Third Floor
Parcel A Fourth Floor

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 11: Parcel B
1.11.1.

Ink on Diazo Mylar

Schedule A Parcel B; Revised 10
December 1985

99
1.11.2.

Ink on Mylar

1.11.3.

Pencil on Mylar

1.11.4.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.5.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.6.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.7.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.8.

Colored Pencil on Ozalid

1.11.9.

Marker on Ozalid

1.11.10.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.11.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.12.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.13.

Ink on Ozalid on Bond

1.11.14.

Ozalid on Bond

Schedule A Parcel B; Scale 1:500;
February 1985
Parcel B Floor Plan; Scale 1:200;
February 1985
Ground Floor by Nelson MacDonald
Design Ltd; Scale 1:200
Ground Floor by Nelson MacDonald
Design Ltd; Scale 1:200
The Heathwood Resort at Ribbon
Creek by Nelson MacDonald
Design; Scale 1:200; 29 August
1985
Heathwood Hotel Ground Floor Plan
by Nelson MacDonald Design Ltd;
Scale 1:100; 14 August 1985
Hotel – Ribbon Creek – Parcel B
Ground Floor; Scale 1:200; 13
February 1985
Heathwood at Ribbon Creek
Building Section by Stephenson,
Raines, Barrett, Christie, Hutton,
Seton, & Partners; Scale 1:100; 28
October 1981
Heathwood at Ribbon Creek
Building Section by Stephenson,
Raines, Barrett, Christie, Hutton,
Seton, & Partners; 10 August 1981
The Inn at Ribbon Creek Ground
Floor Plan by Raines, Finlayson,
Barrett, & Partners; Scale 1:100
The Inn at Ribbon Creek Ground
Floor Plan by Raines, Finlayson,
Barrett, & Partners; Scale 1:100
The Inn at Ribbon Creek Ground
Floor Plan by Raines, Finlayson,
Barrett, & Partners; Scale 1:100
The Inn at Ribbon Creek Ground
Floor Plan by Raines, Finlayson,

100

1.11.15.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.16.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.17.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.18.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.19.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.20.

Marker on Ozalid

1.11.21.

Marker on Ozalid

1.11.22.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.23.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.24.

Ozalid on Bond

1.11.25.

Marker on Ozalid

Barrett, & Partners; Scale 1:200; 20
November 1985
Parcel B by Raines, Finlayson,
Barrett, & Partners; 31 January
1986
Master Plan for Parcel B by Raines,
Finlayson, Barrett, & Partners; 31
January 1986
Hotel – Ribbon Creek Village –
Parcel B Ground Floor by Raines,
Finlayson, Barrett, & Partners;
Scale 1:200; 13 October 1985
Ground Floor Plan for the Inn at
Ribbon Creek by Raines, Finlayson,
Barrett, & Partners; Scale 1:200; 5
December 1985
Ground Floor Plan for the Inn at
Ribbon Creek by Raines, Finlayson,
Barrett, & Partners; Scale 1:100
Heathwood at Ribbon Creek Floor
Plans by Stephenson, Raines,
Barrett, Christie, Hutton, Seton, &
Partners; Scale 1:200; 30 October
1981
Nakiska Hotel Site Plan by Proppe
Architects Ltd; Scale 1:250; 6
October 1986
The Manor at Kananaskis Main
Entrance Layout by Proppe
Architects Ltd; Scale 1:50
The Manor at Kananaskis Ground
Floor Plan by Proppe Architects;
Scale 1:100; November
The Manor at Kananaskis Site Plan
by Proppe Architects Ltd; Scale
1:250; 6 October 1986
Nakiska Hotel Ground Floor by
Proppe Architects Ltd; Scale 1:100

101
1.11.26.

Sepia Print

1.11.27.

Marker on Print on Bond

1.11.28.

Sepia Print

1.11.29.

Marker on Print on Bond

Heathwood at Ribbon Creek Site
Plan
Heathwood at Ribbon Creek Site
Plan
Heathwood at Ribbon Creek Ground
Level; 20 November 1981
Heathwood at Ribbon Creek Ground
Level; 20 November 1981

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 12: Parcel C
1.12.1.
Print on Mylar
1.12.2.
Print on Mylar
1.12.3.
Print on Mylar
1.12.4.
Print on Mylar
1.12.5.
Print on Mylar
1.12.6.
Ink on Mylar
Tentative Lease Area
1.12.7.
Ozalid Package

A. Master Plan on Sheet a-1
B. Main Floor Plan on Sheet a-3
C. Elevations on Sheet a-8
1.12.8.
Ozalid Package

A. Site Plan on Sheet 1
B. Main Floor Plan on Sheet 3
C. Elevations on Sheet 7
1.12.9.
Ozalid Package

Parcel C Boundaries and Utilities
Schedule A Parcel C
Schedule A Parcel C
Schedule A Parcel C
Schedule A Parcel C
Schedule A Parcel C Description of
Pocaterra Lodge created by
Lemermeyer Architect Ltd; 2
December 1985

Red Ribbon Inn created by Wayne
H. Wright and Lemermeyer
Architects; 23 July 1985

Pocaterra Lodge created by
Lemermeyer Architect Ltd; 28
January 1986

A. Master Plan on Sheet a-1
B. Main Floor Plan on Sheet a-3
C. Elevations on Sheet a-8
Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 13: Fortress Junction Service Centre
1.13.1.

Ozalid on Bond

Ron Boruk Architect

102
A. Site Plan
B. Main Floor Plan
C. Floor Plan for Proposed Residence
1.13.2.
Ozalid on Bond

Floor Plan by Ron Boruk Architect;
12 April 1983

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 14: Maintenance Building
1.14.1.

Ozalid Package
A.
B.
C.
D.

Village of Ribbon Creek
Maintenance Facility

Floor Plans
Elevations
Site Plan (1)
Site Plan (2)

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 15: Staff Housing
1.15.1.

Print & Contact Paper on Diazo

1.15.2.

Ozalid on Bond

1.15.3.
1.15.4.

Ink on Mylar
Print on Diazo Mylar

1.15.5.

Ozalid on Bond

1.15.6.
1.15.7.

Ink on Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

1.15.8.

Ozalid on Bond

1.15.9.

Pencil on Ozalid on Bond

1.15.10.

Ozalid on Bond

1.15.11.

Marker on Ozalid on Bond

1.15.12.
1.15.13.

Marker on Ozalid on Bond
Pencil on Mylar

Employee Housing Site Plan; Scale
1:500; 15 January 1986
Staff Housing Parking Phase I; Scale
1:500; 14 June 1986
Existing Topography; Scale 1:500
Existing Topography; Scale 1:500;
15 January 1985
Employee Housing; Scale 1:500; 4
February 1986
Employee Housing; Scale 1:500
Staff Housing Concept; Scale 1:500;
6 June 1986
Ribbon Creek Employee Housing
Scheme Two
Employee Housing Site Plan; Scale
1:500; 15 January 1986
Ribbon Creek Staff Housing Plans
and Elevations; April 1986
Employee Housing Scheme #1;
Scale 1:500; 27 May 1986
Employee Housing; Scale 1:500
Employee Housing Site Plan
Grading Rough Draft

103
1.15.14.

Pencil and Ink on Trace

1.15.15.
1.15.16.

Ozalid
Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.15.17.

Ozalid on Bond

1.15.18.

Pencil on Mylar

1.15.19.
1.15.20.
1.15.21.

Pencil and Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Pencil and Ink on Mylar

1.15.22.

Print on Acetate

1.15.23.
1.15.24.
1.15.25.
1.15.26.
1.15.27.

Ink on Trace
Ink on Mylar
Pencil and Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Pencil and Ink on Trace

1.15.28.
1.15.29.

Ink and Marker on Trace
Pencil and Print on Diazo Mylar

1.15.30.
1.15.31.

Pencil on Mylar
Print on Diazo Mylar

1.15.32.
1.15.33.
1.15.34.

Ozalid on Bond
Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace

1.15.35.

Marker on Ozalid

1.15.36.
1.15.37.

Ink and Pencil on Mylar
Ozalid on Bond

1.15.38.

Ink and Pencil on Mylar

Employee Housing Site Plan
Grading
Employee Housing Site Plan
Employee Housing Site Plan; Scale
1:500; 15 January 1986
Grading and Utilities Ground Survey
of Staff Housing Area by Reid,
Crowther, & Partners Ltd.; Scale
1:500; 13 June 1986
Employee Housing Site Plan; Scale
1:500; 4 February 1986
Landscape Plan
Site Plan
Employee Housing Scheme #1; 27
May 1986
Topography of Employee Housing
Site; Scale 1:500
Site Plan
Site Plan
Site Plan
Site Plan
Employee Housing Master Plan; 19
June 1986
Concept Plan
Employee Housing Site Plan; Scale
1:500; 15 January 1986
Concept Plan
Employee Housing Site Plan; Scale
1:500; 22 January 1986
Employee Housing Concept
Parking Study
Parking and Circulation Study
Option 1
Employee Housing Scheme Four;
Scale 1:500
Employee Housing Scheme One
Employee Housing Scheme Two;
Scale 1:500; 13 May 1986
Employee Housing Scheme Three

104
1.15.39.
1.15.40.
1.15.41.

Ink on Mylar
Pencil on Trace
Ink on Ozalid

1.15.42.
1.15.43.
1.15.44.

Black Tape on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink and Pencil on Mylar

1.15.45.

Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.15.46.

Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.15.47.

Print and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.15.48.

Pencil and Ink on Mylar

1.15.49.

Ink on Mylar

1.15.50.

Ink on Mylar

1.15.51.

Ink on Mylar

1.15.52.

Print on Diazo Mylar

1.15.53.
1.15.54.

Ink and Pencil on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

1.15.55.

Print on Diazo Mylar

1.15.56.

Pencil and Ink on Diazo Mylar

1.15.57.

Ink on Mylar

Employee Housing Scheme Four
Concept Drawing
Employee Housing Scheme Four;
Scale 1:500
Fire Access Plan Pin Bar Document
Site Plan Pin Bar Document
The Village at Ribbon Creek
Employee Housing Pin Bar
Document; Scale 1:500; 27 October
1981
Employee Housing Site Plan Pin Bar
Document; Scale 1:500; 15 January
1986
Financial Trustco Proposed Site Plan
Pin Bar Document; Scale 1:500; 15
January 1986
Grading Employee Housing Site
Plan Pin Bar Document; Scale
1:500; 15 January 1986
Grading Employee Housing Site
Plan Pin Bar Document
Employee Housing Site Plan Pin Bar
Document
Lot Delineation Pin Bar Document;
29 April 1986
Right of Way and Topography Pin
Bar Document
Site Plan Pin Bar Document; 25 June
1986
Grading Plan Pin Bar Document
Schedule A Area Subject to Lease
Pin Bar Document; 31 October
1986
Employee Housing master Plan Pin
Bar Document; Scale 1:500
Employee Housing Grading Plan Pin
Bar Document
Suitability Study Pin Bar Document

105
1.15.58.

Print and Ink on Mylar

1.15.59.

Ink on Trace

1.15.60.
1.15.61.
1.15.62.

Ink on Trace
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

1.15.63.

Print on Acetate

1.15.64.

Pencil on Trace

1.15.65.

Ink and Pencil on Trace

A.
B.
1.15.66.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.15.67.

Plan View
Cross-sections
Ozalid on Bond
Staff Housing Package; 2 July 1986
(Clearing) Layout Plan
Grading and Utilities: Road and Parking Layout
Grading and Utilities: Road and Parking Grading
(Utilities) Layout Plan
Marker on Ozalid w/ Yellow Sheet Walkway, Turf, and Lighting Area
Calculations; 23 June 1986
Walkway Area Calculations
Site Plan with Calculations
Ozalid on Bond
Staff Housing Lot One by Snihur
Consulting Ltd.; April 1987
Site Development Plan
Floor Plans
Ozalid on Bond
Staff Housing by McKellar
Architects; 10 August 1981
Ozalid on Bond
Ribbon Creek Staff Housing by
Proppe Architect Ltd.; 24
December 1985
Ozalid on Bond
Ribbon Creek Staff Housing 76 Unit
Complex Plans and Elevations by
Proppe Architect Ltd.; 7 April 1986

A.
B.
1.15.68.
A.
B.
1.15.69.
1.15.70.

1.15.71.

Proposed Circulation Plan; Scale
1:500; 15 January 1986
Ribbon Creek Employee Housing
Scheme Two
Employee Housing Scheme Two
Fire Access Plan; Scale 1:500
Employee Housing Landscape Plan;
Scale 1:500
Employee Housing Master Plan Pin
Bar Document; 25 June 1986
Cut and Fill Calculations from 1st
Pass Grading; 22 June 1986
Employee Housing Study; Scale
1:500; 14 January 1986

106
1.15.72.

Ozalid on Bond

A. Street Elevations
B. Front Elevations
1.15.73. Ozalid on Bond

A. Floor Plan
B. Floor Plan
1.15.74. Ozalid on Bond

A.
B.
C.
1.15.75.

Floor Plan Main Level
Floor Plan
Floor Plan Main Level
Pencil on Mylar

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.15.76.

Section A
Section B
Section C
Section D
Title block
Sepia Print on Acetate

88-Pillow Staff Housing by Western
Professional Design Centre Ltd.; 10
August 1986

Staff Housing by Western
Professional Design Centre Ltd.; 10
August 1986

Staff Housing by Western
Professional Design Centre Ltd.; 10
September 1986

Employee Housing Site Plan
Sections; Scale 1:250; 15 January
1986

Employee Housing Site Plan
Sections; Scale 1:250; 15 January
1986

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 16: Illustrations
1.16.1.
1.16.2.

Ink on Mylar
Print and Ink on Mylar

1.16.3.
1.16.4.

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

1.16.5.

Marker on Bond
A. View 1
B. View 2

Axonometric Drawing of Village
Axonometric Drawing of Village by
Robert L. McIlhargey; 1982
Perspective of Village; August 1981
Perspective of West Gateway in
Winter
Computer-Aided Perspective

107
C. View 3
D. View 4
1.16.6.
Pencil on Trace
1.16.7.
Marker on Trace
1.16.8.
Ozalid on Bond

1.16.9.
A.
B.
C.
1.16.10.
1.16.11.
1.16.12.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
1.16.13.

Marker on Trace
South Elevation
South Elevation
East Elevation
Pencil on Trace
Ozalid on Bond
Marker on Trace
Unnamed
Unnamed
East
South
South
North
West
Pencil on Trace

1.16.14.
1.16.15.

Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace

1.16.16.

Pencil on Trace

1.16.17.
A.
B.
C.
1.16.18.

Ozalid on Bond
East
South
Roof Plan
Pencil and Ink on Mylar

1.16.19.

Ink on Mylar

Day Lodge Roof Plan
Day Lodge Roof Plan
Day Lodge Second Floor Plan by
CCMP&V Architects and
Engineers; Scale 1:100; 10 June
1985
Day Lodge Elevations

Roof Plan and Calculations
Main Floor; Scale 1:200
Building Elevations

Proposed Entry Revisions for Parcel
B & C: Section Looking Northeast
to Parcel B & C; Scale 1:100; 25
September 1986
North Elevation
Parcel A Elevation Studies; July
1985
West and East Elevations; 10 July
1985
Elevations Package

Sections for Worksheet on Rooms
and Cold Roof Details
Snow Deflection Studies for
Architectural Design Guidelines

108
1.16.20.

Ink on Mylar

1.16.21.

Pencil and Print on Diazo Mylar

1.16.22.

Ink on Mylar

1.16.23.

Pencil and Print on Diazo Mylar

1.16.24.
1.16.25.

Sepia Print and Pencil on Mylar
Pencil on Mylar

1.16.26.

Sepia on Mylar

1.16.27.

Pencil on Vellum

1.16.28.
1.16.29.
1.16.30.
1.16.31.
1.16.32.
1.16.33.
1.16.34.

Pencil on Vellum
Pencil on Vellum
Pencil on Sepia on Mylar
Marker and Print on Bond
Print on Acetate
Print on Photopaper
Print on Photopaper

East Elevation Parcel A Master Plan;
Scale 1:200; 4 March 1986
East Elevation Parcel A Master Plan;
Scale 1:200; 4 March 1986
South Elevation Parcel A Master
Plan; Scale 1:200; 4 March 1986
South Elevation Parcel A Master
Plan; Scale 1:200; 4 March 1986
Elevations of Ribbon Creek Village
Day Lodge and Building C
Elevation; Scale 1:200
Section and Elevations by
Stevenson, Raines, Barrett,
Christie, Hutton, Seton, & Partners;
20 November 1981
Roof Plan for Ribbon Creek Package
A with Hagman Yaw; 29 June 1982
Sections
Section B-B
Composite Elevation
Composite Elevation
Sections
Sections
Composite Elevation

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 17: Document Packages
1.17.1.

Print on Photopaper
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

Fire Access Master Plan
Master Plan
Landscape Master Plan
Landscape Master Plan
Master Plan
Lighting Master Plan
Grading Master Plan
Illustrative Plan
Signage Master Plan

The Village at Ribbon Creek Master
Plan; January 1986

109
1.17.2.

Print on Photopaper

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
1.17.3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
1.17.4.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

Cover Page
Page 9
Pages 4 & 5
Contents
Pages 3 & 6
Pages 2 & 7
Pages 1 & 8
Print on Mylar
Site Analysis
Illustrative Plan
Parking and Circulation Plan
Ground Level Plan
Landscape Concept Plan
Common Elements Plan
Subdivision Plan
Area Utility Plan
Schematic Utility Plan
Conceptual Grading Plan
Print on Bond
Cover
Building Location
Landscape Plan 1:500
Landscape Plan 1:200
Grading Plan
Site Lighting Plan
Signage Plan
Fire Access Plan

1.17.5.

Commercial Signage Policy Design
Standards and Approval Process for
Kananaskis Village and Association
Membership Adopted 13 March
1987

Printing Package

Village Master Plan

Printing Package Site Analysis
Iterations
A.
B.
C.
D.

Print on Acetate
Print on Photopaper
Print on Photopaper
Print on Vellum

110
1.17.6.

Printing Package Parking and
Circulation Plan Iterations
A. Print on Vellum
B. Print on Acetate
C. Marker and Print on Photopaper

1.17.7.

Printing Package Ground Level Plan
Iterations
A. Print on Photopaper
B. Sepia on Acetate
C. Print on Acetate

1.17.8.

Printing Package Landscape Concept
Plan Iterations
A. Print on Photopaper
B. Print on Acetate

1.17.9.

Printing Package Common Elements
Plan Iterations

A.
B.
C.
D.
1.17.10.

Print on Photopaper
Print on Photopaper
Print on Vellum
Print on Avetate

A.
B.
C.
D.
1.17.11.

Print on Vellum
Print on Acetate
Print on Photopaper
Print on Photopaper

Printing Package Subdivision Plan
Iterations

A. Print on Acetate
B. Print on Photopaper
1.17.12.
A. Print on Acetate
B. Print on Photopaper
1.17.13.
A. Print on Acetate
B. Print on Photopaper
1.17.14. Print and Ink on Mylar

Printing Package Area Utility Plan
Iterations

Printing Package Schematic Utility
Plan Iterations

Printing Package Conceptual
Grading Plan Iterations

Village Master Plan Site Analysis

111
1.17.15.
1.17.16.

Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar

1.17.17.

Print on Mylar

1.17.18.

Print on Mylar

1.17.19.

Print on Mylar

1.17.20.

Print on Mylar

1.17.21.

Print on Mylar

1.17.22.

Print on Mylar

1.17.23.

Print on Mylar

1.17.24.

Print on Mylar

1.17.25.

Print on Mylar

1.17.26.

Print on Mylar

1.17.27.

Print on Mylar

1.17.28.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

Pencil on Sepia Print
Elevations and Sections
Subdivision Plan
Elevations
Landscape Concept Plan
Pencil on Sepia; Concept Diagram
Elevations and Sections
Bill Johnson Sketches
Road Exposure and Alignment
Perspective Sketches

Village Master Plan Site Analysis
Village Master Plan Area Utility
Plan
Village Master Plan Landscape
Concept Plan
Village Master Plan Area Utility
Plan
Village Master Plan Schematic
Utility Plan
Village Master Plan Conceptual
Grading Plan
Village Master Plan Subdivision
Plan
Village Master Plan Subdivision
Plan
Village Master Plan Conceptual
Grading Plan
Village Master Plan Parking and
Circulation Plan
Village Master Plan Parking and
Circulation Plan
Village Master Plan Ground Level
Plan
Village Master Plan Schematic
Utility Plan
Mid-Point Document Package

Series 1: Kananaskis Cluster 18: Banff Downtown Enhancement
1.18.1.

Ozalid on Bond

Area Map

112
1.18.2.

Ozalid on Bond

1.18.3.
1.18.4.
1.18.5.
1.18.6.
1.18.7.
1.18.8.
1.18.9.
1.18.10.
1.18.11.
1.18.12.
1.18.13.
1.18.14.

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Marker on Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

1.18.15.
1.18.16.
1.18.17.
1.18.18.
1.18.19.
1.18.20.
1.18.21.
1.18.22.
1.18.23.
1.18.24.
1.18.25.
1.18.26.
1.18.27.
1.18.28.
1.18.29.
1.18.30.
1.18.31.
1.18.32.
1.18.33.
1.18.34.

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

1.18.35.

Ozalid on Bond

Banff Alberta Downtown
Enhancement; 11 March 1992
Banff Calculation Studies
2 Lane Scheme
4 Lanes Section
3 Lanes – 2 Lanes in One Direction
3 Lane Options
Boundaries and Circulation
Concept Sketch
Visitor Auto Access and Parking
Parking Management; Fall 1992
Shuttle Stops and Route
2 Lane One-Way System
Modified Street Section with Review
of Parking Lanes
Circulation Schematic
Existing Service Access
Circulation Schematic
Intersection Schematic
Intersection Schematic
Entry in Plan View and Section
Entry Concept Schematic
Entry Concept Schematic
Circulation Schematic
Parking Study
Routes and Nodes
Banff Avenue Paving
Banff Avenue Paving
Intersection Plans and Sections
Off Banff Avenue Schematic
Area Map with Circulation
BDEP Design Component: Traffic
Circulation Schematics
BDEP Design Component: Linkages
BDEP Design Component:
Intersections and Nodes
Banff Springs Hotel Signage

113

APPENDIX C
HIGH DESERT

Call Code

2.1.1.
2.1.2.A.
2.1.2.B.
2.1.2.C.
2.1.3.
2.1.4.A.
2.1.4.B.
2.1.5.
2.1.6.A.
2.1.6.B.
2.1.6.C.
2.1.6.D.
2.1.6.E.
2.1.6.F.
2.1.6.G.

Pin Bar Document Package
The Trailhead Setbacks and ROW; Scale 1”:60’; 14
December 1993
Setback and Lot Line Dimensioning; 5 November 1993
Setback and Lot Line Dimensioning; 5 November 1993
The Trailhead Site Plan; Scale 1”:60’; 14 December 1993
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents

Subtitle
Medium
Cluster 1: Parcel 1: High Desert Trailhead
Ink on Trace
Finished Site Grading
Ink on Mylar
Building Footprints with Setback Ink on Mylar
Roadways & Property
Boundaries
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Trace
Pencil on Print
Marker on Print on
Bond
Base Lines

Ink on Mylar

Sheet 18 of 25

Ink on Mylar

Setbacks and ROW

Ink on Mylar

Labels

Ink on Mylar

Sheet 19 of 25

Ink on Mylar

Title Block

Ink on Mylar

Base Lines

Ink on Mylar

Labels

Ink on Mylar

114

2.1.6.H.

Title
Series 1: High Desert
High Desert Trailhead Parcel Revised Plan; Scale 1”:60’;
23 November 1993
Pin Bar Document Package
Pin Bar Document Package

2.1.9.

Juniper, Pine & Oak Streetscape

2.1.10.

Tree Streetscape with Cul-de-Sacs

2.1.11.
2.1.12.
2.1.13.
2.1.14.
2.1.15.

Tree Streetscape with Cul-de-Sacs
High Desert Area Map
Tract 8 Area Calculations
Tract A Sheet 6
Tract A Sheet 7

2.1.16.

2.1.20.B.

Preliminary Utility Layout
Preliminary Plat of Trailhead Subdivision Albuquerque
New Mexico; January 1994
High Desert Trailhead Parcel 28 Lot Scheme Alternative
‘A’: Phase 1 Landscape Plan; 1”;50’; 12 October 1993
Simms Reservoir No. 2 Site Development Plan
Trailhead Subdivision Grading/Drainage Plan; Scale
1"=60'
Trailhead Subdivision Grading/Drainage Plan; Scale
1"=60'

2.1.21.

Embudito Trail Planting Plan

2.1.22.

La Luz Trail Planting Plan

2.1.17.
2.1.18.
2.1.19.
2.1.20.A.

Sheet 20 of 25

Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Print on Acetate
Colored Pencil on
Ozalid on Bond
Colored Pencil on
Ozalid on Bond
Colored Pencil on
Ozalid on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ink & Print on
Vellum
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Revisions

Ink on Trace

Base Map

Print on Bond
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond

115

2.1.6.I.
2.1.7.
2.1.8.

High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan Pin Bar
Documents
Tree Streetscape Pin Bar Document
Topography

2.1.23.
2.1.24.
2.1.25.
2.1.26.
2.1.27.
2.1.28.

Lotting Plan with Grading
High Desert Trailhead Parcel Revised Plan; Scale 1”:60’;
23 November 1993
Lot & Building Footprint Arrangement on Trace
Aerial Photograph with Grading & Lotting Plan
Setbacks and Lotting Plan; Scale 1"=60'; 5 November
1993
High Desert Trailhead Parcel 28 Lot Scheme Alternative
‘B’; Scale 1”:50’; 12 October 1993

2.1.29.

Aerial Photograph with square footage

2.1.30.
2.1.31.
2.1.32.

Topography
La Luz Trail Place Spot Elevations
La Luz Trail Place Spot Elevations

2.1.33.
2.1.34.
2.1.35.

Lotting Plan
The Trailhead Site Plan
Sections for Seeding with native grass mix
High Desert Trailhead Landscape Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 7
March 1994
Lotting Plan with Square Footage
Lotting Plan with Square Footage
Plat of Trailhead Subdivision Albuquerque New Mexico
Sheet 2 of 2; January 1994
Trailhead Perimeter Planting Alternative 2 Sheet 2; Scale
1"=60'; 7 March 1994

2.1.36.
2.1.37.A.
2.1.37.B.
2.1.38.
2.1.39.

Print on Mylar
Print on Bond
Ink on Trace
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Ozalid on Bond

Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Print on Photo
paper
Adhesive on Mylar
Adhesive on Mylar
Print on Photo
paper
Print on Mylar
Adhesive on Mylar
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate

Ink on Trace
116

2.2.7.

Lotting Plan with Pedestrian Routes; 29 November 1993

2.2.8.

Trees and Turf; 29 November 1993

2.2.9.

Labels; 29 November 1993

2.2.10.

Grading and Drainage; 29 November 1993

2.2.11.

Building Footprints and Setbacks; 29 November 1993

2.2.12.

Labels; 29 November 1993

2.2.13.

Roads; 29 November 1993

2.2.14.

Grading

2.1.41.
2.1.42.
2.1.43.
2.2.1.
2.2.2.
2.2.3.
2.2.4.
2.2.5.

Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Print on Vellum
Ink on Trace
Cluster 2: Parcel 2
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate

117

2.2.6.

Trailhead Perimeter Planting Alternative 1 Sheet 1 of 2;
7 March 1994
Trailhead Parcel Adjacent Subdivision Footprint/Lot Size
Comparison; Scale 1”:50’; 15 November 1993
Lotting Plan
The Trailhead Cul-de-Sac Concepts; Scale 1"=60'
Series 1: High Desert
Proposed Planting and Berm Grading
Trees and Turf
Pedestrian Routes and Signage
Building Footprints and Setbacks
High Desert Tract 2-A
Parcel 2 Building Footprints and Setbacks; 29 November
1993

2.1.40.

Landscape
Parcel 2 Cul-de-Sac Plan; Scale 1"=30'

2.2.17.A.
2.2.17.B.

Parcel 2 Notes on Site Plan; 20 September 1993
Parcel 2 Notes on Site Plan; 20 September 1993

2.2.18.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.19.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.20.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.21.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

Landform Cross Section
Trees and Turf Pin Bar
Document

2.2.22.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

Pedestrian Route and Signage

2.2.23.
2.2.24.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

Lotting Plan Alternative #1
Lotting Plan Alternative #2

2.2.25.
2.2.26.
2.2.27.
2.2.28.
2.2.29.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.30.
2.2.31.
2.2.32.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

Lotting Plan Alternative #2
Lotting Plan Alternative #2
Lotting Plan Alternative #3
Spot Elevations
Boundaries Pin Bar Document
Revisions to Parcel 2; 30
September 1993
Grading and Drainage
Grading and Drainage

Notes
Site Plan
Parcel 2 Lot Acreage; 2 July
1993
Revised Proposed Landform
Along Tramway Boulevard;
Scale 1”:20’; 2 July 1993

Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Ink on Mylar
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Ink on Trace
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Pencil on Trace
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace

118

2.2.15.
2.2.16.

Sepia Print on
Acetate
Print on Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Acetate
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.34.
2.2.35.
2.2.36.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.37.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.38.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.39.
2.2.40.
2.2.41.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints
Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.42.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.43.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.44.

Parcel 2 Sections, Trace Studies, & Working Prints

2.2.45.

High Desert Parcel 2; Scale 1”:100’; 29 November 1993
High Desert Tracts 2A-1A & 2A-1B Scheme A; Scale
1”:50’; 2 May 1994
High Desert Tracts 2A-1A & 2A-1B Scheme C; Scale
1”:50’; 2 May 1994
Land Survey for Parcel A
Parcel 2 Grading & Spot Elevations; Scale 1"=100'; 29
November 1993
Series 1: High Desert
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Final"

2.2.46.
2.2.47.
2.2.48.
2.2.49.
2.3.1.A.

Grading and Drainage
Lotting Plan Alternative #2
Variation
Lotting Plan
Lotting Plan

Pencil on Trace

Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Pencil & Ink on
Project Boundary & Acreage
Trace
Pedestrian Routes and Street
Pencil & Ink on
Lights
Trace
Pencil & Ink on
Trees and Grading
Trace
Roadway Curvature
Pencil on Trace
Roadway Curvature
Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Print on
Lotting Plan
Mylar
Site Plan Revisions with Grading Ink on Ozalid on
& Drainage
Bond
Ink on Ozalid on
Site Plan Revisions
Bond
Sepia Print on
Acetate

Ink on Mylar
Cluster 3: Parcel 3
Setbacks; 25 February 1994
Ink on Mylar

119

2.2.33.

Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Final"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Final"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Final"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Final"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Final"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Obsolete"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Obsolete"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Obsolete"
Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Obsolete"

2.3.2.E.

2.3.4.

Parcel 3 Pin Bar Documents Labeled "Obsolete"
High Desert Parcel 3 Alternative; Scale 1”:100’; 30 June
1993
Parcel 3 Utility Layout Plan Discussion Level; 11
October 1993

2.3.5.

Parcel 3 Grading and Drainage; 24 November 1993

2.3.6.

Parcel 3 Pedestrian Circulation & Signage

2.3.7.

Parcel 3 Master Plan of Combined Pin Bar Documents

2.3.8.

Parcel 3 Grading; Scale 1"=100'; 24 November 1993
Parcel 3 Combined Pin Bar Documents from Final; Scale
1"=100'; 24 November 1993
Series 1: High Desert
Scenario 1: 25 October 1991
Scenario 2: 25 October 1991

2.3.3.

2.3.9.
2.4.1.
2.4.2.

Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

Ink on Trace
Sepia Print on
Mylar
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Cluster 4: Site Analysis & Inventory
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace

120

2.3.1.B.
2.3.1.C.
2.3.1.D.
2.3.1.E.
2.3.1.F.
2.3.2.A.
2.3.2.B.
2.3.2.C.
2.3.2.D.

Grading and Drainage; 24
November 1993
Labels
Trees and Turf
Pedestrian Routes and Signage
Parcel Boundaries
Grading and Drainage
Trees
Turf
Pedestrian Routes and Signage
Building Footprints and
Setbacks

Scenario 3: 25 October 1991
Scenario 4: 25 October 1991
Scenario 5: 25 October 1991

2.4.6.

Scenarios #1-4

2.4.7.

Scenario #2a

2.4.8.

Scenario

2.4.9.

Scenario 2A

2.4.10.

Scenario 2B

2.4.11.

Scenario 2C

2.4.12.

Open Space Governance

2.4.13.
2.4.14.
2.4.15.
2.4.16.
2.4.17.

Draft Zoning Plan
High Desert Phasing Plan
Developable Land Summary
Landscape Concept Plan
Land Use Plan with Golf
Cultural and Community Centers: Retirement Center,
Teens, Golf, & Cultural Center
Cultural and Community Centers: School, Neighborhood
Commercial, Park, & Church
Cultural and Community Centers: Roads, Reservoir,
Potential Land Trade, & Lot Size
Academy Lands East Conceptual Master Plan

2.4.18.
2.4.19.
2.4.20.
2.4.21.

Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ink & Marker on
Trace
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

121

2.4.3.
2.4.4.
2.4.5.

2.4.22.
2.4.23.
2.4.24.
2.4.25.
2.4.26.
2.4.27.
2.4.28.
2.4.29.
2.4.30.
2.4.31.
2.4.32.
2.4.33.
2.4.34.

Circulation Diagram
Utility Plan
Building Footprints & Travel Routes
Vegetation
Drainage Concept Plan
Circulation Plan
Floodplain
Landscape Concept Plan
Open Space/Trails Plan
Phasing Plan
Street Names Plan
Soils Plan
Land Use Plan

2.4.35.

Road Use Diagram

2.4.36.A.

Site Suitability on Trace

Sheet 1

2.4.36.B.

Site Suitability on Trace
Riparian Vegetation Zone & Floodplain with Building
Envelopes; 16 December 1992; Scale 1"=200'

Sheet 2

2.4.37.
2.4.38.
2.4.39.
2.4.40.
2.4.41.
2.4.42.
2.4.43.

Aerial Photograph with Existing Topography
Aerial Photograph with Existing Topography
Dam Locations/Arroyo Delineation
Site Inventory & Analysis; Scale 1"=300'
100 Year Flood Plain Map
Tracts & Floodplains Diagram

Ink on Trace
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink & Marker on
Ozalid on Bond
Colored Pencil on
Trace
Colored Pencil on
Trace

Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Vellum
Print on Mylar
Print on Bond

122

2.4.44.A.
2.4.44.B.
2.4.44.C.
2.4.44.D.
2.4.44.E.
2.4.44.F.
2.4.44.G.
2.4.44.H.
2.4.44.I.
2.4.44.J.
2.4.44.K.
2.4.44.L.
2.4.44.M.
2.4.45.

Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Plat of High Desert Albuquerque New Mexico; 18
October 1993
Soils Map; Scale 1"=400'

Sheet 1 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 2 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 3 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 4 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 5 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 6 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 7 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 8 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 9 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 10 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 11 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 12 of 13

Print on Bond

Sheet 13 of 13

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
123

Series 1: High Desert
2.5.1.
2.5.2.
2.5.3.
2.5.4.
2.5.5.

Topographic Survey for High Desert Sales Office; Scale
1”:20’; February 1995
Topographic Survey for High Desert Sales Office with
Plant Relocation Program; Scale 1”:20’; February 1995
High Desert Sales Office Grading and Utility Plan; 28
June 1995
High Desert Office Revised Planting Plan 22 May 1995

2.5.19.A.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

2.5.9.

Print on Bond
Print & Ink on
Vellum
Print on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Red Colored Pencil
on Ozalid on Bond
Print on Bond
Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace
Print on Vellum

Cover Sheet

Print on Vellum
Ink on Mylar
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar

124

2.5.10.
2.5.11.
2.5.12.
2.5.13.
2.5.14.
2.5.15.
2.5.16.
2.5.17.
2.5.18.

Context Diagram; Scale 1”:20’; 2 June 1995
Grass Location Diagram, Aesthetic Groupings, &
Boulder Placement
Plan with Sections A-A & B-B
Planting Plan
High Desert Office Grading with Section; Scale 1/8”:1’;
25 January 1995
High Desert Office Planting with Section; Scale 1/8”:1’;
25 January 1995
Context Diagram; Scale 1”:20’; 2 June 1995
Natural Plant Associations Diagram; 2 June 1995
Spatial Diagram and Circulation Loops; 2 June 1995
Genus/Plant Type Comparison Groupings; 2 June 1995
Water Use; 2 June 1995
Seasonal Color Diagram
Planting L-1.1
Planting

2.5.6.
2.5.7.
2.5.8.

Cluster 5: High Desert Office

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Details D-1.0

2.5.19.C.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Planting Plan Detail

2.5.19.D.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

L-5.0; Scale 1/8”:1’

2.5.19.E.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Planting Plan Title block

2.5.19.F.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

L-4.0; Scale 1/8”:1’

2.5.19.G.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Planting Plan Title block

2.5.19.H.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

L-3.0; Scale 1/8”:1’

2.5.19.I.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Planting Plan Details

2.5.19.J.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Base 1

2.5.19.K.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

L-2.0; Scale 1/8”:1’

2.5.19.L.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Grading

2.5.19.M.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Plant Details

2.5.19.N.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Plant Details

2.5.19.O.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Planting Plan L-1.0

2.5.19.P.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

Planting Details

Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Mylar

125

2.5.19.B.

2.5.19.Q.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

2.5.19.R.

High Desert Office; 14 July 1995

2.5.20.A.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package

2.5.20.B.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package

2.5.20.C.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package

2.5.20.D.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package

2.5.20.E.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package

2.5.20.F.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package

2.5.20.G.

High Desert Office Ozalid Package
Series 1: High Desert

2.6.1.
2.6.2.

Plant Schedule by Region
Planting Plan
Series 1: High Desert

2.7.1.

Parcel 7 Apartments; Scale 1”:100’; 26 May 1993

2.7.2.

Parcel 7 Apartments; Scale 1”:100’; 26 May 1993

2.7.3.

Parcel 7 Apartments; Scale 1”:100’; 26 May 1993

Groundcovers

Pencil & Ink on
Mylar
Pencil & Ink on
Path Layout Plan L-1.1
Mylar
Marker & Pencil on
Cover Page
Ozalid on Bond
Marker & Pencil on
Planting Plan L-1
Ozalid on Bond
Marker & Pencil on
Planting Plan L-2
Ozalid on Bond
Marker & Pencil on
Planting Plan L-3
Ozalid on Bond
Marker & Pencil on
Planting Plan L-4
Ozalid on Bond
Marker & Pencil on
Planting Plan L-5
Ozalid on Bond
Marker & Pencil on
Details D-1
Ozalid on Bond
Cluster 6: Planting Design
Pencil & Ink on
Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Cluster 7: Parcel 7: Apartments
Ink on Print on
Photo paper
Ink on Print on
Photo paper
Ink on Print on
Photo paper
126

2.7.4.

Vegetation Regions

2.7.5.
2.7.6.
2.7.7.

Concept Diagram
Illustrative Master Plan
Illustrative Master Plan

2.7.8.

Illustrative Master Plan
Parcel 7 Notes on Trace with Acetate Site Plan; 30
September 1993
Parcel 7 Notes on Trace with Acetate Site Plan; 30
September 1993
Planting Concept; Scale 1”:50’; 25 March 1994
Thompson Fiasco Grading and Drainage
Culbertson Creation Grading Concept; Scale 1”:50’; 25
March 1994
Concept Site Plan

2.7.9.A.
2.7.9.B.
2.7.10.
2.7.11.
2.7.12.
2.7.13.A.
2.7.13.B.
2.7.14.
2.7.15.
2.7.16.
2.7.17.
2.7.18.
2.7.19.
2.7.20.
2.7.21.

Concept Site Plan
Potential Stub Locations; Scale 1”:100’; 23 September
1993
High Desert Parcel 7; Scale 1”:300’
Parcel 7 Pedestrian Routes and Signage; 11 November
1993
Parcel 7 Site Plan; Scale 1”:100’; 11 November 1993
Turf Pin Bar Document; 11 November 1993
Roadway Curvature Study
Trees and Turf Pin Bar Document; June 1993
Grading and Drainage; June 1993

Ink & Marker on
Trace Paper
Marker on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Print on Photo
paper
Notes

Trace Paper

Site Plan

Print on Acetate
Ink on Trace Paper
Ink on Trace Paper

Site Plan
Topographic Map

Ink on Trace Paper
Acetate
Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Bond
Print on Acetate
Ink on Mylar
Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Pencil on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
127

2.7.22.
2.7.23.
2.7.24.
2.7.25.
2.7.26.
2.7.27.
2.7.28.
2.7.29.
2.7.30.
2.7.31.
2.7.32.
2.7.33.
2.7.34.
2.7.35.
2.7.36.
2.7.37.

Parcel 7 Site Plan with Acreage and Unit Calculations
Site Plan with List of Elements to Address; Scale
1"=100'
Concept Diagram with Analysis
Concept of Roadways and Lots
Parcel 7 Title block Pin Bar Document; Scale 1"=100';
26 May 1993
Alternative A with Floodplain Delineation; Scale
1”:100’; 26 May 1993
Alternative B with Floodplain Delineation; Scale
1”:100’; 26 May 1993
Site Plan
Parcel 7 Unit and Parking Concentration Study
Parcel 7 Apartments Site Plan Pin Bar Document; Scale
1"=100'; 23 April 1993
Parcel 7 Proposed Contours Pin Bar Document
Parcel 7 Section; 7 June 1993
Parcel 7 Apartments Alternative A; Scale 1”:100’; 26
May 1993
Parcel 7 Apartments Alternative B; Scale 1”:100’; 26
May 1993

Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Sepia Print on
Acetate
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Marker on Trace
Paper
Ink on Trace Paper
Print on Acetate
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Trace
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Marker on Trace
Paper
Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Diazo
Mylar

128

2.7.38.

Parcel 7 Spot Elevations and Grading Pin Bar Document;
11 November 1993
Parcel 7 Trees Pin Bar Document; 11 November 1993
Parcel 7 Pin Bar Document Compilation; Scale 1”:100’;
11 November 1993

2.7.39.

2.7.40.
2.7.41.

2.7.42.
2.7.43.
2.7.44.
2.7.45.
2.7.46.
2.7.47.
2.7.48.
2.7.49.
2.7.50.
2.7.51.A.

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Vellum
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

129

2.7.51.B.

Topographic Map with Parcel Boundaries
Trammell Crow Residential High Desert Apartments by
Todd & Associates, Inc. Preliminary Building Plans; 11
April 1993 (2)
Trammell Crow Residential High Desert Apartments by
Todd & Associates, Inc. Perspective; 5 April 1993
Trammel Crow Residential High Desert Apartments
Preliminary Site Plan by Todd & Associates, Inc; 11 May
1993
Site Plan by Todd & Associates, Inc.; 21 January 1994
Tract 7 Conceptual Grading/Drainage Plan by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; March 1994
Tract 7 Conceptual Grading/Drainage Plan by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; March 1994
Tract 7 Conceptual Utility Plan by Todd & Associates,
Inc.; 3 March 1994
Tract 7 Preliminary Site Plan by Todd & Associates,
Inc.; 28 February 1994
Tract 7 Preliminary Site Plan by Todd & Associates,
Inc.; 28 February 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert The Hilltop Landscape Cover
Sheet; 14 April 1994
Tract 7 Landscape Plan; 8 March 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Site Plan by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 14 April 1994
L2
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Site Plan by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 14 April 1994
L3

Acetate Spliced on
Mylar

2.7.51.C.
2.7.52.A.
2.7.52.B.
2.7.53.A.
2.7.53.B.
2.7.53.C.
2.7.54.

2.8.1.A.
2.8.1.B.
2.8.1.C.
2.8.1.D.
2.8.1.E.
2.8.1.F.

L4

Ozalid on Bond

L5

Ozalid on Bond

L6

Ozalid on Bond

L7

Ozalid on Bond

L8

Ozalid on Bond

L9

Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Cluster 8: The Parks at High Desert

Cover Sheet
High Desert Park Performance
Stage & Picnic Shelter
High Desert Bike Storage, Sign,
& Wall Details
High Desert Site Amenities
Legend
High Desert Enlargement of Play
Areas
High Desert Proposed Park Site
Grading Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Layout Plan

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
130

2.8.1.G.

Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Site Plan by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 14 April 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Schematic by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 12 April 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Schematic by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 12 April 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Schematic by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 12 April 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Schematic by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 12 April 1994
Pinnacle at High Desert Landscape Schematic by Todd &
Associates, Inc.; 12 April 1994
High Desert Parcel 7; Scale 1”:300’
Series 1: High Desert
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998

2.8.1.H.
2.8.1.I.
2.8.1.J.
2.8.1.K.
2.8.1.L.
2.8.1.M.
2.8.1.N.
2.8.1.O.
2.8.1.P.
2.8.1.Q.
2.8.1.R.
2.8.1.S.
2.8.1.T.

High Desert Layout Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Layout Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Layout Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Electrical Site Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Electrical Site Plan
High Desert Park Irrigation
Plans
High Desert Park Irrigation
Plans
High Desert Park Irrigation
Plans
High Desert Park Irrigation
Plans
High Desert Park Irrigation
Details

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Planting Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Planting Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Planting Plan

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Planting Plan

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

131

2.8.1.U.

The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998

2.8.1.V.
2.8.1.W.
2.8.1.X.
2.8.1.Y.
2.8.1.Z.
2.8.1.AA.
2.8.1.BB.
2.8.1.CC.
2.8.1.DD.
2.8.2.A.
2.8.2.B.
2.8.2.C.
2.8.2.D.
2.8.3.A.
2.8.3.B.

High Desert Planting Plan
High Desert Planting & Seeding
Legend

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Basketball Details
High Desert Tennis & Sand
Volleyball Details
High Desert Play Equipment
Details
High Desert Site Furnishings
Details
Signing & Construction Traffic
Control Standards
Typical Traffic Control &
Signing Examples
High Desert Proposed Park Site
Grading Plan
Sheet 1
Sheet 2
Sheet 3
Sheet 4

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

Site Plan & Arroyo

Ozalid on Bond
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Pencil & Ink on
Trace

Base Map

Print on Bond

West

Trace Paper

132

2.8.3.C.

The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
The Park at High Desert Construction Documents
Package; 22 January 1998
Lot Allocations
Lot Allocations
Lot Allocations
Lot Allocations
New Mexico Educators Federal Credit Union Pathway
Office Park Site Plan & Arroyo
New Mexico Educators Federal Credit Union Pathway
Office Park Site Plan & Arroyo
New Mexico Educators Federal Credit Union Pathway
Office Park Site Plan & Arroyo

2.8.3.D.
2.8.3.E.
2.8.4.
2.8.5.

New Mexico Educators Federal Credit Union Pathway
Office Park Site Plan & Arroyo
New Mexico Educators Federal Credit Union Pathway
Office Park Site Plan & Arroyo
Pathway Office Park: New Mexico Educators Federal
Credit Union Landscaping Plan; 29 August 1997

2.8.16.
2.8.17.

Topographic Map
Arial Photograph with Contours

2.8.6.

2.8.7.
2.8.8.
2.8.9.
2.8.10.
2.8.11.
2.8.12.
2.8.13.A.
2.8.13.B.

Fountain B

Colored Pencil &
Ink on Trace
Colored Pencil &
Ink on Trace

Colored Pencil &
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

Angle Parking
Base Map

Ozalid on Bond
with Redlining
Ozalid on Bond
with Redlining
Ozalid on Bond
with Redlining
Print on Bond
Trace
Copy on Bond
Print on Vellum
Print on Vellum
Print on Photo
paper
Print on Mylar

133

2.8.14.
2.8.15.

Vista Del Norte Park Layout Plan (2)
Vista Del Norte Park Schematic Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 8
February 2000
Tracts 8A, 8B, and 8C Drainage Plan Proposed Phase I
Conditions and Drainage Basins Map; Scale 1"=100'; 31
March 1994
Jogging/Walking Trail
Vista Del Norte Park Schematic Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 8
February 2000
Vista Del Norte Park Schematic Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 8
February 2000
Vista Del Norte Park Schematic Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 8
February 2000
Phase I of Vista Del Norte Park; Scale 1"=40'
Vista Del Norte Layout Plan
Vista Del Norte Layout Plan
Boca Negra Trail Overlook Design Development Plan;
Scale 1/8"=1'
Topographic Map

Fountain A

2.8.18.A.
2.8.18.B.
2.8.18.C.
2.8.18.D.

2.9.1.

2.10.1.
2.10.2.A.

Sheet 1

Print on Acetate

Sheet 2

Print on Acetate

Sheet 3

Print on Acetate

Sheet 4

Print on Acetate
Cluster 9: Century Theaters
Pencil & Ink on
Vellum
Cluster 10: Streetscapes

Revision Overlay
Base

Pencil on Trace
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond

Sheet 1
Sheet 2
Sheet 3
Sheet 4
Sheet 5
Sheet 6
Sheet 7
Sheet 8

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

134

2.10.2.B.
2.10.3.
2.10.4.
2.10.5.A.
2.10.5.B.
2.10.5.C.
2.10.5.D.
2.10.5.E.
2.10.5.F.
2.10.5.G.
2.10.5.H.

Plat of High Desert Bernalillo County New Mexico June
1993
Plat of High Desert Bernalillo County New Mexico June
1993
Plat of High Desert Bernalillo County New Mexico June
1993
Plat of High Desert Bernalillo County New Mexico June
1993
Series 1: High Desert
Century Theaters Landscape Concept Plan A; Scale
1"=50'; 28 July 1995
Series 1: High Desert
Tramway Corridor: Existing Power Poles and 12 VHP
Gas Line Locations; 24 July 1993
Revised Proposed Landform Along Tramway Boulevard
with Trace Revision Overlay; Scale 1”:20’; 2 July 1993
Revised Proposed Landform Along Tramway Boulevard
with Trace Revision Overlay; Scale 1”:20’; 2 July 1993
Roadway Map
Spot Elevations
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A

9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A
9th and I Street Improvements; 30 June 1997 Revision A

2.10.6.A.

Proposed Sidewalk Layout

2.10.6.B.

Proposed Sidewalk Layout

2.10.6.C.

Proposed Sidewalk Layout

2.10.6.D.

Proposed Sidewalk Layout
Proposed Sidewalk Layout; Scale 1”:20’; 12 November
1995

2.10.7.

Sheet 9
Sheet 10
Sheet 11
Sheet 12
Sheet 13
Sheet 14
Sheet 15
Sheet 16
Sheet 17
Sheet 18
Sheet 19
Sheet 20
Sheet 21
Sheet 22
Sheet 23
Sheet 24
Sheet 25
Sheet 26
Sheet 27
Proposed Sidewalk Layout Base;
Scale 1”:20’; 12 November 1995
Option #1; Scale 1"=20'; 5
November 1995
Option #2; Scale 1"=20'; 5
November 1995
Option #3; Scale 1"=20'; 5
November 1995

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Marker on Trace
Marker on Trace
Marker on Trace
Marker on Trace
Marker & Print on
Bond

135

2.10.5.I.
2.10.5.J.
2.10.5.K.
2.10.5.L.
2.10.5.M.
2.10.5.N.
2.10.5.O.
2.10.5.P.
2.10.5.Q.
2.10.5.R.
2.10.5.S.
2.10.5.T.
2.10.5.U.
2.10.5.V.
2.10.5.W.
2.10.5.X.
2.10.5.Y.
2.10.5.Z.
2.10.5.AA.

Sidewalk Plan; Scale 1"=30'; December

2.10.9.

Sidewalk Plan; Scale 1”:40’; 12 December 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995

2.10.10.A.
2.10.10.B.
2.10.10.C.
2.10.10.D.
2.10.10.E.
2.10.10.F.
2.10.10.G.
2.10.10.H.
2.10.10.I.
2.10.10.J.
2.10.10.K.
2.10.10.L.

Cover Sheet

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Boulevard Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Boulevard Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Cortaderia Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Mirror Planting

Trace Paper

Cortaderia Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Cortaderia Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Planting Details

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

136

2.10.8.

Pencil & Print on
Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Print on Bond

2.10.10.M.
2.10.10.N.
2.10.10.O.
2.10.10.P.
2.10.10.Q.
2.10.10.R.
2.10.10.S.
2.10.10.T.
2.10.11.A.
2.10.11.B.
2.10.11.C.
2.10.11.D.
2.10.11.E.

Spain Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

Cortaderia Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

Cortaderia Road Irrigation

Ozalid on Bond

Irrigation Details

Ozalid on Bond

Irrigation Details

Ozalid on Bond

Cover Sheet

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Spain Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Boulevard Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Boulevard Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Academy Boulevard Planting

Ozalid on Bond

137

2.10.11.F.

High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase I: Academy, Spain, and
Cortaderia Medians; City Approved Set 13 April 1995
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians

2.10.11.G.
2.10.11.H.
2.10.11.I.
2.10.12.A.
2.10.12.B.
2.10.12.C.
2.10.12.D.
2.10.12.E.
2.10.12.F.
2.10.12.G.

High Desert Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

High Desert Road Planting

Ozalid on Bond

Planting Details

Ozalid on Bond

Cover Sheet

Ozalid on Bond

L-1.1

Ozalid on Bond

L-1.2

Ozalid on Bond

L-1.3

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.1

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.2

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.3

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.4

Ozalid on Bond

138

2.10.12.H.

High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape Phase II: Academy, Spain, and
High Desert St. Medians
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994

2.10.12.I.
2.10.12.J.
2.10.12.K.
2.10.12.L.
2.10.13.A.
2.10.13.B.
2.10.13.C.
2.10.13.D.
2.10.13.E.
2.10.13.F.
2.10.13.G.
2.10.13.H.

High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Academy Boulevard, Spain
Road, Cortaderia Street Issued for 90% Review; 8 July
1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994

L-2.5

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.6

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.7

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.8

Ozalid on Bond

Cover Sheet

Ozalid on Bond

L-1.1

Ozalid on Bond

L-1.2

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.1

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.2

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.3

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.4

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.5

Ozalid on Bond
139

2.10.15.

High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
High Desert Streetscape: Tramway Boulevard Issued for
90% Review; 8 July 1994
Design Development Plan Phase One Streetscape; Scale
1”:40’; 7 April 1994
Schematic Streetscape Plan for Imperata Street Typical
Landscape Plan; Scale 1”:50’; 14 September 1993

2.10.16.

Schematic Streetscape Plan for Spain Street Typical
Landscape Plan

2.10.17.

Schematic Streetscape Plan for Cortaderia Street Typical
Landscape Plan; Scale 1”:50’; 14 September 1993

2.10.18.

Schematic Streetscape Plan for Academy Road Typical
Landscape Plan; Scale 1”:50’; 8 September 1993

2.10.13.I.
2.10.13.J.
2.10.13.K.
2.10.13.L.
2.10.14.

2.10.19.
2.10.20.A.
2.10.20.B.

Schematic Streetscape Plan for Tramway Boulevard
Typical Landscape Plan; Scale 1”:50’; 8 September 1993
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995

L-2.6

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.7

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.8

Ozalid on Bond

L-2.9

Ozalid on Bond

Cover Sheet
List of Drawings

Print on Mylar
Colored Pencil on
Ozalid on Bond
Ink & Colored
Pencil on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink & Colored
Pencil on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink & Colored
Pencil on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink & Colored
Pencil on Ozalid on
Bond
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
140

2.10.20.C.
2.10.20.D.
2.10.20.E.
2.10.20.F.
2.10.20.G.
2.10.20.H.
2.10.21.
2.10.22.A.
2.10.22.B.
2.10.22.C.
2.10.23.

High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Unit 1 Streetscape Design Development; 25
July 1995
High Desert Streetscape Unit 1: Highlands at High
Desert
Tramway Boulevard Landscape Construction Plan
Package
Tramway Boulevard Landscape Construction Plan
Package
Tramway Boulevard Landscape Construction Plan
Package

2.10.26.A.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Print & Acetate
Splices on Vellum
Ozalid on Bond

Sheet 3-6

Print on Bond

Sheet 3-7

Print on Bond

Sheet 3-8

Print on Bond
Colored Pencil &
Print on Bond
Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Bond

High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert Cover
Sheet

Ozalid on Bond

141

2.10.24.
2.10.25.

Planting Plan along Unlabeled Roadway
Street Sections; 11 April 1992 with Utilities Added 20
August 1992
Rancho Viejo Streetscapes; June 1997

Academy Boulevard (Tramway
to Cortaderia)
Academy Boulevard (Cortaderia
to High Desert)
Spain Road (Tramway to
Cortaderia)
Spain Road (Cortaderia to
Imperata St.)
Cortaderia Street (Spain Road to
Academy Blvd.)
Imperata Street (Spain Road to
Cul-de-sac)

2.10.26.B.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.C.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.D.
2.10.26.E.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)
High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.G.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)
High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.H.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.I.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.F.

2.10.26.J.
2.10.26.K.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)
High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Grading Plan
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Grading Plan
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Grading Plan and Sidewalk
Layout
Planting Concept Plan on Trace
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
Planting Concept Plan on Trace
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
Planting Concept Plan on Trace

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Ozalid on Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
142

2.10.26.L.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.M.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.10.26.N.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)

2.11.2.

Enlargement of Retention Basin

2.11.3.

Topography & Spot Elevations

2.11.4.

Topographic Map

2.11.5.

Simms Park Trail Plan; Scale 1”:100’; 16 April 1992

2.11.6.

Simms Park Trail Plan; Scale 1”:100’; 16 April 1992
Flood Control Authority Portion of East Heights
Topographic Map; Scale 1"=200'
Portion of Elena Gallegos Grant Topographic Map; Scale
1"=200'

2.11.7.
2.11.8.

143

2.11.1.

High Desert Streetscape Highlands at High Desert
Package (Incomplete)
Series 1: High Desert
Topographic Map

2.10.26.O.

High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
Ozalid on Bond
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
Ozalid on Bond
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert
Planting Plan
Ozalid on Bond
High Desert Streetscape
Highlands at High Desert Detail
Sheet
Ozalid on Bond
Cluster 11: Topography & Grading
Print on Acetate
Print on Photo
paper
Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Diazo
Mylar with
Redlining
Print on Diazo
Mylar with
Redlining
Sepia Print on
Mylar
Sepia Print on
Mylar

Topographic Map; 11 April 1992
Topographic Map
Topographic Map
Series 1: High Desert

2.12.1.A.

Sediment Pond Proposals

Sheet 1

2.12.1.B.

Sediment Pond Proposals

Sheet 2

2.12.1.C.

Sediment Pond Proposals

Sheet 3

2.12.1.D.
2.12.2.
2.12.3.
2.12.4.

Sediment Pond Proposals
Estate Lot Study; 1”:30’
Estate Lot Study with Topography; 1”:30’
Estate Lot Study; 8 April 1993

Sheet 4

2.12.5.
2.12.6.
2.12.7.

Concept Diagram
Site Plan on Trace
50x100 Single Family Detached Lots; Scale 1”:50’
Series 1: High Desert
High Desert Vicinity Map
Location Map
High Desert Site Plan
Lotting Plan
Lotting Plan
Topographic Map
Series 1: High Desert
Perspective Sketch of Project Area

2.13.1.
2.13.2.
2.13.3.
2.13.4.
2.13.5.
2.13.6.
2.14.1.

Cluster 13: High Desert Master Plan
Ink on Mylar
Print on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Cluster 14: Illustrations & Imagery
Pencil on Vellum

144

2.11.9.
2.11.10.
2.11.11.

Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Acetate
Ink on Mylar
Cluster 12: Studies & Schematics
Spliced Print on
Acetate
Spliced Print on
Acetate
Spliced Print on
Acetate
Spliced Print on
Acetate
Ink on Mylar
Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Yellow
Trace
Ink on Trace

2.14.2.
2.14.3.

Pencil on Bond
Pencil on Vellum
Pencil on Vellum
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace

145

2.14.4.
2.14.5.
2.14.6.
2.14.7.
2.14.8.
2.14.9.
2.14.10.
2.14.11.
2.14.12.
2.14.13.
2.14.14.
2.14.15.
2.14.16.
2.14.17.
2.14.18.
2.14.19.
2.14.20.
2.14.21.
2.14.22.
2.14.23.
2.14.24.
2.14.25.
2.14.26.
2.14.27.
2.14.28.

Color Perspective Sketch of Project Area
Non-Native Planting Zone Inside Walled Yards
Native L.S. Front Yards: Taller Non-Native Trees in
Rear Yards
Contemporary Ranch Style (Approved)
Approved Pueblo Style (One Story)
Territorial (Approved)
Colonial Spanish
Doors & Entrance Windows
Contemporary Style (Approved)
Ranch Style (Approved)
Approved Pueblo Style (2 Story)
Not Approved Styles
Stepped Fascia: Contemporary or territorial
Stepped Fascia Territorial
Balcony Detail
Stepped Fascia: Colonial Spanish or Mediterranean
Column Alternatives
Archway Alternatives
Chimney Designs
Exterior Stairs
A/C Unit Location
Wind Orientation
Cul-De-Sac Schematic
Create Undulating Landform and Gentle Slope Transition
Wall Alternatives
Exterior Lighting
Curb Drops

2.14.29.
2.14.30.
2.14.31.
2.14.32.
2.14.33.
2.14.34.
2.14.35.
2.14.36.
2.14.37.
2.14.38.
2.14.39.

Switch Box Alternatives
Building/Site Relationship Cross-Section
Parking Screens Alternatives
Wall Grade Change & Horizontal Direction Change;
Obsolete 23 June 1993
Ornamental Iron at Cow Walls
Residential Lane Cross Section
Residential Street Cross Section
Residential Collector Cross Section
Minor Collector Road Cross Section
Major Collector Road Cross Section
Elevation

2.14.40.

High Desert Guidelines for Sustainability Cover Page

2.14.41.

Computer Generated Perspective of Project Area

2.14.42.

Computer Generated Perspective

2.14.43.
2.14.44.

Computer Generated Perspective
Pueblo Style Cross-Section in Color
Series 1: High Desert
Lotting Plan for Parcel 15

2.15.1.
2.15.2.
2.15.3.
2.15.4.

Lotting Plan for Parcel 15
Lotting Plan with Existing Topography
Lotting Plan with Existing Topography; Version 2 June
1994

Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Ink on Trace
Print on Photo
paper
Print on Photo
paper
Print on Photo
paper
Print on Photo
paper
Cluster 15: Parcel 15
Ozalid on Bond
Print & Ink on
Mylar
Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
146

2.15.5.
2.15.6.
2.15.7.

Lotting Plan with Existing Topography
Lotting Plan with Existing Topography; Version 21 June
1994
Lotting Plan with Existing Topography

2.15.8.A.

Lotting Plan with Existing Topography

2.15.8.B.

Lotting Plan with Existing Topography

2.15.8.C.
2.15.9.A.
2.15.9.B.
2.15.9.C.

Lotting Plan with Existing Topography
Trace of Intersection
Trace of Lotting Plan
Trace of Intersections

2.15.10.

2.15.12.

Lotting Plan with Existing Topography
High Desert Panhandle Aerial Photograph with
Topography
Lotting Plan with Existing Topography with Phase 1
Delineation

2.15.13.

Lotting Plan

2.15.14.

Highlands Planting Plan Schematic Plan; 30 August 1994
Orthophoto Contour Map of the Highlands Units 1. 2. &
3 at High Desert Subdivision

2.15.11.

2.15.15.
2.15.16.

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Pencil on Ozalid on
Bond
Trace of
Intersection
Trace of
Intersection
Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace
Pencil on Trace
Pencil & Ink on
Ozalid
Print on Mylar
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Ink & Print on
Mylar
Ink on Ozalid on
Bond
Print & Ink on
Bond
Print on Photo
paper
Cluster 16: Parcel 16: The Highlands

147

Property Allocation for Parcel 16
Series 1: High Desert

Marker on Ozalid
on Bond

2.16.1.

2.16.2.B.

Lot Allocations for Parcel 16: The Highlands
Planting Concept Plan over Highlands Planting Plan;
Scale 1”:20’
Planting Concept Plan over Highlands Planting Plan;
Scale 1”:20’

2.16.3.

Highlands Planting Concept Plan

2.16.4.

2.16.6.B.

Highlands Planting Concept Plan
Highlands Grading Plan; Scale 1”:20’ with Mylar Sheet
of Grading Revision
Highlands Grading Plan; Scale 1”:20’ with Mylar Sheet
of Grading Revision
Highlands Planting Plan; Scale 1”:20’ with Mylar Sheet
of Grading Revision
Highlands Planting Plan; Scale 1”:20’ with Mylar Sheet
of Grading Revision

2.16.7.

Highlands Planting Plan; Scale 1”:20’

2.16.8.

Planting Concept Plan
Series 1: High Desert
Enlarged Master Development Schedule
Master Development Schedule

2.16.2.A.

2.16.5.A.
2.16.5.B.
2.16.6.A.

2.17.1.
2.17.2.
2.17.3.

Planting Plan

Ozalid on Bond
Colored Pencil on
Trace
Colored Pencil on
Trace

Grading Plan

Print on Bond

Grading Revision

Ink on Mylar

Planting Plan

Print on Bond

Grading Revision

Ink on Mylar
Marker on Ozalid
on Bond
Pencil & Ink on
Trace
Cluster 17: Master Development Schedule
Print on Acetate
Print on Acetate
Marker on Print on
Bond
Cluster 18: Consultant Works
Control System
Ozalid on Bond

148

2.18.1.A.

Master Development Schedule High Desert
Series 1: High Desert
Irrigation Master Plan by aci

Planting Concept Plan on Trace

Print on Photo
paper
Pencil & Ink on
Trace

2.18.1.B.

Irrigation Master Plan by aci

2.18.2.A.

Richard Emik Associates

2.18.2.B.
2.18.2.C.
2.19.1.

Richard Emik Associates
Richard Emik Associates
Series 1: High Desert
Gas

2.19.2.A.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.2.B.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.2.C.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.2.D.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.2.E.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.2.F.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.2.G.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

Phase I Water Sources
Ozalid on Bond
Street/Transition Landscape
Concept and Entry
Monumentation Elevation; 8
June 1994
Ozalid on Bond
High Desert Apartments Cross
Sections
Ozalid on Bond
Plant Material Zones
Ozalid on Bond
Cluster 19: Engineering/Utility Packages
Print on Bond
Print on Bond with
Overall Paving Plan Phase I-B
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Overall Paving Plan Phase I-A
Redlining
Paving Plan and Profile
Academy Station 70+00 to
Print on Bond with
Station 80+50
Redlining
Paving Plan and Profile
Academy Station 57+50 to
Print on Bond with
Station 70+00
Redlining
Paving Plan and Profile Imperata
Street Station 23+50 to 36+00
Print on Bond with
(S)
Redlining
Paving Plan and Profile Imperata
Street Station 12+00 to 23+50
Print on Bond with
(South)
Redlining
Paving Plan and Profile
Cortaderia Street Station 60+00
Print on Bond with
to 72+00
Redlining
149

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.A.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.B.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.C.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.D.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.E.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.F.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.G.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.H.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.I.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.J.

High Desert Subdivision Plan

2.19.3.K.

High Desert Subdivision Plan
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.A.

Title Sheet

Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond with
Redlining
Print on Bond

150

2.19.2.H.

Paving Plan and Profile
Cortaderia Street Station 48+00
to 60+00
Utility Plan Profile: Academy
Station 46+00 to 57+50
Utility Plan Profile: Academy
Station 57+50 to 70+00
Utility Plan Profile: Academy
Station 70+00 to 80+50
Utility Plan Profile: Academy
Station 80+50 to 83+21.15
Utility Plan Profile: High Desert
Street Station 1+00 to 8+00
Utility Plan Profile: Spain Road
Station 58+00 to 70+00
Utility Plan Profile: Spain Road
Station 70+00 to 81+00
Utility Plan Profile: Cortaderia
Street Station 60+00 to 72+00
Utility Plan Profile: Cortaderia
Street Station 48+00 to 60+00
Utility Plan Profile: Imperata
Street Station 12+00 to 23+50
(South)
Utility Plan Profile: Imperata
Street Station 23+50 to 36+00
(South)

2.19.4.B.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.D.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.E.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.F.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.G.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.H.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.I.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.J.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.K.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

2.19.4.C.

Paving Plan and Profile: Elena
Gallegos Place Station 1+00 to
12+00
Paving Plan and Profile: Elena
Gallegos Place Station 12+00 to
16+84.92
Paving Plan and Profile: Canada
Del Oso Station 1+00 to 9+58.20
Paving Plan and Profile: Canada
del Oso Station 9+58.20 to
19+07.47
Paving Plan and Profile: Canada
del Oso Station 19+07.47 to
27+40.27
Paving Plan and Profile: Apache
Plume Place Station 1+12 to
8+28.74
Paving Plan and Profile: Fringe
Sage Court Station 1+12 to
7+49.10
Paving Plan and Profile: Blue
Flax Court Station 1+75 to
4+67.15
Paving Plan and Profile: Elena
Gallegos Court Station 1+12 to
2+56.70
Paving Plan and Profile: Bear
Grass Court Station 1+11 to
3+80.92

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
151

2.19.4.L.
2.19.4.M.
2.19.4.N.
2.19.4.O.
2.19.4.P.
2.19.4.Q.
2.19.4.R.
2.19.4.S.
2.19.4.T.
2.19.4.U.
2.19.4.V.
2.19.4.W.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

Utility Plan: Waterline Easement

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

152

2.19.4.X.

Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1
Construction Plans for the Highlands at High Desert
Subdivision Unit 1

Paving Plan and Profile: Buffalo
Grass Court Station 1+12 to
1+36.12
Utility Plan: Elena Gallegos
Place Station 1+00 to 12+00
Utility Plan: Elena Gallegos
Place Station 12+00 to 16+84.92
Utility Plan: Canada Del Oso
Station 1+00 to 9+58.20
Utility Plan: Canada del Oso
Station 9+58.20 to 19+07.47
Utility Plan: Canada del Oso
Station Utility Plan: 19+07.47 to
27+40.27
Utility Plan: Apache Plume
Place Station 1+12 to 8+28.74
Utility Plan: Fringe Sage Court
Station 1+12 to 7+49.10
Utility Plan: Blue Flax Court
Station 1+75 to 4+67.15
Utility Plan: Elena Gallegos
Court Station 1+12 to 2+56.70
Utility Plan: Bear Grass Court
Station 1+11 to 3+80.92
Utility Plan: Buffalo Grass Court
Station 1+12 to 1+36.12

2.19.5.A.
2.19.5.B.
2.19.5.C.
2.19.5.D.

2.19.5..E.
2.19.5.F.
2.19.5.G.
2.19.5.H.

2.19.5.I.
2.19.5.J.
2.19.5.K.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)

Title Sheet/Vicinity Map
Plan and Profile Station 2+08 to
8+50
Plan and Profile Station 8+50 to
20+50
Plan and Profile Station 20+50
to 32+00
Storm Drain Plan & Profile:
Academy Station 32+00 35+31.79 and North Bear
Tributary Arroyo Desiltation
Pond
Plan and Profile Station 32+00
to 35+17.15

Ozalid on Bond

North Bear Tributary Pond
Plan and Profile Station 40+00
to 50+50
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Academy Boulevard Station
50+50 to 52+33.74 and South
Bear Tributary Arroyo
Desiltation Pond
Plan and Profile Station 50+50
to 52+33.74
South Bear Tributary Pond
Finished Grade Grid Map

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
153

2.19.5.R.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)

2.19.5.S.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)

2.19.5.L.
2.19.5.M.
2.19.5.N.
2.19.5.O.
2.19.5.P.
2.19.5.Q.

2.19.5.T.
2.19.6.A.
2.19.6.B.
2.19.6.C.
2.19.6.D.

Ozalid on Bond

Desiltation Ponds Details

Ozalid on Bond

Desiltation Ponds Details

Ozalid on Bond

Riprap Details
Tramway Ponds Grading Plan
and Miscellaneous Details

Ozalid on Bond

Wire Enclosed Riprap Details

Ozalid on Bond

Structural Details
Special Wingwall and Headwall
for 48” Diameter RCP Station
35+17.15
Special Wingwall and Headwall
for 84” Diameter RCP Station
52+17.49

Ozalid on Bond

Title Sheet

Print on Bond

General Notes

Print on Bond

Key Map

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

154

2.19.6.E.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase 1B-1 Storm Drainage (Academy Storm Drain)
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

Plan and Profile Station 6+30.59
to 11+63.82

2.19.6.O.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.P.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.Q.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.R.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.F.
2.19.6.G.
2.19.6.H.
2.19.6.I.
2.19.6.J.
2.19.6.K.
2.19.6.L.
2.19.6.M.
2.19.6.N.

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control
Typical Road and Pavement
Sections
Typical Road and Pavement
Sections

Print on Bond

Overall Paving Plan

Print on Bond

Overall Utility Plan

Print on Bond

Overall Utility Plan
Paving Plan and Profile
Academy Boulevard Station
46+00 to 57+50
Paving Plan and Profile
Academy Boulevard Station
57+50 to 70+00
Paving Plan and Profile
Academy Boulevard Station
70+00 to 80+50

Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
155

2.19.6.S.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.U.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.V.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.W.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.T.

2.19.6.Y.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.Z.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.AA.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.X.

2.19.6.BB.

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

156

2.19.6.CC.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

Paving Plan and Profile
Academy Boulevard Station
80+50 to 83+21.16
Paving Plan and Profile High
Desert Street Station 1+00 to
8+00
Paving Plan and Profile Spain
Road Station 51+00 to 58+00
Paving Plan and Profile
Cortaderia Street Station 48+00
to 60+00
Intersection Details:
Academy/Tramway Intersection
Detail
Intersection Details:
Spain/Tramway Intersection
Detail
Intersection Details: Tramway
Bike/Pedestrian Path Details
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Academy Boulevard Station
57+50 to 70+00
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Cortaderia Street Station 48+00
to 60+00
Drainage Plans: Desiltation Pond
#6 and Academy Storm & Drain
Outlet Works
Drainage Plans: Desiltation Pond
#7

2.19.6.DD.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.EE.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.FF.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.GG.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.HH.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.II.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.LL.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.MM.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.JJ.
2.19.6.KK.

Drainage Plans: Misc. Drainage
Utility Plan and Profile:
Academy Boulevard Station
46+00 to 57+50, Includes Storm
Drain
Utility Plan and Profile:
Academy Boulevard Station
57+50 to 70+00
Utility Plan and Profile:
Academy Boulevard Station
70+00 to 80+50, Includes Storm
Drain
Utility Plan and Profile:
Academy Boulevard Station
80+50 to 83+21.16
Utility Plan and Profile: High
Desert Street Station 1+00 to
8+00
Utility Plan and Profile: Spain
Road Station 41+00 to 51+00 &
SAS Extension
Utility Plan and Profile: Sanitary
Sewer Extension in Spain Road
Utility Plan and Profile: Sanitary
Sewer Extension in Spain Road
Utility Plan and Profile: Spain
Road Station 51+00 to 58+00,
Includes Storm Drain

Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
157

2.19.6.QQ.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.RR.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.SS.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.TT.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.UU.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.VV.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.WW.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.OO.

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

158

2.19.6.PP.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.NN.

Utility Plan and Profile:
Cortaderia Street Station 48+00
to 60+00
Utility Plan and Profile:
Waterline Details
Traffic Signal & Lighting Plans:
Traffic Signal Notes and Legend
Traffic Signal & Lighting Plans:
Signal/Lighting Estimated
Quantity
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Academy/Tramway
Signal Demolition/Construction
Plan
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Academy/Tramway
Traffic Signal Plan
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Academy/Tramway
Traffic Signal Conduits and
Cables
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Academy/Tramway
Traffic Signal Functions and
Detectors
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Spain/Tramway
Demolition/Construction Plan
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Spain/Tramway Traffic
Signal Plan

2.19.6.XX.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.YY.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.ZZ.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

159

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.AAA. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.BBB. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.CCC. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.DDD. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.EEE. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.FFF. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.GGG. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.HHH. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.III.
A

Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Spain/Tramway Traffic
Signal Conduits and Cables
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Spain/Tramway Traffic
Signal Functions and Detectors
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Academy/Tramway
Lighting Plans
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Spain/Tramway Lighting
Plans
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details
Traffic Signal and Lighting
Plans: Traffic Signal Details

2.19.6.JJJ.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.KKK. A
2.19.6.LLL.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

2.19.6.MM
M.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.NNN. A

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond

Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

160

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.OOO. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.PPP. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.QQQ. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.RRR. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.SSS. A

Traffic Control Plans: Sequence
of Construction
Traffic Control Plans: COASigning and Construction Traffic
Control Standards
Traffic Control Plans: COATypical Traffic Control and
Signing Examples
Striping and Signing Plans:
Phase I-A Striping and Signing
Plan for Academy State 46+00 Station 70+00
Striping and Signing Plans:
Phase I-A Striping and Signing
Plan for Academy Station 70+00
- 83+12.16 and High Desert
Station 1+00 - 8+00
Striping and Signing Plans:
Phase I-A Striping and Signing
Plan for Spain Road Station
46+00 - 58+00 and Cortaderia
Street Station 50+00 - 60+00
Landscape and Irrigation Plans:
Landscape and Irrigation Plans
Landscape and Irrigation Plans:
Landscape and Irrigation Plans
Landscape and Irrigation Plans:
Landscape and Irrigation Plans
Landscape and Irrigation Plans:
Landscape and Irrigation Plans

Landscape and Irrigation Plans:
Landscape and Irrigation Plans
Landscape and Irrigation Plans:
Landscape and Irrigation Plans

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Title Sheet

Print on Bond

General Notes

Print on Bond

Key Map

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control

Print on Bond

Plat/Survey Control
Typical Road and Pavement
Sections
Typical Road and Pavement
Sections

Print on Bond

Overall Paving Plan

Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
161

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IA
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.6.UUU. A
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.A.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.B.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.C.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.D.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.E.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.F.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.G.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.H.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.I.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.J.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.K.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.L.
B
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase I2.19.7.M.
B
2.19.6.TTT.

2.19.7.Q.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.R.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.S.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.T.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.U.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.V.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.W.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.X.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.N.
2.19.7.O.

Overall Utility Plan
Paving Plan and Profile: Spain
Road Station 58+00 to 70+00
Paving Plan and Profile: Spain
Road Station 70+00 to 81+00
Paving Plan and Profile:
Cortaderia Street Station 60+00
to 72+00
Paving Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 1+00 to
12+00
Paving Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 12+00 to
23+50
Paving Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 23+50 to
36+00
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Spain Storm Drain Station 1+00
to 5+77.83
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Spain Road Station 58+00 to
70+00
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Spain Road Station 70+00 to
81+00
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Cortaderia Street Station 60+00
to 72+00

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

162

2.19.7.P.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.Y.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.JJ.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.KK.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.AA.
2.19.7.BB.
2.19.7.CC.
2.19.7.DD.
2.19.7.EE.
2.19.7.FF.
2.19.7.GG.
2.19.7.HH.

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

163

2.19.7.II.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.Z.

Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 12+00 to
23+50
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 23+50 to
36+00
Storm Drain Plan and Profile:
Miscellaneous Drainage Details
Drainage Plans: Desiltation Pond
#1
Drainage Plans: Desiltation
Ponds #2 and #2A
Drainage Plans: Desiltation Pond
#3
Drainage Plans: Desiltation Pond
#4, #5A and #5B
Drainage Plans: Spain Storm
Drain Connection at Tramway
Drainage Plans: Spain Storm
Drain Connection Details
Utility Plan and Profile: Spain
Road Station 58+00 to 70+00
Utility Plan and Profile: Spain
Road Station 70+00 to 81+00
Utility Plan and Profile:
Cortaderia Street Station 60+00
to 72+00
Utility Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 1+00 to
12+00

2.19.7.LL.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.NN.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB
Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.OO.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.PP.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.QQ.

Construction Plans for High Desert Subdivision Phase IB

2.19.7.MM.

Utility Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 12+00 to
23+50
Utility Plan and Profile:
Imperata Street Station 23+50 to
36+00
Utility Plan and Profile:
Waterline Details
Striping and Signing Plans:
Spain Road Station 58+00 to
81+00
Striping and Signing Plans:
Cortaderia Street Station 60+00
to 72+00 & Imperata Street
Station 10+00 to 12+00
Striping and Signing Plans:
Imperata Street Station 12+00 to
36+00

Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond
Print on Bond

Print on Bond
Print on Bond

164

165

APPENDIX D
ASPCOL

Call Code

3.1.1.A.
3.1.1.B.
3.1.1.C.
3.1.1.D.
3.1.1.E.
3.1.1.F.
3.1.2.
3.1.3.
3.1.4.
3.1.5.

Subtitle

Series 3: ASPCOL Cluster 1: Topography & Grading
Topographic Map by Schmueser Gordon Meyer Inc.
by Reids Aerial Mapping; Scale 1"=50'; 10 October
1989
Sheet 1
Topographic Map by Schmueser Gordon Meyer Inc.
by Reids Aerial Mapping; Scale 1"=50'; 10 October
1989
Sheet 2
Topographic Map by Schmueser Gordon Meyer Inc.
by Reids Aerial Mapping; Scale 1"=50'; 10 October
1989
Sheet 3
Topographic Map by Schmueser Gordon Meyer Inc.
by Reids Aerial Mapping; Scale 1"=50'; 10 October
1989
Sheet 4
Topographic Map by Schmueser Gordon Meyer Inc.
by Reids Aerial Mapping; Scale 1"=50'; 10 October
1989
Sheet 5
Topographic Map by Schmueser Gordon Meyer Inc.
by Reids Aerial Mapping; Scale 1"=50'; 10 October
1989
Sheet 6
Unlabeled Plat; Scale 1"=10'
Starwood Plat Layout
Plat of Stern Ranch Subdivision and Starwood
Subdivision; Scale 1"=400'
Plat of Lots R-17-A and R-18-A, Starwood, and Plat of
Starwood Fourteen; Scale 1"=100'
Amended and Restated Plat of Starwood Ranch Lot
Split by Alpine Surveys, Inc.; Revised 23 March 1989

Medium

Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Print on Vellum
Print on Bond
Print on Vellum
Print on Bond
Ozalid on Bond

166

3.1.6.

Title

3.1.7.

3.1.8.
3.1.9.

3.1.10.

Second Amended and Restated Plat of Starwood Ranch
Lot Split by Alpine Surveys, Inc.; 2 August 1989
Star Mountain Ranch/Starwood Ranch; Lot Line
Adjustment by Alpine Surveys, Inc.; Revisions on 8
December 1986
Star Mesa 35 Acre Parcel Vicinity Map; Scale
1"=1025'
ASPCOL/Starwood Ranch Subdivision: Summary of
Area Irrigated by Red Mountain Ditch; Scale 1"=200';
5 August 1991

Ozalid on Bond

Series 3: ASPCOL Cluster 2: Master Plan
3.2.1.

3.2.2.

3.2.3.
3.2.4.
3.2.5.
3.2.6.

Ink & Adhesive on Diazo
Mylar

Print on Mylar
Ink and Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

Path to Caretakers

Print on Diazo Mylar
Pencil and Ink on Trace

167

3.2.7.
3.2.8.A.

ASPCOL Illustrative Master Plan; Scale 1:=60'
ASPCOL Residence Master Plan: Existing Conditions
Prepared by Design Workshop, Inc.; 1"=120'; 8
December 1989
ASPCOL Residence Master Plan: Existing Conditions
Prepared by Design Workshop, Inc.; 1"=120'; 2
February 1990
Topographic Map of ASPCOL and Surroundings with
Lot Lines; Scale 1"=200'
ASPCOL Topographic Map
ASPCOL Schematic Ranch Master Plan; Scale 1"=60';
26 February 1990
ASPCOL Master Plan with Ski Amenities: Scale
1"=120'; 1 April 1990
ASPCOL Master Plan

Colored Pencil and Marker
on Print on Bond

ASPCOL Master Plan

Roadway Redesign

3.2.8.C.

ASPCOL Master Plan

3.2.9.A.
3.2.9.B.
3.2.10.
3.2.11.
3.2.12.

ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=60'
ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=60'; 1 April 1990
ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=120'; 1 April 1990
ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=60'; 1 April 1990
ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=120'; 1 April 1990

Revisions
Aspen Forest; 5 August
1991
Base Map

3.2.13.
3.2.14.A.
3.2.14.B.

ASPCOL Master Plan; 1"=200'; 3 July 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan
ASPCOL Master Plan

3.2.15.
3.2.16.
3.2.17.

ASPCOL Master Plan; 1"=200'; 5 August 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=200'; 5 August 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan; Scale 1"=120'; 7 January 1992
ASPCOL Master Plan: Irrigation Quantities; Scale
1"=60'; 1 April 1990
ASPCOL Master Plan: Irrigation Quantities; Scale
1"=60'; 1 April 1990 Irrigation 8 August 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan: Additional Landscape Zones;
Scale 1"=60'; Revised 23 October 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan: Additional Landscape Zones;
Scale 1"=60'; Revised 23 October 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan; --cess Alternatives; Scale
1"=120'; 9 October 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan with Surroundings and
Measurements; Scale 1"=200'

3.2.18.
3.2.19.
3.2.20.
3.2.21.
3.2.22.
3.2.23.

Master Plan
Blank Sheet

Pencil and Ink on Trace
Ink on Print on Diazo
Mylar
Colored Pencil and Ink on
Trace
Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Sepia on Acetate
Print on Diazo Mylar
Ink and Print on Diazo
Mylar
Print on Acetate
Mylar
Ink and Print on Diazo
Mylar
Ozalid on Bond
Ozalid on Bond
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Adhesive, Ink, and Print on
Diazo Mylar
Ozalid on Bond
Print on Diazo Mylar
Red Pencil on Print on
Bond

168

3.2.8.B.

3.2.24.A.

ASPCOL Pin Bar Document Set

3.2.24.B.

ASPCOL Pin Bar Document Set

3.2.24.C.

ASPCOL Pin Bar Document Set
ASPCOL Master Plan: Bricol Access Alternatives;
Scale 1"=120'; 9 October 1991
ASPCOL Master Plan: Grounds Maintenance Bid
Package: Exhibit Four: Limit of Work; 16 March 1992
Revised 5 May 1992

3.2.25.

3.2.26.

3.3.1.A.
3.3.1.B.
3.3.1.C.
3.3.2.A.
3.3.2.B.
3.3.2.C.

Series 3: ASPCOL Cluster 3: Planting & Irrigation Plans
L-1: Site Plan; Scale
Bricol Log Home
1"=20'
L-4: Tree Planting Plan;
Bricol Log Home
Scale 1/8": 1'
L-5: Shrub &
Groundcover Planting
Bricol Log Home
Plan; Scale 1/8"=1'
L4.1: Entry Drive Planting
Starwood Ranch Lot Two
Plan; 1"=30'
L4.2: House Planting
Starwood Ranch Lot Two
Plan; 1/16"=1'
L4.3: Planting Plan
Starwood Ranch Lot Two
Courtyards; Scale 1/8"=1'
L4.4: Planting Plan
Starwood Ranch Lot Two
Stream Terrace; 1.8"=1'

Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ozalid on Bond

Ink on Mylar

Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate

169

3.3.2.D.

Site Plan Base; Scale
1"=30'
L2.1: Site Grading Plan;
Scale 1":30'
L2.2: Site Grading Plan;
Scale 1"=30'

3.3.2.E.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.2.F.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.2.G.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.2.H.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.A.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.B.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.C.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.D.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.E.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.F.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.G.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.3.3.H.
3.3.4.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two
ASPCOL Landscape Plan

L5.1: Irrigation Pump
Plan; Scale 1"=30'
L5.2: Entry Drive
Irrigation Plan; No Scale
L5.3: House Irrigation
Plan; No Scale
L5.4: Irrigation Details;
No Scale
L4.1: Entry Drive Planting
Plan; 1"=30'
L4.2: House Planting
Plan; 1/16"=1'
L4.3: Planting Plan
Courtyards; Scale 1/8"=1'
L4.4: Planting Plan
Stream Terrace; 1/8"=1'
L5.1: Irrigation Pump
Plan; Scale 1"=30'
L5.2: Entry Drive
Irrigation Plan; No Scale
L5.3: House Irrigation
Plan; No Scale
L5.4: Irrigation Details;
No Scale

Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Sepia Print on Mylar
Print on Photo paper

Series 3: ASPCOL Cluster 4: Equestrian Center
170

3.4.1.A.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.4.1.B.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.4.1.C.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two

3.4.1.D.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two
Equestrian Center Grading Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 13
August 1990
Equestrian Center Layout; Scale 1"=20'; 14 August
1990
Equestrian Center Planting Plan; Scale 1"=20'
Equestrian Center Hardscape
Equestrian Center Planting Plan; Scale 1"=20'

3.4.2.
3.4.3.
3.4.4.
3.4.5.
3.4.6.

3.5.1.
3.5.2.
3.5.3.A.

1: Equestrian Center
Grading; Scale 1"=20'; 13
August 1990
2: Equestrian Center
Layout; Scale 1"=20'; 14
August 1990
3: Equestrian Center
Planting Plan; Scale
1"=20'
Equestrian Center Details;
22 August 1990

Sepia on Acetate
Sepia on Acetate
Print on Mylar
Pencil & Print on Mylar
Pencil and Ink on Mylar
Pencil on Mylar
Pencil and Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

Series 3: ASPCOL Cluster 5: Tennis Court
ASPCOL Residence: Tennis Court Plan with Section;
Scale 1"=10'; 1 January 1990
Pencil and Ink on Mylar
Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents;
Proposed Tennis Court
Print on Mylar
TC 1: Scale 1"=10'; Issued
for Construction 30 July
Tennis Court Construction Documents
1990
Print on Mylar
171

3.5.3.B.

Tennis Court Construction Documents

3.5.3.C.

Tennis Court Construction Documents

3.5.3.D.

Tennis Court Construction Documents
Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents
Progress Print; Printed 5 June 1990
Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents
Progress Print; Printed 5 June 1990

3.5.4.A.
3.5.4.B.

3.5.4.C.

3.5.4.D.
3.5.5.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents
Progress Print; Printed 5 June 1990
Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents;
Dimension Plan
Schematic Tennis Court Grading; Scale 1"=10'; 22
February 1990

Ink and Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar

Dimension Plan

Ozalid on Bond

Grading Plan

Ozalid on Bond

Retaining Wall/Fence
Elevation and Tennis
House/Retaining
Wall/Fence Elevation
Guard Rail Elevation,
Gate Elevation, Sandstone
Paving/Steps, Retaining
Wall @ Tennis Court,
Tennis Net Post, Paving
Over Structure, Concrete
Band/Fence Post
Connection, Tennis
Court/Light
Connection/Footing

Ozalid on Bond

Ozalid on Bond
Print on Mylar
Marker on Mylar

172

3.5.6.

Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents
Progress Print; Printed 5 June 1990

TC 2: Grading Plan; Scale
1"=10'; Issued for
Construction 30 July 1990
TC 3: Details; Issued for
Construction 30 July 1990
TC 4: Details; Issued for
Construction 30 July 1990

3.5.7.A.
3.5.7.B.
3.5.7.C.
3.5.8.
3.5.9.
3.5.10.
3.5.11.
3.5.12.A.

Schematic Tennis Court Grading
Schematic Tennis Court Grading
Schematic Tennis Court Grading
Tennis Court Grading Plan
Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents
Tennis Court Details
Starwood Ranch Lot Two; Construction Documents
Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.B.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.C.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.D.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.E.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.F.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.G.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.H.

Tennis Court Details

3.5.12.I.

Tennis Court Details

Base Map
Contours
Contours
Grading Plan

Blank Sheet
1: Gate Elevation; Scale
1"=1'
2: Typical Section Paving Over Structure;
Scale 1 1/2"= 1'
3: Sandstone
Paving/Steps; Scale 1
1/2"=1'
4: Retaining Wall at
Tennis Court; Scale 3/4" =
1'
5: Tennis Net Post; Scale
1"=1'
6: Tennis Court Light
Detail; Scale 1"=1'
7: Concrete Band/Fence
Post Connection; Scale 1
1/2"=1'
8: Fence Elevation; Scale
1"=1'

Pencil on Mylar
Pencil and Ink on Trace
Pencil and Ink on Trace
Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Pencil and Print on Mylar
Print on Mylar
Mylar
Print on Mylar

Pencil on Graph Paper
Pencil on Graph Paper
Print on Mylar
Pencil and Print on Graph
Paper
Pencil on Graph Paper
Pencil and Print on Graph
Paper
Print on Mylar
173

3.5.13.

3.6.1.
3.6.2.
3.6.3.
3.6.4.
3.6.5.
3.6.6.
3.6.7.
3.6.8.
3.6.9.
3.6.10.

Series 3: ASPCOL Cluster 6: Pond
ASPCOL Pond Grading Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 9 January
1991
ASPCOL Pond Grading Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 9 January
1991
ASPCOL Pond Grading Plan; Scale 1"=20'; 9 January
1991
ASPCOL Pond Study Alternative "A"; Scale 1"=30';
13 August 1991
ASPCOL Supplemental Pond Alternative A; Scale
1"=20'; 29 October 1991
ASPCOL Supplemental Pond Alternative B; Scale
1"=20'; 29 October 1991
ASPCOL Pond #2 Pin Bar Document; Scale 1"=20'; 30
October 1991
ASPCOL Pond Alternative; Scale 1"=30'; 23
December 1991
ASPCOL Pond Alternative; 23 December 1991
ASPCOL Pond Alternative; 23 December 1991
Site Plan and Sections; 29
Bricol E.T. Beds
January 1992
Bricol E.T. Beds
Grading Plan
Pond with Existing and Proposed Topography
ASPCOL Pond Grading Plan
Pond and Existing Topography

Print on Vellum

Red & Black Ink on Mylar
Pencil & Black Ink on
Mylar
Red & Black Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Red & Black Ink on Mylar
Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar
Red & Black Ink on Mylar
Ink on Mylar

174

3.6.11.A.
3.6.11.B.
3.6.12.
3.6.13.
3.6.14.

ASPCOL Residence Foundation Plan; Scale 1/8"=1'; 8
June 1990

3.6.15.A.
3.6.15.B.
3.6.16.A.
3.6.16.B
3.6.17.

Preliminary ASPCOL Supplemental Pond Plan View
by Schmueser Gordon Meyer, Inc.; 12 March 1992
Preliminary ASPCOL Supplemental Pond Details by
Schmueser Gordon Meyer, Inc.; 12 March 1992
Preliminary ASPCOL Supplemental Pond Plan View
by Schmueser Gordon Meyer, Inc.; 26 March 1992
Preliminary ASPCOL Supplemental Pond Details by
Schmueser Gordon Meyer, Inc.; 26 March 1992
ASPCOL Site Grading

Sheet 1 of 2

Ozalid on Bond

Sheet 2 of 2

Ozalid on Bond

Sheet 1 of 2

Ozalid on Bond

Sheet 2 of 2

Ozalid on Bond
Ink on Mylar

175

176

APPENDIX E
PROPOSED TEACHING MODULE

177
The following is a teaching module proposed by Carlos Licón, a professor in the
Landscape Architecture and Environmental Planning Department at Utah State
University, utilizing some of the Design Workshop Archives and Digital Collection.
A Learning Module for LAEP 3120 Residential Planning & Design
The Residential Planning and Design Studio focuses on residential projects,
planned unit developments, transit-oriented development, and community facilities. It is
an introduction to theory and methods of community and neighborhood design and
planning. The sequence of projects goes from single family unit studies to housing
development design proposals.
A learning module can be an excellent introduction to larger housing design
methodologies in the second part of the semester. It will provide students with the
opportunity to review the design process of the High Desert (Parcel 7) project, reflect,
and understand better their own approach to design problems. The learning module
presents different levels of information and knowledge changing through different phases
of a design process. Students will analyze each phase and should discover the information
relevant to each step in the process. The critical review of Design Workshop Archive and
Digital Collection documents should also help the students develop and practice skills of
critical analysis of design documents. They will have an opportunity to express in writing
their findings and observations about a design.
Student will be presented with a series of documents showing the design process
of a project. Two categories of information in the DW documents are relevant to the
learning module: content and process information:

178
Content information: the substantive evidence contained in the documents. The
student responsibility is to identify what type of information is present in each phase of
the project and to describe its characteristics. Content information can be grouped in:
•

Base drawing [photo, printed map, etc.]

•

Text annotations describing features or comments about the project

•

Diagrams

•

Other drawings over the base drawing

•

Quantitative information [tables, notes, etc.]

Process information: every document is part of a larger complete design process.
This process requires different types of data and different ways of representing the
information depending on the purpose of each document in the larger design process.
The student can analyze each document to identify and describe not only what content
information is evident, but how it is handled. This is the main portion of analysis for the
student. This study on methods will help to interpret and define the DW analysis process.
The student will identify purpose and process from information about:
•

Relative importance of different elements of the project represented in the
document

•

Level of precision of the drawing elements

•

Dominant type of information [text annotations, details, corrections,
sketches, technical drawing, etc.

•

Intended purpose of drawing

179
•

Types of analysis elements present [quantification of features,
descriptions, tests…]

For the student to be able to analyze documents, it is important establish an initial
framework of the design process. This framework will be used to organize DW
documents before delivering them to students for the module activities. The list can
initially be:
•

Exploration

•

Site analysis

•

Concept development

•

Draft proposal

•

Full proposal

•

Details

•

Technical solutions

•

Supporting document
Students will be presented with drawing images phase by phase. Together with

the images the module will include a brief description of the document, a series of
activities, and questions for the student. Each exercise requires the student to analyze a
particular set of drawings, identifying and describing the components present, and write
her description of that phase of the planning process as evident in the DW documents. At
the end of the module the student will have described five to seven phases of the design
process and should have identified evidence to support his descriptions.

180
For the final document of the module, the student will represent her understanding
of the complete design process and will discuss the differences, shortcomings, and
advantages of the DW approach compared to her personal approach. At the end of the
module, the student should feel comfortable to talk about:
•

The design process

•

The type of information each design phase needs to handle

•

The level of precision required

•

The dialogue between designers and the project

•

The communication power of documents

•

The thinking process expressed in the documents

•

The styles of designers [related to individual thinking process]

A structured analysis of DW documents allows the student to:
•

Discover from the documents evidence of type of info, levels, etc.

•

Describe how the elements identified interplay

•

Explain the intentions of the designer and how the ideas are communicated

•

Compare with her own approach to design and reflect on the differences

•

Evaluate the design process

•

Explain it

Possible student outcomes [products]:
•

Process analysis papers

•

Diagram of the design process with highlights and missing points

181
•

Quantitative analysis of the project: areas, linear feet of road, patterns, typologies,
mix of uses, circulation, entrances, etc.

This learning module needs additional support with
•

Readings on design process

•

Presentation of document information

•

Discussion on the type of information included in a design process

•

Project and activities descriptions

•

Format for analysis and diagrams for terminology and process

