© 2014

Kevin Michael Lerner

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

GADFLY TO THE WATCHDOGS: HOW THE JOURNALISM REVIEW (MORE)
GOADED THE MAINSTREAM PRESS TOWARD SELF-CRITICISM IN THE 1970S
By
KEVIN MICHAEL LERNER
A Dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School-New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University o f New Jersey
in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Doctor o f Philosophy
Graduate Program in Communication, Information and Library Studies
written under the direction of
David Greenberg
and approved by

New Brunswick, New Jersey
May 2014

IJMI N u m b e r :

3641812

All r i g h t s r e s e r v e d
IN FO RM A TIO N T O ALL U S E R S
T h e q u ality of t h i s r e p r o d u c t io n is d e p e n d e n t u p o n t h e q u ality of t h e c o p y s u b m i t t e d .
In t h e u n l ik e l y e v e n t t h a t t h e a u t h o r d i d n o t s e n d a c o m p l e t e m a n u s c r i p t
a n d t h e r e a r e m i s s i n g p a g e s , t h e s e wi l l b e n o t e d .

Also,

if m a t e r i a l h a d t o b e r e m o v e d ,

a n o t e wi l l i n d i c a t e t h e d e l e t i o n .

UMI
D is s e r ta t io n P u b lis h in g

UMI
P u b lish e d by P ro Q u e s t LLC (2014).

3641812
C o p y r i g h t in t h e D i s s e r t a t i o n h e l d b y t h e A u t h o r .

M icro fo rm Edition © P r o Q u e s t LLC.
Al l r i g h t s r e s e r v e d . T h i s w o r k i s p r o t e c t e d a g a i n s t
u n a u t h o r i z e d c o p y in g u n d e r Title 17, U n ite d S t a t e s C o d e

ProOuest
P r o Q u e s t LLC.
789 E ast E isen h o w er Parkw ay
P.O . B ox 1346
Ann A rbor.

Ml 4 8 1 0 6 - 1 3 4 6

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION

Gadfly to the Watchdogs: How the Journalism Review (MORE)
Goaded the Mainstream Press Toward Self-Criticism in the 1970s.

By KEVIN MICHAEL LERNER

Dissertation Director:
David Greenberg

This dissertation tells the history o f (MORE), a journalism review founded and
run by a group of journalists who found themselves constrained by the professional
norms of their employers and their profession. In telling (M ORE)’s story, the dissertation
tells a part o f the story o f the organized press in America in the bulk o f the 1970s, and
some of its interactions with that decade’s cultural convulsions. The dissertation takes a
historical approach, telling (MORE)’s story through the use o f the magazine itself as
primary text; oral history interviews with surviving editors, contributors and participants
in the journalism review’s six “Counter-Conventions”; primary documents, including
archival material from the records of news organizations and individuals involved with
(MORE); and audio recordings o f parts o f the Counter-Conventions. These sources are

supplemented by a body o f secondary literature including contemporary news reports,
other works of press criticism from the era and academic studies o f press criticism and
the history o f the 1970s.
The study of (MORE) provides insight into changes in journalistic
professionalism in the 1970s, a key period after the rise o f what Michael Schudson calls
“the critical culture”; it investigates the role o f press criticism in the functioning of the
press and the effects, both direct and implied, that press criticism has on mainstream
publications; it will trace some o f the roots of the professional press’s increasing selfawareness in response to rampant anti-intellectualism among its members; and, using the
ideas of these self-aware journalists as a guide, it begins to trace the outline of an
intellectual history o f the 1970s.
This dissertation advances four main arguments regarding (MORE) and the
national and journalistic cultures in which it operated:
1. (MORE) changed the nature o f press criticism, and began its diffusion into the
culture.
2. (MORE) changed the way journalists thought about themselves and their
profession.
3. (MORE) influenced the way the organized press practiced its trade at a time when
the industry was reshaping itself.
4. (MORE) reflects broader changes in society in the 1970s.

Dedication and acknowledgements

When I talked to Victor Navasky o f the Columbia University Graduate School of
Journalism about my ideas for a dissertation about press criticism, he suggested that I
focus on (MORE), and put me in contact with his friend Dick Poliak. More than anyone,
Poliak was instrumental in my ability to research this work. While he knew that I would
not be telling the story o f (MORE), the journalism review that he cofounded, from his
point o f view, he was kind enough to loan me his personal bound volumes o f the
magazine for several months, even going so far as to have his building’s superintendent
fetch them for me out o f his apartment while he and his wife were in Vietnam, partway
through an around-the-world trip. Poliak also gave me several hours o f his time for
interviews and opened up his address book to share contact information for several of the
other (MORE) contributors I interviewed for this project. O f course, I would also like to
thank those who gave me their time and tried their best to remember how and why certain
events happened 40 years ago. The oral history sections of this dissertation would have
been impossible without them.
I would also like to thank the staff of the Manuscripts and Archives Division of
the New York Public Library. They were invaluable in helping me to find material about
(MORE) in their collections, which was particularly important since the staff o f (MORE)
did not save most of their own correspondence or other records. The Dorot Jewish
Division o f the Library also helped in providing access to a 1971 oral history interview
with J. Anthony Lukas.
Karen Michel connected me with the archivists at Pacifica Radio. Thank you to

her and to her friend Adi Gevins who facilitated my relationship with the Pacifica
Archives. Thanks especially to Shawn Dellis, who pulled up the actual tapes and
performed the work o f digitally transferring them for me.
Sandra Hanson, who was the chair o f the English department at LaGuardia
Community College when I began my teaching career, recognized that I was a good
candidate for a doctoral program and goaded me to apply. I might have figured that out
for m yself eventually, but I owe her my gratitude for pushing me when she did.
And thank you to the faculty and administration at Marist College, for giving me
a wonderful and supportive place to work even while I was completing this dissertation. I
am excited honored now to move on to the next stage o f my academic career there.
Thanks o f course also to the committee that guided this research. I was fortunate
to find m yself in the program at Rutgers, where an interdisciplinary approach allowed me
to use historical methods in a community where much o f the research uses the tools of
social science instead. My chairperson, David Greenberg, brought a combination of
journalism knowledge and rigorous historical methods to bear on my work, and he was a
terrific mentor, coach and role model. His historical training (and dual appointment in
Rutgers’s excellent history department) also helped bring on the excellent T.J. Jackson
Lears, who was invaluable in helping me to broaden the scope of this dissertation to
address some o f the social and intellectual history that are in this work. Susan Keith has
worked almost as closely with me on this project as David has, and has been generous in
sharing her preliminary work on the journalism review movement, which has obviously
influenced this dissertation. And Linda Steiner was my first adviser at Rutgers before she
moved to The University of Maryland. I take it as a huge compliment that she would

V

offer to stay on my committee even after she moved on. And she may be my best editor. I
appreciate her patience in sticking with my most convoluted sentences.
My partner, Simon, lived through this. I thank him for putting up with me while I
worked, and for telling me to work when I didn’t.
My dad is in many ways my ideal reader— a smart, well-educated person with an
endless stream of questions.
My mom is my academic idol. I watched her finish her own dissertation when I
was in high school, so I knew what to expect— and also knew that it was possible.
This dissertation is dedicated to Simon and to my parents.

Vi

Table of Contents

• Abstract o f the D issertation.........................................................................................ii
• Dedication and Acknowledgements...........................................................................iv
• Introduction.....................................................................................................................1
• Chapter 1: From The Kingdom and the Power to The Powers That B e :
The Culture o f Professionalism in American Journalism through
the 1970s and Journalistic Press Criticism in the United States............................26
• Chapter 2: Newsroom Cabals, Barnyard Epithets and a
Ringing Declaration of Purpose: (MORE) magazine from
its founding in 1971 to the end of 1973.................................................................... 71
• Chapter 3: Taking Our Cue From Joe: The A.J. Liebling
Counter-Conventions Make (MORE) a Newsroom N am e.....................................147
• Chapter 4: The Press Becomes the Media, and a
Journalism Review Becomes a Media M agazine....................................................201
• Chapter 5: The Loyal Opposition: (MORE) and The Times....................................242
• Chapter 6: Gawker, Content, Bloggers, Spy. The Legacy o f (M ORE).................. 289
• Bibliography.................................................................................................................. 311

vii

1

I am that gadfly which God has given the state and all day long and in all places am
always fastening upon you, arousing and persuading and reproaching you.
— Socrates, in Plato’s Apology1

Introduction
In the early summer of 1971, three partners— a Pulitzer Prize-winning former
New York Times staffer, a former Newsweek media columnist and an independently
wealthy self-made reporter for The New York Post—published the first issue of a
journalism review. It was an unassuming publication, physically. It was printed on cheap
paper, nearly newsprint quality, and similar in size to a tabloid newspaper or the New
York Review o f Books, with whom it shared a designer,3 (as well as some aspirations
toward intellectualism). (MORE),4 as this review was called, was not the first journalism
review in the U.S., but it was different from the ones that existed already to such an
extent and in ways that make it an important piece o f journalism history and for the
intellectual history o f the press in the 1970s. At one time, it even had the same sort of
intellectual credibility that the New York Review and The Village Voice had, being
mentioned in the same breath as a venue for writers who “want a discriminating audience

1 Plato, Apology, trans. Benjamin Jowett. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Internet Classics
Archive, 1994). http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html
2 (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1971.
3 Sam Antupit, who designed (MORE) in its first few years, also created the look of the
New York Review o f Books, and brought some o f that design sensibility to the lesserknown journalism review.
4 I have adopted the stylization o f the title that the magazine itself used under its first
group o f owners— all caps with parentheses. When I refer to the magazine after its sale
by these owners, I use the standard More. Not only does this follow the practice o f the
editors, but it also reflects that these two incarnations were almost different publications.
When I am quoting from secondary sources, I maintain the formatting o f that original
source.

2

with a populist tinge.”5 Among journalism reviews, The Columbia Journalism Review,
subsidized by Columbia University, had been around for a decade, long enough for an
anthology to have been published already;6 a strong contingent o f regional journalism
reviews had existed for almost as long (and in some cases longer); and in the three years
since the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago, several new regional journalism
reviews had sprung up in various places around the United States.7 Like the Columbia
Journalism Review, (MORE) had national aspirations. And like the regional reviews,
(MORE) was going to be written by working journalists and would take a much more
anti-institutional stance than The Columbia Journalism Review, which was staid by
comparison, and written by academics as much as by journalists. (MORE) combined
ideas from the other reviews, and by adding its irreverent, intellectual, anti-institutional
bent, created something new. For a certain breed o f disaffected professional journalist,
one who hadn’t seen or read the regional reviews, it was something that was also
bordering on revolutionary. Even for those journalists who were familiar with the
regional reviews, (MORE) was something new: a journalism review that negotiated the
path between the generally more anti-establishment regional reviews and the pro-

5 Ellen Frankfort, The Voice: Life at The Village Voice, A n Unauthorized Account (New
York: William Morrow and Company, 1976).
6 Alfred Balk and James Boylan, editors, Our Troubled Press: Ten Years o f the Columbia
Journalism Review (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1971).
7 Several articles document this movement around the time o f (M ORE)’s founding:
“More Journalism Reviews,” Columbia Journalism Review, May 1970, 4-5. Norman
Hill, “The Growing Phenomenon of the Journalism Review,” The Saturday Review,
September 11, 1971, 59-60. “Journalism’s In-House Critics,” Time, December 6, 1971,
80-81. Don Rose, “New Voices o f Newsmen,” The Nation, January 10, 1972, 43-46. S.J.
Adamo, “The Press: Perils o f Self-Criticism,” America, February 1972, 130-131. “A
Review o f Reviews,” Columbia Journalism Review, March/April 1972, 4-7. “More
Monitors,” Columbia Journalism Review, March/April 1972, 7.

3

institutional Columbia Journalism Review. (MORE) was an alternative publication
without being an underground publication.
The masthead o f (M ORE)’s pilot issue included only three people: editor Richard
Poliak, a former press columnist for Newsweek, as well as a former editor and journalist
for various publications; publisher William Woodward III; and famed designer Sam
Antupit, who had served as Esquire’’s art director in the 1960s, and who developed the
template for The New York Review o f Books, the format of which (MORE) strongly
resembled. The issue ran to 24 pages, printed in two colors (black with a scarlet-red logo,
the name of the magazine framed by square brackets. Stuart H. Loory, who had been the
Moscow bureau chief for the New York H erald Tribune and the Washington bureau Chief
for the Los Angeles Times, wrote the cover article, about how the press played along with
Richard Nixon’s exploitation o f Vietnam prisoners o f war. And the other contributors to
the issue were no less impressive: J. Anthony Lukas, who had won the Pulitzer Prize for
investigative reporting while at the New York Times', George E. Reedy, who had been a
press secretary for Lyndon Johnson; Village Voice reporter Paul Cowan; Charlotte Curtis,
who was then women’s editor for the New York Times, and who would go on to run its
Op-Ed page; and David Halberstam. An advisory committee for the first issue included
New Yorker writer Calvin Trillin and CBS news correspondent Mike Wallace.
In an unsigned letter from the editor, the magazine claimed that it would have no
“Ringing Declaration o f Purpose,” since such declarations were nearly impossible to live
up to:
Despite your best intentions, little old ladies from Dubuque do pick up your
magazine. Or some newspaper editor (or even publisher) momentarily forgets the
marble admonition in the lobby and gives the news partially with both fear and
favor.... [W]e have reluctantly put aside our own Ringing Declaration o f Purpose

4

(and a clarion call it was, too) in favor o f a sentence or two on what we hope to
accomplish. Our goal is to cover the New York area press—by which we mean
newspapers, magazines, radio and television— with the kind o f tough-mindedness
we think the press should but seldom does apply to its coverage o f the world. We
hope to do this seriously but not without wit, fairly but not “objectively.”
o

Despite their shrugging off o f the idea o f the Ringing Declaration o f Purpose,
clearly these critics of journalism intended to have some effect on the way that journalism
was being practiced in their home town. And while they purported to be a local review of
journalism (and acknowledged that they were late to starting a city review for New
York), the very nature o f the New York press was such that it also constituted the de
facto national press, since so many o f the country’s news organizations made their home
there. Also, as the Ringing Declaration makes clear, (MORE) was aware o f the idea o f
objectivity that was pervasive in the profession o f journalism from the very start o f its
publication. Whether or not journalism can be said to fit the exact sociological definition
o f what makes up a profession, certainly the practitioners o f journalism at mainstream
news outlets held a collection of normative beliefs about the best way to practice the
craft, and (MORE) was acutely aware of the frustrations that journalists at these
institutions were beginning to feel with their institutions. Some journalists, including
(MORE) co-founder Tony Lukas, felt that the professional norm o f objectivity was being
used by mainstream institutions o f the press as a facade o f impartiality that concealed an
actual complicity with power. This frustration was o f a piece with the anti­
institutionalism that had come to characterize political movements (mostly on the left, but
also across the board) in the previous decade. In 1971, the mainstream o f the American
institutional press was just beginning to come to terms with the cultural changes that

8 Untitled editor’s note, (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1971, 2.

5

would come to be known as “the sixties,”9 and American journalism was roiling with
some of the same counter-cultural passions that had thrown public life into upheaval in
the previous decade. Seymour Hersh published his dispatches on the My Lai massacre in
1969. Leftist student organizations had given rise to a vigorous underground press that
was on the verge o f softening into alternative newsweeklies.10 But the mainstream press
was also awakening to new possibilities: (MORE) began publication in June, 1971, the
very same month that the New York Times began publishing the classified military history
that would be known as the Pentagon Papers; and the Watergate break-in was a year
away. Journalism was changing, and many o f those who thought about its role in society
also began to think about new ways to practice this old art. The “New Journalists” had
begun to explore new kinds of subjectivity and personal voice in the writing of
journalistic work. By the summer o f 1978, when (M ORE)’s last owner finally sold its
subscription list to its comparatively tepid, but institutionally supported rival CJR,
(MORE) had been a witness to and participant in some epochal changes in American
journalism. (MORE) itself was a direct reaction to frustration that one o f its founders, the
Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter J. Anthony Lukas felt a couple years earlier with how his
employer— also the Times—would let him characterize the “Chicago 7” conspiracy
trial.11 It was a time in which major news organizations were grappling with the tensions
between the tradition of objectivity and a new generation o f young, college-educated

9 Historians differ on when “the sixties” began and ended, but the social and cultural
changes that term signifies clearly did not fit into the chronological 1960s.
10 John McMillian, Smoking Typewriters: The Sixties Underground Press and the Rise o f
Alternative M edia in America (New York: Oxford, 2011).
11 Lukas expressed this frustration most directly in the preface to his book The Barnyard
Epithet and Other Obscenities: Notes on the Chicago Conspiracy Trial (New York:
Harper & Row, 1970).

6

journalists who wanted to engage with social change and write in their own voices.

12

It

was the decade in which the mainstream press began to distrust institutions and
mainstream America began to distrust the mainstream press. But at the same time, it was
also the decade in which “investigative reporting would suddenly gain celebrity and sex
appeal and would redefine the image of the profession.”13 It was the decade in which a
reporter could be played, in an Oscar-winning (and popular) film, by Robert Redford. It
was the decade in which “the press” was subsumed into “the media.” Yet at the same
time, the 1970s were the decade in which the monolithic voice o f authority, which had
been challenged throughout the 1960s, was finally dissolved.
This dissertation tells the history o f (MORE), and in so doing tells a part o f the
story o f the organized press in America in the bulk o f the 1970s, and some of its
interactions with that decade’s cultural convulsions. The dissertation takes a historical
approach, telling (M ORE)’s story through the use o f the magazine itself as primary text;
oral history interviews with surviving editors, contributors and participants in the
journalism review’s six “Counter-Conventions”; primary documents, including archival
material from the records o f news organizations and individuals involved with (MORE);
and audio recordings o f parts o f the Counter-Conventions. These sources are
supplemented by a body o f secondary literature including contemporary news reports,
other works of press criticism from the era and academic studies o f press criticism and
the history o f the 1970s.

12

Michael Schudson, Discovering the News: A Social History o f American Newspapers
(New York: Basic Books, 1978).
13 Bill Kovach and Tom Rosenstiel, The Elements o f Journalism (New York: Three
Rivers Press, 2007), 140.

7

The study of (MORE) provides insight into changes in journalistic
professionalism in the 1970s, a key period after the rise o f what Michael Schudson calls
“the critical culture”; it investigates the role o f press criticism in the functioning of the
press and the effects, both direct and implied, that press criticism has on mainstream
publications; it will trace some o f the roots of the professional press’s increasing selfawareness in response to rampant anti-intellectualism among its members; and, using the
ideas of these self-aware journalists as a guide, it begins to trace the outline of an
intellectual history o f the 1970s.

Themes and theses of the dissertation
This dissertation advances four main arguments regarding (MORE) and the
national and journalistic cultures in which it operated:

1. (MORE) changed the nature of press criticism, and began its diffusion into
the culture.
The critical culture o f the late 1960s and early 1970s and the journalistic ethics
movement blossomed in such a way that the American press was ready for a
journalism review such as (MORE). The increasing education level o f reporters
and the events o f the 1960s fueled the questioning of authority in newsrooms and
the open expression o f dissent. (MORE) grew out o f a small but energetic
tradition o f press criticism, but it achieved a greater influence within the culture of
journalism than its predecessors did, shaping the press in subtle but significant
ways. The progress that (MORE) made spurred changes in the culture o f criticism

that would develop in the decades after (MORE), influencing criticism of the
press and other media by professionals and the public into the present.

(MORE) changed the way journalists thought about themselves and their
profession.
(MORE) reflects a change in attitude prevalent in the American press during the
1970s, which was not previously expressed in the self-aware and self-mocking
way that (MORE) expressed it. In this period, a sizable cohort o f reporters began
calling for a tradition of intellectual inquiry and self-examination that could
replace the anti-intellectualism they saw as inherent in a blind pursuit of
objectivity and a bland institutional voice in news writing. While the press, like
all social institutions, is in a state o f constant change, the 1970s do represent a
time of particularly notable change within the ethics and practices of the
profession, and (MORE) influenced that change, while also forming a community
for likeminded journalists to meet and discuss their ideas for the development of
the profession.

(MORE) influenced the way the organized press practiced its trade at a time
when the industry was reshaping itself.
(MORE) was instrumental in facilitating the American press’s conversation about
itself and its relationship to the culture at large in the 1970s. For the most part,
that conversation centered on questions o f the press and its relationship to
institutions— both those that it covered and those that produced and published the
journalism itself. The movements that had sprung up in the 1960s exposed
problems with racism, sexism and elitism that the press itself was not immune to.

And while (MORE) never pitched itself as a counter-cultural publication—mostly
owing to the institutional associations that most o f its writers held or had held— it
did forge a place for itself as both counter to and part o f the institutions o f the
American press, critiquing those institutions and attempting to spur them toward
better news coverage, and countering their more excessive focus on professional
conformity as an expression o f power over their reporters. In the 1970s, powerful
institutions of journalism began a transition from being influential but
independent to being corporate conglomerates. The press became the media. But
as that move occurred, (MORE) helped to carve out a place for a more
independent vision o f journalism within those consolidated media corporations.

(MORE) reflects broader changes in society in the 1970s.
Finally, this dissertation posits that studying (MORE) allows a historian to begin
to sketch an intellectual history o f the 1970s, which has mostly been absent from
the scholarly literature. While it is admittedly a narrow lens with which to view a
decade, (MORE) serves as a record o f the ideas o f some o f the most important
journalists who chronicled the decade, and the intellectual history o f the press can
establish an outline of the broader intellectual history o f the culture. The
chronological 1970s have often been subsumed into the two more easily
categorizable decades that surround them, with a “long 1960s” running from the
assassination o f John F. Kennedy to the resignation o f Richard Nixon, and a “long
1980s” that often picks up with the rise in cultural conservatism that led to Ronald
Reagan’s election. However, the 1970s, roughly congruent with the publication of

10

(MORE), brought on a period when the broader culture co-opted social liberalism
while turning, simultaneously, toward economic conservatism.
This dissertation tells the story of (MORE) in six chapters, arranged more or less
chronologically, each addressing some of the major, intertwining themes that run through
(M ORE)’s history, and placing them against the backdrop o f the transition from the
1960s into the 1980s, putting (MORE) in the context o f the history and functions o f press
criticism, and examining how the journal reflects the changing professional standards of
journalists and their rebellion against the anti-intellectualism endemic in the press.
Peter Richardson, in introducing the story of (MORE)’s contemporary, the
muckraking Ramparts magazine, said that writing about a magazine is like telling the
story o f a rock band. There is an institutional identity, but as individual personalities
leave and enter the magazine, that identity changes in subtle or significant ways.14 As
much as possible I try to follow that model in this dissertation, also drawing from the
ideas of Fred Turner, who shows how the individuals who were involved with The Whole
Earth Catalog operated as a network, more than as a monolithic institution.15
The rest of this introduction summarizes the six chapters that follow.

14 Peter Richardson, A Bomb in Every Issue: How the Short, Unruly Life o f Ramparts
M agazine Changed America (New York: New Press, 2010).
15 Fred Turner, From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth
Network, and the Rise o f Digital Utopianism (Chicago: University of Chicago, 2006).

11

Chapter 1: From The Kingdom and the Power to The Powers That Be: The Culture of
Professionalism in American Journalism through the 1970s and Journalistic Press
Criticism in the United States
The first chapter of this dissertation lays out the primary themes and begins to
build the main arguments o f the dissertation. The historiography builds on works
covering the history and theory o f press criticism, beginning with works covering the
nascent press criticism o f the 1 9 ^ century, followed by some of the canonical works of
press criticism of the early 2 0 ^ century, such as books by Will Irwin, Upton Sinclair,
George Seldes and H.L. Mencken. The chapter also surveys mid-century work by
perhaps the most famous American press critic, A. J. Liebling, who was a direct
inspiration to the founders o f (MORE). A few scholarly works also deal with the history
and theory o f press criticism, including a few books, a dissertation and several academic
articles. I place (MORE) in the context of these predecessors and contemporaries and,
having established a taxonomy o f press criticism based on this survey, I distinguish
(MORE) from them and explain its importance in that lineage as a journalism review
written primarily by working journalists.
The first chapter also sets up the culture of professionalism that had developed in
the American press up to the beginning o f the 1970s, since (MORE) is a direct reflection
o f that culture and a reaction to it as well. Michael Schudson identified a “critical culture”
in journalism at about the time of (MORE)’s founding, and this historiography builds on
that idea to explain some of the tensions that caused a new breed o f educated young
journalists to feel constrained by old newsroom norms. This chapter connects the rise of
alternative media, the changing demographics o f mainstream newsrooms and broader

12

changes in the culture o f the 1960s to explain these changes and set the stage for the
founding of (MORE) in 1971 by the frustrated working journalists who picked up on the
traditions o f journalistic press criticism in creating their magazine.

Chapter 2: Newsroom Cabals, Barnyard Epithets and a Ringing Declaration of
Purpose: (MORE) magazine from its founding in 1971 to the end of 1973
Chapter two takes up the story of the founding of (MORE) itself, beginning by
bringing together the three co-founders who invented, edited and financed the magazine
in its first incarnation. J. Anthony Lukas, a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter for The New
York Times, had begun to chafe under the constraints of the newsroom’s bland
institutional style and its insistence on objectivity. This came to a head when Lukas was
in Chicago, covering the federal trial o f several radical activists who were accused of
conspiracy to incite riots in connection with the 1968 Democratic Convention. As far as
(MORE) is concerned, Lukas had two seminal experiences in Chicago. First, he began to
argue with his editors when he realized that the trial was a political show trial, and the
Times editors wouldn’t let him state that conclusion in the paper.16 Secondly, he met the
editors o f the Chicago Journalism Review, to that date the most influential of a group of
regional journalism reviews that had been started in various places around the country.
Unlike the staid and quasi-academic Columbia Journalism Review, the Chicago review
was written by working reporters around Chicago, and took a political stand against the
editorial staffs that employed them. Lukas was inspired by The Chicago Journalism
Review, and when he returned to New York, he told his friend and former Baltimore Sun

16 Lukas, Barnyard Epithet.

13

colleague Dick Poliak that Poliak should become the editor o f a new journalism review.17
Poliak, who had also edited the media column for Newsweek, agreed, and the two friends
held a series o f meetings to gauge interest in a new publication and to try to obtain some
financing for it. At one meeting, held at the Harvard Club, a young man named Bill (or
“Woody”) Woodward approached them and offered to fund the magazine out o f his own
pocket. Woodward was a reporter at The New York Post, and had been mentioned in a
New York M agazine article about a “cabal” at the Times (and some similar organizing at
the Post), which had also noted Tony Lukas’s participation (and hinted at his leadership
of) the cabal. 18 Woodward had some anti-institutional feelings, but he also had money.
His grandfather had started the Manufacturers Hanover Bank, and Woodward got his job
at the Post in part because his grandmother was friendly with its owner-publisher,
Dorothy S ch iff19 The three founders formed a corporation, Rosebud Associates, and
published a pilot issue. Four months later, in October 1971, the magazine began monthly
publication. The balance o f this chapter examines, through close reading and historical
context, the first year or so of stories that (MORE) published.
Chapter two draws on a variety of sources including bound volumes o f (MORE)
provided by its first editor, Richard Poliak; oral history interviews with surviving editors,
writers and observers o f the magazine; archival documents from the records o f The New
York Times and The New York Post, which are available at the New York Public Library;
an oral history interview with J. Anthony Lukas that was recorded the same month that

17 Richard Poliak, interview with the author, September 8, 2011.
18 Edwin Diamond, “The Cabal at the ‘New York Times’: Which Way to the
Revolution?” New York, May 18, 1970, 42-45.
19 Susan Braudy, This Crazy Thing Called Love: The Golden World and Fatal Marriage
o f Ann and Billy Woodward. (New York: St. M artin’s Paperbacks, 1992).

14

the pilot issue o f (MORE) was released; and a variety o f contemporary press sources that
illuminate the tensions that gave rise to (MORE) and the press culture that (MORE)
critiqued.

Chapter 3: Taking Our Cue From Joe: The A.J. Liebling Counter-Conventions
Make (MORE) a Newsroom Name
Chapter three tells the story of the A.J. Liebling Counter-Conventions, a series of
six national conventions where readers of (MORE) and other like-minded journalists,
students, professors and various assorted hangers-on gathered to discuss the issues that
were percolating in newsrooms across the United States. Much o f what these reporters
wanted to talk about consisted o f the issues that were raised in chapters one and two of
this dissertation, but many o f them had been a topic o f discussion in newsrooms for
decades, and many o f them still are. But three decades before the advent o f social media
or even Jim Romenesko’s media news and gossip blog, reporters had no outlet for
connecting with reporters at other publications beyond gathering at the local reporters’
bar. This was especially difficult for journalists who wanted to find out what their peers
in other cities were talking about. The new class of journalists who were college educated
and saw an ethical calling in their careers were scattered, but the launch o f (MORE) in
1971 began to give them the idea that there were others out there like themselves. And
the first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention, held over two days in June, 1971, brought
them together under one roof for the first time. The magazine was barely a year (and only
ten issues) old when thousands o f journalists, students, professors and hangers-on
gathered at the Martin Luther King Labor Center in New York, but still the convention

15

drew notice in several local and national papers and New York magazine, and was
covered live by WBAI, the Pacifica radio station, and by Manhattan’s newly installed
cable television network.
(MORE) had named the conference for A.J. Liebling, the late New Yorker press
critic, who embodied the spirit of literary and intellectual prodding of the press that
(MORE) admired, and who also espoused a thoroughly anti-publisher take on press
criticism. That stance explained the “Counter” in the name o f the convention. It was held
directly counter to the American Newspaper Publishers Association convention, held at
the distinctly tonier Waldorf-Astoria across town. The first convention featured panels on
“The New Journalism,” on why reporters leave daily papers, on the role o f racism,
sexism and elitism in journalism, and a keynote address by Times writer Tom Wicker,
who called for the introduction o f “an intellectual tradition in journalism,” one that would
encourage journalists to be more self-critical and less accepting o f the institutional
wisdom o f their employers. The climax o f the event itself was the awarding o f the first
“A.J. Liebling Prize” to the independent investigative journalist I.F. Stone, who
exemplified one o f the many strands o f journalism—the hard-nosed watchdog, in this
case—that (MORE) advocated a return to. Liebling’s widow, Jean Stafford Liebling, was
on hand to award the prize and lend legitimacy to the use o f Liebling’s name. Even this
atmosphere o f being “counter” to the institutional press w asn’t enough for many
attendees, and the activist Abbie Hoffman and several others pushed their way onto
convention panels in order to get their voices heard. This illustrates the difficult balance
that conference organizers and even (MORE)’s editors had to keep in order to negotiate a
path between being critical and being radical.

16

Perhaps more importantly though, the conference brought together those
disaffected reporters who were not nationally known— not the Halberstams or the
Lukases or the Wolfes— and who wanted to connect to each other and, in some cases,
even begin to take organized action to change the way their newsrooms operated. The
participants organized two late-night meetings and organized a committee to address
issues o f concern before the second Liebling convention. Izzy Stone even dropped in to
one o f the late-night sessions.

20

The woman who reported that tidbit about Stone in the

Philadelphia Journalism Review wrote her piece because she found the atmosphere at the
Liebling Convention liberating. But the reaction of her full-time employer, the
Philadelphia Inquirer, also demonstrated that news organizations feared the power of
organized reporters. Shortly after publishing her piece on the convention, she was fired.
And she was not the only conference-goer to meet that fate. 21
(MORE) held a second Liebling Convention in Washington, D.C. in 1973, just as
Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward’s reporting on Watergate was becoming a sensation
among reporters. They returned to New York the following year and for two more years,
with the final convention coming a little later in the year than the others, in November,
1976. In 1975, to include more West Coast media, they also convened a conference in
San Francisco, where the convention met with even more resistance to its “straight”
approach to media criticism. Eventually, the (MORE) conventions, like the magazine
itself, did become more mainstream. Even by the third convention, having a newspaper
writer for a keynote speaker seemed passe, and someone like Tom Wicker was

20

Patricia McBroom, “Seeds o f Revolution,” Philadelphia Journalism Review, June
1972, 3-4.
21 “The Counter-Convention (conf d),” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1972, 21.

17

superseded by the comedian and film director Woody Allen. The conventions became a
place where young reporters could come to gawk at celebrities, a phenomenon that the
socialist former Wall Street Journal reporter Kent MacDougall called “starfucks.” 22
Chapter three also builds on a combination o f primary and secondary sources,
including panel transcripts housed in the New York Public Library; archival recordings of
parts o f two conventions that were made by Pacifica radio stations; contemporary
coverage in mainstream and alternative newspapers, and interviews with participants and
panelists. The journalist Nora Sayre also took extensive notes at the first two
conventions, and those notes are archived with her papers, also at the New York Public
Library.

Chapter 4: The Press Becomes the Media, and a Journalism Review Becomes a
Media Magazine
The A. J. Liebling Counter-Convention solidified the national reputation of
(MORE), and over the next few years, the journalism review had its greatest period of
stability. Several staff changes marked the period. Tony Lukas was still a guiding force
for the magazine, but he increasingly spent his time working on book and magazine
writing projects. Woody Woodward also began to spend less time at the magazine—not
that he spent much even at the beginning. But he sent in some business managers to try to
get the publication on solid financial footing, a series o f repeated attempts that never
really succeeded. Woodward kept supporting publication with checks from his own
fortune. The original designer o f the magazine, Sam Antupit, also left, and was replaced

22

Interview with the author, August 8, 2012.

18

by a young designer named Malcolm Frouman, who tightened up the journal’s look,
making it slightly more machine-made, a little bit less handmade, though it retained its
newsprint aesthetic and still relied heavily on commissioned cartoons, particularly on
work by Marty Norman, who also designed an iconic poster for one of the Liebling
conventions, depicting a 1930s reporter in suspenders and fedora saying “Hello
sweetheart, get me rewrite.”
More significantly, the magazine hired two editors in this period who shaped the
editorial content of (MORE). One was a new assistant editor named Claudia Cohen, who
had recently graduated from the University o f Pennsylvania and had been the first woman
to edit the Daily Pennsylvanian student newspaper there. Cohen became very close to
Dick Poliak, who mentored his new assistant editor. Cohen, who would later become a
well-known gossip columnist and television personality, brought her interest in high
society and in the personalities o f the people working in media companies. She would
also become an important bridge to a later era o f the magazine, when it was sold to new
owners. (MORE) also brought on its first Washington editor, a young reporter named Brit
Hume, who had most recently been one o f the reporting assistants to Jack Anderson, the
syndicated columnist and investigative reporter. Hume too would go on to a long career
in television.
The three founders o f Rosebud Associates were never able to find a way to make
(MORE) stable financially. They and their business managers blamed a combination of
reasons: journalists were not a cohesive group to sell advertising to; the circulation never
got high enough; they should have been pursuing foundation support more actively.
Woody Woodward no longer wanted to support the magazine out o f his own pocket.

19

Dick Poliak said that the amount o f time that he was devoting to the magazine had aided
in tearing apart his marriage, and his wife said that she would not contest giving Poliak
full joint custody o f their daughter if he were able to promise that he would have a more
“normal” life.

23

So Rosebud Associates reluctantly sold the magazine (Lukas was in

favor of letting it die rather than see it go into the wrong hands) in the summer o f 1976.
The magazine took a one-month hiatus and returned with a late summer double
issue in a totally new format under the guidance o f its new editor/publisher Michael
Kramer, a young writer who had left Clay Felker’s New York Magazine to take over
(MORE). The new issues were no longer printed on cheap newsprint, but rather on glossy
paper. They were glued at the spine instead o f being stapled. They ran to 50 or 60 pages
each month instead of the old magazine’s 20 or 24 pages. In short, it looked more like a
glossy newsstand magazine. Kramer borrowed New York's graphic designer (and the
designer o f the iconic “I ‘heart’ NY” poster) Milton Glaser to lead the redesign. The logo
also got reworked. The squared parentheses o f the old logo, which harked back to vague
nostalgic days o f print journalism, were gone, as was the tagline “A Journalism Review.”
Instead, M ore had become “The Media Magazine.” It was an important change in
direction, as the new young editor tried to broaden the appeal of the magazine and
increase its circulation.
M ore was a different magazine after the original triumvirate sold it. In addition to
its press criticism, the magazine had regular features on advertising, movies and
television, even outside o f the realm of news. There was more photography. And while
some staff members (Claudia Cohen, notably) remained, the tone o f the magazine tilted

23

Interview with the author, September 8, 2011.

20

more toward awe at the media and the personalities who ran the media companies. On the
whole, the magazine shifted from an early 1970s anti-establishment publication with one
foot in the late 1960s and a real interest in sticking it to the “powers that be” (to use the
phrase frequent (MORE) contributor David Halberstam used for his book on the news
media) to one that felt more slick and corporate— and almost conservative— in a way that
seemed to presage the coming 1980s.This is not to say that M ore ever became politically
conservative— it did run a piece by the young Christopher Hitchens—but it became more
a part o f the establishment in the Michael Kramer era than it ever did under Poliak and
Lukas.
M ore did occasionally continue to piss off the media establishment. In the winter
o f 1976-1977, the Australian-English press baron Rupert Murdoch made a splash by
purchasing Woody Woodward’s former employer, the liberal evening newspaper The
New York Post from Woodward’s mother’s friend Dorothy Schiff M ore was certainly
not the first press outlet to break this story, but it did play a small but significant role.
When Murdoch bought the Post, Clay Felker, editor of New York, and Michael Kramer’s
mentor, commissioned a deeply critical profile o f Murdoch to run in the magazine. But
before it could run, Murdoch bought New York too, and killed the story. Through his
connection to Felker, Kramer got hold o f the profile and ran it, splashing across the cover
o f M ore the accompanying David Levine illustration of Murdoch as a killer bee invading
New York.
The Murdoch incident shows that M ore had the potential to become something
just as worthy as its previous incarnation, but with a little bit more popular sizzle, and
less satire and long-winded critical commentary. But just as Rosebud associates

21

discovered, M ore would not be beloved by a mass audience, and could barely even make
inroads in impressing the media companies that the magazine covered. (Kramer wrote to
Times managing editor Abe Rosenthal in 1976, asking for his increased participation, and
Rosenthal replied that M ore still reflected “the psychic problems and nastiness o f some of
the people who used to put out More and are now still involved with it.”24 Like Poliak,
Lukas and Woodward before him, Kramer eventually decided that he had to sell, this
time to a publisher named James B. Adler, who had made his money as the founder o f the
Congressional Information Service in Washington, D.C. A young writer named Robert
Friedman took over as editor, and under the guidance o f Poliak and Lukas attempted to
honor the magazine’s roots while continuing the new format. But the Adler/Friedman era
was even shorter than the Kramer era. Adler tried to run M ore from Washington, and a
few months after purchasing it by assuming the liability for its debts, Adler became ill
and sold the magazine one last time. Adler looked for a suitable publisher, and Poliak and
Lukas advocated on the magazine’s behalf, even years after they had first sold it. But in
the end, Adler sold M ore’s subscription list to the Columbia Journalism Review, the staid
competitor with institutional and foundation support. In the end, M ore was a victim o f the
decline in interest in the radical politics that inspired it even if (MORE) never quite
reached the level o f radicalism. Michael Schudson made that diagnosis about the other
journalism reviews o f the movement when he published Discovering the News, but he

24 Letter from Abe Rosenthal to Michael Kramer, October 6, 1976. New York Public
Library, New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929
Box 87, Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.

22

said that “M ore is read widely.”

25

That situation would not last through the end o f the

year.
Chapter five builds on a close reading of the second half o f the Rosebud era as
well as the Kramer/Adler-era issues o f M ore combined with oral history interviews and a
few archival documents found in the archives, mostly o f The New York Times.

Chapter 5: The Loyal Opposition: (MORE) and The Times
From the very beginning, (MORE) saw itself in large part as a nemesis to a single
publication. I use this chapter as way of examining the negotiated role the journalism
review carved for itself as a gadfly to the watchdogs. Primarily, I will examine the
review’s relationship with its chief nemesis, The New York Times. The very first issue of
(MORE) dealt at length with an essay by the Washington insider and future U.S. senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan. (MORE)’s response essay, written by Stuart Loory, mostly
picked apart Moynihan’s argument that the press should be more deferential to executive
power. But an editorial tucked in at the end o f the short pieces (MORE) gathered under
the heading “Hellbox,” noted that Moynihan had made one suggestion for the press that
the editors o f (MORE) agreed with: publications should run corrections in a regular, fixed
spot. Before 1973, very few if any publications ran corrections regularly; instead, they
were haphazard and often handled differently by different parts o f the publication.
(MORE) took up Moynihan’s challenge, saying that it would publish corrections, when
needed, in the same Hellbox spot in every issue thereafter. And Poliak challenged other
publications, including the Times, to do the same. While the Times did not immediately

25 Schudson, 189.

23

jum p on (MORE)’s suggestion, within a year or so, the paper did regularize its
corrections policy and begin publishing them daily on the second front page o f the paper.
Poliak claims this as a victory for (MORE) but the full story is more nuanced and speaks
to relationship that (MORE) had with an establishment paper such as the Times. The idea
for publishing corrections in one consistent place had been around for at least a couple of
years, and was a part o f a general trend toward press ethics and accountability. But the
Times, and especially its managing editor, Abe Rosenthal, regarded (MORE) as a
frivolous and juvenile, and while he was certainly aware o f both the Moynihan essay and
(MORE), he didn’t act until the more mature and responsible (in his view) Columbia
Journalism Review made a similar suggestion.
(MORE) constantly had to negotiate between being a magazine staffed by former
journalists for mainstream publications and one that appealed to a more radical element
that wanted to tear down the established system. (MORE) was consistently somewhere in
between. Its editorial stance was that it wanted to improve the existing media system,
rather than tear it down and start over—though it was certainly always more radical than
The Columbia Journalism Review. And never afraid to piss off a powerful institution.
In 1968, the Times hired a Yale University professor o f organizational behavior to
consult on the Times'?, editorial management structure. Chris Argyris studied the paper
for several years, getting access to the publisher and all o f the top editors and also
running a management retreat for them. As part o f his agreement with the paper, he
would be allowed to write a book about it, with the name o f the paper and all o f its staff

24

members obscured.26 Argyris, who had moved to Harvard by the time the book was
published, negotiated at length with the Times, who felt that no amount o f name changing
could sufficiently obfuscate the identity o f the paper (Argyris called it The Daily Planet)
or the editors. But the book, Behind the Front Page, was published, to little fanfare, by an
academic press. Then David Rubin, a (MORE) contributor and a professor o f journalism
at New York University, “decoded” the book and published a lengthy excerpt in
(MORE), including a dialogue among editors with their names restored. The Times was
predictably furious.
In focusing on the relationship between the Times and (MORE), this chapter will
use archival materials, particularly from a large trove o f Times papers at the New York
Public Library; oral history interviews; and a close reading o f (MORE) in this period to
analyze the relationship between a press critic and the institutions that the critic works to
improve.

Chapter 6: Gawker, Content, Bloggers, Spy: The Legacy of (MORE)
Chapter six turns toward an examination o f and assessment o f the legacy of
(MORE). Chapter five closely examines the influence that (MORE) had on its primary
targets, but this chapter will address the ways that the journalism review has extended
and facilitated the “critical culture” within the press that had just begun to flower when
(MORE) was founded, in addition to using some o f the models o f press criticism outlined
in chapter one as a way o f assessing the magazine’s impact.

26 Chris Argyris, Behind the Front Page: Organizational Self-Renewal in a Metropolitan
Newspaper (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1974).

25

This chapter addresses several publications that followed in the wake o f (MORE),
including the press criticism o f the pseudonymous “J. J. Hunsecker,” writing in the 1980s
satirical magazine Spy, Steven Brill’s Content, the short-lived media magazine o f the
early 2000s (which read very much like late-eraM ore); and the snarky media website
Gawker. I also examine the influence (MORE) had on non-joumalistic press criticism
such as media watchdog organizations and even on the satirical commentary o f Jon
Stewart and Stephen Colbert. The chapter will also look at efforts by some o f the writers
involved in (MORE) to resurrect a journal o f press criticism o f their own, and at work
that those writers and others have done as independent press critics or regular columnists
writing about the press.
Most importantly though, the chapter looks at the influence of (MORE) on the
online ecosystem of press criticism that has developed since the advent o f social media
platforms, allowing people who think critically about the operations of the press in the
United States—journalists, students, academics, politicians, and even just interested
observers—to share their ideas in real time, in a way that (MORE) could only begin to do
with its monthly publication schedule and its yearly conference. In a way, the community
o f press criticism on social media including Twitter and Facebook can be seen as a
constant Liebling Convention. (MORE) admittedly did not have more than a glancing
effect on the culture at large, but this final chapter also examines how the cultural
changes that (MORE) mirrored manifested in a broader context.

26

Chapter 1: From The Kingdom and the Power to The Powers That Be: The Culture
of Professionalism in American Journalism through the 1970s and Journalistic
Press Criticism in the United States
The journalism review (MORE) was published in an era bookended by two large
and influential works of journalism about journalism: Gay Talese’s The Kingdom and the
Power and David Halberstam’s The Powers That Be. Talese’s book portrayed his former
employer, The New York Times, as a place that was a much less monolithic institution on
the inside than it probably seemed to outsiders. 21 The book, published in 1969, was a new
animal, in that it was an eye opener to a reading public that hadn’t necessarily given
much thought to how the news was produced, or to the idea that there could be any
dissenters from the selections that editors and writers made for the newspaper. Perhaps
they hadn’t even thought about the fact that editors made choices. The news was the
news. But The Kingdom and the Power became Talese’s first best-seller, and an era of
increased public discussion and scrutiny o f the press had begun.
(MORE) contributor David Halberstam published his own book about the news
media, The Powers That Be, in 1979, the year after the journalism review ceased
publication. It’s a colossus of a book, more than 700 pages long, and according to the
jacket copy, seven years in the making (almost exactly the period o f (M ORE)’s
existence).

28

The Powers That Be examines four media giants: CBS, Time, The Los

Angeles Times and The Washington Post—four of the most powerful news organizations
in the country in the late 1970s— and tells the story of the powerful people behind those
institutions and their interactions with the government and corporate interests. The end of

21

Gay Talese, The Kingdom and the Power (New York: Random House, 2007).
28 David Halberstam, The Powers That Be (New York: Knopf, 1979).

27

the 1970s was a time when late 1960s distrust o f institutions began to segue into the
1980s, a time when they were more widely celebrated and less widely questioned.
These two books fit neatly in chronology just before the launch of (MORE) and
just after its demise, and both were written by men who had ties to the review
(Halberstam was a close friend and colleague of founder Tony Lukas and Talese was a
headliner at the first A. J. Liebling Counter-Convention). But their timing was not just
coincidental. The books serve as a convenient shorthand for the changes that roiled the
organized press and the broader public in the 1970s, a complex, dynamic and unstable
decade often characterized as a mere transition from the 1960s to the 1980s, both of
which have better established identities as decades.
The Kingdom and the Power appeared at a time when distrust o f public
institutions was beginning to hit an apogee. Distrust o f media and government grew
throughout the sixties as the public began to realize the scope of the deception that had
brought the country into the Vietnam war and the complicity o f the press in furthering
that deception. The demonstrations and the violent police response surrounding the 1968
Democratic Convention in Chicago made many people realize that the mainstream news
media were slow to recognize new political developments, and often minimized,
delegitimized or moderated them once it did pick up on those movements, as Todd Gitlin
a sociologist and media scholar who participated in some o f those political movements as
a young man, argues. 29 So by 1969 or so, when Talese’s book about The New York Times
appeared, a public was ready to hear about the dissension within the ranks o f media
institutions. But by the end of the seventies, the public again seemed eager for strong

29

Todd Gitlin, The Whole World is Watching (Berkeley: University o f California Press,
2003).

28

institutions that had answers and promoted a strong, unified and more conservative
country. A decade of malaise and anti-institutional attitudes had worn off, especially as
society began to rediscover the idea o f the market, both economically, and really for the
first time, even in the realm of ideas and in the academy.30
The transition from the 1960s to the 1980s in journalism marked a change in the
way that journalists thought about themselves. Talese had left the Times in 1965, and
made a name for him self as a magazine and book author. He was often associated with
the “New Journalists,” including the movement’s evangelist, Tom Wolfe,31 and others
who attempted to elevate the style of journalism in the late sixties and early seventies.
But also tied into the New Journalism was both an implicit (and sometimes explicit)
critique o f objectivity, which some o f them saw as limiting the potential for a new kind of
journalistic truth. During this period, journalists became more self-aware and self-critical
generally, and made the strongest argument yet that the editorial functions of news
making were the essential element in the publication o f a newspaper or the production of
a television news show— and that objectivity as a professional ideal was actually being
used as a form of control by editors and publishers who were their employers. The news
gatherers, writers and editors asserted themselves as more important than the
publishers— a view that they had likely always held, but one for which they were able to
articulate a coherent and compelling argument. Reporters thrust themselves into the
intellectual life o f the United States in the seventies, making inroads against perceptions
that the norms o f the professional press made journalism, counter-intuitively, an anti­
intellectual profession.

30 Daniel T. Rodgers, Age o f Fracture (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap, 2011).
31 Tom Wolfe: The New Journalism. (New York: Harper & Row, 1973).

29

This renewed sense o f intellectualism in American journalism manifested itself in
the critical culture of 1970s newsrooms and in journalism reviews such as (MORE). For
this reason, a study o f (MORE) illuminates not only the mores of journalists in the
period, but also serves as a great starting point for an intellectual history o f the seventies.
While the ideas of academics, essayists and public intellectuals are important, many more
people engage with the popular press in forming their ideas. And (MORE) was the forum
in which the best journalists o f the 1970s engaged with each other’s ideas.
At the same time, the 1970s were the beginning o f the period that press critic Jack
Shafer suggests are the closest thing to a “golden age” o f American newspapers, by
which he means not the quality o f the product so much as the stability of their income:
“from about 1970 to 2005... consolidation o f titles gave the surviving papers near
monopoly power over mass market advertising in their markets.”3 2 David Halberstam’s
The Powers That Be serves as a sort of capstone to this period, having been published in
1979, and researched over the course of the tumultuous period that resulted in their rise.
Halberstam had come to prominence as a questioner o f institutional authority, attempting
to discover whether or not the narrative about the Vietnam War that government officials
had been feeding him and other reporters was true. O f course he did this for one of the
biggest institutions o f the press in the mid-1960s, The New York Times. Halberstam
eventually felt constrained by that institution as well, and turned to books and magazines,
just as his friend Tony Lukas had and as Gay Talese had before him. Both Halberstam
and Talese were accused of painting unfair portraits of their subjects and even of just

Jack Shafer, “Move over Bezos, ESPN can do news better than you,” Reuters.com.
http://blogs.reuters.com/jackshafer/2013/10/23/move-over-bezos-espn-can-do-newsbetter-than-you/ Published October 23, 2013. Accessed October 24, 2013.

30

getting their facts plain wrong, but the portraits have endured, and their combined
thesis—these institutions of the press held immense power in shaping public thought—
have endured, even if they are not rock solid works o f academic history. That The
Kingdom and the Power and The Powers That Be both include the word “power” in their
titles is no coincidence. Nor are their Biblical resonances. By the end o f the 1970s,
Americans had learned that the “voice o f God” tone of their journalism was
manufactured by human beings, but they had also learned that the earthly kingdoms that
controlled the media were no less powerful.
As (MORE) began publication in 1971, the profession o f journalism was
changing; the culture at large was changing; and the business of newspapers, magazines
and broadcast news was also about to be remade. Journalists questioned the professional
norm of objectivity with new vehemence and fought with publishers for control o f the
work they did. (MORE) chronicled these changes and played a role in them as well, but
in order to understand (MORE)’s place in this ecosystem, an understanding of the
ecosystem is necessary. This chapter addresses that ecosystem: the unquestioning
professional objectivity o f the rank and file reporter; the history o f press criticism; the
change from a professional press to a corporate media system; and overarching changes
in society that accompanied all o f this.

Objectivity, professionalism, anti-intellectualism and corporate journalism’s
complicity with power
(MORE) represents an important development in the self-regard of journalists as a
professional group— or at least as a group pursuing similar goals and sharing norms. Prior

31

to the rise of the large city newspaper beginning in the 1830s, there was no real concept
o f the job o f a reporter. Newspapers were usually small operations published as side
projects by printers or financed by political parties. Those who were wealthy enough to
publish newspapers did enjoy autonomy, but ever since those publishers began hiring
writers to work for them, those employees functioned without any real way of expressing
their own opinions, for the most part. This was especially true as newspapers began to
standardize their “voice” and adopt the posture o f objectivity, largely in an effort to avoid
losing advertisers or subscribers. Objectivity has roots in the positivist tradition, and may
originally have been meant to function somewhat as a scientific method for journalists.
But by the 1970s, that meaning had been lost, and it had come to mean something more
like “balance” or even a bland disinterestedness that many reporters felt stifled them and
denied them their independent voices.
The advent o f underground and alternative newspapers, as well as independent
newsletters such as I.F. Stone’s Weekly, allowed j oumalists to be truly independent for
the first time since the rise o f mass circulation newspapers in the 1 9 ^ Century. Also, the
reporters’ power movement (also known as the democracy in the newsroom movement)
gave journalists hope that they could have a voice in running larger newsrooms when
they weren’t able to start their own publications—though the movement, inspired by
reporters’ strikes in Europe was mostly ineffective, and petered out by the end of the
seventies.33 (MORE) gave these independent (and independent-minded) journalists a way

33 Ron Dorfman, “Truth, Justice and the American W ay,” Revue Frangaise d ’E tudes
Americaines 3 (October 1978): 183-191; “The Journalists’ Movement,” Columbia
Journalism Review (July 1973): 5.

32

to see themselves as a united force across publications, and solidified quasi-professional
standards that transcended the industry of journalism.
But in addition to aiding the social status of journalists, professionalization was a
boon to publishers, who could see the development of professional standards and a single
“voice” for journalists as a way of getting their staffs to fall in line. Also, the key
professional ideal that journalists coalesced around—the ideal o f objectivity— could also
be seen as a way o f masking a complicity with power.
By the 1890s, the basic structure o f a news story had been standardized, though
historians differ on the reasons for the development o f the “hard news” form, often
referred to as the “inverted pyramid.”34 In inverted pyramid news writing, a lead sentence
conveys the main news item quickly and clearly, and details about the event proceed
from that lead in order o f importance. The form possibly grew out o f the stilted, concise
language of telegraph communications beginning in the 1860s, or its adoption allowed
various news organizations to use the same material from the Associated Press news
wires. Publishers and editors controlled journalists’ writing in order to ease the work of
their superiors or to appeal to the widest possible audience. William S. Solomon argued

34 Michael Emery, Edwin Emery, & Nancy L. Roberts. The Press and America: An
Interpretive H istory o f the M ass Media, 9th ed. (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2000).; Frank
Luther Mott, American Journalism, 3rd ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1962).; Horst Pottker,
“News and its Communicative Quality: The Inverted Pyramid— When and Why Did it
Appear? . Journalism Studies, 4:4, 2003, 501-511.; Marianne Salcetti, “The Emergence
o f the Reporter: Mechanization and the Devaluation of Editorial Workers,” In Hanno
Hardt & Bonnie Brennen (Eds.), News Workers: Toward a History o f the Rank and File
(Minneapolis: University o f Minnesota Press, 1995), 48-74; Paul Starr, The Creation o f
theM edia: Political Origins o f Modern Communications (New York: Basic Books,
2004); Mitchell Stephens, A History o f News (Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace, 1997).

33

that “In size, visibility, and influence, the newspapers that became dominant were those
that catered to advertisers and treated news as a commodity.”35
Sometime in the first half o f the 2 0 ^ Century however, the inverted pyramid and
objectivity gained a rationale that elevated them to the status o f professional practice
rather than production convenience or editorial imposition. Reporters began a march
toward professionalism, which would secure them middle class stability, and as a
consequence of this professionalization, the journalists internalized the idea of
objectivity, and what had been an external requirement became internalized. It became
the best practice. In other words, as employee reporters began to assert themselves as
professionals, the objectivity ideal was co-opted as their own, and many reporters would
fail to see why it was an ideal that was in the best interest o f their publications, not
necessarily in their own.
But objectivity also allowed editors and writers the comforting illusion of
independence, and in many ways journalists convinced themselves that the noble ideals
o f objectivity served their own purposes, when in reality, this ideal allowed publishers to
exert a kind of unquestioned control over editorial content. Objectivity ensured that
newspapers would never be too inflammatory for readers or advertisers. These same
concerns would resurface in the 1970s, when (MORE) was published. However, the
concern in the later period was more with corporatized editors than it was with the
publishers— or at least it extended the concern to the editorial hierarchy.

35 William S. Solomon, “The Site of Newsroom Labor: The Division o f Editorial
Practices. In Hanno Hardt & Bonnie Brennen (Eds.), News Workers: Toward a History o f
the Rank and File (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995), 116.

34

George Seldes observed: “The reporter throughout our history has been the
lowliest o f animals. Believing him self to be too good to join in any organization or
movement, he has found him self exploited by everyone.”36 According to Marianne
Salcetti, newspaper reporters in the 2 0 ^ century were more educated than those who had
come before them, but they were entering a more mechanized workplace, and in the
division of labor, their work was devalued and considered replaceable. Their stories were
subsumed into the larger “voice” o f the newspaper, which was seen by the management
classes as being more important than the voice o f the individual journalist.37 Meanwhile,
according to William Solomon, a new class of editors separated the publishers from the
reporters and functioned as a sort of middle management, further distancing individual
reporters from any hope of true autonomy.

38

This was certainly true o f reporters such as J.

Anthony Lukas, who chafed under the leadership of New York Times managing editor
A.M. Rosenthal, leading in part to Lukas’s idea to found (MORE). Rosenthal had been
venerated as a reporter—by other reporters—before he became an editor and alienated
many o f his former newsroom colleagues.
For Richard Hofstadter and for Robert H. Wiebe the social function o f journalists
was a key part o f the Progressive movement, the political idea that an active,
participatory democracy with a strong basis in scientific rationality could overcome the
evils o f an industrialized, urban society. The professions could create and secure a middle
class and insulate against the corrupting influence o f capital through their ethical codes.
Through the research component o f the professional schools, the professions also
36 George Seldes, Lords o f the Press, (New York: Julian Messner, 1938).
37 Marianne Salcetti, “The Emergence o f the Reporter: Mechanization and the
Devaluation o f Editorial Workers.”
38 William S. Solomon, “The Site of Newsroom Labor.”

35

connected themselves to the new social sciences, which were become established in the
universities at about the same time.39 The scientific rationality o f medicine or engineering
could thus be applied to pedagogy, social work, psychology, or even to journalism.
For Hofstadter, journalists were central to the Progressive project. He goes so far
as to say, in fact, that “ [i]t is hardly an exaggeration to say that the Progressive mind was
characteristically a journalistic mind, and that its characteristic contribution was that of
the socially responsible reporter-reformer.”40 But the journalists Hofstadter is referring
to—the group known as the muckrakers—were primarily magazine writers. And in
magazines, reporters were given more freedom to develop their unique voices or to
express their occasionally radical political views. The reformers mostly went to the
magazines, and those reporters who sought steady jobs went into newspapers, where they
could hope to achieve a comfortable middle class existence at the expense o f some level
o f autonomy.
Though the valorization of rationality was a boon to those who view journalism as
a kind of populist social science and contributed to the solidifying of the objectivity norm
in journalism, the concomitant standardization has always been an ill fit for journalism,
which, in the U.S. system cannot be a limited-entry profession in the way that medicine
or law or even teaching could require a standardized education or licensing. Not all
people who practice journalism see themselves as professionals, and so those who
worked for newspapers were the main proponents o f professionalism. Those who worked
to effect social change were often outside the newspaper industry, as the muckrakers

39 Thomas L. Haskell, The Emergence o f Professional Social Science (Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000).
40 Haskell, 186.

36

were. Also, many of these newspaper journalists were still working-class, not college
educated, and viewed themselves more as craftspeople than as professionals.
Criticisms such as Upton Sinclair’s and those o f the journalist Will Irwin in a
seminal 1911 C ollier’s magazine series on American newspapers reignited public outrage
in the commercialism o f newspapers. Mostly though, technological advances and wide
circulation were seen as a good thing. Birkhead quotes the muckraker Lincoln Steffens,
who had spent the early part o f his career at newspapers before moving to the more
independent world o f magazine journalism:
The idealists, even more than the money-makers, should insist that the good
newspaper be so made that it will pay; since it is not the paper but the readers they are
after and the profits are the proof o f the reading.41
Douglas Birkhead holds that Irwin’s series was a watershed moment in the
understanding o f the commercial press— and it was just that: commercial. Summarizing
Irwin, Birkhead writes that the new institution o f journalism “could not be separated from
its free enterprise orientation, corporate organization, or the capital investment of its
technological base. But its power and intrinsic importance to modem life gave it
prerogatives that extended beyond the boundary of property rights.”42 For Irwin, the
reform o f professional journalism would have to happen within the successful institution
o f commercial newspapers. Birkhead is one o f several scholars o f journalism ’s
professionalism who finds that
[t]he fit o f an occupational ideal o f individual autonomy to an industrial
bureaucracy would not be perfect: journalism would be destined to a perennial

41 Quoted in Douglas Birkhead, “The Power in the Image: Professionalization and the
‘Communications Revolution,9” American Journalism, 1(1984), 7.
42 Birkhead., 10.

37

state o f semi-professionalism, to a faith in a “spirit o f professionalism” rather than
in the exact example o f the established professions.”43
Irwin, as a seminal critic o f the press, foreshadows A. J. Liebling, who was a direct
inspiration for (MORE). And Irwin also foreshadows (MORE) itself in his questioning of
the commercial motivations o f publishers.
The peak o f journalism ’s professionalization movement coincided in the 1920s
with the articulation of the norm of objectivity.44 Bill Kovach and Tom Rosenstiel argue
that the original meaning o f the term was not freedom from bias, but rather one that
“called for journalists to develop a consistent method o f testing information— a
transparent approach to evidence—precisely so that personal and cultural biases would
not undermine the accuracy of their work.”45 Walter Lippmann, similarly, wrote of
journalists: “There is but one kind o f unity possible in a world as diverse as ours. It is a
unity o f method, rather than aim; the unity o f disciplined experiment.”46 Journalists
would gather information and analyze it, but accept any conclusion that the evidence
pointed toward, rather than the conclusion that the journalists preferred. Then these
conclusions would be presented in bland, neutral language, so as not to color these semiscientific conclusions.
O f course, these are broad historical generalizations, and several newspapers did
use a lively writing style to attract readers, instead of striving for disinterested blandness

43 Ibid., 11.
44 Stephen A. Banning, “The Professionalization o f Journalism: A Nineteenth-Century
Beginning,” Journalism History, 24\4, 1998, 157-163; Kovach and Rosenstiel. The
Elements o f Journalism; Schudson, Discovering the News.
45 Kovach and Rosentstiel, p. 72
46 Walter Lippmann, Liberty and the News (New York,: Harcourt, Brace and Howe,
1920).

38

but as Michael Schudson argued, this “story” model was gradually superseded by an
“information model” :
While reporters subscribed concurrently to the ideals of factuality and
entertainment in writing the news, some o f the papers they worked for chose
identities that strongly emphasized one ideal or the other. The World and the
Journal chose to be entertaining; the old penny press, especially the Times after
Adolph Ochs rejuvenated it in 1896, took the path of factuality.47
It is these information model newspapers that survived, with newspapers known
as “writers’ papers” gradually dying out. The World ceased publication as its own paper
in 1931, and its successor as the reigning writers’ paper in New York, the Herald
Tribune, could not survive the 1965 newspaper strike, and went out o f business only a
few years before (MORE) was founded. This left The New York Times as the dominant
newspaper in New York, and indeed the dominant newspaper in the United States. This
was a clear victory for the objective “information model.” As Andrew Porwancher
convincingly argues, since Adolph Ochs, who had bought and remade the Times in the
early 2 0 ^ Century, was the “Prophet of Objectivity,” and the key figure in establishing
objectivity as a professional ideal. Porwancher argues that the choice o f objectivity was
not an altruistic one or one that guided institutional norms. Rather, objectivity was used
to legitimize institutional goals o f increased advertising and circulation.

48

The professional model had become well ingrained by the time sociologist
Herbert Gans wrote his 1979 book on the culture o f newsrooms (published just after the
end o f the (MORE) era), in which he studied two national network television evening
news programs and two news magazines. Throughout the book, Gans refers to journalists

47 Schudson.
48
Andrew Porwancher, “Objectivity’s Prophet: Adolph S. Ochs and the New York Times,
\8 9 6 -\9 3 5 Y Journalism History 36:4 (2011): 186-195.

39

as professionals with almost no explanation. He does, however, touch on the theme of
professional autonomy several times during his work. Interestingly, he adds first-person
observation to the theorizing of earlier academics. Journalists have some autonomy, he
writes, particularly the senior writers who have gained the trust of their editors. He notes
that this autonomy may frequently be “illusory,” since editors find ways o f controlling the
newsroom by means other than threats, and by allowing the individual journalists to feel
as if they have freedom. “Writers are entitled to select their own facts, draw their own
conclusions and come up with their own evaluations, although they may be edited
later.”49 Gans, despite his training as a sociologist, wasn’t working from the history of
professionalism either, and yet he hit on the same point. Objectivity gave publishers and
editors a framework for keeping their writers’ ideas within what Daniel Hallin calls the
“sphere o f legitimate controversy.”50
Over the course o f the 2 0 ^ Century, the professional ideal o f objectivity became
increasingly ingrained in the culture of journalism, and by the time (MORE) was first
published, journalism had become, I will argue, an anti-intellectual practice.

Anti-intellectualism in professional American journalism
Historians o f the U.S. press have expended little effort examining its intellectual
history. And at the same time, intellectual historians often ignore the role o f journalists in
propagating the ideas o f a culture. Journalism is a profession that traditionally has long
had writing as one of its core skills; it often concerns itself with public policy and the free

49 Herbert Gans, Deciding W hat’s News: A Study o f CBS Evening News, NBC Nightly
News, Newsweek, and Time (Evanston, 111.: Northwestern University Press, 2004), 101.
50 Daniel Hallin, The Uncensored War (Berkeley: University o f California, 1989).

40

flow o f information in a democracy; as a subject o f academic study, journalism has built
up a substantial amount o f scholarship; and journalism is taught as a major or minor in
hundreds of colleges and universities in the United States (though college-level
instruction is not, in and o f itself, a guarantee o f an intellectual approach to the subject).
In fact the core processes o f journalism—reporting, critical evaluation o f public events,
and investigation— are inherently intellectual. Because o f these factors and others, one
could easily make the commonsense assumption that journalists, as a group, have adopted
the probing, questing, questioning and self-critical habits o f mind that characterize
intellectuals. Yet despite the near-continual presence o f at least some intellectual
journalism (as much of the so-called “elite” media would likely be called), the organized
members of the U.S. mass media have on the whole been not merely a non-intellectual
group, but rather an a/rft-intellectual group, actively fomenting a press that is populist,
anti-elitist, anti-rational, instrumentalist, and blindly professional, and the doctrine of
objectivity fed this.
Very few academic studies have looked at the history o f anti-intellectualism in the
American press, and not many more have looked at anti-intellectualism in America in
general. Since the institutional press began to form in its present state in the period
between the rise o f the Penny Press and the Yellow Journalism era o f thriving urban
newspapers, several reformers and critics inside and outside o f the working press have
attempted to add an intellectual dimension its standards o f practice, and nearly all of
these attempts have failed, in the long term, to effect much change in the general tenor o f
the press’s intellectual operation. Therefore anti-intellectualism is an integral idea when it
comes to understanding the collective mindset of the institutional press, and also a major

41

part o f what the founders o f (MORE) were rebelling against. While tangible change may
seem to be the most logical way to measure the effect o f a critic o f the press, as asserted
above, a good critic instead influences the ideas o f journalism—the intellectual
atmosphere surrounding and guiding the practice, rather than the practice itself.
Two works, one building upon the other, serve as the historical and theoretical
bases for dealing with the idea o f anti-intellectualism. The first, from which its definition
o f anti-intellectualism is taken, is the classic and seminal work on anti-intellectualism,
Richard Hofstadter’s historically-informed 1963 examination o f the phenomenon, Antiintellectualism in American Life. This book defines intellect, which Hofstadter contrasts
with simple intelligence. For Hofstadter, intelligence is simple “excellence o f mind,”
which “works within the framework of limited but clearly stated goals.. ..”51 For
Hofstadter,
Intellect... is the critical, creative, and contemplative side o f mind. Whereas
intelligence seeks to grasp, manipulate, re-order, adjust, intellect examines,
ponders, wonders, theorizes, criticizes, imagines. Intelligence will seize the
immediate meaning in a situation and evaluate it. Intellect evaluates evaluations,
and looks for the meanings o f situations as a whole. 52

In Hofstadter’s definition, a great many intelligent people are not intellectuals, and being
an intellectual, conversely, does not guarantee intelligence. A great surgeon or attorney
might be very intelligent, and indeed that might be all a client would want. An intelligent
surgeon would be well versed in the best practices o f the day, and be able to understand
and execute them. But an intellectual would be questioning those practices, looking for a
better way. A patient might not want an intellectual surgeon, since that surgeon might be

51 Richard Hofstadter, Anti-intellectualism in American Life (New York: Vintage, 1963).
52 Hofstadter, 25.

42

prone to experimentation. On the other hand, the intellectuals in a profession are the ones
who push it forward. In medicine, that would be the researchers who do experiment and
who find the next great procedure or even a cure. Journalists might be asking questions of
their sources all the time, but that is just a part o f their job. I argue that they do not have
as strong a tradition o f questioning their own practices, accepting ideas such as
objectivity as unquestionable truths.
The bulk of Hofstadter’s book examines the several strains of intellectualism,
from its roots, as Hofstadter identifies them, in early American evangelicalism, to his
direct incitement to write the book, the McCarthyite anti-Communism o f the 1940s and
1950s (an anti-intellectual atmosphere that A.J. Liebling directly deals with in his
Wayward Press writings).
The sociologist Daniel Rigney reread Hofstadter and codified his historical
overview into a theoretical framework that makes Hofstadter’s ideas more practical to
build upon for working scholars.53 Rigney identifies three distinct strains o f antiintellectualism in the more general arguments put forth by Hofstadter: religious anti­
rationalism, populist anti-elitism, and unreflective instrumentalism.
Within the first strand o f Hofstadterian anti-intellectualism, religious anti­
rationalism, Rigney identifies two distinct strands o f conflict: “warm” emotion vs. “cold”
reason, on one hand, and absolutism vs. relativism on the other. The first dialectic
Hofstadter identifies with the decline of Puritan preachers as rational religious leaders
and the ascent o f emotional, charismatic evangelical leaders. The second tilts believers
toward the absolutism of unquestioning faith. In defining the second strain of anti-

53 Daniel Rigney, “Three Kinds of Anti-intellectualism: Rethinking Hofstadter,”
Sociological Inquiry 61:4 (1991).

43

intellectualism, populist anti-elitism, Rigney notes that “In any society with democratic
aspirations, we may expect a mistrust o f claims to superior knowledge or wisdom on the
part o f an educated elite, especially when such claims are suspected to be instruments in
the service of class privilege.”54 Hofstadter suggests that this strain of anti-intellectualism
arose with the decline o f the patrician, educated leaders of the American Revolution,
where “The leaders were the intellectuals,”55 and the rise o f Jacksonian populist
democracy. Interestingly (though neither Rigney nor Hofstadter mentions this
coincidence), Jackson’s 1828 election victory coincides almost exactly with the advent of
the Penny Press and the first large single-purpose newspaper companies (The New York
Sun debuted in 1833). The final strain o f anti-intellectualism in Rigney’s Hofstadterderived framework is unreflective instrumentalism, “the devaluation o f forms o f thought
that do not promise relatively immediate practical payoffs.”56 This is an emphasis on the
practical, rather than the theoretical, and can be seen both in industry and in the
expectation that universities would focus not on theoretical education, but on training
students for specific jobs in those industries. Rigney sees this as the dominant form of
anti-intellectualism in American life at the time of his 1991 writing.
To Rigney’s three categories, I would add a fourth, a category of antiintellectualism that may be particular to the press, and which I call “unquestioning
professionalism.” This category builds on Hofstadter’s distinction between intelligence
and intellectualism. While elsewhere, a lack o f intellect does not automatically equal antiintellectualism, I would argue that reporters who unquestioningly accept the norms of

54 Rigney, 441.
55 Hofstadter, 145.
56 Rigney, 444.

44

their profession are actively opposing an intellectual approach to news, and therefore
contribute to the atmosphere of anti-intellectualism that pervades American journalism.
This separates my category o f unquestioning professionalism from the benign exercise of
intelligence without intellect, a combination that may be fine for a doctor or an engineer,
but that is potentially dangerous in a profession that deals in the public dissemination of
knowledge and ideas.
Daniel Rigney’s implicit call for research into anti-intellectualism among the
American media and its subset, the American press, has mostly gone unanswered. Only
one published work addresses the topic as its primary undertaking, Dane Claussen’s Antiintellectualism in American Media: Magazines & Higher Education.51 This is a valuable
volume, particularly for its summary o f the scholarly work on anti-intellectualism and for
its contextualization of the press within that history. However, it is not as comprehensive
as its title might suggest. The key to its original research lies in the subtitle: the book is
an examination o f the coverage of higher education in .American magazines in the 2(fi*
century, and while its findings certainly contribute to the understanding of the press and
its anti-intellectual predilections, it is not a particularly broad study. Whereas he
attempted to demonstrate how the press perpetuates anti-intellectualism in the public at
large, there are no histories that examine anti-intellectual attitudes within the institutional
press itself, and how those attitudes are perpetuated within the profession itself, and not
necessarily in the public at large.
Several plausible explanations for the anti-intellectualism of the press present
themselves. First, the commercial nature o f the U.S. press in general— and the more
57 Dane Claussen, Anti-intellectualism in American Media: Magazines & H igher
Education (New York: Peter Lang, 2004).

45

recent corporate consolidation o f the media have driven journalism ’s appeal to a populist,
middlebrow audience. The effort to maintain a “mass media” requires a mass audience,
and like media in general, the press has aimed its reporting at the broadest possible swath
o f the American public, rather than trying to reach an educated minority or trying to
educate the majority. The idea o f “infotainment” is very closely related to this: in order to
maintain this mass audience, news organizations treat news as just one more element of
the media, rather than as an important entity unto itself. News, the idea behind
infotainment holds, must be entertaining. Importance and relevance are secondary. This
leads not only to a focus on entertainment news, sports, and car crashes that have
spectacular video available, but also to the sensationalizing o f more “serious” news. This
sort o f sensationalizing clearly fits into Rigney’s category of populist anti-elitism.
But the anti-intellectualism o f the press is likely not driven entirely by corporate
concerns. The professional norms of journalists themselves sustain anti-intellectual
attitudes. Reporters have a long history o f vocationalism, preferring to think of
themselves as constituting a trade or a craft rather than a profession, with all of the
esoteric knowledge and specialized training that professional status would require.
Reporting has a strong working-class background, with a tradition of young people
working their way from being copy boys, ferrying typescripts between reporters and
editors, to being editors themselves. These traditions were beginning to die away by the
time (MORE) came on the scene, but they lasted at least into the late 1970s. This is not to
say that there are not intellectuals within the working classes, because there certainly are,
but the tradition (now largely fading) is to be a hard-drinking, tough-as-nails metro
reporter who is unfazed by anything he (and with the His Girl Friday exception, the

46

tradition is for it to be a “he”) might see down at the precinct or in the back rooms o f the
ward boss.
Two other explanations for anti-intellectualism in the press also seem likely. The
first is public criticism o f effete and elitist intellectual snobbery. This is an attack that is
leveled against intellectuals of all stripes, in and out of the press, but it can have a
particular power when wielded against the press. The paradigmatic example o f this would
be Senator Joseph McCarthy’s attacks on university professors, writers and journalists
during the Red Scare of the 1950s, but this is only one o f many possible examples. These
attacks have their particular power over journalists because of the final and perhaps most
important reason for the persistence o f anti-intellectualism in the American press: the
veneration o f truth and the organized press’s devotion to the idea o f objectivity. For at
least a century (though some historians debate the origins) 5 8 American journalists have
held to an idea of “truth” as, if not an attainable ideal, at least a goal to strive for at all
times. Attacks on the elitism o f the press often paint it as biased toward liberal thinking,
and any conclusion on one side or another o f any debate is sure to attract attacks from
those who believe that the reporters are not holding to the standards o f their trade. The
veneration o f objectivity also leads reporters to value fact over analysis and commentary.
The fa c t is the ultimate goal o f the American news reporter, and while the collection of
facts can be one o f the instrumental ends of intelligence, it is not an intellectual activity,
or at least is not seen as such by reporters who attempt to dissociate fact from

58

See Daniel T.Z. Mindich, Just the Facts: H ow “Objectivity ” Came to Define American
Journalism (New York: New York University, 1998); Schudson, Discovering the N ew s;
and Barbie Zelizer, “When Facts, Truth, and reality are God-Terms: On Journalism’s
Uneasy Place in Cultural Studies,” Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies, 1:1
(2004).

47

interpretation, and thereby ignore the intellectual implications o f the process. J. Anthony
Lukas, the (MORE) cofounder, struggled with The New York Times' insistence on
objectivity, a key impetus for his creation of (MORE). There had been plenty of careful
thinking about the press, but little o f it had come from within the organized press. Lukas
sought to change that.

The forms and functions of press criticism prior to the founding of (MORE)
In a 1968 book that was part o f an “Open Letter” series, John Tebbel opened his
“letter” to newspaper readers in this way: “You are, I assume, a critic of newspapers.”59
His assumption, o f course, was based on the idea that every reader is a critic. He goes on
to write that the press has many sorts of critics, including disdainful intellectuals and
reactionary ideologues. But he admits that he, too, had been a critic o f the press.
But in 1968, Tebbel had likely not seen much press criticism in the sense of, say,
“film criticism.” For him, and for most observers o f the press in 1968, “press criticism”
would likely have been synonymous with “criticism of the press,” rather than an
organized activity, or even a profession. There had been some— The Columbia
Journalism Review had published for five years by then, and A. J. Liebling had only
recently concluded off his influential Wayward Press column.
In 1968, John Tebbel was on the vanguard o f a new wave of this newer sort of
press criticism, the kind that sought not just to criticize as in “to pick on,” but to criticize
in the sense o f analyzing and suggesting paths toward improvement. And yet by the end
o f the decade, dozens o f books would be published for a general audience examining the

59 John Tebbel, O penLetter to Newspaper Readers (New York: Heineman, 1968), 11.

48

workings o f the press. In addition to The Kingdom and the Power and The Power and the
Glory, there was be Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein’s memoir o f their Watergate
reporting, A ll the President’s Men; Timothy Crouse’s The Boys on the Bus, about
presidential campaign reporting; memoirs by investigative columnist Jack Anderson;
works of press criticism for a general audience; and several seminal academic works of
criticism, including Gaye Tuchman’s Making News, Herbert Gans’s Deciding W hat’s
News, and Michael Schudson’s Discovering the News. The Woodward and Bernstein
book became an Oscar-winning film. Enrollment in journalism schools spiked during the
1970s. And while this may have had nothing to do, directly, with Woodward and
Bernstein, as has often been said, certainly it speaks to a rising interest in the practice of
watchdog journalism and the role of journalism in society. People were talking about the
press in the 1970s, not just the stories that the press covered.
Those intellectuals who have found themselves constrained by the norms o f the
professionalized institutional press— and those who find fault with it from the outside—
have often turned to press criticism, both to express their own frustration, and to attempt
to effect change within the press. The best, and perhaps only, way to maintain a press that
is both free o f government and corporate control, and yet responsible to the demand that
it function to propagate a democratic society and its attendant culture, is to encourage the
growth and flourishing o f a robust, public, and intellectually probing body o f criticism
around it.
Linda Lumsden identified four broad themes that recur throughout the history of
American press criticism, and these were certainly taken up by (MORE) as well. They
are: “the danger o f sensationalism and inaccuracies, democracy’s dependence upon a free

49

press, the social responsibility o f the press, and the detrimental influence o f capitalism
upon newspaper economics.”60 Scholars have traced the origins o f press criticism in the
United States as far back as the 1 9 ^ century. Hazel Dicken-Garcia puts it in the early part
o f that century, “as writers began to ponder the press’s effects on society.”61 DickenGarcia’s book was seminal in the history of media ethics. As she notes in her first
chapter:
No literature deals to a significant degree with the history of journalistic ethics.
None examines what journalists have viewed overtim e as “right” and “wrong” practices,
appropriate or inappropriate conduct, or the role of ethics in their work. No literature
examines criticism o f the press and how it may have changed over time, or discussions
among journalists that might show what they have collectively emphasized in how they
have gone about their work over the centuries.62
Since Dicken-Garcia’s writing, that literature on the history of journalism ethics,
and specifically press criticism, has grown somewhat, though not extensively. Her writing
gave a thorough hearing to the concerns o f the 1 9 ^ century, though the writings she
examines were mostly occasional pieces in periodicals, not regularly published columns
on the press or entire press journals. And until the late 1 9 ^ century, most thinking about
newspapers (since newspapers and “the press” were synonymous for most o f this
history), regarded their partisanship, which was an open, acknowledged and accepted

60 Linda J. Lumsden, “Press Criticism,” in American Journalism: History, Principles,
Practices, ed. W. David Sloan and Lisa Mullikin Parcell (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland &
Co., 2002), 55.
61 Hazel Dicken-Garcia, Journalistic Standards in Nineteenth-Century America
(Madison: University o f Wisconsin Press, 1989), 116.
62 Ibid, 4.

50

fact.63 Attacks on the press were attacks on their views, not so much on their role as an
integral institution in a representative democracy. That makes sense, since systematic
thinking about the role o f the press in society really began to gain traction in the 2Cfa
century— even though traces o f this sort o f thinking can be traced back to the nation’s
founding.64 Criticism o f the press was taken up in the late 1 9 ^ century by “men o f
letters,” as Linda Lumsden puts it. Writers such as E.L. Godkin, editor o f The Nation, and
others writing in The Atlantic M onthly and Forum brought more reasoned critiques than
the “polemics” that preceded them.65
Marion Tuttle Marzolf, one o f the few academic writers to take up DickenGarcia’s call for a history o f press criticism as a study o f press ethics and performance
standards, begins her history in this period. For her, the 1880s were a key turning point
because, she argued, “today’s standards and values were mainly shaped around the turn o f
the century when a “new journalism” challenged and replaced an old journalism that was
rooted in the partisan political tradition.” This, she writes, “created the need for new ways
o f thinking about the press.”66 M arzolf surveyed periodicals and professional publications
for her study and concluded that in the 1880s press criticism was already beginning to
regard journalism as a profession, and much o f the criticism in this period wrestled with
the new ideals for non-partisan journalism that had been brought to the East Coast from

63 Lumsden, 55-56.
64 Thomas Jefferson wrote that “our liberty depends on the freedom o f the press, and that
cannot be limited without being lost.” Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Dr. James Currie,
January 28, 1786. Library o f Congress American Memory Collection, Selected
Quotations from the Thomas Jefferson Papers. Accessed online at
hdl.loc.gov/loc.mss/mtj.mtjbib001765
65 Lumsden, 56-57.
66 Marion Tuttle Marzolf, Civilizing Voices: American Press Criticism 1880—1950 (New
York: Longman, 1991), 3.

51

the American Midwest, by publishers such as Joseph Pulitzer. The critics, many o f whom
were men of letters (as Lumsden also observed) were worried that newspapers were
nothing more than vulgar trash.67 This sort o f criticism intensified when Pulitzer’s
dominance in New York City was challenged by William Randolph Hearst and the brand
o f “yellow journalism” that he brought with him. Critics focused on the “bad taste and
moral decay”68 o f this type o f journalism, and openly called for a reform movement, or
almost a ritual purification o f newspapers.
By the turn o f the century, press critics, influenced by the Progressive movement
toward society’s moral betterment, began to visualize an “ideal newspaper”69 that would
deal only with fact— almost a scientific reporting, in an age that venerated empiricism—
or a newspaper that could be a civilizing influence on its readers and society in general.
The first decade o f the 2 0 ^ Century also brought the first journalism programs in
American universities, the advent o f muckraking, and a growing sense o f professionalism
among members of the press— and growing concern about the increasingly corporate
publishers who employed them.70
Marzolf and Dicken-Garcia (and one unpublished dissertation)71 are the only
historians who give much thought to press criticism before World War I. Adding some
credence to the claim that pre-20^1 century press criticism has largely been ignored by
critics, Tom Goldstein does not even acknowledge that there was press criticism before
the turn o f the century, or even before 1911, when Will Irwin published his 15-part series
67 Ibid, 7-19.
68 Ibid; 24.
69 Ibid; 45.
70 Ibid, 50-59.
71 Yasmine Tarek Dabbous, “‘Blessed be the Critics of Newspapers’: Journalistic
Criticism o f Journalism 1865-1930 (PhD diss., Louisiana State University, 2010).

52

“The American Newspaper: A Study o f Journalism in its Relation to the Public” in
C ollier’s magazine. The subtitle o f his anthology, Killing the Messenger: 100 Years o f
M edia Criticism, also hints at Goldstein’s temporal limitation, and this from a writer who
claims to “interpret criticism broadly.”

72

Most histories o f press criticism do include Irwin specifically, regardless of
whether or not they begin with him. Irwin’s series became canonical, eventually even
being reprinted in book form. That it was published in C ollier’s, a popular general
interest magazine was key. But it also railed against the influence o f commercialism and
the need to attract readers and advertisers, and did so with enough vitriol that a selection
from it would be included almost a century later in an anthology o f “radical” press
criticism.73 The 15-part series (announced as 14, but extended with a muckraking-style
piece that Irwin’s editors requested) tackled journalism history, yellow journalism, the
role o f the editor/publisher and the reporter in defining the news, the influence of
advertising, and the hope that a new generation of well-trained reporters would take over
and improve the lot o f the industry.74
Upton Sinclair, associated with the muckrakers and known to history for The
Jungle, his novel o f the Chicago meatpacking industry, also warrants inclusion in the
radical anthology, not least because his self-published 1919 book o f press criticism, The
Brass Check, explicitly compared newspapers to prostitutes working for the wealthy

72

Tom Goldstein, Killing theMessenger: 100 Years o f M edia Criticism, revised edition
(New York: Columbia, 2007).
73 Robert W. McChesney and Ben Scott, editors, Our Unfree Press: 100 Years o f Radical
M edia Criticism (New York: The New Press, 2004).
74 Will Irwin, The American Newspaper: A Series First Appearing in Collier’s, January—
July 1911. Edited by Clifford Weigle mid David G. Clark (Ames, Iowa: The Iowa State
University Press, 1969).

53

elites whose interests they supported in print. Sinclair was a socialist, so this view is
understandable. But Robert W. McChesney and Ben Scott argue that The Brass Check
actually appeared in something o f a golden age of press criticism, when hundreds of
examples appeared in mainstream magazines (Irwin’s C ollier’s pieces included).
McChesney and Scott argue that Sinclair’s work and that o f other radical critics has been
ignored by the mainstream precisely because it was radical.75 (MORE) would be acutely
aware o f the balancing act o f trying to push against the mainstream and encourage change
without ever completely alienating the institutions from which they came, for risk of
having no influence at all.
In the 1920s and 1930s, a handful o f other writers also published books about
journalism. The columnist and critic Walter Lippmann published three books on the
interactions among the press, the public and a representative democratic government.76
The most famous and influential of these, Public Opinion, introduced the idea that people
form their ideas based on sketches of the real world, which they receive largely through
media. And for Lippmann, news did not necessarily equal truth. Lippmann also argued
that the “manufacture o f consent” was important for a representative democracy in which
not all citizens directly participate in governance.77 In the 1930s, George Seldes followed
in the tradition of Irwin, Sinclair and Lippmann with two books o f his own. 78 In the case
o f Irwin and Sinclair, he did so by railing against the influence o f powerful political and

75 Robert W. McChesney and Ben Scott, Introduction to The Brass Check: A Study o f
American Journalism, by Upton Sinclair (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2003), ix xxxiii.
76 Liberty and the News'. 1920; Public Opinion: 1922; The Phantom Public: 1925.
77 Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion (New York: Lree Press, 1997).
78
George Seldes, Freedom o f the Press (Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company,
1935); and Lords o f the Press (New York: Julian Messner, 1938).

54

corporate influences on the news. And he “agreed with Lippmann that the press needed
better trained newsmen—professionals who adhered to an enforceable code.”79 Like
Sinclair, he was seen as a “crank” by the newspaper industry, and many publishers
refused advertising for his books or fired reviewers who gave the books positive notice.
But still, the books sold surprisingly well, and Seldes influenced a later generation of
critics. 80 One o f those critics was A. J. Liebling, perhaps the single most famous press
critic in U.S. history, and a direct inspiration to the editors o f (MORE), who would name
their series of conventions and an associated award in his honor.
Liebling wrote 83 columns about the press for The New Yorker, 82 o f them under
the heading “The Wayward Press.” Though he made it very much his own, Liebling
didn’t originate the column. Former newspaper reporter Morris Markey began it. 81
Humorist Robert Benchley had the most sustained tenure before Liebling (74 pieces, just
short o f Liebling’s 83), and it had passed through several hands (some pseudonymous)
before it got to Liebling. 82 Nevertheless, Liebling so took command of the form, and
published so regularly that he effectively established him self as the archetype of the press
critic. Jack Shafer, a press critic himself, later wrote that Liebling had earned a reputation
as the “patron saint of press criticism,” and while he suspects that this reputation is one of
word o f mouth, rather than of the printed word, his own revisiting o f Liebling’s works

79 Marzolf, 141.
80 Ibid., 141-142.
81
Edmund W. Midura, “A.J. Liebling: The Wayward Pressman as Critic,” Journalism
Monographs 33 (April 1974), 8.
82
Raymond Sokolov, Wayward Reporter: The Life o f A.J. Liebling (New York: Harper &
Row, 1980), 52; Stanley L. Harrison, ‘“ The Wayward Press’ Revisited: The
Contributions of Robert Benchley,” Journalism History 19:1 (1993), 19-27.

55

more or less bear out that reputation.

83

Publishers were a favorite target of his (as they

were to some o f his predecessors) and he famously wrote the axiom, “Freedom of the
press is guaranteed only to those who own one.” 84 Liebling would become an avatar o f
press criticism for the writers and editors o f (MORE), largely for these reasons, and also
because of his humor and sparkling prose, both of which were qualities that the
journalism review would echo.
The years immediately preceding the launch of (MORE) saw a new focus on
journalism ethics and accountability, and one of the chief figures in that period was Ben
Bagdikian. Though most o f his career would occur concurrent with and after the run of
(MORE), including his time as the ombudsman for The Washington Post,

85

he had

already published an impassioned critique o f American newspapers in Esquire, an essay
that first got him attention as a press critic.86 In that piece, he called for newspapers to
have in-house readers’ representatives, or ombudsmen, and eventually got to serve in the
role from 1971 to 1972 at The Washington Post. The idea o f an ombudsman fit in with the
reformist atmosphere of the late 1960s and 1970s in the American press, as did
Bagdikian’s call for a press council, an idea that would also be realized at the national
level, if only briefly, in the 1970s. 87 Bagdikian would go on to publish several books of

83

Jack Shafer, “The Church o f Liebling: The uncritical worshippers o f America’s best
press critic.” Slate, August 25, 2004. http://www.slate.com/id/2105627/
84
A.J. Liebling, “The Wayward Press: Do You Belong in Journalism?” The New Yorker
(May 14, 1960), 109.
85
Arthur S. Hayes, “Ben H. Bagdikian: Ahead o f the Curve,” in Press Critics are the
Fifth Estate: M edia Watchdogs in America (Wesport, Connecticut: Praeger, 2008) 53-63.
86 Ben Bagdikian, “The American Newspaper is Neither Record, Mirror, Journal, Ledger,
Bulletin, Telegram, Examiner, Register, Chronicle, Gazette, Observer, Monitor, Nor
Herald o f the D ay’s Events.” Esquire, March 1967, 124; 138-142.
87
Norman E. Isaacs, Untended Gates: The M ismanaged Press (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1986), 107-109.

56

press criticism, including The Information M achines, The Effete Conspiracy and his most
o o

famous, The M edia Monopoly,

which has had multiple editions and reprints since then.

There were other, more direct influences on the creation of (MORE) in 1971,
however, including a several thriving (and more less-than-thriving) regional journalism
reviews that had been popping up around the country in the years preceding the launch of
(MORE), including reviews in St. Louis, Philadelphia, Colorado, and Southern California
among several others.

89

Although (MORE) had national ambitions, it was originally

intended to be a New York journalism review— a late entry into the regional journalism
review movement. There had also been at least two other attempts at a journalism review
in the city, one published by something called The New York Media Project and called
Pac-O-Lies (which had a distinctly “underground” feel to it), and one put out by some
disaffected Associated Press employees. Little evidence o f the reach of these publications
remains.
The rise in awareness o f journalistic practice and the critical culture began to
spawn some thinking not just about journalism, but also about press criticism for the first
time. In 1974, James Carey, a media and cultural scholar, published an essay in which he
called for a regular culture of press criticism. He complained that “there is no tradition of

88

Ben H. Bagdikian, The Information Machines: Their Impact on M en and the M edia
(New York: Harper Colophon, 1971); The Effete Conspiracy and Other Crimes by the
Press (New York: Harper & Row, 1972); The M edia M onopoly (Boston: Beacon Press,
1983).
89
In addition to the contemporary articles about the journalism review movement cited
on page 2 o f this proposal, see also M. Addis, “A Study o f the Surface Accuracy o f The
Columbia Journalism Review and M O RE (M. A. thesis, Central Michigan University,
1974); and Kristie Bunton Northington, “Media Criticism as Professional SelfRegulation: A Study o f U.S. Journalism Reviews,” (Ph.D. diss., Indiana University,
1993).

57

sustained, systematic, and intellectually sound criticism of the press,”90 and the
fragmented nature of this dissertation’s brief history of press criticism would tend to
support that. For Carey, the key was that “democracy as a form o f political life is
essentially a theory of criticism and criticism, properly construed, is indispensable to the
idea o f freedom.”91 In other words, the ability to criticize the government, written into the
Constitution, needs to be broadened to the criticism o f the critics. The huge quantity of
the press’s output, Carey argued, called out for a much more robust dialogue about it, and
even more criticism than other forms of cultural production, such as movies or theater,
already got. There was some, Carey acknowledged, but most of it was only reaching other
journalists, and not the reading public at large (here he specifically mentioned the
Columbia Journalism Review and “the new reviews that have sprung up in many cities, in
the underground press” and the “coteries o f professionals and students that queue up
92

before the Chicago Journalism Review.” The regional journalism reviews were not all
part o f the underground press, but he was right that they did not reach a particularly large
audience. (MORE) tried, at times, to attract a general audience, at least to the level of The
New York Review o f Books, but perhaps it was too difficult to attract an audience of
general-interest citizens in reasoned criticism of the press. Many years later, Ben Scott
and Robert McChesney suggested that the power o f press criticism (and “radical” press
criticism in particular) lies “in its ability to show that the modem commercial press
system operates in a manner that is antithetical to the democratic values embodied in the

90 James W. Carey, “Journalism and Criticism: The Case of an Undeveloped Profession,”
The Review o f Politics 36 (Apr., 1974), 227.
91 Ib id , 228-229.
92 Ibid., 236.

58

First Amendment.”93 For both McChesney and Scott, and for Carey, the value o f press
criticism lies in the ability o f more speech to correct the failings of insufficient or
incorrect speech.
The same year that Carey’s essay was published, Lee Brown, then a professor at
the University o f Maryland, published one o f the first books that attempted to analyze
American press criticism.94 Brown attempted to classify the various types of criticism of
journalism that he saw as extant:
With the growing movement for a national press council, these have become the
principal forms o f contemporary press criticism: the resurgent joumalist-critic; the
journal, particularly the local journal, for criticism o f the press; the establishment
o f local press councils, by individual publishers and under the auspices o f the
Mellett Fund; the establishment o f in-house ombudsmen, on only a few
newspapers, to respond to reader complaints; and the reports o f presidential and
i
other
commissions. 95
Brown’s overview of the landscape of press criticism isn’t bad, though it probably
suffers from an over-broad interpretation o f what defines “press criticism,” and he leaves
out a category or two that existed in 1974 just as surely as they do today (academic
criticism, for instance; and if w e’re to use Brown’s broad brush, we should also include
criticism o f the press by courts). But much has changed in the last four decades too, so I
offer an updated taxonomy of press criticism:
1.

Regularly published commentary in the popular press or online. These are
columnists and press critics who critique the performance of the press for the
benefit o f the practice o f journalism; and who demystify the press for a general
audience. The archetypal press critic, of course, would be A.J. Liebling. But

93 McChesney and Scott, 7.
94 Lee Brown, The Reluctant Reformation: on Criticizing the Press in America. (New
York: David McKay, 1974).
95 Brown, 70.

59

today, this would include people with the title o f press critic such as Reuters’ Jack
Shafer, as well as reporter-columnists such as David Carr for the New York
Times. This could also include a radio program such as N PR’s On the Media. This
type of criticism is written for the general public, and therefore bridges the
important divide between the members of the press and those
reader/viewer/consumers who are not actively engaged in the production of
journalism: for perpetuation o f representative democracy. But this is also press
criticism as film or literary or art or even restaurant criticism, really top-flight
criticism that connects the creative act (insofar as journalism is a creative act) to
cultural currents.
2.

Ombudsmen and public editors. These are similar to the press critics, except
that their role is more limited in two ways: One, their charge is to monitor the
performance of a single outlet, their employer. Two, they are reader
representatives, and therefore not independent critics guided by their own critical
instincts. They tend to respond mostly to reader complaints, or at least to
perceived reader complaints.

3.

Academic critics. There are a few members of academia working to actively
influence the practice o f journalism for the better, such as NYU’s Jay
Rosen, and Jeff Jarvis o f the CUNY Journalism School. But academic critics of
journalism don’t have to be only journalism professors. Why not public policy
professors, sociologists, historians, philosophers, mass communication
researchers, literature professors, legal scholars and economists, to name a few?

60

One could include the Nieman Foundation here, too, as a university-based
journalism think tank.
4.

Books. Occasional books aimed at a popular audience summarize the state o f the
practice of journalism, opine about its shortcomings, and offer advice for its
future. There has been a glut o f these recently, aiming at divining the “future of
journalism,” but it’s a genre that can be traced back at least to Upton Sinclair’s
‘The Brass Check,’ and having in its lineage George Seldes, Will Irwin and a
steady stream of others.

5.

Journalism reviews. The Columbia Journalism Review and a few other scattered
magazines all that really survive of the journalism review movement of the late
’60s and early ’70s that Brown cites. Aminuscule few journalism reviews even
pretend to a general audience— (MORE) probably had the broadest (and most
sustained—B r ill’s Content, a similar attempt to bring media criticism to the
masses lasted only from 1998 to 2001, and watered down its criticism even earlier
than that) ambitions. An argument could be made to include professional
organizations such as the Society o f Professional Journalists in this category too,
since they share an audience and an aim: speak to professional journalists about
the practice o f journalism. They monitor standards and set codes of ethical
conduct. However, I would exclude them since their maintenance of standards
does not occur through critical writing about the press.

These five are the core, but there are arguments to be made for a few other types o f press
criticism. Brown sees politicians complaining about the press as press criticism, but there
is a significant qualitative difference between criticism and self-serving complaint, so

61

Spiro Agnew does not count, in my reasoning, as a press critic, just because he criticized
the press (but FAIR and AIM, the partisan press watchdogs, might). Quite a few o f the
capsule histories of press criticism bring up the Hutchins Commission report too, and
occasionally other lesser government commission reports on the activities o f the press. If
you’re going to include these, I would argue that you have to include Louis
Brandeis and Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. as press critics too, for their masterful defense
o f freedom of expression in their Supreme Court decisions as well as Brandeis and
Samuel Warren’s seminal article on the “Right to Privacy.”96
This broad characterization o f what constitutes journalism criticism (one that
includes professional organizations, partisan watchdogs and legal decisions) took shape
for the most part after the journalism ethics movement o f the 1960s and 1970s. What ties
these outlets together is a shared desire to bring accountability to the press organizations
that purport to keep the government and other powerful institutions accountable. But the
written sort o f analytical journalistic criticism o f the press has much older origins, even
though the same impulse drove them: to rein in news organizations that had become
institutions themselves.
In her book Critical Conversations: A Theory o f Press Criticism, Wendy Wyatt
constructs a model o f criticism which argues that the main active body o f press critics
must come from outside the working press, so that they are not “situated in their
knowledge.”97 Journalists, she writes, must participate in the process o f criticism for it to
be effective, but the curation o f criticism must come from outside the paid members of a

96 Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy,” H arvard Law
Review 4(5), December, 1890.
97 Wendy Wyatt, Critical Conversations: A Theory o f Press Criticism (Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press, 2007), 157.

62

news organization. (MORE) attempted to achieve a sort o f balance, though most of its
contributors were working journalists. The editors o f (MORE) wrote, however, that they
would try to forbid reporters from writing about their own publications, as indicated in
the opening editor’s note disclaiming the Ringing Declaration of Purpose:
Many o f our contributors (though by no means all) will be working journalists in
the city and we hope that their employers will have the common sense to
recognize that a journalist ought to be free to write about his profession without
feeling his job is in jeopardy. For our part, we recognize the conflict o f interest in
asking a journalist to write about his own organization and consequently have
98
established an ironclad policy never to commission or publish such articles.
For Wyatt, this would not be enough. Her model is a discursive one— one that
seeks to foster change in the press through an active discourse, among the members of the
“press” and the citizens who are affected by the actions o f the press and o f the
government. She analogizes the relationship between the press and its consumer/critics to
that between citizens and government in a democracy. In theory, membership in any one
o f these groups is open to all: citizens are journalists only when they are acting as
journalists; citizens serve as the government only when they are elected to do so. They
never lose their status as citizens. For Wyatt, press criticism must function “as a social
process or communicative public sphere that facilitates the discourses of citizens who are
part o f a complex, decentered society.”99 The critics also have a responsibility to interest
the public in the workings o f the press and o f the criticism. Otherwise, she says, the
criticism is meaningless. Wyatt illustrates the interactions among the press, critics, and
the critical public with a diagram showing the press at the “institutional center” o f a
bullseye. Surrounding them are the critics who are in conversation with the press. And

98

Editor’s note, More: A Journalism Review, June 1971, 2.
99 Wyatt, 134.

63

finally, the critical public lies at the periphery.100 Communication must occur between the
first and second levels, and the second and third. So critics facilitate the discussion
between the interested public and the institutional press that serves it.
Arthur S. Hayes has chronicled and analyzed much o f the press criticism that has
followed (MORE), some of it inspired, more or less directly, by that journal. Hayes takes
a very broad view o f press criticism, including not only partisan press watchdogs, but
also the concept o f citizen journalism and even the satirical news programs The Daily
Show and The Colbert Report. His chapter on B r ill’s Content, a media magazine from the
turn o f the 21s* century is particularly apt, especially in comparison with the latter days of
(MORE), as discussed below.101
Hayes also wrestles with the idea of what makes press criticism “influential,” and
unlike the undefined but likely more realistic goals o f furthering a democratic discourse
that Wendy Wyatt aims for, Hayes actually proposes a nine-part test for press critic
influence:
1. Has the critique led to the dismissal, resignation, or reassignment of a reporter,
broadcast public affairs personality, editor, or news executive?
2. Has the critique led to content or programming changes consistent with widely
acknowledged journalism ethical standards?
3. Has the critique led to a reform o f a news organization’s standards and practices?

100 Ib id , 149.
1014B r ill’s Content'. “An Inside-the-Sausage-Factory Look at Media for People Who Eat
Sausages, Not Those Who Make Them,” in Press Critics..., 85-102.

64

4. Has the critique spurred public debate in public forums and in the news media
about news media performance or the business o f mass media, helping to shape
public opinion on the issue?
5. Do news media outlets quote the individual or organization as an authority on
news media ethics and performance?
6. Does the individual or organization have a longtime and substantial following,
measured in viewers, books [sic] sales or Web-site hits?
7. Has the individual or organization inspired a movement?
8. Has the individual or organization established standards of inquiry, analysis or
proposals used by other critics?
9. Have the individual’s critiques gained currency among other critics and scholars
who point to the individual as a groundbreaking activist or thinker in news media
criticism?102
Though Hayes’ criteria seem as if they were written in order to justify the inclusion of the
subjects of his various chapters, they are actually helpful questions forjudging influence
in ways beyond just direct changes in the practices o f a news organization that criteria 1—
3 cover, and these criteria will be used in analyzing the influence o f (MORE), particularly
in chapter four of this dissertation, which examines the relationship between the
journalism review and the mainstream press that it critiqued. But this dissertation looks
most closely at those effects that are not merely operant, but more subtle and nuanced.
The direct effect o f a journalism review would be difficult to measure, but this
dissertation attempts to trace (MORE)’s influence to the extent that it is possible.

102 Hayes, 4.

65

(MORE) and the Intellectual History of the Seventies
Sociologist and media historian Michael Schudson argues that this “long-term
trend toward greater political sophistication and critical scrutiny of government”103
directly affected journalists because o f the muckraking tradition o f American journalism
made journalists feel more disconnected in general from the government, but also
“trusted more in, and cared more about, government.”104 As Schudson points out, an
adversarial culture needs a target— something to be adversarial toward— and for
journalism, this manifested in a critique o f the norm of the kind o f journalistic objectivity
that purported to be values-free, a brand o f popular social science with no political aims.
Schudson, writing in the late 1970s, identified three broad aims of this criticism of
objectivity:
1.

“ [T]he content o f a news story rests on a set of substantive political assumptions,
assumptions whose validity is never questioned.”105

2.

“ [F]orm constitutes content. [T]he form o f the news story incorporates its own
bias.”106

3. The news story is “a social form tightly constrained by the routines of news
gathering.”107
Schudson argues that two journalistic traditions were revived in the 1960s and 1970s in
opposition to the norm o f objectivity: the muckraking tradition and the literary tradition,
both of which are strongly reflected in the pages of (MORE).

103 Schudson, 179.
104 Ibid., 180.
Ibid., 184
106 Ibid.
107 Ibid., 185

66

The literary half o f that pairing has long been described under the term “the new
journalism,” largely because o f a long two-part essay Tom Wolfe wrote first for New York
magazine, and later as the introduction to an anthology also called The New
Journalism.

108

But at the time, both o f these strains—the literary and the hard-nosed

muckraking tradition— as well as other forms of advocacy and interpretive journalism
were all seen as a part of the same movement away from objectivity, and all of them
carried the label “New Journalism” to a certain extent.109 For intellectual historian
Howard Brick, the literary New Journalism was a revolt against positivism, and a move
toward the critical, the literary and the personal. Journalists began to attract the attention
o f intellectuals, and many of them also took a new kind o f intellectual interest in their
own work.110 But Brick sees literary New Journalism and the muckraking tradition as
being at odds, since muckraking still relies heavily on the idea of objectivity, if
objectivity is interpreted strictly as positivism, the journalistic equivalent o f the scientific
method. Muckraking still relies heavily on the gathering and analysis o f information,
rather than just on impressionistic feeling and critical thought. But in the eyes o f many
journalists, “objectivity” encompassed a broader set of ideas, including reporters’
autonomy and advocacy journalism. According to John J. Pauly, one journalism dean and
historian who lived through the period saw that the New Journalism represented a change
not just in form, but in the sensibility of the reporter. This dean, Ted Peterson o f the
University o f Illinois, also “understood the New Journalism in relation to other forces

108

Tom Wolfe, editor, The New Journalism (New York: Harper and Row, 1973).
109 This analysis is based on a panel discussion held at the first A.J. Liebling CounterConvention, sponsored by (MORE) in 1972.
110 Howard Brick, Age o f Contradiction: American Thought and Culture in the 1960s
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell, 1998), 37-39.

67

roiling the profession,” including “the underground press, debates over objectivity,
changes in the magazine business, the founding o f new journalism reviews like [MORE],
protests at the annual meetings o f corporations and proposals to name working reporters
to the boards of directors of wire services.”111 The press was integral to the New Left
movement o f the sixties, and (MORE) appeared at a moment when the truly underground
publications such as The Berkeley Barb and The East Village Other were inspiring a new
breed o f publications that saw themselves not so much as underground, but instead as
alternatives to the mainstream press. 112 The Village Voice had been around for almost two
decades as an alternative publication,113 but other papers, mostly weeklies, were
springing up to provide an alternative to daily newspapers without being seen as too
radical for a larger portion o f readers who may have been turned off by the politics, the
production values or the vulgarity o f the underground rags.114 These alternative
publications were occupying a constantly negotiated position between opposition and
popular respectability. It is a contradiction that Grace Elizabeth Hale describes as
“contradictory desires to be a part o f the American center and yet separate from it, to fit
in and to oppose... .”115 This was a position that (MORE) struggled with as well,

111 John J. Pauly, “Finding Ourselves in the New Journalism,” in 1968: Year o f Media
Decision, Robert Giles and Robert W. Snyder, editors (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction,
2001 ).
112
McMillian, Smoking Typewriters', Abe Peck, Uncovering the Sixties: The Life and
Times o f the Underground Press (New York: Citadel, 1991).
113 Kevin Michael McAuliffe, The Great American Newspaper: The Rise and Fall o f the
Village Voice (New York: Scribner, 1978).
114 Calvin Trillin, “U.S. Journal: Seattle, Wash.: Alternatives,” The New Yorker, April 10,
1978, 118-125.
115 Grace Elizabeth Hale, A Nation o f Outsiders: How the White M iddle Class Fell in
Love with Rebellion in Postwar America (New York: Oxford, 2011).

68

criticizing the mainstream press while going out of its way not to slide from an antiinstitutional position to a counter-cultural one.
Few scholars have looked at the intellectual history o f the seventies, though some
works of cultural and political history have begun to take the decade seriously, rather than
as nothing more than a bridge between the revolutionary sixties and the corporate
eighties. For Andreas Killen, the seventies are a time of conspiracies, cults, the allsurface-no-depth imagery of Andy Warhol, and the self-revelation and self-promotion of
the birth o f reality television as represented by the television series A n American
Family ,116 For Bruce J. Schulman, the seventies were a period o f multiculturalism,
feminism, a lack of self-confidence and an eventual turn to conservatism with the
“squares” becoming the hip by the time o f Ronald Reagan’s election.117
The 1970s, however, were also a period o f changes in mass media. As noted in the
introduction to this proposal, it was the decade that saw the Watergate scandal unfold in
The Washington Post. It was the decade of the Pentagon Papers. It was the decade o f the
WBAI obscenity trial. It was the decade in which journalism became a glamorous
profession when Woodward and Bernstein became Redford and Hoffman. Muckraking
became a celebrity pursuit. The “w riter’s newspaper,” the New YorkHerald-Tribune, had
gone out o f business in 1966, a victim of financial pressures in general, and the New York
newspaper strike o f 1962-63.118 Some reporters had seen the Herald-Trib as a place
where they could have more freedom, and New York magazine, which would become a

116 Andreas Killen, 1973 Nervous Breakdown: Watergate: Warhol, and the Birth o f PostSixties America (New York: Bloomsbury, 2006).
117 Bruce J. Schulman, The Seventies: The Great Shift in American Culture, Society and
Politics (New York: DiCapo, 2002).
118 Richard Kluger, The Paper: The Life and Death o f the New York Herald-Tribune
(New York: Knopf, 1986.

69

center of literary journalism in the late 1960s and 1970s, had begun life as the Sunday
magazine supplement. New York's rival for stylish and politically aware journalism,
Rolling Stone, had begun publishing in 1967 (and moved to New York a decade later.119
The newspaper strike o f ’63 also helped to spawn The New York Review o f Books, a
relative o f (MORE) in terms o f staff and looks. 120
The death of the Herald-Tribune left New York a three-newspaper town. The
thorough but boring (at least outwardly, as Gay Talese showed) New York Times was the
morning broadsheet. The Daily News was the morning tabloid. And Dorothy Schiff’s
evening Post, still quite a liberal paper for most o f the 1970s, rounded out the trio.
Newspapers o f the 1970s were still very much the newspapers that had been around since
early in the century, and publishers looked at changes represented by the New Journalism
with skepticism. 121 But by the end o f the seventies, even the staid New York Times would
abandon its two-section news report for a multi-section newspaper with several
magazine-like sections. 122
The weekly news magazines were still seen as strong and important. Most
national magazines of importance were based in New York (including Newsweek, which
saw a feminist uprising o f sorts in 1970) 123 as were of course the national television
network news operations, in a world where Walter Cronkite could still be seen by a

119 Robert Draper, Rolling Stone Magazine: The Uncensored History (New York:
Doubleday, 1990.
120 Philip Nobile, Intellectual Skywriting: Literary Politics & The New York Review of
Books (New York: Charterhouse, 1974).
121
Ernest C. Hynds, American Newspapers in the 1970s (New York: Hastings House,
1975).
122 Susan E. Tifft and Alex S. Jones, The Trust: The Private and Powerful Family Behind
The New York Times (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 1999).
123
Lynn Povich, The Good Girls Revolt: How the Women o/N ew sw eek Sued Their
Bosses and Changed the Workplace (New York: Public Affairs, 2012).

70

national public as knowing what really happened in the country, and the important news
could be summed up in 20-some minutes o f airtim e. It was into this atmosphere that
(MORE) launched as New York’s journalism review—but a regional journalism review,
no matter what its aspirations, becomes a national journalism review when its region is
New York City. And the writers and editors of (MORE) knew that what made it into the
mainstream news report was only a part of the story. Hence the name.

71

Chapter 2: Newsroom Cabals, Barnyard Epithets and a Ringing Declaration of
Purpose: (MORE) magazine from its founding in 1971 to the end of 1973

(MORE) criticism needed
A. J. Liebling, the New Yorker press critic for many years in the 40s, 50s and 60s,
wrote, famously, that “Freedom o f the press is guaranteed only to those who own one,”124
and the quotation (though parenthetical in the original), has become so commonly
repeated as to become almost a truism, and almost certainly a cliche. But while in the
original the phrase came up owing to Liebling’s concern about newspaper consolidation,
(and while those who quote it have used it profligately), the aphorism holds true in at
least one seemingly paradoxical way: reporters don’t write for newspapers; reporters
write for publishers. And for Liebling, publishers were the ultimate threat to the quality of
the press, because their money drove the content o f their newspapers (and Liebling
almost exclusively concerned himself with newspapers). So the paradox here is that
reporters don’t really enjoy freedom o f the press, since their work is always filtered
through the desires o f their newsroom management. As detailed in chapter one, reporters
working for news organizations at least as early as the 1890s would often feel that their
own voices were marginalized, 125 and by the late 1960s and early 1970s, as newsroom

124 A.J. Liebling, “The Wayward Press: Do You Belong in Journalism?” The New Yorker,
May 14, 1960, p. 109.
125
In a study o f reporters-tumed-writers, from Walt Whitman and Mark Twain to Ernest
Hemingway, Shelley Fisher Fishkin wrote that 1 9 ^ and early 2(fi* century reporters
chafed under “the limits of conventional journalism as they knew it—the subjects that
were excluded, the superficial, formulaic treatment of subjects that were discussed, the
lack o f connection to any time but the present, the extravagant claims to
authoritativeness, the failure to challenge the reader to think for himself—were apparent
to them....” Shelley Fisher Fishkin, From Fact to Fiction : Journalism & Imaginative

72

demographics changed, moving from being places dominated by hard-nosed working
class reporters to being enclaves of educated journalists, something o f a resistance
movement sprang up—not just reporters’ unions, which had been long established, and
focused mostly on salary and working conditions— but a real move toward autonomy for
a group o f reporters who saw themselves not just as hired hacks, but as writers.
In some ways, the culmination of this movement was the development o f the
reporter-run journalism review after 1968. This movement mostly encompassed local
journalism reviews, one of which, The Chicago Journalism Review, was inspired directly
by poor reporting surrounding the Chicago conspiracy trial o f 1968, and became the sort
o f spiritual godfather of the reviews.126 But one of these journalism reviews succeeded at
a level unseen in the local reviews— aspiring to (and reaching, to an extent) a national
audience, rather than just a local one, spawning a series o f well-attended and much
written-about “counter-conventions,” and maintaining a tone that w asn’t quite countercultural, (though it was influenced by the counter-culture that surrounded it) but was
certainly at least anti-establishment. That journalism review was called (MORE).
Dick Poliak—who would become the founding editor of, passionate advocate for,
and editorial voice o f (MORE), the monthly journalism review founded in 1971—had no
thoughts o f starting such a publication o f any kind when his friend, the New York Times
reporter J. Anthony Lukas invited him to dinner on the Upper East Side o f Manhattan.

Writing in America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985), p. 8. For a longer
discussion o f the evolution of reporters’ attitudes toward their work, see Michael
Schudson, Discovering the News: A Social History o f American Newspapers (New York:
Basic Books, 1978).
126 The Columbia Journalism Review was founded earlier, in 1962, though in its early
days, it was mostly written by academics, and is therefore somewhat outside the
movement that would follow it.

73

Poliak had written about the press before, as a reporter at Newsweek, but he was
between jobs at the time o f Lukas’s proposition, back living in New York after a stint as a
newspaper editor in Honolulu. He and Lukas knew each other from the Baltimore Sun,
where both had worked, but Poliak may have had some idea that this was more than just
two old friends getting dinner when they sat down. Poliak remembers that he was eating
soup when Tony Lukas told him the real purpose o f their meeting: New York City needed
a journalism review, Lukas said, and Poliak should be its editor.
Poliak and Lukas were aware of the journalism review movement that had taken
hold in recent years, including new journals in St. Louis, Montana and Washington, DC.
Both o f them loved news, and the craft of gathering and reporting it, and had their ears to
the ground of developments. And reporting was changing rapidly in 1970 and ’71,
transitioning from being the sort of inky, salacious trade that Ivy Leaguers would turn
their noses up at into a respectable profession, one with new standards o f excellence.
Newspapers found themselves with a new raft o f employees who, buoyed by their
educations and the anti-establishment social atmosphere o f the 1960s, were beginning to
chafe at the limitations put on them by profit-seeking publishers and editors who they
saw as staid and conservative, limiting their ability to describe how they, as reporters,
saw the world. As detailed in chapter 1, Michael Schudson argues that this new breed of
reporter was instrumental to the rise of the “critical culture” that was becoming more
pervasive in the newsrooms of the late ’60s and early ’70s:
Young people, more likely to fit into the youth culture o f casual manners and
language, open sexuality, and rock music, covered the campuses and social movements
and were influenced by them. They often felt uncomfortable in their reportorial roles,

74

almost as if they were agents o f “straight” society spying on a subversive culture. They
found themselves sympathetic to the ideas and values o f the people they wrote about and
increasingly skeptical, uneasy, or outraged at the transformation o f their stories between
copy desk and printed page.127
This ferment expressed itself in many ways in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Traditionally underrepresented groups including that largest body o f disenfranchised—
women—pushed for new, equal roles in the newsroom.

128

John J. Pauly pinpoints the

New Journalism practiced by Tom Wolfe, Gay Talese and Joan Didion (among others) as
the focal point for young journalists “finding themselves” in that period, but he links the
form, via the files o f the late University o f Illinois dean Ted Peterson, to the underground
press, debates over objectivity, and even specifically to the founding of (MORE). For
Pauly and Peterson, these interconnected events reflect a new “intellectual seriousness” in
y

journalism.

129

In an interview 40 years after he founded the magazine, Poliak said that at one of
the A. J. Liebling Counter-Conventions that (MORE) would eventually host, the reporter
and columnist Murray Kempton pulled him aside and told him to go easy on most
reporters, because, “They’re doing the best they can.” Poliak said he thought that what
Kempton meant was that “you don’t have to have any special kind of education to be a
journalist.” Poliak explained:

127 Schudson, p. 181.
128
For an account o f the biggest women’s uprising in a newsroom, see The Good Girls
Revolt: How the Women o/N ew sw eek Sued Their Bosses and Changed the Workplace,
by Lynn Povich (New York: Public Affairs, 2012).
129
John J. Pauly, “Finding Ourselves in the New Journalism,” in 1968: Year o f Media
Decision, Robert Giles and Robert W. Snyder, eds. (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishers, 2001), p. 135.

75

I graduated from Amherst and went to work at the Worcester Telegram. Nobody
asked me anything. They took a look at a few clips from the Amherst student
paper and said yes. And they sent me to the Uxbridge bureau to cover high school
football and the police blotter, and that’s how it worked. And so the combination
o f the staff not having any real intellectual depth and the management not having
a real intellectual depth, or at least feeling any demand for it, is why a lot of
people leave the profession. It’s why [David] Halberstam and [Anthony] Lukas
and [Gay] Talese leave. They can’t do the long form. They reach a ceiling beyond
which you cannot go. And I don’t mean money or promotions; I mean intellectual
elbow room. You just cannot do it at a magazine or a newspaper. And I think that
happens to anybody who has any real intellectual curiosity.130
So Lukas and Poliak were aware o f the new atmosphere in newsrooms and o f the small
journalism reviews that were trying to keep their local newspapers honest (and in the case
o f The Columbia Journalism Review, reach a national audience—though the pair saw
CJR as being too close to, if not a part of, that staid establishment press, even if they saw
themselves as being outside of the counter-culture, too). Lukas, who was bom in 1933,
was about ten years too old to be involved in the counter-culture himself, according to
Poliak (who described him self the same way), but he was aware of it, covering the late
1960s like a concerned older brother.131 So Poliak and Lukas were outsiders both to the
counter-culture and to the rapidly professionalizing world o f daily journalism in which
they had both worked.
But since historical actors rarely make their decisions as reflections o f a Zeitgeist
seen only in retrospect, Poliak and Lukas likely did not start (MORE) as a way of
reflecting cultural currents. Instead, Lukas had a specific inspiration in mind, the first and
most prominent o f the regional journalism reviews, the Chicago Journalism Review,
edited by Ron Dorfman. Lukas had been spending quite a bit o f time in Chicago not long

130 Interview with the author, September 8, 2011.
131 Interview with the author, September 8, 2011.

76

before his meeting with Poliak, in his job as a reporter for the New York Times. He was
there in the fall o f 1969 and winter o f 1970 to cover the Chicago conspiracy trial. While
Lukas was in Chicago, he met the staff o f the Chicago Journalism Review and came
away impressed. But perhaps more importantly, he too became one o f that new breed of
reporter whose capability and ambition outstripped the limits o f his editors.

The Barnyard Epithet, and the Cabal at the New York Times
Tony Lukas had already won his first Pulitzer Prize and a George Polk award by
the time he was in Chicago for the trial. His Pulitzer came in 1968 for a Times story
called “The Two Worlds of Linda Fitzpatrick,” in which he chronicled the life and violent
death of a teenage girl from wealthy Greenwich, Connecticut who had gotten involved in
the hippie movement, and more disastrously, drugs. 132 The Times had also sent him to
India, Ceylon, Japan, Pakistan, South Africa and Zaire. Upon his return to the United
States, the Times also sponsored him for a Nieman fellowship for reporters (with some
reluctance to have him leave the newsroom, thinking that he might never return, but even
more worried that a rising star reporter would be “exceedingly unhappy” if he were not
allowed to stretch himself)133 at Harvard University, from which he had also graduated
magna cum laude in 1955 (making him one of that new breed o f Ivy League-educated
journalists himself). So he was a seasoned and award-winning reporter who was already
familiar with the counter-culture and figures such as Abbie Hoffman, Rennie Davis and
David Dellinger when he came to cover the conspiracy trial, even if, in his short 1970

132 J. Anthony Lukas, “The Two Worlds o f Linda Fitzpatrick,” The New York Times,
October 16, 1967.
133 Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to Clifton Daniel, November 28, 1967. New York
Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 27, Folder 21: Lukas, J. Anthony.

77

book about the trial, he wrote that his assumptions about the trial, as it began, “were
formed partly by inexperience, partly by a liberal’s respect for the courts and the law.”134
In that book, The Barnyard Epithet and Other Obscenities: Notes on the Chicago
Conspiracy Trial, Lukas tells the story o f his frustrating negotiations with an editor at the
Times, one whom he leaves unnamed. Lukas was covering the trial for The New York
Times Magazine, for which he had been writing, as well as for the daily newspaper, and
one chunk o f The Barnyard Epithet was originally published in the Times. According to
Lukas, it was the news section of the daily paper that gave him trouble. On February 4,
1970, the Deputy Chief o f the Chicago Police was testifying about observing David
Dellinger leaving Grant Park “at the head of a militant group.” According to Lukas, “At
that, Mr. Dellinger looked up from his seat at the defense table and said, ‘Oh bullshit! ’”
Before the end of the day, the judge revoked Dellinger’s bail for the rest o f the trial to
reprimand him for this outburst. Lukas knew that this was an important story for The
Times, but he was also aware that he was going to be asked to leave out the offending
word that led to the story in the first place:
Knowing the Times ’ sensitivity about such language, I called the National Desk
and asked how they wanted to handle Mr. Dellinger’s phrase. The editor on duty said he
didn’t think we could use it and suggested I just say “an obscenity.” I objected, arguing
that it w asn’t, strictly speaking, an obscenity; that if we called it that most people would
assume it was something much worse; and that since it was central to the day’s events we
ought to tell our readers just what Mr. Dellinger had said. The editor thought for a
moment and said, “Why don’t we just call it ‘a barnyard epithet’?” Everything

134 J. Anthony Lukas, The Barnyard Epithet and Other Obscenities: Notes on the
Chicago Conspiracy Trial (New York: Harper and Row, 1970), p. 2.

78

considered, that seemed like the best solution, and that was the way it appeared in the
Times the next morning.135
Actually, the next morning, it appeared as “a barnyard vulgarity,” but even if the
Lukas misremembered the words he and the editor settled upon, the general sense
remained.136 But while Lukas’s reporting continued to appear in the Times, and even in
that excerpt from The Barnyard Epithet which appeared in the Times M agazine, the
“bullshit” incident was symptomatic o f the limitations on Lukas’s reporting. “I
concluded,” Lukas writes by way of explaining why he was adding his book to the pile
already being written about the trial, “that the Barnyard Epithet was only one of many
aspects which called for fuller reporting.”137 There was more to the story than the Times
was able or willing to print: in fact, the New York Times commitment to an ideal of
“objectivity” kept Lukas from being able to report his real discovery about the trial: that
it was a political show trial, not a real criminal trial. Lukas sought an outlet for his
frustration with “he said, she said” journalism by writing his book— and also later, in the
magazine that, in its very title, alluded to the idea that just because the story in the
newspaper had come to an end, the story that the article was covering continued on.
Lukas had also met Ron Dorfman, the editor of the Chicago Journalism Review
during his time covering the conspiracy trial. In March, 1970, Dorfman’s magazine
devoted at least half a dozen different articles about the trial. The lead article, written by
Henry DeZutter, viewed the trial as a sort o f play, because, as the story says, “Only a
dramatist can put it all together, to distill the essence out of the official record o f the

135 Lukas, Barnyard Epithet, p. vii.
136 J. Anthony Lukas, “Disorder Erupts at Chicago Trial After Judge Jails a Defendant for
Using a Vulgarity,” The New York Times, February 5, 1970, p. 18.
137 Lukas, Barnyard Epithet, p. viii.

79

conspiracy trial and transmit it to those who w eren’t there. Those who weren’t missed a
lot. And while a complete transcript would help, it w on’t do it all.” 138
There was extensive news coverage, but that’s the trouble: it was news coverage.
This was not a “newsman’s” trial. First, there was simply too much to handle, too much
drama, too much “nuance” to capture with the meager tools o f pen-and-paper reporting.
Second, the forms and formulae o f the newsman—the snappy lead, the capsule summary,
the few quick quotes and— yes—the objectivity (“Facts without their nuance”) simply did
not work for this story.
So here may be another inkling for Lukas that there was “more” to many o f the
stories that the press purported to cover.
One other story in that issue o f the Chicago Journalism Review is important for
the tale o f Tony Lukas in Chicago though: a sidebar set into the text of a story about
reporters responding to Federal subpoenas. Under the headline “Need Help?” is a brief
report on a new committee, one which Lukas was a member of:
Reporters meeting informally at Georgetown University March 8 set up the
Reporters’ Committee on Freedom o f the Press, a 13-man (and 0-woman) group
to coordinate the responses o f line professionals to the government’s attempts to
intimidate the media through use o f subpoena power. The committee will
undertake legal research independent o f the media corporations, act as a national
clearinghouse for information on developments in the field, and provide
i
• 139
assistance to newsmen who
request it.
Lukas represented the committee, with his New York Times affiliation clearly
listed after his name— even though he was not going to be long for the full-time staff of
the paper.

138 Henry DeZutter, “The trial: You had to be there,” Chicago Journalism Review, March
1970, p. 3.
139 “Need Help?” Chicago Journalism Review, March 1970, p. 14.

80

In a sense, The Barnyard Epithet can be seen as the de facto first issue of
(MORE). Lukas would continue to work for the Times as a contributing editor (basically
a freelance writer who agrees to write on a regular basis), but he would leave the staff
under which he found him self chafing. And the story that he told in his book was the first
time that he was able to tell the part o f the story that his institution wouldn’t let him tell.
Two months after the Chicago Journalism Review issue that noted Lukas’s
inclusion on the Reporters’ Committee on Lreedom of the Press, Lukas popped up as a
newsroom rabble-rouser again, this time in New York magazine, in an article that
provocatively suggested that there was a “cabal” afoot at the New York Times. This cabal,
wrote Edwin Diamond, “has no officers, no dominant ideology, no agenda, and no
definite plans.”140 In an unattributed quotation, one Times cabalist insists that “Lukas is
not our Lenin,” almost making it clear that Lukas was, despite the source’s protests, a
leader of the cabal. The article goes into some detail about Lukas’s discontent in covering
the Chicago conspiracy trial, and notes that he had trouble keeping his frustration to
himself:
When Lukas returned to New York earlier this year he shared some o f his
discontent with other reporters and writers— and with non-Times people. At a seminar at
Columbia University, for example, a student listened to Lukas’ complaints about the
Times' trial coverage and then asked him why he stayed. Lukas’ half-kidding references
to his salary and “perks” (air travel card, etc.) hardly did much to assuage student doubts
about the m edia’s integrity.141

140 Edwin Diamond, “The Cabal at the ‘New York Times’: Which Way to the
Revolution?” New York, May 18, 1970, p. 42.
141 Diamond, p. 43.

81

In addition to Lukas, the article mentions several future (MORE) contributors,
including the Times'?, women’s news editor Charlotte Curtis, Washington Post writer
Nicholas von Hoffman, and Times reporter Earl Caldwell. (Also noted was a young New
York Post reporter named William Woodward, who would become essential to (MORE)’s
beginnings.) But most intriguingly, Diamond writes that some in the “cabal” were
pondering a more public version of the Times’s interoffice memo “Winners and Sinners,”
which highlighted good and bad coverage (and grammatical mistakes) among Times
staffers. Diamond writes that “There is a model in the Chicago Journalism Review, an
excellent monthly put out by young Second City reporters.. ..”142
So it was in this atmosphere that Lukas suggested that he and Poliak create their
own, New York-based journalism review. After all, w asn’t New York where most o f the
national press was headquartered? But in order to make this project work, Poliak and
Lukas wanted to make sure that they had enough support for and enough interest in their
project. To accomplish this, they would go through a two-step trial process. And of
course, neither of them had the money it would take to start a magazine, so investors had
to be found.

The rebellious scion reporter becomes a publisher himself
Lukas and Poliak decided to hold a meeting first— an open meeting, bringing in
any New York City area reporters who felt the same sorts o f frustrations in their work as
Lukas was feeling. They both knew quite a few people at New York news organizations
so they spread the word through the grapevine. There was going to be a meeting at the

142 Diamond, p. 45

82

Harvard Club, on West 4 4 ^ Street, near Grand Central Terminal. Come, they said, share
your ideas for a new publication.
Interviewed 40 years after this meeting, Poliak doesn’t remember who came, or
exactly what was said by whom (and the same is true for many o f the surviving members
o f (M ORE)’s first advisory panel, though Calvin Trillin remembered a meeting at some
sort o f club,143 and Ron Dorfman confirmed that it was indeed at the Harvard Club).144
But Poliak does remember that the turnout was far more than he had expected.
Apparently, the frustration in the newsrooms was even higher than he and Lukas had
guessed. Even though it’s not entirely possible to ascertain who attended, it seems
reasonable to think that the advisory committee listed on the masthead o f (M ORE)’s first
issue may have been there, or at least form a representative idea o f the sort o f journalist
who was interested in the idea o f a new journalism review that would hold news
organizations to a higher standard. In addition to Tony Lukas, who was not officially an
editor, despite being a co-founder, the advisory committee for the first issue included Paul
Cowan, Ernest Dunbar, Pamela Howard, A. Kent MacDougall, Calvin Trillin and Mike
Wallace.
After the meeting, which seems to have occurred sometime in late 1970, given
that the magazine’s young publisher claimed to have worked on it for “more than six
months” on the publication, and he hadn’t met the other co-founders before the Harvard
Club meeting.145 There, Poliak and Lukas were approached by someone they didn’t
know, a young man who asked how the organizers planned to fund the magazine. He was

143 Telephone interview with the author, June 21, 2012.
144 Interview with the author, August 10, 2012.
145 “Promising More,” Newsweek, June 14, 1971, 64.

83

interested in supporting it in some way, and had some family money he could use as he
chose. This was William Woodward III, the young New York Post writer mentioned in the
New York magazine article about the cabal at the New York Times, who, together with
Lukas and Poliak would become the third founder of (MORE). He was only 26 at the
time.
Woodward, who went by the nickname Woody, was the son of William
Woodward, Jr., who was in turn the heir to the Hanover National Bank fortune. Woody
Woodward was 11 years old when, in 1955, his parents attended a dinner party for Wallis
Simpson, the Duchess of Windsor. There had been reports that night of a prowler in their
neighborhood, Oyster Bay on Long Island. Woody Woodward’s parents retired to
separate bedrooms, armed and nervous. Sometime during the night, Woodward’s father
came into his w ife’s room, and she shot and killed him while their two boys, including
the young Woody Woodward slept in other rooms.146
The killing was a sensation. Life magazine called it “The Shooting o f the
Century.”147 A grand jury ruled that the shooting had been an accident, but there were
persistent rumors that it was intentional. William Woodward, Jr., was known to have been
promiscuous with both women and men, so the idea was that his wife had found out
about his extracurricular relationships. Truman Capote was also fascinated by the killing
and wrote part o f a novel about it, with the fictionalized Mrs. Woodward clearly killing
her husband intentionally. Several of these chapters were published in Esquire magazine,

146 The sensational story o f the Woodward murder and subsequent suicide is told by
Susan Braudy in her pulpy but well-researched book This Crazy Thing Called Love: The
Golden World and Fatal Marriage o f Ann and Billy Woodward. (New York: St. M artin’s
Paperbacks, 1992).
147 Jim Yardley, “Heir to a Fortune, and to Tragedy; Suicide Ends the Life o f a Wealthy,
and Haunted, Man,” The New York Times, May 8, 1999.

84

and Woody Woodward’s mother reacted: she killed herself. Less than a year later,
Woodward’s brother jumped from a hotel window on Central Park South and also died.
Dominick Dunne later fictionalized the story for his novel The Two Mrs. Grenvilles.
But despite his wealthy, and publicly tragic upbringing, Woody Woodward was
not entirely an outsider to the journalistic community that Poliak and Lukas had invited to
the Harvard Club, and was in fact quite sympathetic to some of the anti-establishment
sentiments that the (MORE) regulars harbored. More than a reportorial dilettante,
Woodward was determined to find a worthwhile career for himself. According to his New
York Times obituary:
In 1968, he became a reporter at The New York Post, and if newspapering seemed
an unlikely career for a multimillionaire, he embraced it. He paid his own way to cover
the Vietnam War, riding around the war on a motorcycle. In New York, he represented the
Newspaper Guild in contract negotiations with management, another unlikely role for the
heir to a banking fortune. 148
According to the New York “cabal” article though, Woodward was chosen as the
newsroom representative by the Post's publisher, Dorothy S chiff149 Woodward’s mother
had socialized with Schiff, and had gotten him his job there,150 and so presumably felt
comfortable talking to him if he were to become the Post's union rep (Diamond describes
Woodward as “both engage and very social.”)151 So as a newsroom union guy, and the
sort o f reporter so eager to go to Vietnam that he paid his own way there, Woodward was
supportive o f the effort, and he agreed to fund a pilot issue o f the new magazine, which

148 Yardley, “H eirto a Fortune...”
149 Diamond, p. 45.
150 Braudy, p. 373.
151 Diamond, p. 45.

85

the founders would use to judge interest in their project. If there was enough, (MORE)
would begin regular publication. They were inspired in this approach by the New York
Review o f Books, a publication Poliak deeply respected, and one which gave the new
journalism review advice and assistance in its early days.

152

In May of 1971, Woodward had lunch with Dorothy Schiff, which seems to have
been done at Woodward’s request. At lunch, he told Schiff about the publication, and
about Poliak. He seems to have requested a leave of absence from the Post the previous
February,153 but at this meeting Woodward explained his connection to (MORE) and that
he was going to serve as publisher. In what appears to be something of a sop to his
mentor as a publisher, he also told her that “it remained to be seen how the business side
and the editorial side got along, mentioning the Harper's situation, which was a clear case
o f business and editorial sides clashing.”154 Woodward was likely aware, o f course, that
the first issue o f the magazine would carry an article about H a rp er’s M agazine forcing its
editor, Willie Morris, out. In a memo she dictated about the lunch, Schiff also found it
noteworthy that (MORE) would have an editorial policy forbidding its writers to write
about their own publications. Given the defensiveness with which she would view later
(MORE) articles and inquiries about the Post, it’s likely that she already had selfpreservation on her mind, and the less interaction that the Post could have with a

152

Interview with the author, September 8, 2011.
153 The reference to the request for a leave o f absence appears in a memo from Jean
Gilette to Paul Sann, dated May 13, 1971. New York Public Library Dorothy Schiff
Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23
154 Dorothy Schiff meeting memorandum, May 4, 1971. New York Public Library
Dorothy Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4 1977, May 23

86

potential journalism review— even through her protege Woodward—the better it would
be for her and her newspaper.
Sometime either at her lunch with Woodward or within the following two weeks,
Schiff decided that Woodward could not work at the Post anymore—that his leave of
absence should become a resignation. In a memo to her files, she wrote, “When I
suggested Woody resign because he was now publisher of (More) and there might be a
conflict o f interest, Woody refused to, saying there was a man on leave from the State
Department and was the editor o f Foreign Affairs but he didn't have the man's name.”155
Woodward had apparently settled on John Franklin Campbell, the editor o f Foreign
Affairs, as his comparison for him self in terms of conflict o f interest. But by this point,
Schiff and her editor, Paul Sann, had already decided what would be done to demonstrate
that the Post was not involved in starting up (MORE). They would question Woodward
openly at the press conference announcing the first issue, making it clear in their
coverage that Woodward was doing this on his own behalf, not Schiff’s.
Lukas and Poliak, with their new partner Woodward providing most o f the early
funding for the magazine from his own pocket, formed a corporation to publish (MORE).
They named their company Rosebud Associates, Inc. The name was a sly nod to one of
the most famous sleds in the fictional history o f journalism, and the Citizen Kane
reference was yet another way of acknowledging the traditions o f journalism. There was,
o f course, an irony in referring to a fictionalized version o f a corrupt newspaper
publisher, but it was a foreshadowing o f the cheeky tone that (MORE) would adopt

155 Dorothy Schiff, memo to files, May 20, 1971. New York Public Library Dorothy
Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4—1977,
May 23

87

toward the business o f j oumalism. (MORE) would, over the years of its existence, play
with several important dialectics, one o f which is the interplay between journalism as a
practice and its role in society versus the publication o f news as a business. Others that
they toyed with included being anti-establishment but proud o f the traditions of
journalism; and being opponents o f anti-intellectualism but also given to juvenile
parodies from time to time. Criticizing a particular news organization or a pervasive
practice within journalism did not mean that the staffers of (MORE) disliked journalism
itself. Journalism was vital to a self-regulating culture and a self-governing society. The
’60s had shown quite clearly (to a certain subset of people) that criticizing the
government did not mean you disliked the country. In fact, in some ways it could be seen
as the ultimate in patriotism— defending your country against its government. (MORE)
occasionally came to see itself as defending journalism against the people who were
actually doing journalism, and doing it poorly.
Rosebud Associates was in business, but the magazine itself also needed a name.
Poliak says he is unsure who came up with the name for the magazine, but its meaning, at
least, was always clear, and exemplified a dual approach that would come to define
(MORE). Before electronic layout of newspaper copy, reporters would mark the end of
each typewritten page with one of two choices: if there was more to the story on the next
page, he would type “(MORE)” to indicate this. If that was the end of the story, he would
type — 30— . So on the one hand, choosing “(MORE)” as the magazine’s name indicated
the thoughts that Tony Lukas was having in Chicago—that there was more to most news
stories than was being told in the mainstream press. On the other hand, the new

nameplate spoke to a sense o f journalistic tradition that its founders (Poliak and Lukas, at
least) felt themselves to be a part o f
To lay out the magazine, Poliak and Lukas brought on Sam Antupit, a well-known
designer o f publications who was perhaps best known for having designed The New York
Review o f Books, with its matte paper, its bigger-than-a-tabloid, but smaller-than-abroadsheet size, and its cartoonish line drawings, most famously by David Levine.156 The
logo Antupit designed was striking and instantly recognizable, though its stylization
would cause large amounts of stylistic variation among other publications that wanted to
refer to the new j oumalism review. Antupit cast the letters in a thick, sans-serif, all-caps
font, closed in on either side by a pair o f what appear to be either parentheses or square
brackets. They’re likely parentheses, but they’re squarish parentheses, and other
publications never seemed quite sure what to do with them when referring to (MORE).
Some went with parentheses, some with brackets, some decided to forgo them altogether,
even though they were integral to the joke behind the magazine’s name. The type of the
word “MORE” is aligned with the top of these parentheses, and then underneath, lined up
with the bottom o f them, are the words “A Journalism Review.”
Rosebud Associates, Inc. filed to register the trademark for on July 29, 1971,
more than a month after the pilot issue appeared. Even the trademark office didn’t quite
get the idea behind the stylized “(MORE),” filing the trademark instead as “(MORE A
JOURNALISM REVIEW).”157 That first issue had a publication date of June, 1971, but it
likely left the presses on May 19, since the trademark approval document gives that date

156 Philip Nobile, Intellectual Skywriting: Literary Politics and The New York Review of
Books (New York: Charterhouse, 1974), 27.
157 MORE A JOURNALISM REVIEW Trademark Details, serial number 72398753,
accessed via Justia Trademarks, wwwjustia.com.

as the first usage o f the trademark, and the date from which it was in force. The
trademark listed the headquarters for (MORE) at 960 Park Avenue in New York, which
seems to have been Woody Woodward’s home address. 158 The first issue bore a cover
price o f 75 cents, and you could subscribe for $7.50 per year. Further discounts were
available to generous patrons who believed that (MORE) would be around for more than
ayear: $14.00 for two years, $19.00 for three.159
When the first issue was ready, the founders held a press conference at the
Algonquin Hotel in Midtown Manhattan, near Grand Central Terminal, and across the
street from the Harvard Club, where the initial meeting had occurred six months earlier.
The Algonquin, of course, is most famous for being the home of the Algonquin Round
Table group o f writers, actors and wits. Whether or not the association was intentional,
the location evokes the idea of a group o f intellectual, witty and cosmopolitan writers,
and given the mission o f (MORE), that seems an appropriate comparison, and Robert
Benchley, who had founded the “Wayward Press” column in The New Yorker, was a
regular member o f the group.
The press conference was held on May 18, 1971, and garnered some coverage in
the mainstream press. Only Poliak and Woodward seem to have attended on behalf of
(MORE), with Lukas beginning what would be his regular role as an outside adviser and
frequent contributor, but not a full-time staff member. Paul Sann, the editor o f The New
York Post, didn’t see much of a need to cover the event at first, even though he knew of

158 Memorandum from Henry Erbach to Arthur Brody, dated June 3, 1971, copies to John
DeBellis and Julian Leeds, re: MORE (A JOURNALISM REVIEW) NEW YORK
TIMES BOOK REVIEW MAY 30TH, 1971. New York Public Library Dorothy Schiff
Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23
159 (MORE): A Journalism Review. June 1971.

90

Woody Woodward’s involvement. A few days before the event, he sent a memo to
Dorothy Schiff, saying that he “would be tempted to cover only if you said so.” Schiff
wrote on the memo: “I ‘said so’ by phone to Paul.”160
According to the resultant article in the Post, (MORE) had an initial press run of
15,000 copies161. Variety had the number at only 13,000, though both agreed that the
Stem Fund for Investigative Journalism had helped to pay for the publication.162 The Post
also noted that there had been several small private donations. Among them, Woodward
him self had also contributed $2,300 o f his own money to the magazine.163 The Post
article also contains the answer to the one question Dolly Schiff wanted asked in order to
distance her newspaper from the new journalism review:
Woodward, asked if he had applied for a leave from The Post to serve as publisher
o f (More), replied: "No I didn't. I asked the Post for a leave o f absence for what I
described as personal and business reasons which they asked me to elaborate on
and which I did. It wasn't until, I'd say, a month or six weeks later that I decided
that it would be interesting and worthwhile for me to spend some time trying to
help this publication set up.
While it’s not clear if that timeline works out with the Harvard Club meeting and
Woodward’s initial request for a leave of absence, the answer did seem to satisfy Schiff,
as she told the P o s f s advertising department to work on securing an ad for (MORE) that
could m n in the Post. She had seen one that (MORE) had taken out in The New York
Times Book Review, featuring a bald head, shown from the top o f the nose up, with
slightly menacing eyes. Printed on the head was the sentence, “Every day the press

160 Memo from Paul Sann to Dorothy Schiff, May 13, 1971. New York Public Library
Dorothy Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4 1977, May 23.
161 “Review O f Press In Bow,” The New YorkPost, May 18, 1971, 10.
162 “Literati: ‘M ore’ Deserves Encore,” Variety, May 26, 1971, 54.
163 “Promising More,” Newsweek.

91

secretly operates on your head: we operate on the press.”164 The ad gave an overview of
what the journalism review would be trying to accomplish:
(MORE) is a new monthly journalism review which will tell you a lot you
don’t know about how the press is run.
(MORE) tells you why some stories are killed, why others are “altered,”
and why what is printed sometimes tells only part o f the story.
(MORE) provides you with inside information about newspapers,
magazines, radio and television which you can’t get anywhere else.
The rest of the ad summarized the content o f the first issue— all o f which
was written on a volunteer basis by its contributors.165
The first incarnation o f (MORE) looks quite a bit like The New York
Review o f Books. Sized at about 11 by 15 inches, roughly the size o f a tabloid newspaper,
(MORE) was printed on cheap newsprint-style paper stock (though the outside pages
were often a slightly better quality paper than the inside), and usually printed in two
colors (i.e., black and a second highlight color. There were very few, if any photographs
in the first issues, but there were line drawings and cartoons. The (MORE) logo appeared
in the top left corner, with an illustration in the top right. In fact, Antupit appears to have
recruited his iconic New York Review o f Books artist David Levine, since Levine drew the
first cover illustration. There were several headlines in bold sans-serif type teasing stories
that were inside, and, like the New York Review o f Books, the lead story began on the
front cover. It w asn’t fancy, but it was clean, and focused on the stories. The cover price,
for those who hadn’t been on the complimentary circulation list for the pilot issue and
who wanted to buy a copy on the newsstand, where it was also available, was 75 cents.166

164 Advertisement for (MORE): A Journalism Review. New York Times Book Review,
May 30, 1971, BR12.
165 “The Media: Promising More,” Newsweek, June 14, 1971, 64.
166 “The Media: Promising More,” Newsweek, June 14, 1971, 64.

92

There hadn’t been much in the way of additions to the masthead between the
Harvard Club meeting and the pilot issue. Poliak was editor. Woodward got second
billing and the title o f publisher. Samuel N. Antupit was listed third, as Designer. Beyond
that, the only names given in the masthead are those o f the aforementioned advisory
committee. The names listed as the advisory committee made up an impressive group of
journalists to be sure. Paul Cowan was a staff writer at the alternative newspaper The
Village Voice. Ernest Dunbar had been the first black reporter hired by a national
magazine—Look. Pamela Howard was the daughter of the former chief o f the Scripps
Howard media company. Kent MacDougall had recently edited a book o f press criticism
published by his employer, The Wall Street Journal167 (and would, 20 years later, come
out as a socialist who had been working inside the establishment press).168 Calvin Trillin
had been on the staff o f The New Yorker since 1963, and would continue to be for at least
40 more years, as well as contributing to The Nation and writing books. And Mike
Wallace had been working as a correspondent for the CBS News program 60 Minutes
since its debut in 1968. It was a serious and diverse bunch who occupied that first
masthead.
In the eight years that (MORE) would exist, almost every byline in the magazine
would belong to someone who was already a respected and well-known journalist, or was
soon to become one. The lineup for the inaugural issue included Stuart H. Loory, then a
Washington correspondent for The Los Angeles Times, who had worked for the New York
Herald-Tribune and would go on to work for CNN beginning in 1980, and then teach at

167 The Press: A Critical Look from the Inside, edited by A. Kent MacDougall (Princeton:
Dow Jones Books, 1966-1972).
168 A. Kent MacDougall, “Boring From Within the Bourgeois Press: Part On q,” M onthly
Review, November 1988. Part Two: December 1988.

93

the University o f Missouri. Lukas contributed a story. George Reedy was a press
secretary in the Johnson administration, and was on a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson
Center for Scholars when he wrote his piece for (MORE). Paul Cowan, also on the
advisory committee, contributed. David Halberstam, who had been Lukas’s New York
Times colleague, was already a Pulitzer Prize winner, and at work on his book The Best
and the Brightest, which would come out the next year. (Halberstam knew Lukas from
their time together in Baltimore, and wrote a recommendation letter for Lukas to bring
him to The New York Times.) He is described in his brief bio as having “recently resigned
as a contributing editor of H arp er’s. Charlotte Curtis was the editor o f The New York
Times w omen’s pages, which still existed as such in 1971. And finally, Ron Dorfman, the
editor o f the inspirational Chicago Journalism Review, wrote a piece for the new
magazine.
Almost everything else was written by Poliak, including the brief pieces in the
front and back o f the magazine, and including the letter from the editor that filled a half
column between the masthead and the table of contents. In this long paragraph, Poliak
disclaimed any grand purpose for the tenuous new undertaking that he was in charge of:
Traditionally, a new publication is launched with a Ringing Declaration of
Purpose. The trouble with such noble manifestoes, however, is that you then have to live
up to them. This often proves exceedingly difficult. Despite your best intentions, little old
ladies from Dubuque do pick up your magazine. Or some newspaper editor (or even
publisher) momentarily forgets the marble admonition in the lobby and gives the news
partially with both fear and favor.169

169 Letter from the editor, (M ORE), June 1971, p. 2.

94

Here Poliak was referring to the “without fear or favor” statement of principles
that Adolph Ochs, the patriarch of the modem New York Times published when he bought
the paper and to the type o f aged Iowans that The New Yorker was decidedly not
supposed to be edited for, in the opinion o f founding editor Harold Ross. Again, (MORE)
is having fun with institutions of journalism while simultaneously acknowledging their
importance. The editor’s note continued:
Not surprisingly, this causes a certain embarrassment. But worse, it turns out to be
quite costly as well. For, having fallen short o f your R.D.P., you are forced to keep up
appearances by noting your achievements in large, expensive advertisements on the back
page o f the Times and The Wall Street Journal. With luck, these advertisements will
persuade your readers that at least you are doing something worthwhile. But then there’s
your staff. They’re a pretty savvy bunch and they really know how far you are from the
old R.D.P.
Now Poliak is pointing out that reporters are not dupes. Neither are readers.
Poliak went on, saying that (MORE) was going to
cover the New York area press— by which we mean newspapers, magazines, radio
and television—with a kind of tough-mindedness we think the press should be
seldom does apply to its coverage o f the world. We hope to do this seriously but
not without wit, fairly but not “objectively.”
But despite Poliak’s stated intention primarily to cover the press in New York,
following the lead o f the earlier, regional journalism reviews, (MORE) clearly had
national aspirations. To some extent, that was a reflection of the fact that many national
news organizations— Time and Newsweek, the Times, the broadcast network news
operations—were based in New York City, and therefore covering the local press meant
covering the national press. Still, the articles even in the first issue belie the magazine’s

95

national leanings: Lukas’s contribution was an article about R ea d er’s Digest, Paul Cowan
wrote about the press’s favorable treatment o f the oil industry; Charlotte Curtis told the
story o f how editor Willie Morris was forced out at H a rp er’s magazine. And (MORE)
also reprinted an article from the Chicago Jorunalism Review, by its editor Ron Dorfman,
in which Dorfman detailed the reporters power struggle at two Chicago newspapers. So
(MORE) hardly put together a parochial editorial lineup for that first issue.
The quotation marks around the word “objectively” in that introductory note also
begin to make clear an attitude toward objectivity that (MORE) would espouse more
broadly over time. In short, the staff o f the magazine thought that it was a scrim that
shielded publishers from blame and stifled the troublesome individual reporters who
wanted their own voice. The articles in that pilot issue also make clear the theme o f the
reporter’s voice, which played such a large role in pushing the magazine’s founders
toward the printing press. In the Hellbox column, devoted to shorter pieces and to
bestowing “Rosebuds” on reporting they deemed exceptional, the editors ran side-by-side
comparisons of two paragraphs of copy that the New York Times correspondent Homer
Bigart turned in, and the toothless one-line distillation that ran in the paper. The column
quotes Bigart:
I never read my stories in the paper anym ore.... It’s a safe way to avoid ulcers.
You can’t win. You finally get to the point where you either have to take it or quit. People
have tried to fight back, but they get nowhere. You can’t beat a newspaper bureaucracy
any more than you can beat any other kind of bureaucracy.170

170 “H ellbox,” (M ORE), June, 1971, p. 2.

96

Paul Cowan’s article on the favorable treatment o f the oil industry raises the issue
o f the new class o f well-educated reporters, and the new sorts o f ethical issues they have
to deal with:
It was difficult for a man who would become a dovish writer for the Times or
Newsweek to believe that his classmate, the corporation executive, would become
an accessory of an institution forced by the biology o f the business world to
control large portions of the earth in order to survive.171
Charlotte Curtis’s article about Willie M orris’s forced resignation addressed the
limitations o f a newsroom given over entirely to the editorial and writing staff; M orris’s
editing style gave writers room to be themselves, intellectually and stylistically (she
quotes David Halberstam as saying that Morris was the only editor who ever understood
him), but his editing also made little allowance for the financial continuity of the
magazine.
Perhaps most directly, Ron Dorfman’s reprinted contribution entirely addressed
the idea o f reporters having their own voice. His story told of the reportorial and editorial
staff o f two Chicago newspapers—the Sun-Times and the D aily News, who objected so
strongly to their papers’ endorsement (both papers were owned by Marshall Field V.) of
Richard Daley for reelection as Chicago’s mayor, that they fought to buy a full-page ad
outlining their objections to Daley, and supporting his opponent, Richard E. Friedman. In
his closing paragraphs, Dorfman elegantly summarizes some o f the fissures that had
begun to appear in the idea that reporters were opinion-free conduits o f pure fact, and he
distills the issue to its core:
Some reporters have openly demonstrated their sympathy with the anti-war
movement. Others have spoken out in favor o f the war effort. Some women
reporters have announced their commitment to the women’s liberation movement.

171 Paul Cowan, “ Slicking Over the Oil Industry,” (M ORE), June, 1971, p. 9.

97

Others have said they are against it. Now some reporters have gone a step further
and openly endorsed a political candidate. None of this is especially
revolutionary, except in the sense that more such acts are bound to follow ... and
each makes it more difficult for the profession to perpetuate the nonsensical
notion that a reporter is a non-human creature who understands everything and
believes nothing. 172
By including this piece, the editors o f (MORE) were declaring that they would not be that
non-human kind of reporter. And in the second issue, six months after the pilot, they also
showed that ethical obligation would be stronger than social ties, when Dick Poliak wrote
a long piece criticizing the New York Post, published by Dorothy Schiff, the friend and
former employer o f (M ORE)’s publisher.173
The most important piece in the first issue, however, was a reaction by George E.
Reedy to an essay in Commentary by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, an academic and an
adviser to the administrations of Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon. Moynihan had written
that there was a growing imbalance between the press and the presidency, with the scales
now tipping toward the press. The Reedy piece plays an important role in the history of
(MORE) for two reasons. One is that Poliak claims that the piece, and a brief editorial
inspired by it, pushed The New York Times into revising its corrections policy, nudging
them into consolidating its corrections in a single box in a fixed part o f the newspaper.
Poliak claims that this is the most significant direct effect that (MORE) ever had on the
ethical operation o f a news organization.174 There is substantial evidence to support this
claim too, though several other factors intervened, as well, and these are investigated in
more detail in chapter five. The second reason the Reedy essay looms large as a
foundational myth for (MORE) is that its last paragraph actually makes a better mission

Ron Dorfman, “Battling the Myths in Chicago,” (MORE), June, 1971, p. 18.
173 “An Intra-Family Sort o f Thing,’ (MORE), October, 1971, p. 3.
174 Interview with the author, September 8, 2011.

statement for the magazine than Poliak’s self-effacing disclaimer o f high moral purpose.
After dismissing Moynihan’s call for independent press councils to monitor news
organizations, Reedy writes:
As an institution, the press has not been sufficiently self-critical and it has
been far readier to protect its privileges than to correct its deficiencies. An
indictment could be drawn that would make the Commentary article pale by
comparison
But a press adequate to the needs of a free society will not be produced by
press boards which pass upon the “truth” or by rationing the amount o f criticism
to which individual groups in our society are entitled. This is not the road to
freedom. It is the road to controlled thought.175
Reedy doesn’t quite say it, but he does seem to imply that journalism reviews
such as (MORE) could serve as the proper forum for that journalistic self-criticism.
Reaction to the first issue was mostly positive, at least among those publications
that chose review it. The Wall Street Journal,116 New York magazine177 and the New York
Times 178 each wrote up the first issue, though none had much to say about it besides a
cursory listing o f its articles and occasionally a note about how it was New York’s first
journalism review. But Nat Hentoff, who among other tasks, was the media critic for The
Village Voice, did not even wait for the press conference announcing (MORE) to review
it. Hentoff didn’t like the name, and cracked jokes about it in his column:
There will be enough money by fall, but the bigger the initial subscription
response, the less (MORE) will have to raise. (You see what happens, Dick, when you
have a title like that?)179

George E. Reedy, “Moynihan’s Scholarly Tantrum,” (MORE), June 1971, p. 7.
176 “New York City Catches Up: Has a Journalism Review,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 19, 1971, 16.
177 “Best Bets,” New York, May 24 1971, 52.
178 “News-Media Review Begins Publication,” The New York Times, May 19, 1971, 45.
179 Nat Hentoff, “Broyard & (MORE),” The Village Voice, May 13, 1971, 19-20.

Hentoff preferred the more prosaic but descriptive title The New York Journalism
Review. O f course, (MORE) had broader ambitions than a title limiting its scope to New
York would allow. But still, unselfishly, Hentoff eagerly welcomed (MORE) to New York
as his competition. “What a pleasure it’s going to be,” he wrote, “to have a place to send
leads instead of guiltily watching them back up because one man in one city can only
cover so much space and time.” Though he complimented the “many experienced hands”
involved in (MORE), it’s possible, given the lack of detail in his review, and the early
publication date, that he was working from the press release alone.
Variety's review was similarly laudatory. The author called it “amazingly good for
a first issue, critical but not with that offensive militancy that marks and mars many
publications devoted to ‘exposing’ whatever it is, and those in charge.” 180 (MORE) could,
in fact, have taken the route of militancy, but even in this first issue, avoided that sort of
confrontation, adopting a tone that would not alienate establishment press institutions in
the same way that more radical publications had. It was a stance that would irritate
publishers without angering them (most of the time), and would allow (MORE) to have a
greater degree o f influence on those they covered. Variety was astute enough to pick up
on that tone even in volume one, issue one—though they were less astute on reading the
name of publishers, misprinting “Rosebud Associates” as “Posbred.”
Variety picked out Charlotte Curtis’s investigation into the ouster o f Willie Morris
as editor o f Harper's as the strongest article, and Newsweek agreed. Dick Poliak had been
the editor o f the “Press” section o f Newsweek, o f course, but nevertheless, the praise
bordered on effusive. Curtis’s piece is a “tour de force.” Though the Newsweek columnist

180

Literati: ‘M ore’ Deserves Encore, 54.

100

noted that New York was late in getting its own journalism review, the columnist picked
up on the national ambition o f (MORE), unlike Hentoff. Newsweek noted that the “top­
flight professional status o f its contributors” also set it apart from other journalism
reviews, where the contributors might have been just as incensed at the state of
journalism, but did not have the same preexisting stature coming into their roles as critics.
That kind o f talent, all o f which had agreed to write without payment for the first issue,
gave the columnist hope that (MORE) could become “the best publication yet devised for
journalists criticizing their own profession.” 181
The Newsweek piece said that Poliak and Woodward would work on soliciting
subscriptions and raising more money (so that all future contributors would be paid), but
quoted Woodward as saying that they weren’t in the publishing business for the money.
“Face it,” Newsweek quotes Woodward as saying. “There’s probably more money in Hula
Hoops than in new journalism reviews.” Woodward hoped that the magazine would be in
the black in five years. And while that never did happen, the first 27 issues, which can be
seen as the first of three semi-distinct periods in the history o f (MORE), did establish
what (MORE) really was up to, if it w asn’t for the money.

(MORE) gets its first assistant editor
As noted in the introduction, Peter Richardson, wrotethat writing about a
magazine is like telling the story o f a rock band, with an institutional identity, but as
individual personalities leave and enter the magazine, that identity changes in subtle or

181 “The Media: Prom ising M ore,” N ew sw eek, June 14, 1971, 64.

101

significant ways.

182

When (MORE) launched its pilot issue, only Dick Poliak, the editor

and Woody Woodward, the publisher, represented the magazine at the press conference.
Even then, while Woodward was important as a fund raiser, the editorial identity o f the
publication was established almost entirely by Poliak. But shortly after it began regular
publication in October 1971, (MORE) gained a second full time editorial staff member,
Terry Pristin, and this dissertation uses Pristin’s tenure as assistant editor to define the
first period of its publication.
The second issue o f (MORE) came out just when Poliak and Woodward had
hoped it would, in the fall of 1971, just four months after the pilot issue. Pristin wrote a
piece for that issue, as a freelancer. She doesn’t recall exactly how she had heard about
(MORE) in that period between the initial excitement and regular publication. She was
young— only 25— and didn’t have the same sort o f connections that Poliak and Lukas
and Halberstam did. After graduating from the Columbia University Graduate School of
Journalism, Pristin worked for a television station in Boston and then for an alternative
newspaper called Boston After D ark (which became the better known Boston Phoenix).
She missed New York though, and quit to return without a job. But she knew someone
who knew someone—maybe Lukas— and she had an idea for a story, she remembers, and
Poliak took it for the first issue. 183 That article looked into the success, or lack thereof, of
the Harlem-based Community News Service, which was intended to bring black voices
into majority white newspapers downtown. The service was failing to bring in enough

182

Peter Richardson, A Bomb in Every Issue: How the Short, Unruly Life o f Ramparts
M agazine Changed America (New York: New Press, 2010).
183
Terry Pristin, discussion with the author, December 17, 2011.

102

money to support itself.

184

The table o f contents for that issue said that Pristin was a

young journalist who had “recently joined the staff o f (MORE),” but the masthead didn’t
have a title for her yet. By November though, she had her name listed next to the title
“Assistant Editor.” She remembers her pay as $160 or $180 per week, “something in that
range. Very little money, but it was fun.” She called working for (MORE), “a heady
experience for a very young person because I was rubbing shoulders with all these
famous people. Dick [Poliak] brought in so many well known journalists and I would go
to the kinds o f parties that I would never be invited to today. There were always parties.
Somehow there were always parties. So I was on a first name basis with people with
distinguished reputations.
While Pristin found that life exciting, she also realized that the mission of
(MORE) might square better with the career achievements of the more senior
contributors to the magazine, since they had the experience both to write more credible
stories and to be able to face up to more established journalists and institutions. “It’s
really better to be a press critic when you actually have done it a little bit,” she said. “You
should have actually done it so you know what goes into it, what kinds of pressures
people are under, and it gives you a little bit more of a humane understanding o f what it’s
like to be a journalist, and I sort o f reversed things in my career.” Pristin did say, though,
that she mostly worked on editing and writing the shorter pieces in the magazine—the
“Hellbox” stories that originally ran on page two and later the “Big Apple” section that
focused on New York City media. Editing duties for the longer pieces mostly belonged to
Poliak.

184 Terry Pristin, “Is Anybody Downtown Listening?” (MORE), October 1971, 6-8.

103

Even with Pristin in the office, the staff o f (MORE) remained exceedingly small.
At most, there were four regular employees who would show up. Poliak and Pristin
constituted the entire editorial staff. According to Pristin, Woody Woodward also came to
the office regularly, at least at first. And Tom Reeves later joined the magazine as a
business and advertising manager. Sam Antupit, the designer, came in toward the end of
the production cycle and sometimes accompanied the group on trips to the printer in
Connecticut, but he was mostly absent. Tony Lukas, the third founder of (MORE) with
Poliak and Woodward, mostly stayed away, busy with other parts of his career. According
to Pristin, Lukas would come into the office occasionally and help to generate story ideas
or to bring in writers— and of course to write stories himself. But he wasn’t an editor.

Themes in (MORE) in the Terry Pristin era, June 1971-December 1973
In the first incarnation o f (MORE), from the pilot issue until December o f 1973, when
Terry Pristin was replaced on the masthead, the magazine developed several consistent
themes and areas o f coverage— many o f which would remain throughout the magazine’s
run, or at least through the period in which Rosebud Associates, the founders, owned the
publication. At the same time, the first two and a half years o f (MORE) established the
magazine’s characteristic tone. The recurring themes included the following:
•

Journalists’ growing distrust o f corporations and for advertising in general.

•

Journalists’ growing distrust o f the government, particularly in matters regarding
surveillance, propaganda. (MORE) also expressed dismay at the number of
journalists and media organizations that willingly complied with government
efforts to censor information or mislead the public.

104

•

In the spirit o f 1970s identity politics, (MORE) was also watchful on behalf of
several interest groups, advocating for their inclusion both in stories in the
mainstream press and in the newsrooms that produced those stories.

•

The chronicling o f new and promising press ventures, interwoven with an elegiac
wistfulness about the dying off o f several venerable media properties.

•

(MORE) was concerned with advocating protections for journalists, particularly
in the area o f the protection of anonymous sources.

•

(MORE) covered obscenity and censorship o f obscenity almost as closely as it
covered the more more serious censorship o f information.

•

(MORE) wrote about issues o f press ethics and accountability, particularly in
coverage of the discussion over whether or not the United States needed a news
council that could independently review stories in the press.

•

Finally, (MORE) chronicled the experience of being a journalist in the 1970s in a
way that its predecessors, such as The Columbia Journalism Review, never did. It
was almost as if it were a lifestyle magazine for journalists.

(MORE) was a local journalism review in the way that The New York Times was a
local newspaper in the 1970s. It was based in New York City, and to some extent its
coverage reflected that fact. New York media organizations were much more likely to
come under scrutiny in (MORE) than were magazines based in Philadelphia or Chicago,
and even more so than dailies in Denver or Dubuque. And the predominantly New Y orkbased staff had a New York-centric view o f the world in much the same way that the
Times often does. It’s the New Yorker’s view of the world that Saul Steinberg cartooned
for the cover of The New Yorker in 1976, with Manhattan seen in granular detail, and the

105

rest o f the country a sketchy rectangle on the horizon. Nevertheless, (MORE) did attempt
to cover the entire country, as did the Times, which already in the 1970s was a national
newspaper as much as it was a local broadsheet. Like the Times, (MORE) would
eventually open a Washington, D.C. Bureau (one staffed by a single man, in (MORE)’s
case). And also like the Times, (MORE) had a national influence. Among journals o f
press criticism, it was the standard bearer for its brief life. All o f these factors influenced
the range o f coverage that made its way into the journalism review, and the beginnings o f
that range can be seen in its first two and a half years.
(M ORE)’s tone in this period also covered a wide range, but particularly coalescing
around two poles: a sort o f New York Review o f Books attempt at intellectual seriousness,
and a cheeky satirical approach. Both o f these world views can be seen as an attempt to
crack the institutional press’s reluctance to engage in self-examination. That reluctance,
as argued in chapter one o f this dissertation, is one o f the key markers o f antiintellectualism in the professions, and (MORE)’s encouragement o f such self-scrutiny
speaks to the journalism review’s place as an opponent o f anti-intellectualism. Almost
always though, whether it was being serious or mocking, (MORE) operated with an
awareness o f the history o f reporting in the United States in mind—particularly the
muckraking tradition— while also advocating for change. Theirs was a progressivism
rooted in sentimentality for a golden age that was never quite real.

Coverage o f business and advertising
In its first months o f publication, (MORE) used a particularly large amount o f
printer’s ink on coverage o f two related issues. In establishing its early anti-institutional

106

stance, (MORE) ran several articles on a theme of distrust o f corporate America.
Interspersed with these were several articles about the nature o f advertising in news
publications and the relationship between money and news in general.
Even (MORE)’s pilot issue featured two articles on the topic. Tony Lukas’s article
about R ea d er’s Digest and its favoring o f corporations over environmental issues
squarely fits into a class of articles in which (MORE) faulted publications for failing to
hold business accountable. Lukas describes a 1969 article that names “the two main
villains” in the degradation o f the environment as the growing U.S. population and a
failure o f oversight by Federal agencies—but leaves out any responsibility on the part of
corporations. But in 1971, this was old news. The news peg for Lukas’s article was an
announced supplement that would run in the September 1971 issue of Digest, which
promised answers to what American corporations were doing to help the environment.
Rather than being hard-hitting investigative reporting however, this was going to be an
advertising supplement, which R ea d er’s Digest sold to companies as a terrific public
relations opportunity. For Lukas, this was a violation of the public service obligation of a
large circulation American general interest magazine.

185

As discussed above, Paul Cowan’s piece on under-coverage o f the oil industry
blamed the chummy relationships between oil executives and journalists who attended
college with them for the lack o f serious reporting. Cowan investigated whether or not
the threat o f losing advertising from oil companies might be to blame, but found that it
accounted for very little of the advertising income of most publications. Cowan puts the
blame squarely on reporters, both for being “too timid or lazy or unimaginative (or all

185 J. Anthony Lukas, “Life in These United States,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
June 1971, 3-4.

107

three) to do the kind of reading and interviewing that would help them understand how
complex organizations like oil companies operate.... They eagerly accept a bureaucrat’s
transparent lie if it will allow them to avoid an ominously difficult piece o f research.”186
But while (MORE) was never reluctant to put the blame for bad reporting on a
lazy reporter, the publication was much more likely to follow the lead o f its patron saint,
A. J. Liebling, and give the lion’s share o f the distrust to the publishers. In the first two
and a half years o f its existence, (MORE) ran at least seven lengthy articles that
questioned the relationship between advertisers and publishers. Journalist Chris Welles
addressed the issue in an article about how The New York Times covered business that he
wrote for cover of the December 1971 issue. Welles analyzed nearly 600 business articles
over a two month period and diagnosed the Times's soft coverage as a combination of
over-reliance on corporate public relations—the sort o f unquestioning reportorial laziness
that troubled Paul Cowan about the oil industry— and the publishers being cowed by
advertisers. He illustrated the second point with an anecdote about airline executives
storming the office o f Times publisher Arthur Ochs Sulzberger after an editorial pushing
for airline deregulation.

187

The point that the Times was a lapdog for corporations was

driven home by a cartoon depicting a tail-wagging New York Times puppy eagerly
delivering a rolled newspaper, clenched in its teeth, to a satisfied looking personification
o f industry, wearing a suit, wingtips and pinkie rings, and chomping on a cigar while
smoke puffs out of the smokestack that constitutes his head. It was one o f the very first
cartoons for (MORE) by an artist named Marty Norman, who would soon become the

186 Paul Cowan, “Slicking Over the Oil Industry,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June
1971,7-9.
187 Chris Welles, “Soft Times for Wall Street,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1971, 1, 10-13.

108

closest thing the magazine had to a house cartoonist (though he ran this cartoon under a
pen name, afraid that he might lose business cartooning for The Times, with which he
also had a business relationship). 188
While the piece about The Times might have obliquely attacked the relationship
between publishers and advertisers—no advertiser was named specifically— (MORE)
took on advertising issues directly several times in the period between June 1971 and
December 1973. There was an article about how newspapers were refusing to take ads
from a computerized car matching system in order to avoid competition with local car
dealership advertising. 189 The same issue had an article about invasive print advertising,
where articles would cut at a diagonal across a page of editorial content or take two
quarter pages at the top left and bottom right, completely dominating the articles that they
subsidized.190 (MORE) covered the New York Times advertising acceptability policy191
(an article which also pushed the conversation into First Amendment territory, by
suggesting that the Times was censoring potentially unsavory ads). (MORE) investigated
the possibly less-than-wholesome public service ads o f The Advertising Council, which
(MORE) found to be overly protective o f “the image and interests of the nation’s
industrial and governmental power brokers.” Some of the Ad Council’s “public service”
ads were, according to this article, “nothing short of a public hoax.” 192 (MORE) also

188

Marty Norman, conversation with the author, December 14, 2011.
189 Nicholas von Hoffman, “Where Not to Find Your New Car,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, November 1971, 1, 14.
190 A. Kent MacDougall, “For Kraft Cheese, How About a Cow?” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, November 1971, 8-9.
191 Nat Hentoff, “ .. .and on the Printed Page,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January
1972, 9-11.
192
Thomas Asher, “Smoking Out Smokey the Bear,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1972, 12-14.

109

looked at propaganda from the strip mining industry193 and even returned to an
examination o f the oil business too, with a more in-depth look at an advertising
supplement that Standard Oil had placed in 16 national and regional magazines.194
(M ORE)’s pace o f coverage o f advertising and business slowed a bit from the end
o f 1972 into 1973, a period in which the magazine ran three pieces, one on deceptive
advertising195 and one about counter-advertisements to counteract it,196 and one frontcover piece about IBM ’s public relations operation.197 The general focus on advertising,
business and their interaction all falls squarely into (MORE)’s anti-institutional stance.
But really, (MORE) doesn’t seem to be anti-corporate in these articles— in fact, bowing
to the need to make money to continue publication, they raised their own advertising
rates in April 1973, with a full page ad costing $600.198 Instead, the overriding message is
one o f disappointment not so much with the corporations— indeed, they’re seen as
naturally rapacious—but with the institutional press that was supposed to be investigating
those corporations. (MORE) was goading the watchdogs, not trying to take down the
press, but trying, at least, to keep those watchdogs from becoming lapdogs like the one in
Marty Norman’s cartoon.

193 Robert Cassidy, “Stripping Out the Facts,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April
1972, 3-5.
194 James Ridgeway, “Exploits of ‘The New Adventurers,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism
Review, July 1972, 1, 18-20.
195 Victor S. Navasky, “Substantiating the ‘Permissible Lie,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism
Review, December 1972, 5-7.
196 Mark J. Green, “Talking Back to the Hucksters,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
October 1973, 6-9.
197 Laton McCartney, “How IBM Spindles the Media,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1973, 1, 19-21.
198
(MORE) Advertising Rates advertisement, (MORE): A Journalism Review, March
1973, 17.

110

Coverage of politics
In March 1973, Woody Woodward, (M ORE)’s publisher, wrote a “Column Two”
essay about some physical changes to the magazine (a switch from two to three columns
and a new subscription price— $10 per year, up from $7.50). More importantly though,
Woodward wrote that the magazine had added a new focus. (MORE) had hired a new
Washington, D.C. editor, and would be holding the second of its A. J. Liebling CounterConventions in Washington as well.199 The new hire was a young reporter named Brit
Hume, who had recently worked for the syndicated Washington investigative columnist
Jack Anderson, and had made his own name with the 1971 publication o f his book Death
and the Mines, which told the story of the United Mine Workers union in the 1960s.200 He
would later publish a memoir of his time with Anderson, further bolstering his bona Tides
as a reporter. 201 Hume’s addition to the masthead and the location o f the second of
(M ORE)’s “counter-conventions” were clear signs that (MORE) had ambitions beyond
New York City.
Given the political atmosphere o f the early 1970s, and the role o f the press in
uncovering national political scandals it is almost surprising that there w asn’t even more
reporting on political reporting in the first few issues o f (MORE). The cover story o f the
pilot issue was about N ixon’s exploitation o f prisoners o f war in Vietnam for his own
political purposes, of course. And the cover of a publication’s pilot issue is a place to
make a statement about the magazine’s values. But the next two issues barely mentioned
politics at all. Perhaps this is owing to (MORE)’s New York centrism. In December of

199 William Woodward, “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, March 1973, 2.
200 Brit Hume, Death and the Mines: Rebellion and M urder in the UMW (New York:
Grossman, 1971).
201 Brit Hume, Inside Story (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1974).

Ill

1972, the coverage o f politics picked up quickly, but even then, it ran in bursts until
Hume joined the staff. Likely this is a result of an overwhelmed editorial staff. Poliak and
Pristin just couldn’t get their heads around more national political coverage than they did,
and the majority of their connections in the press were also New Yorkers. Things
stabilized once Hume came on board.
The same anti-institutional stance that informed (M ORE)’s early coverage of
business and advertising would be equally evident in the magazine’s coverage of the
press’s relationship with government, though in the era of the Pentagon Papers and
Watergate, (MORE) would place more o f the blame on the government in this
relationship than on failures o f the press. Still, the press remained the main concern.
From December 1971 to March 1972, each issue o f (MORE) carried at least one
story about the relationship between the press and the government. These included
articles lamenting The New York Times'?, Washington bureau chief James “Scotty”
Reston’s transformation from a scrappy reporter to a “journalistic statesman,”

202

about

how a North Carolinian named Jesse Helms used his fame from broadcasting on the
Tobacco Network to get elected to the U.S. Senate,

203

or about how and on law

enforcement surveilling activist groups in order to have a chilling effect on their free
speech.204 And while surveillance and the comings and goings of Tim esmm were
interesting to (MORE), they were overshadowed by the two main veins o f coverage that
began to dominate once the implications o f the Daniel Ellsberg’s leaking o f the Pentagon

202 J. Anthony Lukas, “Say It A in’t So, Scotty” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May
1973, 1, 17-22.
203
Mark Pinsky, “Riding the Airwaves to Washington,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1973, 4-6.
204 James Aronson, “On Assignment with WFBI,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1972, 1.

112

papers to The New York Times became clear and as the revelations o f two virtually
unknown Washington Post reporters started to come to light. After the Pentagon Papers
and while the Watergate case was beginning to build momentum, (MORE) found its
footing as a critic of government reporting and found much to write about on the topics of
government cover-ups and leakers in the wake o f Vietnam, and more specifically about
Richard Nixon himself.
(M ORE)’s coverage of the Pentagon Papers case and government leakers began in
January 1972, about six months after The Times began publishing them. That piece, by
Edwin Diamond, criticized the job that wire services and newspapers had done covering
the grand jury investigations “fishing” for government leaks after the Pentagon Papers
were made public 205. In part, wrote Diamond, the news organizations just didn’t have
enough writers with the intellectual firepower needed to cover such a complex case.
Much o f the story was taking place in Boston, which didn’t attract the top writers from
the national press, and reporting the case properly involved a combination o f political and
legal knowledge that most stringers wouldn’t be able to pick up, especially if they were
responsible for other stories. And grand jury investigations are also particularly closed
proceedings, which made the reporting even more difficult, even for the strongest
reporters. Diamond attempts to provide some clarity to the story as it stood in late 1971,
when he wrote the essay, attempting to add to the work o f Sanford Ungar of The
Washington Post, the one reporter Diamond praises in the piece. He also examines how
the ongoing investigations had begun to have a chilling effect not just on Ellsberg (whose
teenage son was subpoenaed) but also on the left-wing intellectuals o f Cambridge,

205

Edwin Diamond, “Fishing in Ellsberg’s Wake,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
January 1972, 1, 13-16.

113

including the linguist Noam Chomsky, the historian Howard Zinn, and even (MORE)
contributor David Halberstam.
Bridging both the theme o f Vietnam coverage and the long arm of Richard Nixon,
(MORE) editor Dick Poliak wrote a piece about a series o f paid political columns that
The Washington Post discouraged from publication in its pages.206 Several foundations
had banded together with the idea o f running a series of 50 open letters to Richard Nixon,
which would be published as paid advertisements. Some o f the letters would be written
by prominent Americans, and the first batch included authors such as historian Lewis
Mumford, singer Harry Belafonte and psychologist Erich Fromm as well as a
businessman, a rancher, and a well-known actor made so nervous by the P ost’s
subsequent behavior in this tale that he asked that his name not be used in this article.” 207
What the Post did is somewhat murky, but it seems to have required each of the authors
to approve his or her individual ad and disclaim any liability for reactions to that ad—
even though the Post had originally said that batch clearance would be fine. This created
enough o f a hassle for the group that was organizing the ads to cancel the entire project.
Poliak suggested that the Post was trying to chill the speech o f the more anti-Nixon letter
writers, since the Post had already caused enough friction with the Nixon administration
through its Watergate reporting. Poliak admits that the case was not clear, and that there is
no inherent right for a third party to be published in a privately owned newspaper. But, he
concludes, “the odds remain unjustly high against the political advertiser with a

206 Richard Poliak, “Trying to Remember Vietnam,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1973, 8-9.
207 Ib id , S.

114

boatrocking message— even at so relatively enlightened an organization as The
Washington Post Co.”208
(MORE) published two substantial articles about political leaks to the press in
1973, at the height o f Watergate. A man called “Anderson Price” wrote the first, but
(MORE) acknowledged that this was a pen name. Price was an accountant who dealt with
politicians as part o f his job (perhaps his pseudonym was a conflation o f the accounting
firms of Arthur Andersen and Price Waterhouse), but who was more interesting to
(MORE) because of what he called his “hobby” : leaking political stories to the press.209
The article purports to explain the specific motivations of its author, but also to provide a
glimpse into the press and political pathologies that make him and leakers like him viable
in the system. Price says that he had always wanted to be a reporter himself, and that
leaking to them continues to give him a thrill:
Why do I do this? Because I like reporters better than any other kind o f people. I
like to be seen in their company in swank restaurants, to eat their food and drink
their liquor as the ply me for leads. I love to exchange bits o f political gossip, to
join in the reporters’ cynical assessment o f politicians and their jealous criticism
o f the columnists, who make so much more money than they for what seems to be
easier work. My biggest high comes when, in the middle of a formal dinner party,
I let drop a particularly juicy item and a reporter takes his pad out o f his dinner
jacket and starts making notes. I will give reporters almost anything they want to
keep them interested in me. 210
Following through on the story’s headline (“How to Become a Reliable Source”), Price
offers just three tips: tell the truth; know who you’re talking to; and don’t blow your
cover. But that headline is also a bit misleading, since the story is really about how “the
whole idea of reliable sources has been debased—not by the sources, but by the

209 Anderson Price, “How to Become a Reliable Source,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, May 1973, 11, 14-15.
210 Ib id , 11.

115

journalists.”

211

Price argues that the vast majority o f anonymous sources are

unnecessarily anonymous—that most o f the stories that use anonymous sourcing could
just as easily be reported on the record, or even more tellingly, not reported at all. As
much as he enjoys his role as a leaker, he thinks that most o f the stories he leaks are
actually just gossip mongering or meaningless prognostication, and for the benefit of the
reader, they should disappear.
A few months later, Bob Kuttner also argues in a (MORE) cover story that the
importance o f anonymous reporting is largely overblown. 212 The occasion for the essay
was Vice President Spiro Agnew’s complaint that he had been the victim of a series of
systematic news leaks designed to destroy his career— and the subsequent judicial order
that would have allowed Agnew’s attorneys to search the private files o f members of the
press. Agnew had resigned by the time o f the article, making that judicial order moot, but
Kuttner felt compelled to argue Agnew’s complaints, combined with the reporting o f Bob
Woodward and Carl Bernstein in covering Watergate, had inflated the importance o f leaks
in the mind o f the public. Real investigative reporting, he argues, requires legwork, and
even when a leak is involved. He quotes the investigative journalist Seymour Hersh, who
says that the real work isn’t getting the leak, but instead calling and calling and calling to
find someone who is willing (or indiscreet enough) to talk, and then calling again until
that first statement can be confirmed or refuted. Kuttner asserts that the growing practice
o f leaks had even given the press more credit than it deserved, since some o f its

211 Ibid., 15.
212 Bob Kuttner, “The Politics o f Leaksmanship,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1973, 1, 14-16.

116

revelations were really only republished leaks o f information that had originally been
gathered by the Senate Watergate Committee headed by Senator Sam Ervin.
Kuttner interviewed the journalists who did much o f the reporting that led to
Agnew’s resignation, and while they wouldn’t reveal their sources, he concluded that
most o f the anonymous information came not from a calculated pattern o f leaks but from
attorneys on either side o f the case— quite normal sources for a reporter. The real lesson
o f Watergate, Kuttner concludes, is not that government officials are necessarily waging a
covert war o f words against each other by leaking to the press, but that the press needs to
stay more vigilant than ever against those government officials’ lies and attempts to cover
up their own wrongdoing. In the last two words of his piece, Kuttner aptly sums up
(M ORE)’s general attitude toward the revival of muckraking journalism: “keep
digging.”213
(MORE) covered the Nixon administration probably more than it covered any
other single topic in 1973—which should not be surprising, given the timing of the
Watergate stories, and even the general anti-Nixon atmosphere. One classified ad as early
as January 1972 advertised “Dump Nixon” stickers for sale. And it was the Nixon
administration together with Vietnam that spurred the return to muckraking that (MORE)
pushed for in Kuttner’s article and in others, such as one that pointed out the press’s
underuse of the Freedom of Information Act.214 Nixon’s Christmastime public relations
effort made the pages of (MORE) in early 1972, 215 as did an essay trying to determine

Ibid., 16.
214 Theodore Jacqueney, “Nibbling at the Bureaucracy,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
October 1973, 15-17.
215 L.H. Whittemore, “The Plugging of the President,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1972, 4-6.

117

why Henry Kissinger garnered so much love from the press corps despite his constant
evasions.216 Nixon’s press secretary, Ron Ziegler, merited a profile,217 and in a lighter
vein, (MORE) asked why The New York Times continued to refer to Spiro Agnew as “Mr.
Agnew” on second reference, despite a policy that revoked honorifics from other people
who had been convicted o f crimes.

As prospects darkened for Nixon, CBS News

correspondent Dan Rather’s interview with him also got coverage, 219 as did the general
turn in television coverage’s tone against the president.

220

And a collection of short essays

published right after Nixon’s reelection asked whether it was the press or the public that
was more at fault for that reelection. If a properly informed public still makes the wrong
decisions, (MORE) wondered, could the press still be blamed for that shortcoming?

221

The authors who answered that question included Tony Lukas, David Halberstam, Nora
Sayre, Joe McGinniss, Timothy Crouse and Roger Wilkins, all of whom were well known
and well respected. Their general conclusion was that the press did what it could—but
that Nixon had found too many ways to manipulate media and control a story that he
needed controlled. They also argued that George McGovern could never be up to
matching Nixon at his own game.

216 Richard Harris, “The Strange Love o f Dr. Kissinger,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1972, 1, 14-16.
217 Martin Nolan, “Ron Among the Plastic Alligators,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1972, 11-13.
218 Jim Kaplan, “The Big Apple: Preserving Dignity on 43rd Street,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, December 1973, 12.
219 Joseph Roddy, “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October 1973, 2, 2 0 21 .
2 20
Bob Kuttner, “Television Turns on Nixon,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1973, 5-6.
221 Nora Sayre, Richard Reeves, J. Anthony Lukas, David Halberstam, Joe McGinniss,
Timothy Crouse, and Roger Wilkins, “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, December 1972, 1, 15-17.

118

While the Pentagon Papers, and then Nixon and Watergate dominated the first two
and a half years o f political coverage in (MORE)— and the cited articles are only about
half o f those that ran—there was also regional coverage, including stories about
Philadelphia, Cleveland and the quirky fraternity o f the New York City Hall press room.
(MORE) even requested that its readers send in tips for good regional stories to cover. 111
But there is no doubt that in the first two and a half years o f its existence, (MORE) found
the two stories it most needed to cover. The timing was felicitous.

Coverage of women and minorities
(M ORE)’s coverage of the Nixon administration so dominated 1973 that political
stories almost literally crowded out cultural stories in that time. But the first year or so of
(MORE) featured regular and earnest coverage o f cultural trends at the end of the
chronological 1960s, as a seemingly unified New Left began to splinter into identity
politics. Feminism, race, and to a lesser extent a newly visible interest group, gays, all
took turns in the spotlight at (MORE). Gay liberation, which borrowed its name original
from women’s liberation only warranted sporadic coverage, but when it came to race and
gender equality, (MORE) regularly covered these topics and both what stories and people
were covered, and also who was able to be adequately included in the newsroom.
The first regular monthly issue, in October 1972, contained articles that touched
on women’s issues as well as problems of racism in the press. The cover story
inaugurated a story structure that would become a semi-regular feature in the magazine:
running stories that more mainstream publications had “killed” or “spiked,” to use the

222 “H ellbox,” (M ORE): A Journalism Review, A ugust 1973, 2.

119

violent language of the newsroom, and usually explaining the story o f how those articles
came to be excluded from the publications that originally commissioned them. This first
instance was a review by the writer and feminist activist Susan Brownmiller. She had
been active in the Women’s Liberation movement for a few years by 1971, but her
biggest fame was a few years off, when she would publish her book Against Our Will:
Men, Women and Rape, which argued that rape had always been defined by men, not by
women.

223

Life magazine had assigned Brownmiller to review The Prisoner o f Sex, Norman
M ailer’s critique of feminism, and reportedly told her to “keep it light,” which seems
almost like a joke when assigning a feminist journalist to review a book by Norman
Mailer. Though in her review, Brownmiller does, to some extent, keep it light, if only by
pointing out that no one is better poised to defend manhood than a man who has both the
word “man” and a homophone for “male” in his name (though comparing M ailer’s
chutzpah to Charles Manson’s god complex probably didn’t help Brownmiller get her
story into the magazine). 224 Even though the editorial preamble to the piece focuses more
on the duplicity and conflicts o f interest that the publishers o f Life engaged in when
killing Brownmiller’s review, putting it on the front page o f the first regular issue o f the
magazine did make a statement that (MORE) identified with the Women’s Liberation
movement. The editorial introduction also did much to establish one of the two
overriding editorial voices o f the magazine: a sneering, sarcastic tone that today would be
described as “snarky” :

223

Susan Brownmiller, Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1975).
224 Susan Brownmiller, “Brownmiller Reviews M ailer... Almost,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, October 1971, 1, 16.

120

Yet surely so high-minded a writer as Norman Mailer would not try and tamper
with the editorial integrity o f Life; and certainly the editors would not bow to him
if he did. The whole thing was probably Ms. Brownmiller’s fault. Here is her
Transgression: 225
Mailer wrote to (MORE), and his letter was published in the next issue. He
included the letter he sent to Life complaining that assigning a review o f his book to a
feminist writer would be analogous to asking Spiro Agnew to review the work of the
feisty investigative journalist I.F. Stone (who would win the first “A. J. Liebling Award”
from (MORE) in 1972). Mailer makes a point in his letter to (MORE) of refusing to call
Brownmiller “Ms.,” dismissing it as an irksome neologism.226
Two 1972 articles looked at sexism in the media. Pamela Howard wrote a piece
looking at a topic that almost certainly would have grated on Norman Mailer: the casual
and careless use o f sexist language by reporters. Her piece opens with a bit o f satire,
another example of the tone that enlivened (MORE) when it was sprinkled in between the
more serious, heavy pieces. Howard wrote a mock news article about New York City
mayor John Lindsay, written in the way it would have been if it had been about his wife
instead:
John Vliet Lindsay, the svelte, blond, 50-year-old father of four, announced today
that he is giving up gardening at Gracie Mansion and setting his signs on more
fertile surroundings—the White House and its Rose Garden. As he sipped coffee
in the mansion’s cozy, aubergine kitchen and his on, Johnny, age 11, whipped up
an Angel Food cake, it was hard to imagine that the city’s pert, cheery, number
one househusband had spent all day traipsing through Bedford Stuyvesant with
his best friends, Meade Esposito, the vivacious Brooklyn leader, and Sid
Davidoff, his muscular man-in-waiting. His Roland Meledandri suit and his blush

225 Ibid., 1.
226 Norman Mailer, letter to the editor. (MORE): A Journalism Review, November 1971,
16. 18.

121

o f pancake makeup were hardly disturbed by the near-riot he caused when he
22 /
walked through.
But the serious message of the piece should not be dismissed because o f the light
tone. Howard’s concern in this piece was not the kind o f blatant, intentional sexism that
had been a more pressing issue for earlier feminists, but a more pernicious kind of
unconscious, unthinking sexism. Unlike many articles in (MORE), this one directly
addressed an audience o f working journalists, and ended with six tips for keeping sexist
language out of their publications. These included: try substituting the word “black” for
the word “women” and see if the phrasing sounds insensitive; don’t call anyone 18 or
older a “girl”; and stop referring to women by their first names on second reference. And
in one of the earliest calls for reader participation, a request, set off by (MORE)’s
signature squared-off parentheses, asked for examples of sexist language in the media,
which would be run in a future issue. Though (MORE) never seemed to follow through
on this, at least the request gave a picture o f the editors when it described Terry Pristin
(not by name, but by implication) as “a tenacious feminist” and Dick Poliak as “a
beleaguered former male chauvinist.”

228

While the reader-sourced best-of-the-worst sexist writing feature never happened,
(MORE) did run a piece that looked at sexist advertising. Many o f the examples that the
author, Barbara J. Siegel, gives are such classics o f chauvinist advertising 40 years later
that they almost feel like museum pieces: There is National Airlines’ “Fly Me” ad, and
one for Olivetti typewriters that openly states that the typewriter is smarter than the
secretary who uses it. Siegel analyzes a good dozen others in what today might seem like

227

Pamela Howard, “Watch Your Language, Men.” (MORE): a Journalism Review,
February 1972, 3.
228 Ibid., 4.

122

an undergraduate mass communication student’s well-done but slightly obvious
analytical paper. Even in 1972, these were not new issues, but they were gaining
prominence, in part because o f the launch of M s., “The New Magazine for Women,”
which Siegel describes as “schizophrenic”— a step in the right direction, but one that was
also “a bitter disappointment to a number o f feminists.”229 The advertising in Ms. mixed
ads that showed women becoming executives with ones that described them as being
dressed by men who are taking care o f them. So while the issue was not new, it was
certainly one that was still incredibly pressing.
After 1972, as Watergate came to dominate the pages o f (MORE), the magazine’s
coverage of women’s issues tapered off somewhat. However, (MORE) did contain some
coverage of women in the newsroom in 1973. In February, a short piece gave updates on
actions by women at Newsweek, Time, Newsday, and The New York Times. At Newsweek,
the women editorial employees seemed to be on the verge of signing an agreement with
management, and the number of women writers was on the rise. At Time, the numbers
had dropped. Activity was just getting underway at Newsday, and no one at The Times
wanted to talk to (MORE) because negotiations seemed to be moving forward.

23 0

In

August, Terry Pristin, the “tenacious feminist,” wrote an update that focused on the
successes o f the Newsweek group, and reported on several other women’s newsroom
movements that were still ongoing. (MORE) said that this was a new moment for
executives at media companies, who suddenly found “themselves confronting firsthand a
story they have been covering for the past several years, as women all over town organize

229 Barbara J. Siegel, ‘“ H e’ll Think You Baked All Day’.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, May 1972, 14.
230 “The Big Apple: Good News, Bad News.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, February
1973, 11.

123

to fight discrimination with their companies.”

231

The Newsweek staff who had originally

sought to increase their numbers in the editorial departments had filed a second complaint
with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and the magazine’s executives
had responded by signing an agreement to increase the number o f women writers (and
balance that with an increase in the number of men working in the research department)
and even ensure that at least one of the magazine’s editorial departments would be headed
by a woman by 1974. Pristin also reported on ongoing developments at ABC, NBC and
CBS. She also gave a brief update on developments at The New York Times, though that
paper’s organizers in the fight for women’s equality in the newsroom remained fairly
tight-lipped.

23 2

A “Column Two” piece by Pristin in the same issue used the start o f a

morning news show to be hosted by Sally Quinn as a jumping-off point for noting how
few women were on air (at CBS, she noted, there were seven on-air women reporters
worldwide).233
Coverage o f minorities— and in 1971, 1972 and 1973, this meant almost
exclusively coverage of black Americans—followed a similar pattern in (MORE), with
the main difference coming in the tone o f the writing. The first regular issue in October
1971 carried two articles on the subject, and the stories ran fairly regularly throughout
1972 before being crowded out by political coverage, just as coverage o f wom en’s issues
had been. But coverage o f race issues was far more earnest than the often jocular tone
that marked the articles about women.

231

Terry Pristin, “The Big Apple: Progress Report.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
August 1973, 12.
232 Ibid., 13
233 Terry Pristin, “Column Two.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, August 1973, 2.

124

The more prominent o f the two articles, framed by editor Dick Poliak, mostly
consisted o f a long memo to New York Post publisher Dorothy Schiff written by a
reporter named Ted Poston (though the magazine consistently misspelled it as “Posten”),
who had been the only black reporter on their staff for many years. The occasion for
publication was a set o f findings by the New York State commissioner o f human rights,
saying that The Post had unfairly let go o f a probationary reporter named William Artis.
The occasion for Poston’s memo was a similar instance, a year earlier, of a black
probationary reporter not being hired. Poliak pointed out the irony o f The P ost’s being
accused of being unsupportive of a downtrodden minority group in a time when it was a
reliably liberal newspaper. Dorothy Schiff, the publisher o f The Post, and an early
supporter o f (M ORE)’s publisher, Bill Woodward, reacted strongly to the piece, and her
stonewalling of the journalism review is told in more detail in chapter 5 of this
dissertation.
In May of 1972, Ernest Dunbar reported from the National Black Political
Convention, where he concluded that while things were better for black reporters than
they had been when he was hired as Look magazine’s first black editorial employee in
1954, in reality “the barriers have merely been moved back a few paces.”234 In Dunbar’s
view, “black reporters are still thin on the ground, still dealing with institutional racism of
a massive sort in an industry that daily offers ethical standards for others to follow ... all
o f us strivers in a profession that kept us out as long as it could and grudgingly accepted a
few o f us when it had to.”235 Dunbar brings up the case o f Earl Caldwell, a black reporter

234 Ernest Dunbar, “Notes from the Belly o f the Whale.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1972, 1.
Ibid., 1.

125

for The New York Times who refused to comply with a federal subpoena after he
infiltrated and investigated the Black Panther Party. Initially the Times supported
Caldwell, but eventually left him to fight the case on his own. Dunbar also engages in
some criticism of another piece that had run in (MORE)— Joe Roddy’s memoir of his
time at Look. Dunbar recalled telling Roddy that Look had never had a black
photographer, a point which never made it into Roddy’s piece. When Dunbar asked him
why it hadn’t, Roddy said that further reporting had turned up the fact that Look w asn’t
unusual in that regard. The irony of this was not lost on Dunbar. Dunbar in his piece, and
also Bob Kuttner in a later piece on black reporters at The Washington Post also echoed
the observation that Dick Poliak had made about The New York Post: sometimes it was
the liberal publications—Look and both Posts included—that had the hardest time
accepting black reporters in their newsrooms, no matter what sort o f editorial policy they
espoused.
One other piece that ran just as 1972 gave way to the Watergate year of 1973 fits
into two of (MORE)’s categories. On the one hand, it’s an article about black
intellectuals. On the other, it is an article about a series o f profiles o f black intellectuals
written by Joseph Okpaku, which was originally written for Esquire. The articles and an
introduction ran in that magazine, severely edited. (MORE), however ran the edited and
original versions o f the introduction side by side, in the same spirit o f publishing Susan
Brownmiller’s spiked review of The Prisoner o f Sex. (MORE) is pretty evenhanded in
assessing the two versions. Terry Pristin, who wrote the framing article, clearly prefer the
writing of the Esquire editor who recast (and severely cut) the introduction and the
profiles o f black intellectuals, though she understands the Okpaku’s outrage at being

126

identified with writers he vehemently disagrees with.236 While (MORE), as an operation,
tended to side with the writer over the editor and the editor over the publisher, this sort of
fair mindedness gives credibility to the other times that (MORE) seemed to reflexively
side with the little guy. In the end, the Okpaku affair seems to be mostly a matter o f style,
and o f a writer not familiar with the editing process being chided for being too stiff in
dealing with his editors.
(MORE) could also be accused o f being a bit stiff in its writing about minorities
in the newsroom. Certainly in 1971-73, an attitude o f moral serious would be entirely
justifiable, though the difference between the lighthearted coverage o f women and the
serious coverage o f blacks does give one pause. Nevertheless, one brief item does raise a
bit of a smile, and it ran, coincidentally, in the same issue as the piece about Okpaku and
Esquire. To illustrate a review of the movie Hammer, The Los Angeles Times originally
chose a publicity photo o f the film ’s co-stars, the black former football player Fred
Williamson and the white actress Elizabeth Harding. Williamson, shirtless, muscular and
very large, reclines against a pillow while Harding, also shirtless, but obscured, rests her
head and her hand on his chest. The photo only ran in the first edition, (MORE) reports.
“Comics run a mere four pages away from movie reviews in the Tim es” the article notes,
“causing women’s editor Jean Sharley Taylor to fear that impressionable little eyes might
catch a glimpse of Fred and Elizabeth.”

237

Ironically, in describing the picture that

replaced it, (MORE) called another actress, Vonetta McGee, “demure,” thus denouncing
institutional racism while simultaneously using one o f the adjectives that Pamela Howard

236 Terry Pristin, “Esquire’’s Black Pointy-Heads.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
January 1973, 6-7.
237 “Hellbox: Blackout?” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January, 1973, 18.

127

specifically mentioned avoiding when talking about women. Clearly, (MORE) did not
have a completely unblemished record on the subject.

Coverage o f the media industry
Much as media-watcher sites such as MediaBistro orjimromenesko.com watch
for announcements o f new publications today, (MORE) excitedly chronicled new
developments in what seemed at the time to be a rapidly changing industry. Less than a
decade earlier, New York City had a vastly different newspaper industry than it had in
1971, when (MORE) began publication. In large part, this was a result o f the newspaper
strike o f 1962, which probably helped kill o ff four newspapers on its own. In telling the
story o f that strike, Scott Sherman described pre-strike New York City as a sort o f newslover’s paradise:
New York in 1962 w as... a place where anyone with a serious newspaper habit
lived in a state o f perpetual bliss: seven dailies appeared in rolling editions around
the clock. There were two upscale morning broadsheets: The New York Times and
the New York H erald Tribune. There were two mass-market morning tabloids with
formidable circulations and devoted working-class readers: the Daily N ew s... and
The New York D aily M irror.... There was an afternoon tabloid, the New York
P o st.... And there were two afternoon broadsheets: the Hearst-owned New York
Journal-American... and the New York World-Telegram & Sun.... Every few hours
bundles containing the latest editions descended on newsstands: the “bulldog”
editions o f the morning dailies arrived around nine p.m., ideal for people
streaming out o f bars, restaurants, and nightclubs, while the first editions o f the
afternoon papers fell off the printing presses a little after eight a.m. 238
By 1971, only the Times, the Post and the D aily News survived. So for serious
news or literate ideas, the Times had become the only game in town. (MORE) would
come to focus much o f its coverage on the Times, for reasons both personal and logical

238 Scott Sherman, “The Long Good-Bye,” Vanity Fair (Web Exclusive), November 30,
2012. http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2012/11/1963-newspaper-strike-bertram-powers

128

reasons

23 9

. In its subtle and long-lasting dance with critiquing and supporting the Times,

(MORE) both sought new publications that might challenge the Paper of Record, and
spur it on to better things, but also (MORE) lamented some o f the also-rans. This was not
an explicit connection, o f course. (MORE)’s general stance seems to have been a support
for a diverse and thriving media, and it is only through the accretion o f the review’s
coverage of media beginnings and endings that these conclusions can be reached.
(M ORE)’s recurring coverage o f the death o f beloved media institutions—the
more wistful, romantic side o f the media birth/death dialectic—began with the
November, 1971 issue. In the early days o f (MORE), headlines were often cryptic—more
literary than they were an indication of the content o f the articles they sat atop. That
November issue included a piece called “Notes from a Bargain Typewriter,”240 in which
Joseph Roddy, a former senior editor at Look magazine, lamented the end o f general
interest magazines, and Look in particular. The headline referred to the typewriter that
Look sold him for $50 when it liquidated its assets. Already in 1971, Collier's had died
(“gaudily,” according to Roddy) and The Saturday Evening Post had come to a
“vituperative” end. In his essay, Roddy also writes that even the venerable Life magazine
was on life support, and that it would probably not be long for this world (and he was
right: it ceased weekly publication in 1972, though it has been revive in various forms
since then).

23 9

If the Times is the most influential paper in the profession o f journalism, then
obviously influencing the influencer would allow (MORE) to have its most powerful
impact on the profession and the industry. This relationship is explored in more depth in
chapter 5 o f this dissertation.
240 Joseph Roddy, “Notes from a Bargain Typewriter, (MORE), A Journalism Review,
November 1971, 3-5.

129

In fact, apart from the references to typewriters, very little about Roddy’s piece
feels anachronistic, even in 2014. No matter how progressive they seem to be to their
readers, journalists often romanticize the past—though maybe that is mostly out of
concern for the institutions that employ them. Evidence o f the that worry about a
paycheck can be seen in Roddy’s lead:
If only there were a few more mass-circulation feature magazines left to run tests
on, I might have an axiom to set down here. In its place I offer only directions for
calculating expiration dates to come: 1) watch the magazine’s staff writers closely
while they are given new issues fresh from the bindery; 2) when they start
counting advertising pages even before they admire their own stories, note the
date; 3) add six months—that’s when the publisher’s salvage crew will begin
selling off the typewriters.241
Though Roddy takes issue with some o f the choices of the magazine’s publisher,
he writes that Look's demise was all but inevitable, and that editorial changes would only
negligibly have prolonged the process. The magazine he wrote, was strung along in its
last months by cigarette ads (an ironic foreshadowing o f the final few issues o f More).
Just about a year after Roddy’s piece, Life finally died for the first time, and
(MORE) memorialized it with an essay by former staff writer Jane Howard. While
(MORE) would often take a cynical approach to the press, its writers also knew how
lucky they were to work in a field where they could meet wonderful people and have
“accessibility to experience,” as Howard quotes Marianne Moore saying. This is very
much akin to the sort of awe with which (M ORE)’s assistant editor Terry Pristin viewed
the people around her, as noted above. Life's staff had known for some time that their
publication was doomed, but at its height, it provided Howard with the chance to meet
Rachel Carson, Vladimir Nabokov, James Baldwin and S.J. Perelman. “In the palmy

241 Ibid., 3.

130

years before the cutbacks and rumors,” she wrote, there was the heady sense that one
might be assigned anytime to go anywhere.”242 She writes that working at Life felt like
being “among the chosen.” 243 Part of that feeling came from the pervasiveness o f the
magazine even before she began to work there. Life, like other general interest magazines
in the early to mid-twentieth century, felt like an immovable part of American culture.
For Howard, this paean to the great magazine wasn’t just about a personal loss of
employment, either. For the last year, she had been working there on a contract basis.
This was about the death of an institution.
(M ORE)’s coverage of launches was more frequent than its elegies to old media,
but also shorter and snappier, in most cases. Much o f that coverage showed up either in
“Hellbox,” the front-of-the-book department that encompassed most o f the pieces that
were too short for full article treatment; or, if the publication was local, the story might
show up in “The Big Apple,” a recurring spread, usually across the centerfold o f the
magazine, which covered New York media. In the same issue as Jane Howard’s Life
essay, The Big Apple included short items about rumors that Bob Guccione, the publisher
o f the m en’s adult magazine Penthouse, might launch a competitor to the not quite as
racy women’s magazine Cosmopolitan; and about a magazine called Couples that would
be launched by Clay Felker, the editor o f New York. Neither of those went anywhere
(Later in 1973, (MORE) reported that the national pilot issue o f Couples had flopped, but
that two competing magazines on a related theme would be launching on the same day:

242 Jane Howard, “No. 3274 Looks Back,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, January 1973,
243 Ibid., 5.

131

Single and Singles)244. That edition o f The Big Apple also had a slightly longer piece
about changes at the Long Island daily Newsday, which had recently introduced a Sunday
edition and a magazine called LI, which was derided as “so fluffy, so inconsequential, so
trite,” by one anonymous staffer quoted in the article.245
A longer article in the January 1973 issue looked at plans for a few new evening
newspapers that might compete with The New York Post. (MORE) had confirmation,
according to the article, that “New York oil millionaire” John Shaheen would begin
publishing a new daily the following Labor Day. Nothing came o f that rumor either,
though (MORE) seemed more interested in running two mockups for an evening edition
o f The New York Times, plans for which had already been abandoned by the time of the
article’s publication. The Times had gone “further than anyone” in planning an afternoon
daily, the article said, but the study groups that had been put together decided that it
would be too much of a drain on the resources of the Times?46
While the January 1973 issue seems to have been the one in which (MORE)
concentrated most of its editorial energies on births and deaths in media properties, the
first two and a half years of the magazine did feature several other stories. (MORE) ran a
long essayistic and impressionistic review o f The 51st State, an experimental
documentary news show on WNET Channel 13, New York City’s public television
station. The legendary writer and editor Murray Kempton wrote the piece, and he
concluded that at least in the sample he had watched, the show fell far short o f the

244 Terry Pristin, “Singles Set,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1973, 12-13.
245 “Hellbox: Cupid, Changes at Newsday, and That Penthouse Boy,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, January 1973, 8-9.
246 William Kutik, “Competition for the Post?” (MORE), A Journalism Review, January
1973,7, 10.

132

promise of its advertising. While the show promised to be vastly different from the
restless “Action News” o f the 1970s (the kind evoked by the Anchorman movies), it in
fact suffered from the same inability to give its important subjects the length o f treatment
that they needed.

247

The only real difference, Kempton suggests, is that “the caste mark of

the self-serious is the moment they shift to the facetious whenever they feel called upon
to prove that, just because they have substance, you shouldn’t think they are
ponderous.”248 Nearly a year later though, when The 51st State was in its second season,
(M ORE)’s editors bestowed a “Rosebud,” (their version o f The Columbia Journalism
Review's “Laurels”) on the show, for demonstrating that television journalism could do
its own serious reporting, and not just recite the day’s headlines. This short piece, which
ran in Hellbox, also noted that most o f the show’s staffers assumed that it was doomed at
the end of that season, since the show was so expensive to produce.
The 51st State was one o f the publications that (MORE) outlived. So was L A ., a
city magazine for Las Angeles on the model o f New York. The February 1973 issue
contained a long autopsy for the short-lived magazine (causes o f death: a confusing
editorial tone followed by financial mismanagement as the magazine gained its editorial
footing).249 (MORE) also chronicled the disastrously short-lived television career o f Sally
Quinn, the Washington Post writer and eventual wife o f Post editor Ben Bradlee. Terry
Pristin used the occasion to write about the lack o f women on television, but she was

247 Murray Kempton, “An Effort to Break With Tradition,” (MORE), A Journalism
Review, April 1972, 6-7, 17-20.
248 Ibid., 6.
249 Gregg Kilday, “The Short, Unhappy Life o f L.A.,” (MORE), A Journalism review,
February 1973, 7-9, 16.

133

writing before the unprepared and very ill Quinn made her debut.

250

Joseph Roddy also

returned to the pages o f (MORE) to talk about Intellectual Digest as a haven for former
writers from Look. Roddy’s coverage was laudatory, though few magazines billing
themselves as intellectual last very long.

251

In the first two and a half years o f (MORE), the magazine did manage to cover a
few new publications that would have a lasting impact, though not always in the depth
that the failed giants or the spectacular misfires would get. The Big Apple briefly noted
the launch o f People magazine as a spin-off of the “People” section o f Time. 252 And in
her debut as a writer for (MORE), Claudia Cohen wrote about a rumored new “Living”
section in The New York Times, which would mimic the wildly successful “Style”
section 253 (for which Sally Quinn wrote, coincidentally). Two anecdotes do not constitute
enough data to substantiate a trend o f course, but it’s hard not to infer that the death o f the
general interest magazine and the rise o f gossip and home publications intimated the end
o f Life as a general interest publication, and the rise o f the general interest in lifestyle
publications.

Coverage of the practice of journalism
As befits a journalism review for which the primary audience would be
journalists, (MORE)’s most consistent topics were those that addressed the requirements

250 Terry Pristin, “Column Two,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, August 1973, 2.
251 Joseph Roddy, “The New Intellectuals,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, July 1973,
16-17.
252 Terry Pristin, “The Big Apple: Up with People,” (MORE), A Journalism Review,
August 1973, 13.
253 Claudia Cohen, “The Big Apple: Top Secret,” (MORE), A Journalism Review,
October 1973, 12-13.

134

o f good, ethical journalism. If, as A.J. Liebling wrote, a school for journalism was
worthless without a school for publishers, (MORE) aimed to be the printed version of
both of those schools. If the magazine’s coverage of the media business, as discussed in
the previous section, would constitute the school for publishers, then the ethical, critical
and First Amendment issues that (MORE) covered, and which are described in this
section, would constitute the journalism school.
One issue that deals specifically with the interactions between editorial and
business staff at news publications was the reporters’ power movement, which was an
inspiration to the founders o f (MORE) in its earliest days, as the first section of this
chapter demonstrates. As noted above, the pilot issue of (MORE) included a piece by
Chicago Journalism Review editor Ron Dorfman about movements for reporters’
autonomy at The Chicago Daily News and the Sun-Times. It was more than a year before
(MORE) tackled the subject in any depth again, but in three consecutive months, it took
up the issue of a staff uprising at the alternative newsweekly The Boston Phoenix. The
piece was written by Bill Kovach, who was working in the Washington bureau of The
New York Times and would eventually go on to lead it, then edit The Atlanta JournalConstitution and run the Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University.
According to Kovach’s article, the owner o f the paper decided to turn it into something
more closely resembling his ideal newspaper— The Wall Street Journal— and he fired the
editor in order to bring in a new editor recruited from an advertising firm. Nearly 40
members of the editorial staff rose up and demanded a say in the operation of the
newsroom. They won at least a partial victory, gaining some concessions including a
carefully detailed process by which an editor could be fired. Kovach sees the prospect of

135

true “democracy in the newsroom” as being a far-off notion, but he also sees the new
arrangement as an opportunity for strengthening the paper. On the one hand, the ideas of
the owner might tamp down some o f the Phoenix'?, tendency toward stories calculated to
shock the establishment. On the other, contributions from the staff could shape cultural
coverage in exciting ways. He quotes one staff member as saying that the counter culture
was already washed up, but that the Phoenix was not about to serve Richard Nixon’s
“dream o f expanding American capitalism.”254 They needed to stay on top o f the culture
and explain the changes in society in the 1970s.
Kovach’s Phoenix article began a four-month run o f articles about democracy in
the newsroom. The following two issues included updates on the Phoenix story. In
August, after the optimism inspired by the newsroom union’s minor victories, (MORE)
found itself reporting on what it saw as a troubling development. After the strike, the
owner of The Phoenix was rumored to be in discussion with a more mainstream rival,
Boston After D ark, in order to arrange a sale or a merger. 255 By September, (MORE) had
cause to report on The Phoenix again. The sale had gone through, and Boston After D ark
officially changed its name to The Phoenix. But the staff who had unionized did not go
with the paper after its purchase, and instead started a new rival alt-weekly, which they
called The Real Paper ,256 This new paper lasted until 1981, but The Phoenix, which
eventually expanded into a small chain of alt-weekly newspapers and other media outlets,

254 Bill Kovach, “Fighting Over Boston’s Phoenix.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July
1972, 8.
255 “Hellbox: The Phoenix (cont’d).” (MORE): A Journalism Review, August 1972, 2,
16.
256 “(Still) Fighting over The Phoenix." (MORE): A Journalism Review, September 1972,
2.

136

lasted until 2013, when it finally ceased publication. In the end, the unionized newsroom
sent the paper that the staff wanted to protect into larger, and more corporate hands.
Speaking o f the favorite newspaper o f the publisher o f The Boston Phoenix, the
next issue of (MORE) contained a piece by journalist A. Kent MacDougall, in which he
tells the story o f the prank he pulled upon resigning from his reporting job at The Wall
Street Journal, and uses that as an opportunity to critique the management style o f the
paper. When he quit, MacDougall wrote up a mock wire story declaring his freedom from
“peonage” at Dow Jones, the company that owned the Journal, and transmitted it to all of
the paper’s bureaus (except St. Louis, for some reason). When this led to his being fired
immediately, rather than being allowed to resign, MacDougall saw the reaction as typical
o f a management structure that made no effort to encourage loyalty or to foster
journalistic careers. He is careful to separate his complaints about the conditions of
employment from the conditions that foster good journalism. In fact, he praises the
Journal as one of the best places in the United States to practice journalism at the highest
level. He even includes a cheeky bar graph showing the paper’s yearly accuracy in
covering pork belly futures (each bar goes all the way to the top, indicating 100%), and
sincerely praises the independence and integrity o f the paper. But he also charts the
paper’s profits and documents that the salaries o f its employees are lower than those of
reporters at less profitable competitors. While this might not be a story o f true democracy
in the newsroom— MacDougall made no effort to organize, deciding instead to leave— it
is a story of discontent with the management structure. Ultimately, MacDougall finds the
conservatism o f the paper, its unwillingness to challenge the essential nature o f Wall

137

Street or to change itself, to be too overwhelming to continue his employment there.

257

It

should be noted o f course that MacDougall also saw him self as a radical socialist, though
it would be another 16 years until he was open about that fact. 258
M acDougall’s piece ran on the cover, and was one o f the longer pieces that
(MORE) ran in this period. And in the same issue, Shelley Fisher wrote about efforts to
achieve democracy in the newsroom in Europe, as a comparison to U.S. attempts. 259 An
editor’s note introducing the piece points out what Kent MacDougall likely already knew:
that there was no socialist tradition in the United States, so American j oumalists looking
to organize had to look to Europe for their models.
Firmly rooted in the U.S., (MORE) seemed to be more concerned with issues of
press harassment and the issue of whether or not shield laws designed to protect reporters
from testifying against their sources would be a good idea for the press. When (MORE)
began regular publication in October 1971, oral arguments for the landmark (yet
muddled) Supreme Court case on reporters’ privilege, Branzburg v. Hayes, was still a few
months in the future.260 The threat o f having to go to jail for a source was very real, and
with the Branzburg case’s unclear precedent, it would continue to be for some time. In
keeping with its ongoing assessment o f the state o f political reporting, (MORE) also kept

257 A. Kent MacDougall, “Up Against The Wall Street Journal.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, October 1972, 1, 12-18.
25 8
A. Kent MacDougall, “Boring From Within the Bourgeois Press: Part One,” M onthly
Review, November 1988. Part Two: December 1988. A. Kent MacDougall, “Memoirs of
a Radical in the Mainstream Press.” Columbia Journalism Review, March/April 1989,
36-39. For a longer discussion o f the MacDougall incident, see Stephen D. Reese, “The
News Paradigm and the Ideology of Objectivity: A Socialist at The Wall Street Journal.”
Critical Studies inM ass Communication 1 (1990), 390-409.
259 Shelley M. Fisher, “La Participation.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October 1972,
8 11
260Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972)
-

.

138

a close eye on issues o f access, harassment and the rights o f newspeople throughout 1972
and 1973.
In April o f 1972, two months before the Branzburg decision, (MORE) ran a piece
by Edwin Goodman, the general manager of WBAI, a public radio station in New
York.261 WBAI had recorded audio tape o f a rebellion inside New York City’s detention
center, nicknamed “The Tombs.” When a judge subpoenaed the tapes, Goodman refused
to hand them over and he ended up in jail him self for two days. Goodman’s jailers treated
him fairly civilly though, and the piece is somewhat tepid, given that it runs in the same
issue as Ernest Dunbar’s piece on black reporters, which has a much more menacing tone
in talking about government harassment, particularly in the case of Earl Caldwell, whose
case was decided together with Branzburg’s. In June, as the case was set to be decided,
(MORE) ran a piece on the case, again focusing attention on Caldwell262, a reminder that
accidents o f alphabet can influence how a Supreme Court decision is remembered. The
court consolidated the cases o f Branzburg, Caldwell and Pappas, even though (MORE)
clearly saw the Caldwell case as the most pressing o f the three, and which had “become
the press’ symbol o f resistance to subpoenas.”263 As the article went to press, journalists
were cautiously optimistic that lower court rulings supporting Caldwell’s decision not to
testify and reveal the names o f his Black Panther Party sources would stand, but Fred
Graham’s (MORE) article cautioned that Richard Nixon had carefully seated enough
conservative justices to give pause to that optimism. Caldwell’s attorneys, he explained,

261 Edwin A. Goodman, “On 44 Hours in Civil Jail.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1972, 12-14.
262 Fred P. Graham, “Will Earl Caldwell Go to Jail?” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
June 1972, 1, 14-16.
263 Ibid., 1.

139

had asked not only for a new Constitutional right to be granted to journalists, but for that
right to be taken to its logical extreme, and the Supreme Court, whatever its makeup,
rarely liked to move so quickly. In fact, the court’s decision was sharply divided, with
four justices clearly indicating that they saw no First Amendment right for journalists to
protect their sources. Four justices indicated that there was, in fact such a right. And one,
Justice Lewis Powell, wrote an opinion that said that there could be such a privilege, but
it was not applicable in this case.
In the face o f such a muddled outcome, (MORE) kept up its support for reporters’
rights, both in reporting on developments and in more ambitiously worded opinion and
editorial pieces. (MORE) ran at least five additional articles before the end o f 1973, three
times in support o f Peter Bridge, who was the first reporter held on contempt charges
after the Branzburg decision.264 One o f the essays was written by New York Times
Supreme Court reporter Anthony Lewis, who would make a name for him self as a strong
supporter o f the First Amendment.
(MORE) also covered obscenity and profanity issues, which, like shield laws for
reporters, is a concern that runs along First Amendment lines, but in a vein not quite as
physically threatening as the specter o f jail time. (MORE) wrote about profanity with all
the relish o f a preteen discovering dirty language and bodily humor, taking real pleasure
in tweaking authority figures, such as when the editors “censored” the headline of one
piece by using the word “B

shit.”265 Ethel Strainchamps, who wrote the piece, gives an

264 Peter J. Bridge: “In Defense o f Newsmen’s Rights.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1972, 3-4; Jack S. Landau, “Harassing the Press,” and Anthony Lewis, “Bad
Time for Civil Liberties,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December 1972, 8-11.
265 Ethel Reed Strainchamps, “Why We Can’t Say B
shit.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, July 1972, 8.

140

amusing history o f “dirty words” in print, and quotes editors who were frustrated that
they couldn’t use some words, even as those words became essential to telling the story
o f counter-culture protests. In a way o f course, (MORE) was founded when an editor told
Tony Lukas that he couldn’t write “bullshit” in an article for the Times. Reading
(M ORE)’s coverage of profanity and obscenity in its first two and a half years, a sense
emerges that (MORE) is reminding the media that w e’re all grownups, and asking: can’t
we talk like grownups do and abandon this silly veneer o f propriety? But the ironically
juvenile way that (MORE) approached this common sense proposition was certainly
funny. There was coverage of the obscenity trial surrounding the popular pornographic
film Deep Throat.266 There was coverage o f newspapers censoring the comic strip
Doonesbury267, and the acceptability o f an ad for a documentary entitled Tits268— or of an
ad containing cartoon nudity that had to be sent back to the artist for some well-placed
towels and swimsuits.269 And there were at least two or three other stories in the period
from June 1971 to the end o f 1973. (MORE), it seems, would stop sniggering, if only the
editors and publishers and judges would allow this discussion out in the open.
As a magazine of press criticism, (MORE) had opinions not just about the
operations o f the press, but also about the best practices for press criticism. Including the
piece about Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s “scholarly tantrum” in the first issue brought up
the idea o f press ethics, self-policing and councils right from the start. That continued

266 Joseph Roddy, “Judge Tyler’s New Mature Courtroom.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, April 1973, 13-15.
Mark McIntyre, “Muting Megaphone Mark.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July
1973, 5-6.
268 Nat Hentoff, “ .. .and on the Printed Page.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January
1972, 9-10.
269 “Hellbox: ‘Are We Sure They’re Just Eating With Their Hands, Bem ie?” ’ (MORE): A
Journalism Review, November 1973, 12-13.

141

with articles written by some o f (M ORE)’s core staff and contributors. Joseph Volz
reviewed the first ombudsman o f The Washington Post, Richard Harwood. 270 Founder
Tony Lukas followed up with a piece on the limits o f in-house press critics. 271 In
February of 1973, Dick Poliak wrote “A Case Against Press Councils,”

272

to extend that

argument. He wouldn’t have written the piece himself, he says, but when he assigned a
writer to read the 64-page report of The Twentieth Century Fund that led to the creation
o f a national press council, this writer apparently could not take the report seriously
enough to write the piece, and begged Poliak to let him off the hook. Poliak didn’t take
the proposal seriously either, and he also cites a survey o f the American Society of
Newspaper Editors that opposed the idea three to one, and the strong statement by New
York Times publisher Arthur Ochs Sulzberger that they would not go along with the
council. However, Poliak argued, his real objection to the idea of a national press council
was that any real change in American journalism had to come from within the profession
itself. That view jibes perfectly with the ethos of (MORE), which was written about
journalism, by journalists, and mostly fo r journalists. Poliak and the other leaders of
(MORE) had faith that “ [t]he newsrooms o f the United States are full o f journalists with
good ideas about how to create a more responsible and responsive press. If they had the
power they deserve, the face of journalism in this country might change markedly— far
more than it err will under periodic hot compresses ministered by a national press

270 Joseph Volz, “Post-Ombudsman.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January 1972, 3 5.
271 J. Anthony Lukas, “The Limits of Self-Criticism,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1972,3, 15, 17.
272 Richard Poliak, “A Case Against Press Councils.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1973, 3.

142

council.”

273

(MORE) had faith in journalism, and (MORE) had faith, more importantly, in

journalists.
In an interview, Dick Poliak said that he had hoped that (MORE) would have an
audience beyond professional journalists, becoming something like a New York Review o f
Books for journalism and media, a forum where intelligent people could intelligently
expound on the relationship between the press and the culture. And while much o f the
content o f (MORE) aimed at bringing in a general audience, the magazine really was, as
stated above, o/joum alism , by journalists and primarily also fo r journalists. To that end
though, (MORE) served as a kind o f lifestyle magazine for reporters in the 1970s, giving
working j oumalists who might not have been at the elite national news organizations a
glimpse into the day to day life o f those who were, and also into the lives o f other
journalists like themselves across the country. So while it was a magazine o f ideas, one
that earnestly pondered why there was not more muckraking investigative journalism,

274

(or explained the history o f the first batch of Muckrakers 275 ), (MORE) was also a
magazine that built a community o f like-minded readers around itself, in the way that the
best and most successful magazines are. A selection o f articles shows the sorts of
reporters’ issues that (MORE) engaged with.
Early in 1972, (MORE) ran a piece on the special challenges o f working in
television newsrooms.276 It called out reporters for being too eager to take freebies from

274 Robert M. Smith, “Why So Little Investigative Reporting?” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, November 1973, 7-9.
275
Justin Kaplan, “The ‘Literature of Exposure,’” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1973, 3-6.
276 Robert Potts, “Surviving the TV Newsroom.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, March
1972, 6-8.

143

the people they covered

277

, and on the next page exposed the inner workings o f the

Pulitzer Prizes, which a former Pulitzer judge shows to be rather less formal, organized or
magical than many reporters might have hoped they would be. 278 Tony Lukas profiled
gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson, parodying Thompson’s style,

279

and Calvin Trillin

wrote about what it’s like to be an out o f town reporter who swoops into unfamiliar cities
and “uses” local newspapers instead o f really reading them. 280 NYU journalism professor
David Rubin wrote about what it was like to be a reporter senior enough to be invited on
a press junket to France with the actor Danny Kaye in tow, 281 and at the other end of the
spectrum, a young cub reporter named Peter W. Kaplan (who would eventually grow up
to be the storied editor o f The New York Observer) described his experience o f being
“baptized” by a source who called him “the first sign of a break in the cold and rather
killing front of New York journalism.” 282 It must have been a heady experience— and an
inspirational one for the other young journalists who read (MORE) and, like Kaplan,
dreamed o f a life as a big city journalist.
Like a cub reporter beginning to find his feet, (MORE) changed itself physically a
bit in the years from 1971 to 1973, switching from two to three columns in March 1973
and bringing on a young graphic designer named Malcolm Frouman as the first full-time

277

Robin Reisig, “ ‘The Biggest Freeloaders Around.’” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
May 1972, 5-8.
278 John McCormally, “Who Cares About the Pulitzer Prize?” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, May 1972, 9-11.
279
J. Anthony Lukas, “The Prince o f Gonzo.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1972, 4-7.
280
Calvin Trillin, “Further More: On Using Newspapers.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, December 1973, 24, 22.
281 David Rubin, “You Are What You Eat.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December
1973, 7-9.
282 Peter Kaplan, “The Big Apple: Baptism.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October
1973,13.

144

art director in July of that year (though Sam Antupit remained on the masthead as having
created the magazine’s design). The new makeup o f the magazine increased its
readability quite a bit, both by giving it a slightly more polished look, and also by
introducing subheads and pull quotes that gave readers a better idea o f what each
particular article was going was going to be about. Prior to this minor redesign, cryptic
headlines occasionally gave little hint as to the content o f each article. In the first issue,
Tony Lukas’s article about R ea d er’s Digest and its bowing to corporations on
environmental issues was called only “Life in These United States.” Ernest Dunbar’s
piece about the experiences of black reporters in the newsroom was called only “Notes
from the Belly of the Whale.”
One thing that was always consistent though was the constant injection o f levity
into the proceedings. In addition to the jokes that made their way into headlines and into
the less ponderous articles, there was a vein o f liveliness in almost every issue. The
choice o f cartoons to illustrate the vast majority o f articles helped. Many of these were
done by Marty Norman, whose accounting books from the period show that he earned as
much as $300 for a complicated front page cartoon

283

(but he never earned as much from

(MORE) as he did from larger national publications). These cartoons, whether by
Norman or by other contributors, often had the bulbous style o f R. Crumb or Monty
Python drawings, sometimes with an Edwardian revival flair that also seemed to crop up
on restaurant menus in the 1970s.

283

Accounting books o f Marty Norman. Private collection.

145

(MORE) also ran several satirical and parody articles. The first regular issue
parodied New York, 284 and Clay Felker’s city magazine became a regular target. Lynn
Sherr took a stab at the style o f M a d magazine in another issue. 285 The magazine devoted
a two-page spread to a brief article about the “poetry” of New York D aily News headlines,
which was surrounded by more than two dozen choice examples o f the art, including “He
Has a Flood o f Gripes, But No One Gives a Dam,” and “Heroin & LSD Used To Ease
Last Trip.”286
Perhaps most famously though, art director Sam Antupit came to the rescue of the
magazine when a story for “The Big Apple” section fell through. Antupit came into the
office with a manila folder full of clippings he had been keeping from The New York
Times. He had more than 30 o f them, all o f them one or two sentence filler stories that the
paper would use to plug holes in the layout when a story didn’t reach the bottom of the
page. And all o f them had headlines that contained the phrase “bus plunge.” Someone at
the paper had made a game o f collecting wire service stories about buses in Asia and
Latin America that had fallen from cliffs or mountain passes. (MORE) ran about 20 of
them, filling two columns.

287

They showed a dark sense o f humor in both (MORE) and

The Times, as the press critic Jack Shafer would also pick up on more than 30 years

284 Lindsy Van Gelder, “The Passionate Parvenu: A Guide.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, October 1971, 5-6.
285 Lynn Sherr, “Some M ad Predictions.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April 1972, 8 9.
286
Eric Thompson, “Lindsay Tosses Aurelio in Ring.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1972, 12-13.
287
“The Big Apple: Games Tim esmcn Play?” (MORE): A Journalism Review, N ovem ber
1972, 10.

146

later.

288

They also showed that as much as there was to say about journalism, even a

journalism review needed a little filler from time to time.

288 Jack Shafer, “The Rise and Fall o f the ‘Bus Plunge’ Story.” Slate. Posted November
13, 2006. Accessed August 15, 2013.
www. slate. com/articles/news_and_politics/press_box/2006/l l/the_rise_and_fall_of_the
bus_plunge_story.single.html

147

Chapter 3: Taking Our Cue From Joe: The A.J. Liebling Counter-Conventions
Make (MORE) a Newsroom Name

On February 25, 1972, Bill Woodward, (MORE)’s publisher, typed up a letter to
A.M. Rosenthal, the Managing Editor o f The New York Times.

He was writing to ask

Rosenthal to sit on a panel called “What Kind o f RM. Paper Should New York Have?” at
an upcoming conference sponsored by (MORE). The four panelists he told Rosenthal that
he had already booked were all current or former Post employees. As a Timesman,
Rosenthal would have added a little bit of variety.
Rosenthal sent a terse response on March 1: “Dear Mr. Woodward: Thank you for
your invitation to appear on the panel. I would rather not.”290
Woodward was no stranger to wealth and power, but now he found him self as the
official representative o f an anti-establishment journalism review that publishers and
editors often wished would just go away. In February o f 1972, (MORE) had only
published five regular issues and one pilot issue the previous June, but the topic of
Woodward’s letter—the first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention— was going to make
(MORE) the newsroom equivalent of a household name. The convention would be held
on April 23rc^ and 2 4 ^ \ a Sunday and a Monday, at the Martin Luther King, Jr., Labor
Center in New York, a block or two west of Times Square and less than a block away
from the headquarters of the Times itself. While that proximity may have been a
289 Letter from William Woodward III to Abe Rosenthal, February 25, 1972. New York
Public Library New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers. MssCol
17929, Box 87, Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
290 Letter from A.M. Rosenthal to William Woodward III, March 1, 1972. New York
Public Library New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers. MssCol
17929, Box 87, Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.

148

coincidence, it was certainly one that the organizers o f the conference would have
enjoyed. The “Counter” in the conference’s name was intended to refer to the American
Newspaper Publishers Association’s annual convention, which was being held across
town at the Waldorf-Astoria, certainly tonier surroundings than a labor union hall in early
1970s Times Square, in the shadow of the Port Authority bus terminal.
But while the powerful people behind the nation’s newspapers may have been
meeting at the Waldorf, it was the Liebling Counter-Convention that became a sensation
among a group o f working reporters who had felt themselves chafing against the
strictures of “objective” reporting and the move toward professionalism that had proven
to be a stale substitute. They were reporters who were increasingly college-educated, and
part o f the youth culture o f the ’60s, a decade that may have been over in numerical
terms, but that in spirit had only recently peaked. And they had seen that there were
alternatives. They had seen the stylistic experimentation of Tom Wolfe and Gay Talese.
They had read the alternative weekly newspapers and their more raucous, subversive
cousins in the underground press. And they knew that there was still a place in journalism
for hard-nosed, independent muckraking, exemplified by I.F. Stone. American journalism
was beginning to explode: the New York Times had begun printing the Pentagon Papers
the same month that (MORE) published its pilot issue. The Watergate scandal was
bubbling up and would come to a head in the next year. The Vietnam War had weakened
the trust that many reporters had for institutional sources. Michael Schudson has called

149

this the rise o f the “critical culture” in journalism, and the realization that the “straight”
news story was a socially constrained form that contained its own inherent biases. 291
Reporters across the country were beginning to feel these restraints, but many of
them had nowhere to go to talk about these issues, save the reporters’ bar at the end o f the
block. (MORE) and a few other, more local, journalism reviews had begun to write about
some of the issues that concerned American journalists, beginning with the Chicago
Journalism Review, which began publication in the wake o f the 1968 Democratic
Convention and what some reporters saw as the shortcomings o f the Chicago press in
covering it. But reading about an issue and being able to connect with other people who
feel the same way you do about your profession are two different things, and the Liebling
Convention allowed 1500 or more reporters to meet their idols—which is what got many
o f them there in the first place—but also let them meet each other and learn that they had
shared complaints, which they used the conference to turn into a shared optimism.
The organizers of the convention chose as their avatar A.J. Liebling, the New
Yorker's former press critic. Liebling worked well as a conference mascot because he was
an intellectual who constantly questioned the assumptions o f journalistic practice;
because he was a fluid and witty stylist; and because he was an inveterate opponent of
publishers and supporter o f the hardworking newspaperman. In addition to being a co­
founder o f (MORE), Tony Lukas was also a co-coordinator o f the conference and wrote
the cover essay for the issue o f the magazine that would be current during the conference.
It was called “Taking Our Cue From Joe,” and said that even though Liebling had died

291

Michael Schudson, “Objectivity, News Management, and the Critical Culture,” in
Discovering the News: A Social H istory o f American Newspapers (New York: Basic
Books, 1978), 160-194.

150

less than ten years earlier, his name was not as well known as Lukas had expected. “For
many o f our younger colleagues, it appears, Liebling has long since passed into illdeserved obscurity....”292 For Lukas, Liebling’s value as an icon lay in his antagonism
toward publishers, his indifference toward editors and his support of reporters. “For what
outraged Liebling far more than error or stupidity was pomposity and pretension, traits he
regularly found in the publishers’ offices but rarely in the city room.” 293
Lukas and Poliak, along with assistant editor Terry Pristin (who may have come
up with the idea for the conference in the first place after having heard of similar
“counter-conventions),294 and the convention’s other co-coordinator, Nora Ephron
(already famous as an essayist and press critic, though not yet as a screenwriter or
director), felt that same solidarity with the reporter. The unsigned editorial at the front of
the magazine, likely written by Poliak, explains the reason that (MORE) had decided to
hold a counter-convention:
The journalist is one o f the nation’s most foolishly wasted resources. In city
rooms and television newsrooms around the country, thousands o f men and
women capable of giving their communities the kind of enlightened, toughminded reporting they deserve are daily demeaned by the feckless institutions for
which they work. And thousands more leave or refuse to enter the profession
every year because o f a system that still rewards stenography and discourages
enterprise. 295
The editorial acknowledges that none o f these particular gripes was new, but felt
that the convention was necessary because “working journalists are beginning to sense

292

J. Anthony Lukas, “Taking Our Cue From Joe,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May,
1972, 1.
293 Ibid., 18.
294 Interview with the author, December 17, 2011.
295 “Why a Counter-Convention,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May, 1972.

151

they might be able to do something about it.” More than anything, that sense o f optimism
pervaded the proceedings o f the convention.
The 1972 A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention wove together several of the themes
that faced American journalism in the early 1970s: the questioning o f the objectivity
norm; the movement o f journalism from being an anonymous “team sport” to a
profession where bylines could become celebrities and writers could have a voice; the
growth of press criticism as an activity; calls for intellectual self-awareness in journalism;
calls for accountability and ethics in reporting; newsroom democracy and anti­
establishment tendencies within the establishment press; a return to muckraking; and the
emergence o f journalism as a glamorous profession. The paper also makes an argument
that these themes came together at the Liebling convention because it gave reporters a
chance to see themselves as an intellectual community for the first time, allowing them to
communicate in ways they could not under the watchful eyes of their editors and
publishers. This paper reconstructs the Liebling Convention using reports from (MORE)
and other contemporary publications, including newspapers and magazines; a complete
transcript o f one panel discussion; letters and memos from the archival papers o f A.M.
Rosenthal and Dorothy Schiff; notes taken by journalist Nora Sayre, who attended; an
oral history recorded by J. Anthony Lukas; as well as interviews by the author with
several surviving organizers and participants.

The ... New ... Journalism
Around the same time he received the letter from Woody Woodward inviting him
to sit on the RM. papers panel, Abe Rosenthal also received a generic invitation to attend

152

the Liebling Convention. In the envelope, he would also have found two RSVP cards.
One card advertised a luncheon speaker: Tom Wicker, a Times columnist. The other
invited its recipient to an opening celebration of the convention, with the New York Post
columnist Jimmy Breslin as a keynote speaker. The scheduled location could hardly be
further, symbolically, from the publishers’ convention: instead o f dining on Waldorf
salad, Counter-Conventioneers would meet at the Times Square location o f Nathan’s
Famous, the hot dog stand.296 In the end, the opening party had to be moved; Nathan’s
employees were beginning what would be a 44-day strike against their employer. 297
Instead, the convention convened for the first time at a Chinese restaurant, Sun Luck
West,

298

“with its little bridge and trickling pond, tinsel and paper dragons.”

299

Charles

Long, writing for The Quill, the magazine o f the Society o f Professional Journalists,
opened his piece about the conference in the second person, putting “you” inside the
restaurant on a rainy spring evening, alongside Nan A. Talese (whom Long demeans by
not naming her and describing her only as “the pretty wife o f Gay Talese”).300 The rest of
the lead continues the name-dropping, by way o f scene setting: Bill Russell, retired
basketball player and television analyst; Mike Wallace; Yippie activist Abbie Hoffman;
Kurt Vonnegut. Then the keynote speech begins:
A path is made for the bulky form o f Jimmy Breslin, the author and former
columnist, and he works his up to a table top, the only place he can be seen by

296 (MORE) Opening Celebration Response Card. Rosenthal Papers, Box 87, Folder 8:
MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
297
“Nathan’s Employes [sic] End Their Strike; Agree to Arbitrate,” Yew York Times,
May 19, 1972, 57.
298
“The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,” Chicago Journalism Review, May, 1972, 3.
299 Sally Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation: New Journalism’s Counter-Convention: Egos
and Insult,” The Washington Post, April 26, 1972, D1-D2.
300 Charles Long, “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention Colossus,” The Quill, June,
1972,34.

153

everyone since no one is sitting down. There through the haze o f his own cigarette
smoke blending with the rest, he sets the stage for much o f the vocabulary that
will follow tomorrow. “The problem to be discussed here, Breslin begins, “is not
so much advocacy in the newsroom as it is Shylock in the composing room.” [....]
Breslin disappears from the table with what has been a five-minute keynote
address, and thus brings to a close Saturday night in a Chinese restaurant.
Several o f the stories written about the Counter-Convention take this quasiliterary, in-the-moment approach to description, perhaps inspired by one of the two
blockbuster panels that opened the meeting the next afternoon (the convention formally
opened at noon, perhaps to allow for hangovers to dissipate). That panel, called (with
Tom Wolfe-ian playful punctuation) “The ... N ew ... Journalism,” brought together a
group o f writers who were already stars in their field, and several o f whom would go on
to populate literary journalism syllabi in colleges across the country: Gay Talese, Gail
Sheehy, Tom Wolfe, Calvin Trillin, Pauline Kael, Renata Adler and moderator Benjamin
deMott. (Albert Goldman was also listed in the program, but seems not to have
participated in the panel.)
The panels took place in two auditoriums, each seating about 800 people,301
though several reports suggest that somewhere between 1500 and 3000 people attended
the sessions.

302

Many were likely drawn by the invitations that the (MORE) staff had

301 Thomas Meehan, “The Time Renata Adler Didn’t Dump Soup on Tom W olfe’s
Head,” Saturday Review, June 3, 1972, 22-24.
302
Long, in “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention Colossus,” says 1500 crowded into
the room for the New Journalism panel alone; in her article for the Philadelphia
Journalism Review, “Seeds o f Revolution,” Patricia McBroom hedged with “several
hundred,” (June 1972, 3); the Chicago Journalism Review had it at between 2,000 and
3,000 (May 1972, 4); Sally Quinn in the Washington Post said “nearly 2,000 attended
each day’s sessions,” (“Journalism’s New N ation...” April 26, 1972, D l); Time has
“some 2,000” (“Journalism’s Woodstock,” May 8, 1972, 96); as did The Progressive
(Erwin Knoll, “New Journalists, Old Journalism,” June, 1972, 38); Newsweek said “more
than 1,500” (“The Enemy Within,” May 8, 1972, 61); Nora Sayre, in her chapter on the
convention in Sixties Going on Seventies, (New York: Arbor House, 1973, 262), is the

154

distributed to the newsrooms o f the New York metropolitan area, which asked recipients
to invite any co-workers who hadn’t gotten their own invitation.303 Enclosed was a draft
o f the convention program, which opened with a quotation from Liebling:
Twelve years ago, the late A.J. Liebling, the The New Yorker's press critic, wrote:
“The (American Newspaper Publishers Association) convention reaches here at the same
season as the Ringling Brothers and Bamum and Bailey C ircus... Like the Big Show, the
convention bears a certain resemblance to its predecessors....” If you’re tired of circuses
come to: The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention.304
Some o f the non-journalists in attendance may also have been drawn by the
popular media attention that the conference received even before it opened. New York
magazine even named it one their “Best Bets” for the weekend, and noted that those who
couldn’t be there could follow the convention on the local Pacifica radio station,
WBAI.305 In fact, WBAI broadcast about 14 hours of live coverage over the two days.306
One o f New York City’s fledgling cable television systems also broadcast much o f the
conference.307 But the reach o f the conference went much further beyond the New York
metropolitan area than the organizers had expected. In part, word spread through the
network of regional journalism reviews that had spring up in the previous three or four

most optimistic, putting the number at 3000, which is the same number that (MORE)
itself later reported (Richard Poliak, “After the Counter-Convention,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, June, 1972, 3).
303 Letter from J. Anthony Lukas and Nora Ephron, co-chairmen to “Colleagues.”
Rosenthal Papers, Box 87, Lolder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
304 A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention Draft Program. Rosenthal Papers, Box 87, Lolder 8:
MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
305 Ellen Stock, ed., “Best Bets: The Press Gang,” New York, April 24,1972, 52.
306 WBAI Lolio, vol. 13, no. 4, April, 1972. Internet Archive, Pacifica Radio Archives
Digitized Lolio Collection, http://archive.org/details/wbaifoliol34wbairich
307 Chicago Journalism Review, “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,” 4.

155

years.

308

(MORE) had also achieved a national circulation o f at least 8,000 copies by this

point,309 and the conference brought in participants from as far away as Iowa, Arizona
and Hawaii.310 And they were all sorts o f people, as Sally Quinn noted:
There were hundreds o f journalism students and scattered emissaries from small­
town Midwestern newspapers who had come to see the media celebrities in their New
York ego center and if what they aspired to was really all that hot. Some had brought
their babies, their tape recorders, their suitcases, their lunch pails, their clips.311
The coats and ties on stage, she wrote, were watched by people in “blue jeans and
raggedy jackets.” The celebrities were certainly a draw, especially for the first panel, but
as Quinn insinuates, many were there to find work, to distribute their “clips.” Some also
came for their own political purposes, as will be discussed below, and the whole mix lent
something o f a circus air to the proceedings, despite the alternative to circuses promised
in the invitation.
But many also came to discuss the issues, and at the first panel, the first order o f
business was to define “New Journalism.” Unsurprisingly, Tom Wolfe, the great
evangelist o f the New Journalism,

312

gave the first statement o f the panel, and the first

thing he did was dismiss definitions. The second was to add him self to a lineage that
includes Boswell, Mark Twain, Chekhov and A.J. Liebling himself. But in addition to
self-aggrandizement, Wolfe also pinpointed what he saw as the new “tremendous appeal”

308

Patricia McBroom, telephone interview with the author, April 30, 2013.
309 “Journalism’s Woodstock,” Newsweek, May 8, 1972, 96.
310 “The Enemy Within,” Newsweek, May 8, 1972, 62; Quinn, “Journalism’s New
Nation,” D2.
311 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
312 See: Tom Wolfe, “The Birth o f ‘The New Journalism’; Eyewitness Report by Tom
Wolfe: Participant Reveals Main Factors Leading to Demise o f the Novel, Rise o f New
Style Covering Events,” New York, February 14, 1972.

156

o f nonfiction writing: “I don’t think that young writers any longer have the obsession,
which I had when I left college and which I think most people my age had, which was to
write a novel. I think the excitement has shifted into non-fiction now.” Pauline Kael, who,
along with Adler and Trillin, represented The New Yorker, a magazine Wolfe had publicly
attacked, accused the New Journalism o f being excellent for some stories, but not “an
adequate form o f journalism for dealing with the issues that most of us are interested in.”
Trillin also raised the question of whether New Journalism relied too heavily on big ideas
that the facts of the reporting ultimately could not support. He related his “airplane
theories” story: when flying out to report a story, he would sometimes get a “brilliant
theory” that would sum up the whole story. But after he did the reporting, the whole
thrust o f the story would change. “ [I]f s not just an error or a wrong date or something
like that,” Trillin said of the problem with the “accountability toward truth” in the New
Journalism, “but that the impression you got in your impressionistic portrait is wrong
because everything you based it on is wrong.”
Gay Talese mostly stayed quiet, because, as he said, he didn’t know where he
stood. “I find m yself siding with Tom, then with Bud [Trillin] and Renata,” he said. “I do
not consider m yself anything but a journalist, old or new; I do my homework and I stand,
or do not, by my record as an accurate reporter.”313
None of this debate was really new in the spring of 1972. What was new was
putting partisans of each side in the debate on a stage together, even if that meant risking
a scene when Renata Adler might have dumped a can o f Campbell’s soup onto Tom
Wolfe’s trademark immaculate white suit, in retaliation for his attacks on The New

313 “Tom W olfe and his D irigible,” (MORE): A Journalism Review , July, 1972, 11, 16.

157

Yorker. More than one story after the convention said that Adler had come armed with a
can and a can opener. But whether or not that was true, she never made good on her
threat.314 It was also a public appearance with Adler and Kael representing the same side
in an argument several years before Adler wrote a very negative review o f Kael’s work,
sparking a feud that would last until Kael’s death.315
Perhaps even more novel than having New Journalism’s advocates and detractors
on stage together was allowing rank and file reporters to question them. (MORE) ran an
edited transcript o f this panel, but the questions from the floor survive only in notes taken
by journalist Nora Sayre. She recorded the west coast journalist Paul Jacobs saying that
he was troubled by the confusion o f style and substance in the discussion. He argued that
even doing the same work as his subjects—farm workers, in his example— didn’t let him
get into their heads. He says that it can only approximate the life o f those people, because
the reporter has the means to escape back to the newsroom and cannot feel what it is like
to be trapped in that job. Referring to Gail Sheehy’s New York story about prostitution, he
says that she could really only say what she thought it would be like to be a prostitute,
even though, as Sheehy explained, she did everything short o f sleep with customers in
reporting that story. Sayre punctuated this in her notes with a punchy “Yes!” Sayre also
records comments and questions from a “wire service man” and a “kid,” neither of whom
she seems to have recognized.316

314 Meehan, “The Time Renata Adler Didn’t Dump Soup...,” 22-24; Chicago Journalism
Review, “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,” 4.
315 Renata Adler, “The Perils o f Pauline,” The New York Review o f Books, August 14,
1980.
316 Handwritten notes from first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. New York Public
Library, Nora Sayre Papers 1940-2001. MssCol 4847. Box 40, Folder 6: Research
Papers: More (Journalism Review).

158

Despite the fireworks that could have erupted at the panel, and despite its star
power, which was clearly intended to open the conference with strong crowds, some in
the audience did not seem to get much o f substance out o f the proceedings. Thomas
Meehan, who wrote the most extensive piece on the supposed Renata Adler plan to dump
soup on Tom Wolfe, used the “nonevent” of the soup as a metaphor for the panel as a
whole: “chaotic and amusing,” but ultimately an empty threat.317 However, there
certainly are issues o f ethics and accountability deeply entwined within what the “New
Journalists” were doing. The mere fact o f their celebrity shows that journalism was
already on its way to becoming a place where individuals could shine, even though it was
often thought o f primarily as something done as a team, where the individual reporter
was less important than the story, and the publication that ran it. The press critic David
Carr wrote that this transition was happening in 2013, 318 but even in 1972, bylines were
already becoming more than just a vanity play for reporters: readers were actually
beginning to notice the names. Individual enterprise mattered to them and to reporters.
As well-attended as the New Journalism panel may have been (and as w ellreported), the panel that ran opposite it in the same time slot may have been even more
important to assessing the state o f organized journalism. That was “Democracy in the
Newsroom,” which brought together Ron Dorfman, the editor o f the Chicago Journalism
Review, three correspondents for French news organizations; one newspaper publisher
from Iowa; and moderator Edwin Diamond, a New York magazine contributing editor. A

317 Meehan, “The Time Renata A dler...,” 22-23.
318
David Carr and Ashley Parker, “House o f Cards: What Happens When a Reporter
Becomes an Army o f One?” New York Times Media Decoder blog, February 28, 2013.
http://mediadecoder.blogs.nytimes.eom/2013/02/28/house-of-cards-what-happens-whena-reporter-becomes-an-army-of-one/

159

couple years earlier, Diamond had written o f a “cabal” at the New York Times, a
movement to challenge the power o f the editors in the newsroom; Tony Lukas had been
one o f the instigators.319 Le M onde and Le Figaro, represented by two o f the French
panelists, had won a measure o f reporter control, and Dorfman had written about efforts
in Chicago to do the same—though the American efforts never went as far as those in
France. 3 20 The Liebling Convention gave a new sense o f “reporter power” to those in
attendance though, and one Monday panel, about the tensions between newsroom
management and reporters, would take up the topic again. And Dick Poliak, the editor of
(MORE), also called midnight meetings on both conference days to consider resolutions
to adopt. Charles Perlik, Jr., the president o f the Newspaper Guild was one of 13 steering
committee members who were set to draft a “declaration of independence from newsmedia management on professional matters.” 321 But the first midnight meeting was still
more than ten hours off.
Still, these first two panels were not completely devoid o f progress in the eyes of
all who attended them, even if none o f the important questions facing the press had been
answered. At least the conference-goers had begun to realize that they were mostly asking
the same questions. The Chicago Journalism Review concluded that even the first two
sessions had “revealed a surprising consensus” on issues that they had thought were
unresolved. One was that “the basic style o f newswriting taught in journalism schools and
required by American news media is a fundamental obstacle to good journalism.” The

319 Edwin Diamond, “The Cabal at the New York Times: Which Way to the Revolution?”
New York, May 18, 1970, 42-45.
320
Ron Dorfman, “Truth, Justice and the American Way,” Revue Fran 9 aise d ’Etudes
Americaines, 3:6 (1978) 183-191.
321
Long, “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention Colossus,” 36.

160

second was that it should be the reporters themselves, “not the owners, not the editors,
not the broadcast producers” who “should have control over what they cover and how
they present it.”322

How They Cover Me
The New Journalism and Democracy in the Newsroom panels were followed by a
panel on covering political campaigns, featuring the syndicated columnist Jack Anderson;
Washington Post columnist David Broder; Joe McGinniss, who had written The Selling o f
the President; Dan Rather, then the CBS News White House correspondent; Victor
Navasky, author of Kennedy Justice', and U.S. Senator Fred Harris, whose name was
printed on the program in a different typeface, which suggests that he may have been a
last-minute addition. 323 Simultaneously, the Committee for Public Justice co-sponsored
“A Public Hearing on Government and the Press.” The late afternoon brought a panel on
challenging television licenses, which was mostly a practical affair, and which Newsweek
noted was under-attended, like all o f the other practical-minded panels. 324 Elsewhere,
conference co-chairman Tony Lukas moderated a panel on sports reporting with former
Major League Baseball player Jim Bouton and his co-author Leonard Schechter, who
collaborated on Bouton’s memoir, Ball Four. Roger Angell, the New Yorker writer; Dick
Young, o f the New York Daily News; and Larry Merchant o f the Post also pitched in.
After a dinner break, several hundred people came back from bars and restaurants
and from milling in the halls— so many jammed into the halls that a closed circuit

322

“The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,” Chicago Journalism Review, 4.
A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention program. Nora Sayre Papers 1940-2001, Box 40,
Lolder 6: Research Papers: More (Journalism Review).
324 “The Enemy Within,” Newsweek, 61.
323

161

television was set up to serve the overflow crowd—

325

and returned to the Martin Luther

King Center for a panel called “How They Cover Me,” another one meant to draw a
crowd. There was no announced lineup for the panel, which was supposed to be a
moderated discussion o f how various celebrities saw themselves covered in the press.
Nora Ephron said that “ [e]very famous person in the world was asked to be on this panel
and refused.” Hugh Hefner, Henry Kissinger, Tom Seaver, Dalton Trumbo, Alger Hiss,
Henry Fonda, Shirley MacLaine, John Lennon, Bob Dylan and Daniel Ellsberg all said
no.326 The mobster Crazy Joe Gallo said yes, but he was killed at a clam house in Little
Italy between the time he had signed on and the day of the conference. 327 The woman
who arranged for him to show up as the surprise guest “made us promise not to tell a soul
because they might come here and shoot him,” Ephron said. 328 The final group included
the activist Abbie Hoffman, actor Tony Randall, film director Otto Preminger, writer
Gore Vidal, Congresswoman Bella Abzug, and Marvin Miller, the head o f the Major
League Baseball Players’ Association. Charlotte Curtis, the editor o f the New York Times
women’s pages moderated.
The Progressive pointed out that any gathering of this size would have “a fair
measure o f irrelevance, o f showboating, o f utter foolishness” 329 and the How They Cover
Me panel was a prime example. Earlier in the day, a group from the underground press
and the “Zippie” party (having recently morphed from the Yippies), had interrupted the
New Journalism panel and demanded that there be an underground press representative

325 Quinn, “Countering the Publishers,” The Washington Post, April 24, 1972, B3.
326 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
327
Tom Folsom, The M ad Ones: Crazy Joe Gallo and the Revolution at the E nd o f the
Underworld (New York: Weinstein Books, 2010), 5.
328 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
329 Knoll, “New Journalists, Old Journalism,” 39.

162

on every panel going forward.330 In general, that seems to have been followed. The
reporter Claudia Dreifus passed Nora Sayre a note that “by Zippie decree,” she had been
added to the panel on racism, sexism and elitism in journalism.331 Tom For 9 ade, the head
o f the Underground Press Syndicate who would go on to found High Times magazine,
had been added to the panel on covering political campaigns. 332 For 9ade was well known
for using pies as a method o f political protest, and there were rumors that he would be
doing so at the conference, though like Renata A dler’s soup, that threat never
materialized.333 But Jerry Rubin and For 9 ade did interrupt the “How They Cover Me”
panel to make a statement supporting George McGovern for president.334 Throughout the
two days, Fran Lee, a New York City activist whose latest cause was advocating for a
“pooper scooper” law, repeatedly interrupted panels. She took the opportunity o f having
so many members o f the working press around to make her case.335 The same was true of
Hal Koppersmith, a fringe candidate for Congress who wore a sandwich board
advertising his platform.336
When the television lights turned off and the celebrities went home, the casual
conference-goers filtered out, and the die-hards convened their midnight session to begin
the newsroom revolution.

330 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
331 Handwritten note from Claudia Dreifus to Nora Sayre. New York Public Library,
Nora Sayre Papers 1940-2001. MssCol 4847. Box 40, Folder 6: Research Papers: More
(Journalism Review).
332 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
333 Handwritten notes from first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. Sayre Papers. Box 40,
Folder 6: Research Papers: More (Journalism Review).
334 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
335 Ibid.
336 Handwritten notes from first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. Sayre Papers. Box 40,
Folder 6: Research Papers: More (Journalism Review).

163

Why Journalists Leave Daily Newspapers
Pat McBroom had come to New York from Philadelphia, where she had been
serving six months’ hard labor on the obituaries desk o f the Inquirer. McBroom had
previously been a science writer, but according to McBroom when management found
out that she was living with Donald Drake, who was the editor o f the Philadelphia
Journalism Review, they suspected that she must somehow be involved.337 She says she
w asn’t, but after attending the Liebling Convention, she became radicalized and typed out
a scathing piece about the “seeds o f revolution” that had been planted in New York.
David Fitzpatrick had come from Phoenix, where he worked for the Arizona
Republic. He became the “casually-dressed young reporter” through whom the Chicago
Journalism Review would look at the conference. In that magazine’s story, Fitzpatrick
represented all of the reporters who wanted change:
What really separated Fitzpatrick and most o f the other journalists in the hall from
the men on the stage was not the geography o f the auditorium, but the constraints of
traditional journalism as practiced everywhere in the United States. Most o f those in the
audience were still fettered; those on the stage had, to some extent, been able to free
themselves. The question Fitzpatrick and the others had was, “How?” 338
Both Fitzpatrick and McBroom would soon find themselves to be unfettered,
though not by their own choice. What got them in trouble was their effort to get some
power in their newsrooms. They tried to answer the “How?”
One o f the first panels on Monday morning was called “Why Journalists Leave
Daily Newspapers.” Three o f the panelists— Tony Lukas, David Halberstam and Sidney

337 Telephone interview with the author, March 30, 2013.
338
“The A.J. Liebling Counter-C onvention,” C hicago Journalism Review, 3.

164

Zion—were former Times reporters who had found themselves limited by the objectivity
that the newspaper required. They had found it inadequate to cover the Vietnam War or in
Lukas’s case, the Chicago conspiracy trial. “The Times wanted, as they later admitted to
me, [a] virtually stenographic account of what went on the courtroom,” Lukas told an oral
history interviewer. “I one day refused to write a story, the only time I’ve ever done it on
the Times. I told them to use the wire services that day because they were telling me that I
could not write the story the way I wanted to write it.”339
The tensions between the (MORE) conference organizers and their former
employers were also demonstrated by the simmering anger with which those employers
greeted word o f the conference. Abe Rosenthal’s terse response to his panel invitation
only told part o f the story. Rosenthal must have noticed some o f the names on the
provisional program for the conference, and he sent a memo to Arthur “Punch”
Sulzberger, the editor o f the Times'.
Tom Wicker and Charlotte Curtis, both editors o f this paper, apparently have
agreed to participate. I think that this makes the Times look just silly. There may
be no way that we can prevent Guild employees from participating but I think that
we have every right and indeed a duty to insist that editors and other executives
do not strike off on their own and make statements or participate in affairs that are
not in the best interests of the paper.340
Sulzberger sent memos to Curtis and Wicker, discouraging them from
participating, but not forbidding it. Curtis, who herself had clashed with Rosenthal,341
sent a memo to Sulzberger (on Women’s News Department stationery) distancing herself

339 J. Anthony Lukas Oral History Memoir. The American Jewish Committee Oral
History Collection. Dorot Jewish Division, New York Public Library. Interviewed by
Erik Bamouw, June 29-30, 1971. Edited and approved December 23, 1972.
340 Memo from “A.M.R.” to Mr. Sulzberger, March 15, 1972. Rosenthal Papers, Box 87,
Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
341 Marilyn Greenwald, A Woman o f the Times: Journalism, Feminism, and the Career
O f Charlotte Curtis (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1999).

165

from (MORE) and the advertising copy that she thought might have implied her approval
o f the conference’s themes, but standing firm in her decision to moderate the “How They
Cover Me” panel. 342 Rosenthal seems to have resigned him self to the conference and
some Times staff participation after that, mustering his own commitment to objectivity,
but certainly not making any promises to treat the Times people at the conference in any
special way:
While I am away, the ANPA convention will be meeting. Also, “More” will have
its counter-meeting. As I have written to Arthur Gelb, we ought to cover the
“More” thing on a strict news basis. I would appreciate it if you would watch the
copy on this. There will be a number o f people like Halberstam, Zion and Lukas,
who will be spouting off. If they have anything important to say, we should print
it. But we should feel under no obligation to print something just because they are
talking. Nor should we feel that simply because they attack the papers, probably
including this one, that we have an inherent obligation to print what they have to
say. We should be fair but not allow ourselves to be used by them.343
This hardly seems like the sort of toxic atmosphere that would drive out a
Halberstam or a Lukas (though “spouting o ff’ does imply a certain attitude). But a letter
from several years later, when a new editor/publisher had taken over (MORE), betrays a
less kind feeling. In it, Rosenthal says that the journalism review is a reflection “of the
psychic problems and nastiness of some of the people who used to put our More and are
now still involved with it.”344
Downtown, at the offices of the New York Post, publisher Dorothy Schiff was
also bracing herself for the beginning o f the Counter-Convention. When Woody
Woodward, one of her reporters, first asked for a leave o f absence to go to work as

342

Memo from Charlotte Curtis to Mr. Sulzberger, March 23, 1972. Rosenthal Papers,
Box 87, Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
343 Memo from “A.M.R.” to Seymour Topping, April 6, 1972. Rosenthal Papers, Box 87,
Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.
344 Letter from “A.M.R.” to Michael Kramer, October 6, 1976. Rosenthal Papers, Box 87,
Folder 8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.

166

(MORE)’s publisher, Schiff seems to have felt a little bit o f pride in her protege.
Woodward had gotten his job as a Post reporter in large part because his mother had
traveled in the same society circles as Schiff.345 There had been inklings of the radical in
Woodward before (MORE) though. The Edwin Diamond article about the Times “cabal”
also mentioned that Woodward was working as a labor negotiator at the Post. But
Schiff’s opinion o f (MORE) really soured when Dick Poliak wrote a piece excoriating the
Post for not giving an African-American reporter the same full tryout that other, white,
reporters got. Schiff wrote a scathing letter to the editor, which she never sent, calling the
article “tendentious.”346 Schiff also wrote on top o f a memo, that she would consider
writing for (MORE) to be “gross disloyalty + dischargeable offense.”347 So it should not
have been surprising that when she discovered that there would be an entire panel
devoted to afternoon newspapers, she would either listen to the radio or watch on
television and take angry notes on the panel—which did, in fact, turn out to mostly be a
complaint-fest about Schiff. She also procured a complete transcript of the panel and
marked it up, with a keen eye for minor inaccuracies and petty slights. 348 She also had a
staffer attend the panel and prepare a lengthy report.349

345 Susan Braudy, This Crazy Thing Called Love: The Golden World and Fatal Marriage
o f Ann and Billy Woodward (New York: St. M artin’s, 1992).
346 Draft o f letter to the editor of (MORE) by Dorothy Schiff, September 22, 1971. New
York Public Library Dorothy Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder “(MORE)
Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23.”
347 Memo from “Bob” [Spitzler] to “Paul” [Sann], September 23, 1971. Schiff Papers,
Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder “(MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23.”
348
Annotated transcript o f WBAI broadcast o f “What Kind o f P.M. Paper Should New
York Have?” Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder “(MORE) CounterConvention, 1972, April-M ay.”
349 Memo from Bill Hanway to Floyd Barger and M. J. O ’Neill, April 26, 1972. Schiff
Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder “(MORE) Counter-Convention, 1972, A prilMay.”

167

These are high profile cases o f editors and publishers who wanted to keep tight
reins on their editorial staff, but they seem to be representative of the pressures that even
less prominent reporters were feeling. While it may have been cathartic or inspirational
for them to hear the stories of reporters who had escaped, they really got their chance to
voice their anger at the two midnight planning sessions. According to Pat McBroom,
about 70 people attended one or both of the meetings.350 As in the daytime sessions, the
actual solutions were left for another day. Sidney Zion said “We’ll declare it now and do
something about it later.”351
The biggest dose o f inspiration came from a surprise visit on the second night
from I.F. Stone, the independent investigative reporter who had just been awarded the
first ever A. J. Liebling Prize “For his commitment, carried on single-handedly over two
decades, to independent and unrelenting investigation of public and private power in
America and his defense o f individual liberty.”

352

In his speech upon accepting the award

from A. J. Liebling’s widow, Jean Stafford Liebling, Stone had opened with a joke that
made it clear how happy— and surprised—he was to see so many “radical journalists” in
one place. As an elder statesman, he had a message for the “kids” in the audience:
[W]e are up against a whole series o f fundamental problems to which we have no
answers. And w hat’s so wonderful about the kids, compared to their grandfathers
is that they know there are no answers and they’re willing to act and to fight and
to search and to move without a clear blueprint, knowing that w e’re in a
wilderness.353

350 Patricia McBroom, “Seeds o f Revolution,” Philadelphia Journalism Review, June,
1972,3.
351 Ibid.
352
A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention program, 1972. Sayre Papers. Box 40, Folder 6:
Research Papers: More (Journalism Review).
353 “As Soon As You Want Som ething...” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June, 1972, 4.

168

Stone’s call for a perseverance in the face of uncertainty— or even the embrace of
uncertainty—fit well with the tone that Times columnist Tom Wicker struck in his
lunchtime keynote address, when he said that “there is no orthodoxy, formula or
dogm a... o f new journalism or objectivity or advocacy or activism ... that can free us
from the ills o f orthodoxy... .”354 And echoing a call that had been issued repeatedly
throughout the convention, he said that reporters needed to avoid “spurious
objectivity.”355 Replacing old orthodoxies with new ones, he said, would not help
journalism, but that instead reporters needed to be free to do their own best work.356 “We
must let a hundred flowers bloom,” Wicker said.357 Flowers like Patricia McBroom from
Philadelphia, or David Fitzpatrick from Phoenix. In the end, the Chicago Journalism
Review piece leaves Fitzpatrick still wondering “how.” That was for the late-night
session. But when Stone showed up that night at the organizing meeting, he spoke to the
participants, telling them once again that he didn’t have any answers. The best he could
do was to rouse the troops, telling them that “The life o f the paper comes from the guys
who write it, not the guy who happens to own it.... They’re the ones who make it good or
bad or wonderful. They’re giving their lives to it, their talents and their devotion and they
have a right to a say in it.” 358
Invigorated by this talk and similar speeches and conversations throughout the
conference, Patricia McBroom went home from the conference and wrote her first piece
for the Philadelphia Journalism Review, which she had avoided so far so as not to make

354 “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,” Chicago Journalism Review, 6.
355 McBroom, “Seeds o f Revolution,” 3.
356 Handwritten notes from first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. Nora Sayre Papers.
Box 40, Folder 6: Research Papers: More (Journalism Review).
357 Quinn, “Journalism’s New Nation,” D2.
358 McBroom, “Seeds o f Revolution,” 3.

169

trouble with the Inquirer. But her PJR piece pulled no punches, and she admits that she
probably made a strategic mistake when she paraded copies o f the journal through the
Inquirer newsroom. Within hours, she was fired— and with the exception of a few
freelance pieces, she didn’t return to journalism for nearly 40 years.359 David Fitzpatrick
met a similar fate when he returned home, despite not even writing about the conference.
“Fitzpatrick was dismissed for refusing to acknowledge that he owed any obligation and
any loyalty to the people who were paying him,” his editor told (MORE).360

Further(MORE)
For most people, however, the first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention did not end
so dramatically. There were additional Monday panels including one on local television
news chaired by Nat Hentoff; a panel on racism, sexism and elitism in journalism that
featured Studs Terkel, Susan Brownmiller, Ernest Dunbar and Jimmy Breslin (years
before his own very public racist and sexist outbursts); an alternative media panel; one on
the future o f women’s pages with Lynn Sherr and Gloria Steinem; and a panel about the
muckraking tradition, which was part o f the celebration of Izzy Stone. There was more
drinking, as there is wont to be with journalists. Then people scattered back to their own
newsrooms to talk about what they had seen, and to look forward to the next conference,
which was going to be held in Washington the following year.
Predictably, the more establishment journals that wrote notices of the convention
were skeptical and emphasized the silliness and the celebrity worship, while more anti­
establishment outlets addressed the spirit of optimism and discovery that many took

359 Telephone interview with the author, March 30, 2013.
360
Counter-Convention (cont’d),” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1972, 21.

170

away. In addition to the articles quoted above, the Counter-Convention got noticed by the
Harvard Crimson361 and even by (MORE)’s stodgier older cousin of a press watchdog, the
Columbia Journalism Review. CJR gave (MORE) a “laurel” because “the unrestricted
attendance and participatory ambience o f the counter-convention made it a landmark.”362

Watergate changes everything: The Liebling Convention moves to D.C.
The following year, (MORE) built on its success with the first CounterConvention by moving the proceedings to Washington, D.C. A few things had changed
from 1972. Instead o f being a two-day event, “Liebling II,” as the banners behind the
panelists called it, had expanded to three days, Friday May 4 through Sunday May 6.363
Instead of being free and open to the public, Liebling II charged convention-goers $8.00,
and according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics inflation calculator, that $8.00 had
the buying power of $42.99 in 2013, so it while it w asn’t an exorbitant amount of money,
it wasn’t insignificant either.364 Instead o f being counter to the American Newspaper
Publishers Association, Liebling II ran counter to the American Society o f Newspaper
Editors convention. But there wasn’t as much o f a difference in venue between the two
concurrent meetings as there was the first year. While the first Liebling convention had
been held at the Martin Luther King Labor Center, a block or two away from the
M idnight Cowboy seediness o f 1970s Times Square, Liebling II moved into the

Gregg J. Kilday, “Meet the Press,” The H arvard Crimson, May 4, 1972.
362 “Darts and Laurels,” Columbia Journalism Review,” July/August, 1972, 7.
363 Program of The Second A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. Nora Sayre Papers 19402001 Mss Col 4847 Box 40, Folder 6: Research Papers: MORE (Journalism Review),
New York Public Library.
364 United States Bureau o f Labor Statistics CPI Inflation Calculator.
http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm

171

significantly more luxe Mayflower Hotel, the historic hotel decorated with gilded accents
and crystal light fixtures just a few blocks away from the White House.
A few months before (MORE) would chronicle Sally Quinn’s adventures in
morning television (see chapter 2), Quinn attended the second annual Liebling
convention. She picked up on the new establishment vibe that pervaded the atmosphere
there, and attributed it to a sea change in the self-regard of the press between the spring of
1972 and the spring o f 1973. The first convention, Quinn wrote, “was still decidedly
unestablishment with at least as many freaks as members o f respectable journalistic
institutions.”365 In Quinn’s assessment, Watergate changed everything. For the press, she
saw at the time, Watergate had given journalists a reason to be proud of the mainstream
press, she argued. O f course, she might be biased, writing as she was for The Washington
Post, which was primarily responsible for breaking the Watergate story— and since she
would eventually marry the editor who directed that coverage. Also, she was basing this
conclusion on observations she made at the opening night party, not including any o f the
actual substance of the conference.
Nevertheless, she did have a point. Coverage o f the Civil Rights Movement,
Vietnam and cultural changes in the United States had given journalists a sense that while
their work could be noble at times, they were up against an establishment that kept their
strongest reporting at bay. Watergate on the other hand showed that a mainstream paper
that was willing to devote time and resources to a story could actually break through the
wall of spin that the establishment put up. And that put the press in the odd position of
being both establishment and anti-establishment at the same time. It was a contradiction

365 Sally Quinn, “(M ORE) Party.” The W ashington Post, M ay 4, 1973, B l.

172

that (MORE) would long struggle with, though the gravitational pull o f the establishment
is almost always stronger than that o f the counter-establishment.
In a short preview writeup for Liebling II which also included a reprint o f the
conference program, The D.C. Gazette, an alternative paper, also complained that the
smaller independent papers were being shut out in favor o f big city dailies and wire
services:
As you will note from the program, only a few representatives of the alternative
press (including your editor) have been invited to participate and underground and
alternative newspapers are being charged $8 a head for the privilege of covering a
journalism counter-convention. This all seems a bit odd and leads one to wonder
what this convention is counter to. Sleep well tonight, Spiro. As long as it’s easier
for a big city daily editor to appear at a journalism counter-convention than it is
for members of the Underground Press Syndicate, you got nothing to fear.366
It should be noted that in addition to the panel that included D.C. Gazette's editor, Sam
Smith, there was also an entire workshop panel devoted to ideas that the “straight” press
could learn from the alternative press.
Nicholas von Hoffman, an occasional (MORE) contributor, but also a Washington
Post writer, also noticed the mainstreaming o f the counter-convention in its second year.
“On other days the younger, farther left and less compromising participants would be
counter-conventioning against the American Society o f Newspaper Editors concurrently
meeting uptown at another hotel. But not in this year o f Watergate,” he wrote. “The
younger ones are so well pleased by the performance o f their rich elders that they have
invited onto their program editors from The Boston Globe, The Chicago Sun-Times, The
Philadelphia Inquirer, The New York Times, and above all, The Washington Post.”367
According to von Hoffman, he and the other “Post Toasties,” as he called his fellow Post

“Things to Do,” D.C. Gazette, April 25, 1973, 9.
367 Nicholas von Hoffman, “Pardon... Me.” The Washington Post, May 7, 1973, B l.

173

employees in a reference to a now-discontinued breakfast cereal, couldn’t help but sweep
with pride in “the cream” o f the accomplishments o f Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein,
no matter how little the rest of them had to do with the Watergate story.
At the opening night party, Sally Quinn watched as reporters dutifully stood in
line for name tags and drink tickets and then stood in line again at the bar to trade them
for drinks. The proceedings were almost dignified, compared to the raucous atmosphere
o f the previous year. Jann Wenner, the founder and editor o f Rolling Stone, even admitted
to Quinn that his magazine w asn’t an underground publication anymore.368 The
alternative press had begun to move inexorably toward the mainstream. Still, it wasn’t so
mainstream that there w eren’t still writers who were scared for their jobs for being at a
(MORE) convention. A joum alist for U.S. News and World Report refused to identify
him self for fear of being fired.
Another example of that protest from the left came from the National
Organization for Women, which held what it called a “counter-counter convention” in the
lobby o f the Mayflower. Joyce Snyder, o f NOW, said that the organization was
disappointed that (MORE) apparently regarded women as “a special interest group.”369
Her objections seemed to be more to the way women were represented in the media than
with the way (MORE) included them on its panels. According to Myra MacPherson, who
also covered Liebling II for the Post, some women came away from the conference
thinking that they would have gotten a fairer hearing across town at the ASNE
convention. She cited two exchanges from the panel on women’s issues. In the first, Sally
Quinn, in her role as a panelist, said that “If a senator is putting his hand on my fanny and

368 Quinn, “(MORE) Party,” B2
369 “Convention Discriminates, NOW Says.” The Washington Post, May 5, 1973, C3.

174

talking about how h e’s thinking o f impeaching Nixon, I’m sure not going to remove his
hand.” She was hissed by the crowd. And a Women’s Wear Daily reporter was asked if
women who use their femininity in reporting would inevitably lose that power as they got
older. Her reply was “Not if she gets a facelift.”370 The Washington Liebling Convention
may have kept some o f the “freaks” out by having the gall to charge admission, but this
and future conferences (particularly (MORE)’s one foray into the West Coast) would
never entirely rid itself o f the protests.
Quinn closed her piece with a quote from Tony Lukas, one which, he hoped,
would set the tone for the conference to come: “Last year I said that journalists only get
together on two occasions, when they’re competing and when they’re drunk.... Last year
they were neither. They were sober and non-competitive. This year we are aiming for
higher peaks. This year we hope they will be sober, non-competitive and
contemplative.”371
Unlike the 1972 Counter-Convention, which was a mishmash o f topics that were
o f concern to journalists, Liebling II had two overriding themes, which Woody
Woodward had announced in a “Column Two” column.

372

Those were political reporting

and power in the newsroom. But really, all anyone wanted to talk about was Watergate—
and this was before there was definitive evidence linking Nixon to knowledge o f the
break-in or o f the cover-up. It was a lucky coincidence for (MORE).
Nora Ephron had relinquished her planning duties for this conference, though her
future husband, Carl Bernstein, was in attendance. Liebling II was put together by Dan

370 Myra MacPherson, “Meet the Press,” The Washington Post. May 7, 1973, B3.
371 Quinn, “(MORE) Party,” B2
372 William Woodward, “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, March 1973, 2.

175

McNamee (who would become a (MORE) business staff member) and Marjorie
Federbush, who would go on to a career in philanthropy. The panels that they put together
were remarkably prescient, given that it took at least six months to put together a Liebling
convention.373 Those panels included:
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•

•

•

Journalistic Lessons of the Vietnam War (moderated by Dan Rather of CBS
News)
Press Councils and Press Criticism (which included Dick Poliak, (M ORE)’s
editor)
Is Anyone Covering the City of Washington? (The panel on which Sam Smith sat)
Getting Subpoenaed: How to Fight Back (a workshop)
Reliable Sources: How Reliable? (moderated by Victor Navasky)
Political Columnists: Can They Be Cosmic Three Days a Week? (Tom Wicker, the
previous year’s keynote speaker, sat on this panel, as did the economist and
political adviser John Kenneth Galbraith, who (MORE) identified merely as a
“gadfly”)
Why is 90 Per Cent o f Washington Uncovered? (Activist Ralph Nader and
journalists Taylor Branch and Morton Mintz sat on the panel)
Power in the Newsroom: Who Has it and How to Get it (a workshop featuring
Ron Dorfman, four domestic and three foreign journalists)
How Women Cover Washington: Do They Need a Special Style, View, Eye,
Portfolio or Other Refuge (moderated by Lynn Sherr, then of WCBS, and
including Sally Quinn, who also covered the convention)
The Government and Broadcasters: Jamming the Airwaves
A Deadline Every Minute: Is Wire Service Reporting Obsolete? (Gene Roberts, at
the beginning of his run as Executive Editor o f The Philadelphia Inquirer, and
Seymour Hersh, who broke the story o f the My Lai massacre participated)
Investigative Reporting: How to Get the Goods on the Baddies (a workshop that
featured Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, amazingly, given the time)
The White House: W ho’s Kicking Whom Around? (Moderated by (MORE)’s
Tony Lukas)
Who Decides What is News? (Moderated by (MORE)’s Brit Hume and including
Jann Wenner o f Rolling Stone and Victor Gold, former press secretary to Vice
President Spiro Agnew)374

373 Kathy Jones, Interview with the author, November 14, 2011.
374 Program of The Second A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. Nora Sayre Papers 19402001 Mss Col 4847 Box 40, Folder 6: Research Papers: MORE (Journalism Review),
New York Public Library.

176

As she had the previous year, journalist Nora Sayre attended the conference and
took extensive notes on the panels she attended (though less extensive than her 1972
notes). She started out Friday morning at the “Lessons of the Vietnam War” panel.
Murray Marder o f The Washington Post argued that Vietnam and Watergate could not
be seen just as “aberrations of justice on [the] part [of the] governm ent].” The press he
said had gotten lulled into accepting the official government view o f the war under the
Kennedy administration because they liked his “panache.” Bob Manning o f The
Atlantic thought that the press had missed the transition from cold war to actual war,
and that it took student protests to goad the press into writing that story. He believes
that the war “raised a lot of questions about whether the job o f the press is simply to
inform.” Marder chimed in that he didn’t think that was enough.375
Afterward, Sayre attended the workshop on how to fight subpoenas. The panel
itself appears to have been mostly practical tips for reporters. For that reason though, it is
worth noting, since unlike at the first Liebling convention, these workshop sessions
seemed geared toward real practical advice for working journalists, as opposed to more
high-minded discussion (or windy bloviating). At the “And Now a Word from your
Editor...” panel, which she attended next, she made note o f the panelists, but didn’t
record much o f what she said. She did however notice that Nora Ephron and Nat Hentoff
asked questions. So did Paul Krassner (“Again,” she remarked. Krassner would later take
pride in “being the first to ask as meaningful a question as possible at each panel” of
every Liebling convention he attended.376) Sayre seems to have skipped the panel

375 Handwritten notes from second A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention. Nora Sayre Papers.
Box 40, Folder 6: Research Papers: More (Journalism Review).
376 Paul Krassner, D.C. Gazette, July 1973, 22.

177

sessions on Saturday o f the conference, but she does have a few notes from a Sunday
panel as well. That was “The White House: W ho’s Kicking Whom Around?” and thanks
to Pacifica Radio, that is the most complete audio recording o f a Liebling panel
discussion that appears to have survived—though Pacifica clearly favored the liberal
panelists in its broadcast.377
The panel less notable for any spirited interaction between its participants than for
its laugh lines and speechifying. The panelists mostly seemed thrilled that they had Nixon
to kick around. Tony Lukas chaired the panel, which included John Osborne of The New
Republic, Robert Semple Jr. o f The New York Times, Henry Trewhitt o f Newsweek,
Andrew Kopkind of WBCN radio, Boston, Sarah McClendon, who ran her own
McClendon News Service, and Raph de Toledano, the conservative author and friend of
Nixon. After an opening montage o f one-liners, the Pacifica recording jumps into the
middle o f McClendon’s remarks: “The whole White House operation in my estimation is
so staged, so programmed, so controlled, that the Watergate just couldn’t have happened
without Nixon and his top aides planning it fully.” She gets a round o f applause from the
receptive crowd. “The president,” she said, “runs the public relations at the White House,
not Ron Ziegler,” N ixon’s press secretary. “No decision, however small is made at the
White House is made without the approval of the president.” She continued on to her
laugh line: “This is why so many mistakes in judgment have been made.” And the
audience obliged her by laughing. She talks quickly, obviously reading from prepared
remarks, but delivering her lines with excellent timing. One anecdote about Nixon’s
attention to detail has him in a receiving line at the White House with 100 journalists and

377 “The White House: W ho’s Kicking Whom Around? Produced by Mark Goldberg.
June 12, 1973. Courtesy o f the Pacifica Radio Archive.

178

90 Chinese visitors, when he sees McClendon across the room, wearing pants to the
White House for the first time. He walks over to her, looks her up and down and says,
“My, my. I thought you were a traditionalist!”
Lukas called on John Osborne next. Osborne w asn’t as disappointed in the press
setup at the Nixon White House, since he said he didn’t expect more than for the press
secretary to deal with the President’s interests. And Watergate didn’t surprise him either,
he said, given the way that he had seen the administration operating. They were secretive
and sanctimonious, and while he couldn’t have predicted the Watergate break-in or the
subsequent cover-up, they seemed of a piece with the rest of the White House’s actions.
Lukas moved on to Bob Semple, who opened with his explanation for why the
White House Press Corps didn’t break the Watergate story: “The answer to that is fairly
simple. The last people who are going to tell you o f their own complicity are the people
you are covering day after day. And has no doubt been pointed out her several times,
Bernstein and Woodward were not only not White House correspondents, they were not
on the national staff o f the Post. They were aggressive and industrious local reporters
who had enough sense not to go to the center to find out what was wrong at the center.”
Pacifica gave time only to those three panelists before cutting to questions. In
order to cut down on the chaos that might ensue when a rowdy crowd had access to an
open microphone, Lukas took written questions from the audience. They were still
pointed and partisan. The first: “Why doesn’t the press corps identify the administration
whores in its midst?”

179

Sarah McClendon closed out proceedings with what in retrospect seems like a
very short-sighted prediction: “We’ll never see such secrecy around the White House
again.”
On Saturday evening of the conference, David Halberstam gave the second annual
A.J. Liebling Award to Homer Bigart, who had recently retired from The New York Times
after a career spanning more than four decades. Yet another Washington Post article about
the convention noted that Bigart’s winning the award showed again the differences
between Liebling II and the first convention. He was “no one of the new journalism,” but
instead “a silver-haired man honored for his four decades o f integrity.” 378 (MORE) had
never set out to be an instrument o f the counter culture, but it was also always working to
goad the mainstream press. It wasn’t counter-culture, but it wasn’t mainstream. (MORE)
would always be caught in between. The mainstream press wouldn’t accept them, but the
alternative press would always protest them.
Following the presentation of the Liebling Award, the conference held its
guaranteed big-draw panel in the M ayflower’s ballroom. Simply called “Watergate,” the
panel featured Ben Bradlee and Carl Bernstein o f the Post. The rest o f the panelists were
no lightweights either: Frank Mankiewicz, George McGovern’s political director; former
New York Times reporter Robert Smith; the writer Garry Wills; Walter Pincus o f The New
Republic, and two former Nixon aides: Richard Whalen and Kevin Phillips. According to
Myra MacPherson’s account, Whalen and Phillips “locked horns” with Wills and
Mankiewicz. Phillips tried to separate him self from the current batch of Nixon aides,

378 Myra MacPherson, “Meet the Press,” The Washington Post, B3.

180

saying that they were despised by Republicans in general. Wills snapped back, saying
that it w asn’t enough to disavow the staff. “Nixon was doing what he was hired to do.”379
The Washington Liebling convention concluded with a re-convening o f the ad hoc
committee that had gathered at the first Counter-Convention. It’s unclear what happened,
except that they found a publisher for an intermittent newsletter. 3 80 But as the new focus
on the suddenly functioning mainstream press suggests, it may very well have been
marginalized. With editors and publishers as supportive o f dogged reporting as Ben
Bradlee and Katherine Graham o f The Washington Post all seemed to have become in the
last year, the Counter-Conventioners appeared to be much less interested in furthering the
cause o f democracy in the newsroom, and far more interested in fawning over the new
celebrities o f the press. Dick Poliak, in assessing the conference after the fact, said that he
was initially discouraged by the lack o f interest in real press reform, despite 1500
journalists being in attendance. He later (by the end o f the column, even) regained his
optimism, but it was probably short-lived. 381 The trend toward the conventions being a
celebrity circus would return, with even greater force, the following year, when the
Liebling convention went home to New York.

Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Counter-Conventions *
*But Were Afraid to Ask

Between the 1973 and 1974 Counter-Conventions, (MORE) had become a
slightly more polished product, as will be demonstrated in chapter 4 of this dissertation.

379 Ibid.
380 Richard Poliak, “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1973, 2, 14-15.
3S1Ibid, 14.

181

The typesetting was more regular; there were more photographs. Things seemed cleaner
and more professional on the page. Some new staff had come on board as well, including
a young woman— a Catholic waitress’s daughter from Buffalo, as she described herself—
named Kathy Jones. Jones wasn't a journalist. She was an alumna of the Peace Corps and
had taught in a Montessori school, but she had been turned on to (MORE) by her friend
Dan McNamee, who had organized the Washington, D.C. Liebling Convention. She was
brought on to sell ads— always a difficult issue for (MORE)— and to organize the
Liebling Conventions going forward. Jones did have some party planning experience,
having worked for Daniel and Philip Berrigan—two brothers, both Catholic priests,
known for their anti-Vietnam war activism— and also having worked for the composer
and conductor Leonard Bernstein and his wife Lelicia. "I think it was on the basis of
that," that she was hired, she said. "I've always thrown a good party." 382
More and more the counter-conventions were turning into parties, too. Whereas
the first A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention, held in a trade union meeting hall, had the
urgency o f a late-night strike-planning session by a group o f union hardliners who
couldn't get their grievances heard by the management, by year three, the conventions
had become boozy victory parties and camp reunions, with a valedictory atmosphere. The
anticipation of Watergate finally catching up to Nixon had driven the mood in
Washington, and amazingly, that still appeared to be the dominant mood when the
Liebling Convention returned to New York City from May 10 to 12, 1974 at the
Roosevelt Hotel near Grand Central Terminal. The price o f admission had risen again—
and significantly. After having been free in 1972 and $8.00 in 1973, the admission price

382

Kathy Jones, Interview with the author, November 14, 2011.

182

in 1974 almost doubled to $15.00. O f course, now that included a "free" subscription to
the magazine, too, but you couldn't renew your own if you already subscribed; you had to
start a new one or give one as a gift. Discounted rooms at the Roosevelt were also
available, $26.00 for a single or $32.00 for a double.383
Friday night opened, as had become expected, with a party. Tony Lukas and Dick
Poliak were pulled aside by a Washington Post reporter who was covering the
conference, and Tony told her that he was “delighted” that Robert Redford would be
playing “one of us.” Redford had recently announced his intention to play Bob
Woodward in a film version of the Watergate investigation story, which would become
the film A ll the President’s Men. Lukas told the reporter that he wanted Omar Shariff to
play him. “The phrase ‘star reporter’ suddenly assumed all sorts of new meaning,” wrote
the Post journalist. 384 Even though the meat o f the conference had been squeezed back
into two days, the panels were packed tighter. Instead o f having two panels concurrently,
there were now three or, at one point, even four. While this was probably meant to spread
out the expected crowd a little bit more (and Liebling III drew about 2000, according to
one source

3 85

though another had the more convincingly specific 1850 as the paid

attendance number386), it also meant that attendees began to suffer from what Dick Poliak
jokingly called "panel envy," the Freudian feeling that whatever panel you didn't attend
must have been better than the one that you did.

387

(Art Buchwald used the same line in

383 Advertisement for Liebling III, (MORE): A Journalism Review, May 1974, 32.
384
Judy Bachrach, "Countering: [MORE] Than a Convention," The Washington Post,
May 13, 1974, B4.
385 Ibid.
386 “The Good, the Bad & the Boring,” The Village Voice, May 16, 1974, 25.
387
Kathy Jones, Interview w ith the author, N ovem ber 14, 2011

183

moderating the Watergate panel the previous year, though he had meant that the audience
were envious o f the panelists for their accomplishments. 388 )
While Watergate may have dominated the mood o f Liebling III, its panels were
decidedly more eclectic than those o f its Washington, D.C. predecessor. The opening
panel and the Saturday night gala panel—the one sandwiched between the presentation of
the Liebling Award and Saturday’s party— were impressive political reporting panels,
however. Author and editor Victor Navasky moderated the opening panel, which featured
investigative reporter Seymour Hersh and Alger Hiss, who had been accused o f spying
for the Soviet Union, talking about national security and the press. That evening,
Washington Post reporter Morton Mintz received the Liebling Award, and (MORE) gave
a special prize to photographer W. Eugene Smith and also gave out a student prize. Mike
Wallace, the host o f CBS News’s 60 Minutes, then hosted a panel on “The Press and the
Presidency” featuring New York Times writer Anthony Lewis, wire service reporter Helen
Thomas and Gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson— an unlikely but probably a lively
group. 389 Dan Rather, also o f CBS, was scheduled to be on the panel as well, but
according to Wallace, he had been called into work to preside over N ixon’s “death
watch.”390
Cultural issues made something o f a return at Liebling III. One panel focused on
the media and coverage o f gay issues. One discussed whether or not there was “a female
sensibility.” Nora Ephron chaired a panel about m en’s magazines that included a Playboy

388 Myra MacPherson, “Meet the Press,” The Washington Post. May 7, 1973, B3.
389 Advertisement for (M ORE)’s Third A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention, (MORE): A
Journalism Review, May 1974, 30.
390 Judy Bachrach, "Countering: [MORE] Than a Convention," The Washington Post,
May 13, 1974, B4.

184

writer and A1 Goldstein, the publisher o f the quasi-pomographic Screw magazine. Robin
Reisig covered the conference for The Village Voice, with an eye toward how women
were treated. She reported that the women’s sensibility panel concluded basically that
there were just good writers and bad writers, “people who make connections” and who
“don’t filter things out of their consciousness.”391 There was also a discussion o f The New
York Times' refusal to use the word “Ms.” instead of “Miss” and “Mrs.” Some o f the
participants “went into a slow bum ” when the editor o f the Times editorial page, John
Oakes, said that he didn’t think it was an important question. Reisig also covered the
women in the newsroom panel, where participants mostly concluded that they still had “a
lo-o-ong way to go.”
Everyone seemed to find the panel on cable and satellite technology deathly
boring. 3 92 But what everyone remembers from Liebling III, said its organizer, Kathy
Jones, was that the final panel had Woody Allen on it.393 Ostensibly, the subject of the
panel was failure, and it also featured author Erica Jong. Judy Bachrach, the Washington
Post reporter who covered the conference, wrote that the celebrities— Alger Hiss, Woody
Allen— dominated the conference, and made it seem less like a conference o f journalists.
And according to Kathy Jones, Allen was a terrible panelist anyway. He spoke quietly,
talked through his hands and mumbled.394
Also, the happenings outside the official panels seemed to take precedence for the
first time. Press critic Alexander Cockburn, in his The Village Voice column, wrote that

391 Robin Reisig, “Is Journalism an Air-Brushed Profession?” The Village Voice, May 16,
1974, 24.
392 Alexander Cockbum, “Press Clips,” The Village Voice, May 16, 1974.
393 Kathy Jones, Interview with the author, November 14, 2011.
394 Judy Bachrach, "Countering: [MORE] Than a Convention," The Washington Post,
May 13, 1974, B l.

185

“Large numbers o f people paced the corridors o f the Roosevelt Hotel, drinking, shouting,
and occasionally justifying the long hours of revelry and gossip by attending panel
discussions.”395 This sort o f camp reunion atmosphere that would come to dominate the
last two New York counter-conventions as well.
Rather than assigning him self to recap the conference, Dick Poliak put a reporter
on it, and picked Calvin Trillin, the New Yorker writer who had been on (M ORE)’s
original advisory board. An in-house piece almost didn’t seem necessary to Trillin, who
suggested, tongue in cheek, that there were so many reporters at the convention “doing a
piece” about it that the next year’s convention should have a panel on how to cover a
Liebling convention. He made up some statistics (and pretended to verify them
“employing the methodology o f New Journalism, by noting how symmetrical the
statistics sounded when I repeated them to m yself in the shower”). Though fake, they
give an idea o f who was attending the conference: “anyone under thirty is part o f the
audience, anyone from thirty-five to forty-five is a panelist, and anyone fifty-five or over
is there to receive the annual A.J. Liebling Award.”396 Trillin found that the Liebling
conventions had grown into an institution since their first year (when even then it was
accused of being too close to the institutions that it purported to run counter to). But now,
Trillin joked, the conference was really only counter to the panelists. For the younger
convention-goers, this may have been an opportunity to meet their idols. For more
established journalists, it was time for more “panel envy” : “a [MORE] convention

395 Cockbum, “Press Clips.”
396 Calvin Trillin, “A Weekend in a Panel Colony,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June
1974, 15.

186

spectator’s first reaction to seeing another writer on the dais,” Tony Lukas told Trillin, “is
‘why him and not m e?” ’
Mostly though, Trillin wrote about how the process o f a Liebling CounterConvention had become regularized. O f course there would be drinking (“If it ain’t
catered, it ain’t journalism,” Jones said397). O f course there would be panel envy. O f
course there would be ponderous self-importance. O f course there would be a protest. In
1972, the protestors had been Abbie Hoffman and his Zippies. In 1973, it had been the
National Organization for Women. In 1974, there was a perfunctory protest by the
National Caucus of Labor Committees. But in Trillin’s telling, even the protestors knew
their part to play in the convention. “When the N.C.L.C. speaker went through his
allotted two minutes before the Saturday night panel, the audience just waited for the end,
like a baseball crowd waiting for the soprano to finish the Star Spangled Banner so the
game can get started.”

398

And in keeping with its move toward celebrity, (MORE) even

managed to get a celebrity to take its pictures—the official photos were by Jill Krementz,
a noted photographer, particularly of writers, and the wife o f novelist Kurt Vonnegut.
So even though 1974 was Kathy Jones’s first year as convention organizer, she
felt pretty confident that she knew what to expect when Poliak asked her to set up a West
Coast version of the counter-conventions, something that would focus on the needs and
concerns of reporters on the other side o f the country, who couldn’t necessarily afford to
come out to New York City. How different could things be in San Francisco?

397 Kathy Jones, Interview with the author, November 14, 2011.
39*Ib id , 18.

187

Not Left Enough for the Left Coast: The Counter-Convention Comes to San
Francisco
San Francisco “was a zoo. That was really a zoo,” Kathy Jones said. She may
never forgive Dick for the idea, she said. “This was really hard. All I remember are the
pickets.” When (MORE) showed up at the Sheraton Palace Hotel— a setting more like the
Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.C. than like the Martin Luther King Jr. Labor
Center— in Lebruary 1975, the conference staff found a fancy hotel full of young, smart,
but unemployed and very miserable writers. More than 1000 people attended, small by
the current standards o f (M ORE)’s conventions, but still a large number. “I ’ve never met
so many unhappy people,” Jones said. “You couldn’t do anything right. The price was
too high. Everyone wanted to get in for free— and they all wanted to get in for free to
something that was clearly racist and sexist and everything else. Just personally, it was
one o f the hardest experiences I’ve had workwise. I can’t talk about it as the kind o f fun
that New York was. It wasn’t fun.”
The best document o f the conference is a two-part radio documentary put together
by the left-leaning Pacifica Radio o f San Francisco, KPFA.399 Pacifica thought that the
conference was mostly “a pretty tame affair,” and that the alternative press was mostly
quite well represented, though with a few glaring exceptions. Pacifica opened its
coverage with part o f a panel on local broadcast news, which started out from the premise
that local news was more entertainment than information. It was one o f the best attended
panels, partly because it was, as had become the norm at Liebling Conventions, “star
studded.” Chief among those was Van Amburg, the host o f KGO-TV’s newscast, which

399 “For [MORE] Information...” Produced by Anita Frankel. February, 1975. Courtesy
o f the Pacifica Radio Archive.

188

was a pioneer in “Happy Talk” news. The panel began with a Phil Jacklin, a San Jose
State philosophy professor, who pushed for open access to broadcast media. His
impassioned rant in favor o f the Fairness Doctrine hearkened back to the passions of the
first Liebling convention. He ended by reading a story lineup from a recent KGO
newscast that concluded with a story about Marilyn Monroe lookalikes. “Our source at
KGO says that Van Amburg had a hard-on the whole time,” Jacklin said, leaving a
mixture o f shock and laughter in the meeting room. Amburg won the crowd over
immediately though, showing the charm that would earn him six-figure salaries on a
mainstream newscast: “I don’t see anything wrong with having a hard on, number one. I
think it’s a nice thing to have.” He then mounted a fairly convincing defense o f news
about people, rather than issues. He was unapologetic about it, but it didn’t seem to
convince the crowd. And Van Amburg became the target for most o f the audience’s
accusatory questions.
According to KPFA, the only happening o f any consequence at the panel was the
appearance o f black members o f the Coalition for Media Change, who paraded around
the podium, as they had at other sessions that day, saying that whatever else the
shortcomings o f the panel, the lack o f minority participation was the panel's most glaring
omission. Pacifica Radio, in what is either a vestige o f 1970s racial sensitivities or a
peculiarity o f its own biases, consistently uses the phrase “third world” to mean
“minority.”
A panel on alternative media and the power structure in San Francisco feels
particularly local and dated, though a panel on coverage o f the Middle East had some
more lasting interest. The panelists included Robert Scheer, the former editor of

189

Ramparts magazine and Russ Stetler o f Intemews news service, who lamented how long
it took the press to give any coverage to the Palestinian side o f the Palestine/Israel
conflict. Sidney Sober, a representative o f the State Department also spoke at the panel.
“With reasonably rare exceptions,” he said, “the news we read in the press doesn’t
surprise us.” The audience could barely control its laughter. Robert Scheer called the
State Department “a fog machine” for that kind of attitude.
The first episode o f Pacifica’s coverage ended with a look at how racism was
handled. “One serious drawback to the conference was the obvious omission o f third
world media organizations,” the final report began. A black media attorney who had been
on the panels accused (MORE) o f “white liberal racism.” Penny Gentilly, who was
(M ORE)’s West Coast coordinator for the conference, then found herself under attack
from an activist from the Community Coalition for Media Change. He pointed out some
o f the racial inequality o f the panels. She is defensive, and sounds young. She explained
that there had been two large meetings that tried to come up with ideas for panels and
panelists. They felt that it was better, Gentilly explained, “not to ghettoize” the panels,
but to include black panelists and women on all o f the panels. The activist challenged her,
saying that it was “ridiculous” that the panel on the Symbionese Liberation Army didn’t
include the organizer of its food distribution efforts. He said it must have been a
conscious exclusion on the part of the (MORE) organizers. “It wasn’t conscious, really it
w asn’t,” protested an increasingly overwhelmed sounding Gentilly. “We left it up to
moderators to put together panels, and I wasn’t on top of it, and I regret that.” The activist
continued: “Black people do exist. Latinos do exist. But they’ve been left out of history,
and now they’re left out of the conference.”

190

“I’m sorry,” Gentilly said, finally. “I thought they were represented.”
Pacifica opened its second show with excerpts from a panel about multinational
corporations. This was followed by a panel about the financial crisis, which included
Anita Frankel, the general manager o f Pacfica’s WPFA and Stewart Brand, the founder
o f The Whole Earth Catalog. More interesting than either of those two however was a
panel on women’s issues, which the Pacifica show calls “by far the least coherent o f the
conference” but “in many ways the most revealing.” Susan Hallis, a freelance journalist,
told the panel that they should forgo opening statements. “The session began in a
vacuum,” Pacifica’s narrator said. Black media activist Edwin Terry from the Coalition
for Media Change broke any illusion o f unity right away (despite not being on the panel)
with an opening statement o f his own: “That two honky females who decided how this
conference would be conducted, and who would be invited shows that they have no
sensitivity, only to try to go to bed with a black man.” The feminist audience was
outraged, but the panel tried to get on track. After a few turns of interesting discussion,
things seemed to fly in several directions at once. One group o f women wanted to break
into small groups to discuss how to take action. Another group wanted the panelists to
decide on some unified themes to guide the discussion. This group didn’t want to discuss
how to get women into more executive roles in mainstream media, and accused the main
panel of being the most conservative panels at the conference. The black women in the
room walked out. Some women did break into small groups and began caucusing. It was
an incredibly fractious session, and one which illustrates the anger and confusion that
made Kathy Jones blanch when talking about the West Coast conference even four
decades later.

191

Anita Frankel, Bill Sokol and Larry Bensky o f KPFA held a roundtable for
themselves, asking what they had learned from the conference. One thing that came out is
the lack o f real investigative reporting in San Francisco, particularly in relation to a panel
on mayor Joe Alioto—who also attended the conference.400 One of the panelists also
noted that on his way to any panel he had to pass through five lines o f people who were
looking for jobs, so the lack of solid reporting w asn’t because o f lack o f talent. They saw
too that there were two conflicting lines: the yearning for professionalism, the ability to
maintain standards and make a living; and the need to examine politics. But the conflict
came, the KPFA panel asserted, in that journalists were unwilling to examine the politics
o f the news organizations that allowed them to do their work.
As for the politics o f (MORE), Larry Bensky said that he had interviewed Tony
Lukas and Woody Woodward, two of the three founders o f (MORE) a few years earlier,
and he said that they had made it clear to him that (MORE) was founded by reporters
who were employed not by alternative media, but by the mainstream media, and yet who
found themselves significantly to the left of their employers, and (MORE) was intended
to express that point of view. They didn’t necessarily want workers’ control o f the media,
but they wanted fairer coverage o f Vietnam. And the professional strain o f (MORE) also
influenced the under-representation o f non-white people at the conference, according to
the KPFA group, since they wanted to show the media as it was, not as it should be, and
they didn’t give much thought to how to include those voices that were already excluded.
(MORE), the KPFA group suggested, didn’t understand the network o f alternative
publications that they saw as being much more vital than the alternative media in New

400 Kathy Jones, Interview w ith the author, N ovem ber 14, 2011.

192

York. Perhaps, they admitted, this is because the underground press was less necessary
because the overground press was that much stronger in New York than it was in San
Francisco. In either case, (MORE) was happy to return to the New York media world, the
world that it knew.
Meanwhile, the San Francisco (MORE) conference did continue one tradition:
partying outside o f the conference rooms. There was plenty of drinking at the Sheraton
Palace Hotel, and upstairs, according to Rolling Stone, there were other substances being
inhaled:
Upstairs, the editors o f High Times magazine had installed two huge canisters of
laughing gas in their hospitality suite. Dozens o f guests were happily frying their
brains and by 2 a.m. the floor was three inches deep with discarded balloons.
Serving as host was Underground Press Syndicate founder Tom Forcade, who
shares High Times ’ New York office, decked out in a three-piece suit. Also on
hand, ex-Yippie Jerry Rubin, shaved and scrubbed and dressed like a fraternity
lounge lizard, and Garry Trudeau, the reclusive author o f the comic strip
“Doonesbury.”
Conference-goers from the later years in New York would remember similar scenes of
debauchery even more than the panels. But o f course, there were panels, too.

The Last Two
The original Rosebud Associates who founded (MORE) held one more
conference in New York while they owned the magazine. After they sold it to a new
editor/publisher, Michael Kramer (a story told in chapter 4 o f this dissertation), Kramer
held one final conference before they finally ran out o f steam. The last two conferences
followed the pattern set by the 1974 Counter-Convention, with an increased level of
veneration o f journalistic celebrity, an increasingly boozier atmosphere in the convention
itself, and one that was almost circus-like in the hallways. The socialist journalist Kent

193

MacDougall referred to the later counter-conventions, with their love o f celebrity
journalists (and other celebrities) as “starfucks.”401 The convention also gave the world of
journalism an iconic poster, one that would live on in the offices o f journalism professors
for decades, and in the toolkits o f set dressers for at least a few years even after (MORE),
the magazine, finally folded. That poster a bold rectangle o f pure 1970s burnt orange
featured a Marty Norman cartoon o f a stereotypical 1920s or 1930s newsman, his striped
sleeves rolled up and his tie loosened between his suspenders, but with his fedora firmly
pulled down to his brow (with a card reading “PRESS” tucked into the brim, o f course).
He clutched a two-piece antique phone and shouted into the mouthpiece: “Hello
sweetheart, get me rew rite!” The image first popped up in the ads for the 1974
convention, but he became an icon o f the magazine and a symbol o f its valuation of hard­
bitten news values. Later, owing to popular demand, Norman and (MORE) would add a
second poster, a woman in a pinstriped suit with the caption “Hello, handsome, get me
rewrite!” on a much calmer blue background. The magazine sold posters with both
images. “Hello sweetheart” would be the logo for the admission badges to the West Coast
Media Conference 402 Norman would also sell version o f the image to the Washington
Journalism Review in 1981, except that the reporter was now holding a contemporary
phone and WJR gave it the caption, “Hello, Sweetheart, Get Me the Computer!”403 At
least WJR thought that the phrase and the image still had resonance three years after
(MORE) had gone out o f business. Norman asked The Columbia Journalism Review,
which had acquired the rights to the image, if he could reprint and sell the posters in the

401 A. Kent MacDougall, interview with the author, August 18, 2012.
402 Marty Norman, interview with the author, December 13, 2011.
403 Washington Journalism Review, December 1981.

194

early 1980s, and he made a small business o f it for a while. The poster even found its way
onto network television when a set dresser decorated the newsroom set o f the 1977-1982
newspaper drama Low Grant, a rare serious spin-off from a comedy, The M ary Tyler
M oore Show.
But even if the image now seems bigger than the conferences it advertised, those
conferences did take place. There was an ever-increasing tilt toward celebrity and
debauchery outside the meeting rooms, but a continued attempt to both challenge and
celebrate the press when the panels were in session.
The 1975 New York Counter-Convention came less than three months after the
San Francisco foray. Held from May 8-11, it was the last o f the regular rites o f spring that
(MORE) would hold. The party had moved a few blocks to the Hotel Commodore, right
next to Grand Central Terminal, and the price rose again, to $20, though still getting
conference-goers a new or gift subscription to the magazine.404 (MORE) did not publish a
full program for Liebling IV, though its ads gave teasers o f who would be there: (MORE)
regular Nick von Hoffman; Jack Newfield o f The Village Voice; Pauline Kael again; Joe
Klein o f Rolling Stone; Halberstam, Lukas and Hume from (MORE); Gay Talese again;
and Gloria Steinem from Ms. Steinem was a particularly important “get” for Kathy Jones
and the conference planning staff, given the reaction o f women’s groups in San Francisco
and in the 1974 New York conference. In fact, (MORE) went a step further and
sponsored a full day on the Friday of the conference that was devoted to something they
called the National Conference on Women and the Media. Other panels would include
covering the C.I.A., “Why the Working Man Hates the Media,” self-censorship, New

404 A dvertisem ent for Liebling IV, (MORE): A Journalism Review April 1975, 11.

195

Journalism revisited, and the role of the critic. There would also be a screening of the
documentary Antonia: A Portrait o f the Woman, which would be introduced by its
director and by Gloria Steinem. The ads also teased something called a “media midway,”
which turned out to be a carnival o f journalism in the hallways o f the Commodore.
Even Dick Poliak admitted that something had changed significantly from the
first Liebling Convention. He said the conventions’ “creeping institutionalism” was hard
to miss. The attendees, he said had accepted management as a given o f working in the
news business and so (MORE) aimed to give them a “useful” convention more than a
“counter” convention. Sure, there were critics, Poliak admitted: “too many stars, too few
blacks, too much preoccupation with The New York Times and feminists.” But he felt that
there was still no danger o f becoming the American Newspaper Publishers Association
convention under another name. “Self-satisfaction hardly seemed the rule” at the
conference, Poliak wrote, and he said that it would continue that way as long as readers
continued to tell (MORE) what they wanted from the magazine and the convention.405
But it is revealing that the one convention panel they chose to transcribe in the magazine
was nothing revolutionary, but rather “The Art o f the Interview,” in which Nat H entoff of
The Voice, Mike Wallace o f CBS, Sally Quinn o f The Washington Post and Richard
Reeves of New York Magazine shared anecdotes about their interviewing escapades and
gave helpful tips to their audience o f fawning, envious and also genuinely interested
journalists.
The Chicago journalist and oral historian Studs Terkel won the 1975 Liebling
Award, the awarding of which was followed by what was supposed to be the marquee

405 Richard Poliak, “Liebling IV ,” (M ORE): A Journalism Review, July 1975, 14.

196

panel that year—the one on self-censorship. But Jules Witcover, writing for The
Progressive, said it was perhaps the most disappointing o f the convention. The panelists,
ironically, seem to have censored themselves and never got deep into the issue o f why the
press w on’t run certain stories. The conference had become a bit staid, he said, with
jackets and ties becoming the uniform on the dais. Though in the end, Witcover said, the
convention still worked, even if it had become a bit boring.406
The Village Voice found the ’75 convention to be interesting enough to put on the
cover—though disappointing enough to say that the convention “never really jelled” this
year.407 The author, Karen Durbin, put the blame on the lack of a single galvanizing issue
the way the previous years had had them. She said that in the first three conventions,
there was nowhere else you wanted to be if you were a journalist. This one lacked some
o f that energy, so the journalists in attendance used their excesses out in the Media
Midway that (MORE) had promised. Durbin found the entire women’s conference a
boring rehash, and says that it gave (MORE) an excuse to leave women off the regular
panels the rest o f the weekend. There was one all-women panel the rest o f the conference,
and it was devoted to women “invading” traditionally male beats such as sports reporting.
That panel did have one moment o f interest though, when a group of women promoting a
book o f women’s humor attacked the panelists with whipped cream pies. Durbn also
went to the panel on criticism, which she enjoyed, since it made her want “to go home
and write,” which most panels o f writers don’t do. Afterward, she ran into several people

Jules Witcover, “Media in the Mirror,” The Progressive, July 1975, 28-29.
407 Karen Durbin, “Journalists at Play: The (MORE) the Merrier?” The Village Voice,
May 19 1975,7-9.

197

who told her that she had missed the best panel. “I would worry,” she wrote, but people
say this to each other at the (MORE) Convention every year.408
Durbin paid a visit to the Media Midway out in the meeting room lobby.
According to her, it consists o f these things:
•

•
•
•

a life-sized photographic cutout o f Elaine Kaufman, the woman who owns
Elaine’s, a status restaurant for writers and other famous people. Next to the
cutout is a sign saying “Get your picture taken with Elaine.”
a game called “Spot the Typos,” which features some pencils and a couple of
bedraggled copies o f the New York Post.
a game called “Test your Headlining Skill,” with copies o f the Daily News for
reference.
the aforementioned Media Heavy machine. For 50 cents, you take a mallet and hit
a lever that will make a ball shoot up a chart. Depending on your heaviness you
may ring the gong at the top. At the top o f the chart is “$500,000 Book Advance,”
with “Pulitzer Price” just below and “White House Correspondent” just below
that. In the middle is “(MORE) Contributing Editor.” At the bottom, just below
“Copyperson,” is “Rock Critic.”

On Saturday evening, Durbin attended a party (not sponsored by (MORE), featuring
“joints, hash brownies, and balloons of nitrous oxide.” She goes to the Liebling Award
panel where someone who is less high than she is tells her that the panel is boring. She
remembers that the last time she had been that high was at the Rolling Stone party at the
1973 (MORE) convention. Clearly she had missed Tom Forcade and the High Times
hospitality suite in San Francisco.
One night, away from the conference, she and her friends discuss the elitist liberal
racism and sexism inherent in (MORE), but like the panels at the conference, the
discussion doesn’t seem to go anywhere. At least the Voice ran a cartoon o f real items
overheard at the conference to keep things interesting.

40SIbid.,9.

198

There is even less information about the final A.J. Liebling Convention than about
1975. M ore placed an ad in New York that gave the names o f some participants including
Seymour Hersh, Nora Ephron, Hustler publisher Larry Flynt, New Yorker critic Brendan
Gill, Nat Hentoff, Liz Smith and New York local TV newsman Gabe Pressman.409 One
house ad in More, as the magazine had restyled itself after having been sold to Michael
Kramer, didn’t give much more information, except to say that the conference had been
scaled back to a single day, and its price ramped up again, now to $30. It had also been
pushed back to the fall o f 1976, likely since the sale of the magazine was being
negotiated the previous spring, when the Liebling Convention would normally have been
held. There were only six panels in three concurrent sessions. There was one on sources
and the effect of Woodward and Bernstein’s “Deep Throat” anonymous source. There
was a reprise o f “The Art o f the Interview” from the previous year (with new panelists, of
course). There was a panel about gossip. There was one about obscenity. One panel had
private investigators giving tips to reporters. And then the A.J. Liebling award would be
given to the staff o f 60 Minutes: producer Don Hewitt and correspondents Dan Rather,
Morley Safer and Mike Wallace. This last was a change on two fronts: this was the first
network news show that would be given the award, even if it was one known for its
muckraking journalism; and this was the first time the recipient o f the award was
announced in advance.410 Even so, editor Michael Kramer had trouble getting the award
made in time, and Don Hewitt ribbed him about it for years, asking him where his award

Ad for Liebling
410 Advertisement for the 5th A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention, M ore: TheM edia
M agazine, November 1976, 36-37.

199

statue was every time the two talked afterward.411 James Aronson, who wrote the only
substantial story about the 1976 conference, was offended by the conference in general—
he said that he wished Liebling could rise up and reclaim his good name—but especially
by the Liebling award. It was accepted, he said “by Mike Wallace, who a few months
earlier on "Sixty Minutes" had helped dig a grave at CBS for Daniel Schorr in an
interview marked by calculated baiting and, according to Schorr, calculated editing. The
award should have gone to Schorr.”412
Even M ore didn’t even run a substantial recap o f the goings-on of this convention.
There was a two-page photo spread instead, with a photo caption that referred to the
panel about interviews as “controversial” but gave no hint as to why. And so the counter­
conventions ended with a bit of a shrug, lost in the shifting management o f the last two
years of the magazine, and in the shifting priorities o f its publishers and editors. The A.J.
Liebling Counter-Convention got the worst o f it, getting bumped unceremoniously from
spring to fall, and then being abandoned altogether.
But the Liebling conventions did have a legacy, and they lived on in the “Hello
Sweetheart” posters that young journalists brought home and used as inspiration. Bob
Stepno, who recently retired as a journalism and media professor at Radford University,
remembered the conferences as “a chance for young reporters from the boonies, who
hadn't been to a big journalism school, to connect with the stars o f the profession.” He
and some friends came down to at least a couple o f the conferences from Hartford, where
he was then working for the Courant, and had what sounds like typical counter-

411 Michael Kramer, interview with the author, January 23, 2013.
412 James Aronson, “On the Banquet Trail o f the Failure o f American Journalism,” In
These Times, January 5-11, 1977, 23.

200

convention experiences, looking up at his journalistic heroes, but also meeting the author
o f a book on polyamorous relationships at a bar across the street. It was, he said, “a very
romantic time to be a young journalist:
even if you were far from the New York excitement. We subscribed to New York
Magazine and CJR and [MORE], and we had the New York mag issue that
launched "Ms." and the one with a (Sorel?) cartoon showing Superman in a phone
booth putting ON his Clark Kent clothes and saying "This is a job for a Mild
Mannered Reporter!" under a headline something like "Investigative reporters, the
new American heroes."413
(MORE) may have hit on the timing o f the romantic side o f journalism by accident, the
side that turned journalists into celebrities and heroes. But it also had a hand in the
mythology— and o f course led the fight to make the institutional press think more
critically about itself, at least in the magazine’s early days. The Counter-Conventions
undoubtedly changed from their origins at the Martin Luther King Jr. Labor Center in
1972. But the magazine changed significantly in the period from January 1974 to its
demise in 1978, too. It hit its highest point and then found a completely new life before it
died, a story that will be told in chapter 4 o f this dissertation.

413 Bob Stepno, em ail to the author, June 28, 2012.

201

Chapter 4: The Press Becomes the Media, and a Journalism Review Becomes a
Media Magazine
No one seems to remember how Claudia Cohen first showed up in the offices of
(MORE), but no one could forget her once she did. She was in her early 20s when Dick
Poliak hired her to replace Terry Pristin as (MORE)’s assistant editor, only a few months
after she graduated from The University of Pennsylvania, where she had been the first
woman to edit the college paper, The D aily Pennsylvanian. She was whip-smart, but had
a taste for gossip, particularly about High Society. And she was a small part o f Society,
too. Her father, Robert Cohen, ran the Hudson County News Company, a newspaper and
magazine distribution company, and her family had money as a result. For Kathy Jones,
Claudia Cohen was a kind o f character she had never met before, a charming one, to be
sure, but one whose lifestyle was completely alien to her own. “She'd be on the phone
discussing with her brother what they were going to buy their mother for her birthday,”
Jones said, “and it would be something like a trip to Boca Raton, and they’d be
discussing what spa to send her to.” Jones said that her family was more likely to be
baking cookies as birthday gifts. Cohen would come to the office dressed like everyone
else, except that she would be dragging a fur coat with her. Cohen and Dick Poliak would
also occasionally burst out into show tunes, which were apparently a favorite around the
(MORE) offices in the middle period of the magazine’s existence—from about 1974 to
1976, when the headquarters moved to Third Avenue, near Grand Central Terminal.414
Robert Friedman, who would edit the magazine when it had changed formats a few years
later, also remembers that Cohen would sometimes— and not just on Fridays— slip into

414 Kathy Jones, Interview w ith the author, N ovem ber 14, 2011.

202

the bathroom at the end o f the day and come out dressed in a cocktail dress, bound for
some party or other.415
It’s unfair to try to extrapolate from the addition of a single person to an editorial
staff to a general change in the tenor o f the magazine, but Claudia Cohen is emblematic
o f a change that did start to come over (MORE) in the period from January o f 1974 until
the summer of 1976, when Rosebud Associates sold the magazine to new owners. This
chapter covers the changes in the magazine in that period, when it became gradually
slicker—both literally and figuratively— and in the period covered by the magazine’s two
subsequent owners.

(MORE) Adjusts to the Post-Water gate Press
As was described in chapter three, Watergate changed the self-regard o f the press
significantly. In the Vietnam era, members o f mainstream press organizations who found
themselves to the left, politically, of those organizations, had bemoaned the failures of
their institutions to cover the world and the culture as they were, and the first incarnation
o f (MORE), and its associated counter-conventions, allowed those journalists a place to
commune, to vent, to figure out how best to reconstitute the act of journalism within or
outside of the institutional press. But when The Washington Post began following the
Watergate story, or at least when the import o f that story became clear, many journalists
began to back away from the idea o f overthrowing the existing system and focused
instead on improving their own practice of journalism within the systems that they began
to see as inevitable. To be clear, (MORE) was never a revolutionary magazine. While

415 Robert Friedman, interview w ith the author, January 17, 2014.

203

many radical writers did attend the Liebling conventions, the core staff o f (MORE)
seemed to be content to work within the system. During the last few years o f Rosebud
Associates ownership, (MORE) continued to push up against institutions with the
intention of changing them, but not with the intention o f toppling them. The magazine
w asn’t above embarrassing the press in order to advocate for change, either, as several of
the stories that ran in this period will show.

1974: (MORE) in the Post-Watergate era
With the addition o f Claudia Cohen, the staff o f (MORE) had grown to eight
people on the masthead in January 1974. There was Dick Poliak, still leading the
magazine and editing most of the longer stories. Claudia Cohen had taken over as
assistant editor, managing the Hellbox stories and The Big Apple section. Tony Lukas
was still there as a senior editor, but mostly attended editorial meetings and came in with
ideas— he wasn’t an every day editor. Woody Woodward had also started to show up less
to the office, but Rosebud had hired an associate publisher named Dan McNamee and a
business manager named David Lusterman. Malcolm Frouman was art director now,
fresh from being a Columbia University undergraduate and a member o f their chapter of
the Students for a Democratic Society.416
The first few issues o f 1974 blend a mixture o f the sorts of anti-institutional
reporting that (MORE) had always done with a new kind o f article that is a little bit more
difficult to define. The anti-institutional stuff is easy to identify. There is an article about

416 This portrait of the office was compiled from interviews with Richard Poliak
(September 8, 2011 and February 21, 2012), Kathy Jones (November 14, 2011), David
Lusterman (October 31, 2011, via telephone), and Malcolm Frouman (October 27, 2011).

204

how the press covers David Rockefeller and Chase Manhattan Bank.417 Another cover
story looks at how reporters have been covering the looming energy crisis, an article
illustrated with a Marty Norman drawing o f Uncle Sam on his knees, pulling a tourniquet
tight with his teeth as he injects oil into his forearm as if it were heroin. A businessman
clutching an armful o f oil cans and an Arabian sheik look on from behind him. 418 This
sort o f criticism o f the press’s coziness with big business is very much o f a piece with
(M ORE)’s coverage from 1971-1973. As is the April 1974 cover story, about reporters
trying to prognosticate the 1976 presidential election, which follows on nicely from
coverage (MORE) did o f political reporting in previous years.419
The February 1974 cover story, however, takes (MORE) in a new direction.
Illustrated with a photograph o f a very hirsute A1 Pacino in the role of Frank Serpico, the
article looks at the phenomenon o f “movies as journalism,” examining the level o f truth
in films such as Serpico. Unsurprisingly, critic Richard Schickel, who wrote the piece,
finds the truth lacking, by the standards o f journalism.420 This piece is not the kind of
hard-hitting, take-down-the-abusers-of-power story that (MORE) specialized in in its
early days. This isn’t to say that it’s an uninteresting or somehow less valuable piece of
journalism, but it does signal the beginnings o f a change in the content of the magazine.
IN 1974, 1975 and 1976, there would be less o f the lingering anger of the New Left
reflected in the magazine (despite a design directory who was an SDS member), and
417 Madeline Nelson, “Money Makes the Press Go ‘Round,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, March 1974, 1.
418
James Ridgeway, “Trying to Catch the Energy Crisis,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, January, 1974, 1.
419 James M. Perry, ‘“ I See a Big White H ouse...’” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1974, 1.
420 Richard Schickel, “The Truth Went Thataway,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1974, 1.

205

more articles about the role o f journalism in society and more lighthearted (but often still
cutting) satire.
The May 1974 issue illustrates some o f the best and worst tendencies o f (MORE)
when it came to using humor as a tool. Alexander Cockbum, an Irish-American political
journalist and critic wrote the cover story, a satirical look at the use o f cliche in foreign
reporting. Cockbum starts by picking apart the work o f C.L. Sulzberger in particular.
Sulzberger was a member o f the family that owns The New York Times, and was a foreign
correspondent for the paper in the 1940s and ’50s— and a columnist up through the
1970s. But he was old news in 1974, so why did Cockburn pick on him? “It seems to me
that C.L. is the summation, the platonic ideal o f what foreign reporting is about,”
Cockbum wrote:
It’s tm e that we do not find him courageously observing Cambodian soldiers on
the outskirts o f Phnom Penh, but this is incidental. C.L. has divined the central
mystery of his craft, which is to fire volley after volley of cliche into the densely
packed prejudices o f his readers. There are no surprises in his w ork.... H e never
deviates into paradox. His work is a constant affirmation of received beliefs. So
why spurn the work o f the old Zen master?421
Cockbum continues in this mode o f praising Sulzberger in order to take down cliche
ridden foreign reporting in general, using irony to satire the fatuous and very oldfashioned Sulzberger. He uses much o f the rest o f the essay as a faux lesson for those
who would seek a career as a foreign correspondent, “instructing” them in the proper
cliches and received wisdom to spout in various locations. Hong Kong is “a time bomb,
but also a listening post, inhabited by China watchers who will eye you with disdain.”
And Chou En-lai “is civilized, but a dedicated revolutionary. He has an uncanny

421 Alexander Cockbum , “How to Earn Y our Trench Coat,” (M ORE): A Journalism
Review. M ay, 1974, 24.

206

command o f detail. This interview should take place late at night and go on for several
hours.”

In a way, Cockbum seems to be lamenting that all o f the really good reporters

have focused their attention on Washington, leaving foreign reporting to the lazy and the
superficial. It’s cutting and funny satire. Cockbum had given disaster coverage a similar
working over in December, 1973, pretending to give a primer in how best to cover
volcano emptions, typhoons and earthquakes— and how to maximize their shock effect
among readers.

423

Cockbum wrote that piece with the same snide, but very funny attitude,

and the pieces are effective as criticism and satire as well as being amusing. The same
issue that contains Cockburn’s piece on foreign reporting, however, also contains a
feature that reads more as snide, mean and holier-than-thou. The piece is called “The 10
Worst,” and purports to be an expose o f the most egregiously bad daily paper in the
United States. Dick Poliak regretted running the story, nearly four decades later since, as
he admitted, the staff o f (MORE) really didn’t know much about regional dailies and
didn’t really have a team o f stringers stationed around the country to give them
nominations. Instead they scraped together ideas from friends around the country, and
came up with a list: The San Francisco Chronicle, The Boston Herald-American, The
Cleveland Plain Dealer, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, The St. Louis Globe-Democrat,
The Los Angeles Herald-Examiner, The New Orleans Times-Picayune, The San Diego
Union, TheM emphis Commercial Appeal, and The Manchester Union Leader. Why those
ten? The introductory note doesn’t explain much, except that they had to have a minimum
circulation o f 150,000 to qualify. Otherwise, the introduction basically admits that the

423

Alexander Cockbum , “D eath Rampant! Readers Rejoice,” (M ORE): A Journalism
Review, D ecem ber 1973, 1.

207

choices are arbitrary and “impressionistic.” The introduction is almost apologetic for
following the trend o f ten-best and ten-worst lists.424 The entire exercise feels like
pandering to readers and a half-hearted attempt to stir up controversy. Perhaps it’s worth
noting that the May 1974 issue was tied to that year’s A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,
so perhaps the 10 Worst list was meant to be a sop to journalists traveling in from the
provinces, so that they could look at (MORE) and say, “Hey, they make fun of my
hometown paper to o !” Or maybe it was just meant to give people something to argue
about in the hallways of the Roosevelt Hotel.
Around this same time, (MORE) began running a fairly incongruous series o f ads.
Advertising in the magazine had always been thin. The original idea had been to capture
some of the same advertising market that ran in The New York Review o f Books or The
New York Times Book Review. But publishers mostly did not seem to be interested in
buying space in a journal for journalists. Many o f the ads were traded space— (MORE)
would get a free ad in Ramparts and Ramparts would get a free ad in (MORE). Most of
the funding for the magazine had been coming from Woody Woodward’s pocket, with
occasional foundation support. Subscriptions brought in a little bit of money too, but
(MORE) had trouble getting its circulation past 20,000, and Poliak says that he would
sometimes check the subscription lists to see if he could identify any ZIP codes outside of
the New York tri-state area or Washington D.C. Usually it was only a smattering.425
(MORE) was never going to be a general interest magazine, and so it had to rely on
advertisers who wanted to reach its particular niche audience. As publishers have long
known, niche audiences with small circulation can be just as profitable as large general
424 “The 10 Worst,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May, 1974, 16-17.
425 Richard Poliak, interview with the author, September 8, 2011.

208

interest audiences. Cat Fancy can sell ads to cat product manufacturers. An architecture
magazine can sell ads to companies that make plumbing fixtures. The problem with
(MORE), though, is that journalists are not a niche audience in the same way. (M ORE)’s
business staff could conceivably sell space to typewriter companies or manufacturers of
portable recording equipment, but the market would be very small. David Lusterman,
(M ORE)’s business manager in this period, later said that (MORE) would never have
been viable as a commercial magazine because there is just no product category that
makes sense to market to journalists as opposed to the general population— and general
advertisers, for the most part, would not be interested in buying space in a magazine with
such a small circulation.426 The ad that started appearing in 1974 was one for Mobil, the
oil and gasoline company. Mobil had come up with a strategy o f targeting opinion leaders
with advertisements that were supposed to give the company a better name. It had started
taking out ads on The New York Times'?, new op-ed page, and Mobil apparently saw the
high-level journalists who read (MORE) as a similar group o f opinion leaders. Given the
number o f anti-Big Oil articles that (MORE) had run, this seems like a fair assumption,
but it also means that Mobil would be advertising in something akin to enemy territory. In
the July 1974 ad that Mobil ran— a full page—the company ran storyboards for a
television commercial it had proposed to the three networks. The ad asked the public for
its opinion on offshore oil drilling. Two o f the three networks— ABC and CBS—turned
down the ad. CBS gave the most thorough explanation, saying that it only accepted ads
for good and services, not for “a controversial issue o f public importance.” M obil’s ad or
public relations people clearly knew their audience, and made their appeal to (MORE)’s

426 David Lusterm an, telephone interview w ith the author, O ctober 31, 2011.

209

readers on First Amendment grounds. Mobil said it was “dangerous” for the advertising
acceptability departments of the networks to be deciding what issues could or could not
be discussed over the broadcast airwaves. Whether or not to accept the ad was an issue
that divided the (MORE) staff, and probably its readers as well. Should (MORE) back a
First Amendment argument for access to its pages, or should it effectively censor Mobil?
And in the debate that the ad itself sparked, would (MORE) support Big Oil or Big
Broadcast? Neither was an appealing choice, but (MORE) always needed money, so they
took the ad— and Mobil ran ads in the magazine for years to come. 427 Later, in the second
physical incarnation of the magazine, the back page would be devoted to Marlboro
cigarettes, another advertiser for which the staff felt morally compromised.
The September 1974 issue serves as a good example o f the state of (MORE) in
this period, and indeed could even be seen as the archetypal issue o f (MORE) at its peak
under the ownership o f its founders. It was also the last issue o f (MORE) to run a story
on its front page. The next month, Malcolm Frouman switched to a more graphic cover,
with an image and cover lines. The cover began to resemble a magazine more than a
tabloid newspaper, though the same cheap paper stock remained, as did the general layout
o f the interior pages. And o f course, the iconic “(MORE)” nameplate also stayed. But
those changes would come in October. The September issue ran its last front page story,
one that was very much in line with the magazine’s history o f criticizing press complicity
with the government. With Nixon finally having resigned, (MORE) looked at the
“honeymoon” that the press was giving Gerald Ford, and found that this was an
institution worth getting rid of. Amazingly, given the antagonism between The New York

47 7

A dvertisem ent for Mobil. (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1974, 15.

210

Times and (MORE)— see chapter five for two case studies o f this relationship—the
Gerald Ford honeymoon article was written by William V. Shannon, a member of the
Times editorial board.
Inside the issue, however, the relationship with the Times felt rockier. Dick Poliak
wrote the “Column Two” piece next to the table o f contents, in which he detailed how
The New York Times fired a reporter named Denny Walsh, in what appears to be direct
retaliation for his interaction with (MORE) the previous month.

428

Walsh had written an

investigative piece about the mayor o f San Francisco, Joe Alioto. Walsh’s piece, which
had taken three months to investigate, questioned Alioto’s testimony in a libel case
involving Look magazine, and alleged connections between Alioto and members o f the
mafia. However, The Times never ran the story. (M ORE)’s Washington editor, Brit Hume,
wrote the cover story for (MORE), in which Walsh claimed that the Times had killed the
Alioto story. An editor’s note that ran alongside Hume’s story explained that the original
version o f the (MORE) story included an excerpt from the report that the Times had
killed. Because (MORE) would then be the first publication to make the allegations
against Alioto, Hume called his office for comment. Eventually, (MORE) was threatened
with lawsuits that— while the journalism review would likely win—might very well
bankrupt it. So (MORE) backed off, and ran only Hume’s story, not the excerpts from
Denny Walsh’s. Abe Rosenthal, the managing editor o f The Times, denied that the story
had been killed.429

428 Richard Poliak, “Column Two: The Firing of Denny Walsh,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, September 1974, 2,
429 Brit Hume, “The Mayor, The Times, and the Lawyers,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, August 1974, 1, 16-18.

211

So the next month, in the archetypal September 1974 (MORE), Dick Poliak had
to report that Denny Walsh had been fired. Poliak accuses the Times o f hypocrisy, saying
that for a publication that speaks out so strongly on behalf o f freedom of speech, this
censorship o f one o f its reporters was unacceptable. Poliak justified the accusation of
censorship by pointing out that Walsh had offered his manuscript to Rolling Stone once
he was told that the Times wouldn’t be running it. It was through Rolling Stone that the
story found its way to (MORE), since Rolling Stone said that the story w asn’t written in
the style o f their usual journalism. Rosenthal claimed that the Walsh manuscript had been
held because of concerns about the quality of the reporting. Poliak countered this by
saying that it would not have been an issue o f Walsh had published with Rolling Stone or
even with (MORE), since the quality of the reporting would no longer be the problem of
the Times. Rosenthal was also being hypocritical, Poliak wrote, since it had lambasted the
Nixon administration for its use o f “plumbers” to stop leaks, and yet Rosenthal was
behaving in exactly the same way.
Across the page from Poliak’s vitriolic column, the Hellbox section reported on
yet another instance o f Doonesbury censorship, this time for a strip that depicted
Republican congressmen falling asleep during the Watergate hearings. After the Hellbox,
(MORE) ran an article by contributing editor David Rubin about the risk of attracting a
libel suit when doing muckraking journalism. The piece is part exposure o f the overuse of
libel and part warning to reporters who sought to do such work.430

430 David Rubin, “The Perils o f M uckraking,” (M ORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1974, 5-9.

212

The ads in the September 1974 issue are also pretty typical for mid-period
(MORE). Following Rubin’s piece on libel suits, The Advocate, which was then a
biweekly newspaper covering news o f interest to gays, ran a full-page ad, focusing on
how certain publications wouldn’t take their ads. There was also a full-page ad for Mobil,
o f course, and one for The American Poetry Review. So there is one ad for a newspaper
run by and for an oppressed cultural minority group, one advocacy ad for a multinational
corporation, and one ad—presumably unpaid—for a review o f poetry. That spread alone
says much about the state o f (MORE) in late 1974.
The 1974 issue also profiled a new phenomenon in broadcast journalism— a
longhaired, mustachioed television reporter named Geraldo Rivera. The occasion for the
profile was Rivera’s recent leap from the local ABC affiliate in New York to his own
evening news and variety show. Jane Howard wrote the piece, and like so many people
who have tried to assess Rivera since 1974, she was unable to figure out how to classify
him: “Is he a swashbuckling muckraker? A name-dropping opportunist? A savior? Or a
phony embarked on a one-way deluxe ego trip with no return ticket?”431 The piece is
prescient in seeing that Rivera would be a part of the media for a long time (though
Howard also speculates, jokingly, about a presidential run in 2000, when Rivera would be
57). And it demonstrates (M ORE)’s growing interest in the personalities o f the media
world. Rivera represented something that had only just begun to exist in the first years of
(MORE), a celebrity o f the new world o f “media,” as opposed to “the press.” Some of
what Rivera did was clearly journalism, but much o f it was not. And (MORE), unlike any
other publication in the period, was wrestling with what these changes would mean. The
431 Jane Howard, ‘“ Stay Right Where You are, Geraldo is Coming!” ’ (MORE): A
Journalism Review, September 1974, 11.

213

next article in the September 1974 issue dealt with a more recognizable kind o f celebrity
to a particular generation o f journalists— Alexander Cockbum wrote about Frank
Sinatra’s relationship with the press on a trip to Australia43 2—but Geraldo was a new
animal. (MORE) may not have known just what to make of him, but it had the foresight
to be able to identify him, and recognize that his kind would be important in whatever
was coming next.
Finally, to close out the archetypal September, 1974 issue o f (MORE), Joseph
Epstein, then a lecturer in English at Northwestern University, examined the possibility
that with Nixon gone, the American people would be looking for a new institution to
vilify, and that institution might very well be the Media (Epstein capitalizes it). Wall
Street and Madison Avenue had each had their turn, and the Media looked to be next. The
requisites were there, he wrote: the Media are powerful; and they have a great potential
for manipulation, given their control o f information. The only thing that might be missing
in the formula for the Media to become the country’s next big villain was a motive. For
investment banking and for advertising, the motive was clear: money. But for the Media,
he argued, the reward was something more intangible: a sense o f being at the center of
things, a heady feeling o f not merely being where the action is but o f having a hand in
shaping the action.”433 In short, the media have too much power, and too little
responsibility, Epstein argued. And that made people suspicious.

432 Alexander Cockbum, “Here’s to Old Blue Eyes (59),” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, September 1974, 17.
433 Joseph Epstein, “Furthermore: The Media as Villain.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, September 1974, 24.

214

(MORE) continued to monitor the media, o f course. That was always the guiding
purpose o f (MORE), particularly under its founding trio and the group o f writers and
editors that they brought into their circle. When (MORE) reached the September 1974
issue, it had been publishing for a few months more than three years. They had made
themselves an anti-institutional institution. The three A.J. Liebling Counter-Conventions
that (MORE) had thrown so far had become must-attend events for a certain segment of
the elite and aspirational-elite press. (MORE) had reached a peak o f its influence and also
probably of its performance. But underneath that influence, there were real financial
problems at the magazine. In November 1974, the magazine published its required report
to the Audit Bureau o f Circulation, which monitored the circulation o f periodicals. The
average press run for the previous year had been 17,131 copies, with the latest issue
having 18,909 copies. Paid subscriptions accounted for 13,459 issues, with an additional
2,112 issues being sold on the newsstand. The magazine gave away about 2,500 copies.
These were not spectacular numbers, barely enough to sustain publication. The ownership
disclosure in the ABC report reflected that. The Audit Bureau required that any
shareholder with more than 1% be reported. And in addition to the original three Rosebud
Associates, (MORE) had significant investment now from six other investors (one of
which was Woody Woodward’s mother). Even at its editorial peak, the magazine was
struggling financially. Rosebud Associates would only hold onto the magazine for
another year and a half. In that time, the editorial staff continued to do good and
important work, with some o f the new, more entertainment-oriented journalism mixed in.

215

1975-1976: The Endgame for Rosebud Associates
(MORE) celebrated the peak o f its influence in 1975 by releasing an anthology of
some of its best work. The book, Stop the Presses, I Want to Get Off], was published by
Random House, and edited by Poliak. It featured a ketchup-red dust jacket with mustardyellow type, an illustration by Marty Norman of a foot bursting through newsprint, and
promotional blurbs from four famous and influential journalists: Studs Terkel, Gay
Talese, Dan Rather and Murray Kempton. Talese wrote that “The best journalists in
America write for (MORE).” Dan Rather wrote that he often disagreed with it, but that
(MORE) was “one o f the most important publications in the country.”434 Poliak wrote an
introduction to the book discussing what (MORE) had accomplished to date. He wrote
that Woody and Tony didn’t share his vision for democracy in the newsroom, but that
(MORE) had been a pretty effective nudge when it came to embarrassing publishers into
doing better work. The anthology contains pieces by many o f (M ORE)’s regulars, divided
into themes, including the big picture, between the lines, profiles, and institutions.
Regular readers o f (MORE) wouldn’t have gotten much that was new out o f it, unless
they wanted a volume to keep on their shelves. Its real value would have been in
exposing some o f the best material from (MORE) to a more general audience than it
normally reached. A review of the book in Library Journal, called the prospect o f a wider
distribution o f these stories “altogether healthy.”435 Everette Dennis, who was a professor
o f journalism at the University of Minnesota at the time, reviewed the book for the

434 Richard Poliak, editor, Stop the Presses, I Want to Get Off] Tales o f the News Business
From the Pages o f (MORE) Magazine (New York: Random House, 1975).
435 Larry Friedman, review o f Stop the Presses, I Want to Get Off] Tales o f the News
Business From the Pages o f (MORE) Magazine, Library Journal 100 (10), May 15, 1975,
979.

216

academic journal Journalism Quarterly. He said that it contained “much good writing
and some thoughtful analysis” o f journalism.436 He found the book generally worthwhile,
but took issue with some of the titles, which he found to be too cutesy and o f little value
for information retrieval. Curiously, he also calls (MORE) anti-intellectual. His complaint
seems to be that (MORE) has little knowledge of the history o f journalism or o f other
press criticism. Perhaps one could come to that conclusion from reading only the book,
but the magazine in general is well aware o f the history in which it is operating, openly
evoking the legacy o f the muckrakers and of A. J. Liebling as a press critic. On the whole,
(MORE) was actually a vociferous opponent o f anti-intellectualism in the American
press, constantly pushing for the press to move toward the sort o f self-scrutiny that is the
hallmark of the intellectual.
(MORE) soldiered on as usual through 1975, with little immediately visible
change in its coverage or its themes. Dick Poliak admitted that running the magazine
essentially on his own had taken a physical and mental toll, as well as a toll on his
personal life, and it is possible that some o f this was tempering the energy and
enthusiasm that had been the hallmark o f the first few years o f (MORE). The publication
had scaled up in ambition and complexity too, with more longer stories, many more
shorter pieces, and a more complicated design makeup. Also o f course, external factors
affected the kind of coverage that (MORE) attempted, and the magazine seems to have
gone into something of a lull of creativity following the successive twin highs created by
the energy o f New Left anti-institutionalism and by the long Watergate saga. (MORE)

436 Everette E. Dennis, review o f Stop the Presses, I want to Get Off], Journalism
Quarterly 52(4), December 1975, 780.

217

seemed to fall into a bit o f a malaise, just as the country famously would at the end of the
1970s.
There were a few notable stories in 1975 and 1976, o f course, with an increase in
the number o f stories that covered media outside o f newsgathering organizations. But
(MORE) also continued to excel at forcing the press to examine itself. In that vein,
(MORE) assigned journalist and historian Garry Wills to critique an entire year’s issues
o f (MORE) and to publish the resulting criticism in the magazine. Wills takes the
opportunity not just to critique individual articles (in fact, he knows that as a consumer of
the elite media, he is exactly (MORE)’s audience), but in fact, Wills uses the piece to
expose and undercut the very premise of the magazine. (MORE), he writes, misses the
point. It spends all of its energy nitpicking the very few elite news outlets that conform at
all to the vision of the press that (MORE) has internalized. He uses the “Ten Worst
Newspapers” feature as his jum ping-off point. O f course this feature turned out to be
bland and almost meaningless, he writes. (MORE) was trying to judge the local
newspapers of the United States by the standards o f The Washington Post. And most
newspapers in the United States in the 1970s were not trying to be the Post. They were
trying to serve their readers, who wanted sports and local event coverage and service
journalism. Wills makes a distinction between two groups that he calls “The Media” and
the press. He suggests that there is an elite media, a group o f newspapers and news
magazines and a few national news programs who conform to those Washington Post or
New York Times definitions o f what makes something news. Most o f “the press,” as he
uses the term doesn’t care to play by those rules, since their circulations are gigantic by
playing to the lowest common denominator. He cites circulation statistics for the

218

highbrow and lowbrow publications, and the contrast is startling. (MORE) does not
understand, Wills writes, that it is overlooking and even dismissing most of the
publications that are consumed by most o f the United States, and is therefore even more
o f a niche publication than it probably already saw itself as being. The great “invisible
journalism” doesn’t interest (MORE) because it doesn’t interest (MORE)’s readers— and
so (MORE), in a way, is playing by the same rules as local newspapers or The R ea d er’s
Digest. What it does do, Wills writes, it does pretty well.437 Wills is right o f course that
(MORE) neglected to cover most of the media, but there is o f course value in pushing for
change from the top. They may also just have been a group o f elite media members
themselves, ones who thought that they were somehow smarter than the people they
covered and smug about it. Certainly both attitudes come through in the magazine’s
coverage.
What was really wrong with the magazine though w asn’t just its coverage. Even if
Wills was right and (MORE) was pandering to its audience as much as any other
publication— even if (M ORE)’s audience craved gossip about The New York Times'
internal machinations instead o f about Patty Hearst’s kidnapping— even if that pandering
was working, the audience wasn’t big enough to support a journalism review, and
(MORE) was beginning to run out of both money and energy. In September o f 1975, The
Washington Post reported that (MORE)’s inspiration, The Chicago Journalism Review,
would be folding. That review’s subscription list had dwindled to 2500, according to the
article, down from a peak o f 9000 in 1970. The Post article is confusingly edited, and it
seems to be referring in places to two different New York-based journalism reviews that
437 Garry Wills, “W hat’s W rong W ith This M agazine?” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
June, 1975, 6-8.

219

are discussing the assumption o f The Chicago Journalism Review's debts and
subscription list, but only The Columbia Journalism Review is named. At one point, the
article says that The Columbia Journalism Review “had in recent years become more like
its nonacademic counterpart,” which Ron Dorfman, the editor o f The Chicago Journalism
Review helped to organize. The sentence seems to refer to (MORE), though that review is
never named, perhaps edited out by someone who found the nomenclature confusing and
assumed that “the New York based journalism review” must refer to Columbia’s. At any
rate, the omen o f The Chicago Journalism Review's death could not have been a happy
one for the staff of (MORE).
Less than a year later, The New York Times ran an article reporting that a sale was
being negotiated for (MORE). In March, 1976, the Times interviewed a young New York
magazine writer named Michael Kramer, who was the leader in a group o f investors who
were looking to buy the magazine. (MORE), Kramer said, was “the classic case o f an
undercapitalized publication,” and he planned to put a substantial amount of money into
it to expand it, and possibly hire another editor. According to the Times, Dick Poliak
would stay on as editor, even after Kramer and his group purchased the magazine from
Poliak, Lukas, Woodward and Robert Livingston, who was the last publisher of (MORE)
in the Rosebud Associates era.438
Dick Poliak didn’t want to sell. He would rather have seen the magazine fold than
watch it go into someone else’s hands, at the risk o f the founders’ vision being perverted
or destroyed. But Woody Woodward didn’t want to be the owner o f a publication that
failed. And Poliak had personal pressures. He said in an interview that when Kramer

438 “Sale o f M ore M agazine Being N egotiated,” The N ew York Times, M arch 4, 1976.

220

approached the Rosebud group with his offer to purchase the magazine, Poliak was in the
midst o f a divorce from his first wife, who told him that if he could get away from his allconsuming magazine and give him self a normal work schedule, then she would not
contest joint custody o f their daughter.439
Kramer gave more detail about what he planned to do with the magazine in an
article that ran in The Washington Post a day after the Times story. Kramer hoped to
convert the magazine from a 32-page tabloid into a 64-page saddle-stitched magazine that
looked more like a newsstand glossy. He also hoped to bring up the circulation and
appeal to a more general audience, one that was not all working journalists. He foresaw a
magazine that was so successful that it could ramp up to biweekly or even weekly
production. (MORE), in Kramer’s vision, would be a slick magazine with appeal to the
general public. According to the final terms of the sale, Rosebud Associates would
continue publishing through the June issue. Despite what The New York Times reported,
Richard Poliak would not be listed as the editor when it re-launched in a July/August
double issue. Michael Kramer would be both publisher and editor o f the new incarnation
o f the magazine.
In the first issue o f (MORE) that came out following the reports o f its sale, the
magazine devoted the cover to one o f the biggest celebrity moments in the history of
journalism: the release o f the movie o f A ll the President’s M en, an adventure story that
had a pair of journalists, one o f them played by the very glamorous Robert Redford.
(MORE) reviewed the movie in that issue. It reviewed the movie eight times, in fact,
hiring as temporary film critics the following luminaries: Russell Baker, Dick Cavett,

439 Richard Poliak, interview w ith the author, September 8, 2011.

221

Jane Howard, Jeff Greenfield, Kurt Vonnegut, Sam Roberts, Roy Cohn, and Frances
Fitzgerald. Mostly the reviewers praised the film, happy that it did not stray too far from
the facts (though some complained that not knowing the identity o f Woodward and
Bernstein’s secret source, Deep Throat, left a shadowy hole at the center o f the movie.
But here were journalists being played by movie stars, journalists turned into heroes.
Despite the fact that the issue was marred by one o f (M ORE)’s sillier conceits (a mosaic
o f nearly identical local television news anchormen who were supposedly competing in
some sort o f beauty pageant440), this issue, the third-to-last in the five-year run of
Rosebud Associates, feels like a sort o f valedictory moment. As the cover line said,
“News Biz Goes Show Biz. (MORE) had chronicled the press from a moment in which
reporters felt equally stymied by their government and their own employers into an age
when reporters had brought down a corrupt president.441 To top things off (and perhaps to
counter-balance the frivolity of the Anchorman Face-Off, (MORE) also ran an article
about how Mobil Oil was confusing the debate over the energy crisis with its
A 442
propaganda.

Two months later, the last page o f the last issue o f (MORE) to be produced by
Rosebud Associates was devoted to a full-page ad placed by Mobil.

440 “The First Annual Anchorman Face-Off” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April,
1976, 16-17.
441 “Reflections on Hollywoodstein” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April 1976, 7-9.
442 Gerald Astor, “The Gospel According to Mobil,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1976, 12-15.

222

Michael Kramer brings New York slick to his new magazine
When More returned to its subscribers’ mailboxes and showed up on newsstands
in the late summer o f 1976, it certainly looked like a different publication. The cheap
newsprint and the tabloid sized pages were gone, replaced by glossy magazine stock in a
traditional magazine size— about eight inches by eleven inches. The iconic squared
parentheses were gone from the logo as well. And more importantly than that, the subtitle
o f the magazine had changed. No longer would (MORE) be a journalism review. Now it
was More: The M edia Magazine. That change alone says as much about the new
direction that the magazine was taking as the physical redesign.
That redesign was done by Milton Glaser and Walter Bernard. Glaser was a co­
founder o f New York magazine with the editor Clay Felker, and would achieve his most
lasting fame when he designed the “I (heart) NY” logo for New York City tourism.
Bernard was his design partner. Since Michael Kramer was a New York columnist, Felker
agreed to “loan” Glaser to More for its redesign.443 Glaser and Bernard did not become
regular staff members, but remained on the masthead of the magazine as “design
consultants.” Kramer says that he took advantage o f that consultant status, and took
mock-ups of every month’s cover to Glaser for his criticism. According to Kramer, Glaser
thoroughly reworked almost every cover, in one case practically ordering Kramer to
arrange a photo shoot for a brand new cover idea.444
Despite the physical overhaul, the masthead o f the new M ore did not look as
different from the old one as fans o f the old (MORE) might have feared. Kramer was

443 Michael Kramer, interview with the author, January 23, 2013.
444 Ibid.

223

editor and publisher, o f course, but his executive editor was the journalist Ron
Rosenbaum, who had been working for the previous incarnation of (MORE) as well.
Claudia Cohen got a promotion to managing editor. Longtime contributors Philip Nobile
and David Rubin got space on the masthead as senior editors. And even though Kramer
had, at one point, said that Richard Poliak would stay on as the editor, he was apparently
willing to move a few slots down and remain on staff as associate editor. Malcolm
Frouman stayed on as art director. Quite a few other familiar names stayed on as
contributing editors, too, including David Halberstam, Bob Kuttner, J. Anthony Lukas
and even cartoonist Marty Norman. Kramer also added seven editorial assistants, who
functioned mostly like interns—young, eager journalists who were willing to work for
nothing, or almost nothing, in exchange for being able to work with people like those
listed above them on the masthead. Perhaps the most significant change though, was the
expansion o f the business side o f the magazine. In addition to Kramer, who straddled
both sides, there was now an associate publisher, a business manager, an advertising sales
person and a publishing assistant.
But did the content change? In his introductory letter, Kramer outlines what he is
trying to do in revamping the magazine. H e’s not changing M ore’s focus on print
journalism, he writes, just expanding it. Instead of covering only the press, the new More
would cover “the other kingdoms in the media realm: television, film, radio, advertising,
publishing, public relations, design and marketing.”445 O f course not all of this was new.
The old (MORE) had devoted an entire issue to publishing and a steady trickle o f articles
afterward. It had looked at advertising and public relations from the point of view o f the

445 M ichael Kramer, “N ew Lead,’’M ore: The M edia M agazine, July/A ugust 1976, 2.

224

journalist— a somewhat adversarial point o f view, to be sure. And Kramer was being
somewhat disingenuous when he said that the old version o f (MORE) had focused
entirely on print journalism; surely he knew that the journalism review had done fairly
extensive coverage of broadcast journalism as well.
The first issue though did reflect some o f Kramer’s added portfolio. For one
thing, the “Big Apple” department, focusing on New York City media was gone, but
Hellbox remained, and eight or nine new departments made their debut (depending on
whether or not one counts “Rosebud,” which had previously been a part o f the Hellbox).
Those departments were: Language, Advertising (which got two stories the first month,
perhaps signaling a particular interest), Sports, Television, Timeswatch (focused entirely
on M ore’s old bete noir, The New York Times), Foreign Desk, Nuts & Bolts, and
Publishing. There were also nine major feature stories, a significant increase over the
average issue in the era o f the founders.
The Michael Kramer era of More started with a splash. The cover story examined
Spiro Agnew’s accusation that the media was run by a “Jewish cabal.” The piece is an
interesting and nuanced one, given the delicacy o f the subject matter. The author, Stephen
Birmingham, begins with an exploration o f the different social strata o f Jewish society in
New York City—the differences between German and Eastern European Jewish
descendants, the separation between observant and secular Jews. He does this by way of
dispelling the “cabal” part o f Agnew’s accusation. But, as a sidebar called “25 Jews in
the News,” attests, in 1976, there was a large number of Jewish journalists and
publishers, and Birmingham turns to Stephen Isaacs’ book Jews and American P olitics
for some o f the historical reasons that Jewish people are attracted to media careers— a

225

history that Agnew ignored. Isaacs points to a history o f support for intellectualism as a
route out of ghettos and into mainstream society, as well as an emphasis on education in
general. And he also notes that many o f these Jews in the media consider themselves
journalists first, Jews second, and he lists three New York Times staffers alone who go by
their initials in bylines in order to avoid their revealing first name: Abraham.
The magazine also has profiles o f the very well-known New York Times writer
R. W. Apple, and one o f a writer the magazine called “one o f the least-known and best
writers we have.”446 The critic John Leonard wrote a guide for those who planned to
watch the political conventions on television— what to watch, and what not to. Regular
contributor Nick von Hoffman contributed a piece, too. The debut sports column was
about New York Yankees broadcaster Mel Allen, and the first television column was
written by Frank Rich, who would go on to be The New York Times theater critic and then
a columnist for New York. Dick Poliak inaugurated the column about the Times. And the
“Nuts & Bolts” column, written by a science writer, literally described how a television
works. And there was a piece that called William Safire stiff and old-fashioned. Safire
had recently started a column about language in The New York Times.
It is an ambitious re-launch issue, and it is supported by significantly more ads
than ever appeared in the Rosebud era. There is one for Mobil, one for International
Paper, one for the book publishing arm o f The New Republic, one for New York (which
was likely a gift from Clay Felker to his protege), one for a biography of Nelson
Rockefeller (co-written, not coincidentally, by Michael Kramer), one for The Progressive

446 Tony Schwartz, “Establishing the Levels o f the Gam qT More: The M edia Magazine,
July/August 1976, 38.

226

magazine, one for Seagram’s 7 whiskey, and a back cover ad for Marlboro cigarettes.
Those are all full page ads, and there is a smattering of smaller ads in the magazine, too.
It’s unclear how many o f them were paid, but eight full ad pages was still far short o f the
number Kramer had calculated that the magazine needed to turn a profit.
By the second issue under Kramer’s leadership, Malcolm Frouman was gone— off
to a job at The New York Review o f Books.447 Rudy Hoglund replaced him as art director.
The issue itself was thinner, perhaps because the debut issue was meant to be a double
issue. Advertising issues had moved to the cover for the first time too. The cover story of
the September 1976 is about the outcome o f a talent search for the perfect child to star in
a new campaign for breakfast cakes that Hostess was going to begin marketing.448 Three
other stories recalled the (MORE) o f old—two about the Washington Post and one that is
a collection o f memories about starting out journalistic careers on the police beat. In
October, the cover story returned to politics, with a story by Ken Auletta about how the
Democratic presidential candidate Jimmy Carter deals with the press.449 But that serious
story was followed immediately by a bit o f frivolity about Hollywood actors who write
poetry 450
Despite the new, broader focus on media, Kramer’s more populist approach to
editing had not elicited huge circulation gains as he had wanted. By the end o f 1976, the
Audit Bureau o f Circulation report that More filed showed that subscriptions had actually

447 Malcolm Frouman, interview with the author, October 27, 2011.
448 Alan Levenstein, “ITT’s Big Gamble on a Ten-Year-Old Kid f More: The M edia
M agazine, September 1976, 22.
449 Ken Auletta, “How Carter Plays the Press f More: The M edia Magazine, October
1976, 12-22.
450 Deanne Stillman, “Make Way for the Show Biz Bards f More: The M edia Magazine,
October 1976, 23-31.

227

dropped. The average number of paid subscriptions in the preceding year had been
14,626. By the end o f 1976, that number had actually dropped to 11,958. Newsstand sales
were up slightly, but not nearly enough to counteract the drop-off in subscriptions.
Kramer’s new vision for the magazine was struggling, as it was unable to find that
general audience— even as the January, 1977 issue marked the first glossy, staged
photograph to appear on M ore’s cover, after six years o f cartoons. The image illustrated a
story called “Kiss & Tell Journalism,” by Ron Rosenbaum, and it was the cover that
Milton Glaser came up with and told Michael Kramer to redo. Kramer had come to
Glaser with a cover done entirely in type, and according to Kramer, Glaser said, “Are you
crazy? Are you out of your minds? This is the one thing you’ve done that could mildly be
considered salacious. You need to get some journalists in bed together!”451 The final
cover shows a shirtless Rudy Hoglund, the art director, in a brass bed with a woman
model. He is tape recording something; she is typing on an electric typewriter. That issue
also had a series o f remembrances of The New York Post by various alumni of that
publication. The feature was tied to the news that Dorothy Schiff, the longtime owner of
the paper, had sold it to the Australian press baron Rupert Murdoch.

The profile of Rupert Murdoch that Rupert Murdoch killed
Rupert Murdoch had already been living in New York for three years before most
o f the city's journalism establishment cared much about who he was. Sure, he owned a
few papers around the country, and he was known for having turned The News o f the
World from a winkingly naughty paper that hid behind a screen o f Victorian propriety

451 M ichael Kramer, Interview w ith the author, January 23, 2013.

228

into the screaming scandal sheet that it remained until this year. And o f course he was
also known for being an Australian press lord. But in New York, he was quiet, a one man
sleeper cell getting the feel for a new place—making friends with Clay Felker, the man
who bought New York magazine from the ashes o f the New York Herald-Tribune and
turned it into the first city magazine, and then, through Felker, Murdoch made the
acquaintance o f Dorothy Schiff, the longtime Roosevelt liberal (and rumored Roosevelt
paramour) who had turned America's oldest newspaper into a tabloid aimed at a
diminishing, mostly Jewish, educated middle class readership.
And then Murdoch struck, buying the Post from his New York social scene
acquaintance, Dolly Schiff. She was a cantankerous, capricious publisher, to be sure, and
even those writers who respected her and were loyal to her didn't seem to like her much.
But still, the sale o f the Post to the Australian press lord? That was a story (one, it seems,
that the Post itself was scooped on).
Clay Felker wasn't going to let this story get away, though. He too was
unpredictable as an editor, but most of the time, people threw in words like "extremely
talented" or even "genius." The man had more or less invented a category o f media, and
had nurtured the careers o f "New Journalists" like Tom Wolfe, Jimmy Breslin and his
own wife, Gail Sheehy. So Felker jumped into editorial action when the Past/M urdoch
news broke. New York commissioned cover art from illustrator David Levine, known for
his New York Review o f Books caricatures. Levine came back with aportrait of Rupert as
a killer bee, his stinger pointed toward the base of the new World Trade Center towers,
and his ham-pink, crosshatched face immediately recognizable.

229

And for the profile itself, Felker's magazine enlisted a pair o f writers, showing in
his choices some o f that editorial acumen he was known for. Presumably to handle the
New York angle, but with knowledge o f Britain, Felker charged Jon Bradshaw, a New
York contributing editor who had also written a book about backgammon, o f all things,
and had worked as a writer in England (at the Sunday Times, long before Murdoch
bought that, too). And to get the Australian side of things, Felker turned to Richard
Neville, the co-founder o f an Australian satirical magazine called Oz, a magazine that
between its Australian and English versions, got Neville involved in no fewer than three
obscenity trials (and earned him the honor o f being played in movies by both Hugh Grant
and Cillian Murphy).
And then, before they went to press, the story and the illustration were killed.
Rupert Murdoch had bought New York.
A January, 1977 article in Time claims that “Felker thought better o f it,” though it
also implies that the illustration was a reaction to the news that Murdoch had wrested
New York away from Felker, which seems bizarre, unless it was commissioned in the
period when Murdoch was still wresting and Felker was still clinging to his beloved
creation. What seems more likely is that the story and cover illustration were
commissioned in that brief period (less than two months, from Thanksgiving to New
Year's) between Murdoch's purchase of the Post and his takeover o f New York. And if
Rupert Murdoch owned New York, there was no way down under that it would be running
a comprehensive cover story about the boss's past.
The story did eventually run, just not in New York. Instead, More continued its
tradition o f swiping up stories that had, in one way or another, been too hot for their

230

original publications. According to the italicized blurb that introduced the article in
the February, 1977 issue, the article and illustration (which More ran on its own
cover) "were commissioned before Rupert Murdoch acquired control o f that publication."
More had already run a pretty extensive package on Murdoch's Post coup, just the
month before. The January number featured an article on how Murdoch's takeover o f the
Post might result in “old-fashioned newspaper war,” especially if the Daily News dared to
enter the evening newspaper market (though of course it was the Post that switched to
mornings).452 There was a collection of memoirs of Dolly Schiff by former Post people
Pete Hamill, and Nora Ephron and by indy muckraker and proto-blogger I.F.
Stone 453 Doug Ireland, a veteran o f the Post, as well as New York and a third publication
that wound up under Murdoch in the New York deal, the Village Voice, wrote the main
news story, as well as a sidebar on how the Newspaper Guild would handle Murdoch if
he tried to fire their unionized employees. “He ain't gettin' rid o f nobody in Guild
jurisdiction,” Ireland quoted the executive vice president of the Guild as saying. "We
don't exist as a severance paying mechanism." As Rich points out in his piece, Murdoch
didn't have to fire them. He just drove them (most o f them, anyway) away.454
But even with all o f this prior coverage, how could More turn down the
opportunity to run the profile o f Rupert Murdoch that might have been inspired by Rupert
Murdoch's looming takeover o f the magazine that commissioned it, and that was doomed

452 Michael Kramer, “The Great New York Newspaper W a r More: The M edia
Magazine, January 1977, 12-13.
453 “We Remember Dolly ” More: The M edia Magazine, January 1977, 14—17.
454 Doug Ireland, “Rupert Murdoch Comes to T o w n More: The M edia Magazine,
January, 1977, 18.

231

by the fact that Rupert Murdoch conquered that magazine, leaving story and illustration
unceremoniously impaled on a spike?
Given what we now know about Rupert Murdoch, the profile isn't shocking
(though it is slightly odd that Neville quotes him self in the third person). We learn about
his Charles Foster Kane-like beginnings in Australia, redeeming his father's lost
newspaper career. We learn about his first attempt to own a "respectable" paper when he
founds The Australian. We learn about the takeover o f The News o f the World. There's
even a seven-column spread o f 21 covers o f the D aily Mirror from 1976, most o f which
have pretty prosaic headlines, given the “Headless Body in Topless Bar” excesses that
were to come at the Post.455
The one story that sticks out and seems to have largely been forgotten is the
shocking and incredibly relevant story o f Digby Bamford. Here is Bradshaw and Neville
(and given the kicker to this story, likely more Neville than Bradshaw)'s version o f the
story in full:
One day in March 1964, a bewildered migrant walked into the offices of
Murdoch's Daily Mirror, clutching his daughter's diary in his hand. Appalled by
what he had read, he sought advice from the seemingly omnipotent arbiters of
community taste. For other reasons, the Mirror shared the migrant's concerns and
decided to print the contents o f the little red book on its front page: "Sex Outrage
in School Lunchbreak," the Mirror blared. Reproduced passages o f the girl's diary
spoke o f secret rendezvous and sexual encounters with schoolmates. As a result of
the publicity, the 14-year-old girl and her "boyfriend," Digby Bamford, were
expelled from school. And for Murdoch's readers, that is where the story ended. It
was never reported that the following day, young Digby Bamford was found
hanging from a clothesline in his backyard; nor was it ever reported that a
pathologist from the children's welfare department filed a report o f the incident in
which he stated that the 14-year-old girl was still a virgin.

455 Jon Bradshaw and Richard Neville, “Killer Bee Reaches New York: The Sensational
History o f Rupert Murdoch,” M ore: The M edia Magazine, February, 1977, 12-23.

232

Only Richard Neville's "obscene" publication, Oz, printed the whole story at the
tim e 456

What this 1977 profile in More— one which was published almost exactly my
entire lifetime ago— shows, is that we knew who Rupert Murdoch was long before the
NOTW phone hacking scandals. And even then it was old news, as Bradshaw and
Neville saw:
Since 1952 he has built his bordello o f newspapers across three continents. For 25
years, his papers have been purveyors of cheap thrills, inciters of death and false
alarms, advocates o f obsolete prejudices, saboteurs of taste, hawkers o f back seats
and second fiddles, of cocks and bulls.457
So our assessment today o f Murdoch isn't hindsight. It's just sight. We've seen it
all along. It's just that until now, we've also played along. The subhead to the More story
asks, "Is this the future?" And the answer, of course, is yes. Yes it was.

The last six months of Kramer’s More
The month after M ore published the long profile o f Murdoch, Dick Poliak andTony
Lukas disappeared from the masthead for the first time in the magazine’s publication
history. It’s not clear what happened. Neither Kramer nor Poliak remembers, and Lukas
died in 1997. Meanwhile, the magazine was getting thinner again. The 64-page issue that
Kramer had hoped to produce every month had fallen to a 54-page issue. The April 1977
issue had only four feature stories and four departments, plus the Hellbox. In May, that
fell to only two feature stories and three departments, plus Hellbox. But that month
Kramer added a young freelance writer named Robert Friedman to the masthead as a

456
457

Ibid., 14.
Ibid., 23.

233

senior editor. Friedman had begun writing for the magazine when Poliak was still the
editor, but even though the first and second editors were feuding over the direction that
More should go in, Friedman had maintained relationships with both of them, and
Kramer invited him on board as a staff member. Friedman readily agreed, not having had
a regular job since he had graduated from college several years earlier. 45 8 It is probably
not a coincidence that Friedman moved onto the masthead when Claudia Cohen left the
magazine. He took her spot, and within a few months he had her last title, too: managing
editor.
Michael Kramer says that one o f the pieces he is most proud o f in his time as editor
o f More was a pair o f articles about criticism that ran in the July/August 1977 issue. The
first piece, by Gerald Nachman, a critic for The New York D aily News, critiqued the
critics of the New York papers.459 But it was the second one that Kramer was really proud
of: a study o f the power o f critics, conducted by two New York University professors
with help from a University of Rochester researcher. The study took six months— half the
time that Kramer owned More, and looked at the theater reviews of five critics over a tenyear period, assigning a numerical value from 1.0 (for a pan) to 5.0 (for a rave). The
study did conclude that critics have the power to close a show. There was a strong
correlation between critics writing pans and the show closing within 50 performances. O f
course, the shows may also have closed because they were terrible. But while academics

45 8

Robert Friedman, interview with the author, January 17, 2014.
459 Gerald Nachman, “W ho’s Afraid o f the Broadway Critic?” M ore: The Media
Magazine, July/August 1977, 18-22.

234

had long written for More, this article was the only instance o f the magazine
commissioning its own academic study.460
In the last year o f More, some of the covers begin to feel prophetic, or even as if
there is an intended double meaning. The September 1977 issue devotes the cover to an
article about obituaries. The cover photo has five mourners surrounding an open casket.
All five mourners— and the man in the casket— are reading the newspaper. Only the dead
man seems unsurprised by what h e’s reading; everyone else has their mouths agape.
Perhaps they’re reading some deathbed revelation about which the corpse him self was
well aware. Or perhaps h e’s only unperturbed because h e’s dead.
But that issue was the last one produced by Michael Kramer as editor and publisher.
News o f the sale came just as the September issue would have been hitting the
newsstands, so there was less lead-time before the next owners took over than there was
when Kramer bought the magazine from Rosebud Associates. Kramer told The New York
Times that the magazine had been losing too much money to sustain it. He claimed that
the circulation had doubled from 10,000 to 20,000 (though the Audit Bureau number
seem to contradict that claim), but said that the magazine had lost about $400,000 since
he had bought it the previous summer, and it was currently $100,000 in debt. The new
owner would be James Adler, who had made a personal fortune by founding the
Congressional Information Service, a company that turned Congressional documents into
microfilm and made then accessible. He would take over control o f the magazine by

460 John Kochevar, Gilda LePatner and James Inglis. “Critic Power: Who Has itN More:
The M edia Magazine, July/August 1977, 23-25, 29-34.

235

assuming its liabilities. Robert Friedman would become editor.461 Friedman had
maintained relationships with both Kramer and with Dick Poliak and Tony Lukas, which
worked out well, since James Adler, the new publisher, had brought Poliak and Lukas
back as advisers. Friedman says that during his time as editor, from the time James Adler
bought it until it folded less than a year later, he did not know Adler well at all, and could
never speak to his motivations for buying the magazine, even when they were ostensibly
working together 462 The Washington Post article about the sale calls Adler “a loyal
subscriber” to M ore, and also notes that Adler and Tony Lukas had worked together at
The Harvard Crimson when they were in college. So it is entirely possible that Poliak and
Lukas knew that More was in financial trouble and that they actively recruited Adler as
publisher, hoping that he would set the magazine’s finances right again, and allow
Friedman to set a clear editorial course that was in line with the one that the two co­
founders had established in 1971. The Post quotes Poliak, who expresses a tentative
enthusiasm about the new publisher. “I want to feel enthusiastic,” he said. He says that it
was the first time that someone who owned the magazine would have real business
experience.

463

The Post article also reveals that the investors group that Kramer had led had called
themselves Namequoit, Inc. Anthony Lukas, William Woodward and Richard Poliak had
called their group Rosebud Associates in a sly reference to the childhood sled o f the
newspaper magnate Charles Foster Kane in the film Citizen Kane. Namequoit was named

461 “More, the Review of Journalism, Being Sold to Washington Group,” The New York
Times, August 30, 1977.
462 Robert Friedman, interview with the author, January 17, 2014.
463 Jean M. W hite,4M ore Changing Hands and Changing Goals,” The Washington Post,
B l, B12.

236

for “the summer sailing camp on Cape Cod that Kramer and his fellow investors attended
as children.”464 Given Woodward’s immense family wealth, perhaps it is unfair to see
resonance in that difference, but one name clearly calls to a mythical history of
journalism and the other seems to indicate a stronger interest in money. But again, that
may be unfair.

Robert Friedman takes More to the end
The October 1977 issue feels like something o f a reunion of the old (MORE) staff,
even though the magazine has a new editor and a new publisher. James Adler, in his note
from the publisher, seems to be saying the same thing: the old magazine you knew is in
good hands again:
My job as publisher is to provide MORE with the kind of stability, support, and
solid management it has always needed. Given this firm foundation, MORE will
become a better magazine than it has ever been before. And every reader knows
that MORE at its best has been very good indeed.465
Adler promises to expand the magazine’s Washington coverage— since he is going to
remain in Washington himself—and to refocus the magazine on strong, independent press
criticism. He also announces that both Poliak and Lukas have returned as associate
editors, as has David Rubin.
The first cover story under Friedman (though given the lead-time o f magazine
articles, it’s possible that it was commissioned earlier) looked at a growing and important
issue in the late 1970s: media monopolies. More ran three stories in the package. One
examined the recent Washington, D.C. Court of Appeals decision that ordered all

464 Ibid., B12.
465 James B. Adler, “Under New Management ” More: The M edia Magazine, October
1977,2.

237

companies that owned a newspaper and a broadcast station in the same market to sell the
broadcast station unless it could prove that the cross-media ownership was in the public
interest.466 The second was a case study o f a man named John Johnson, who owned the
only newspaper, the only television station, and two local radio stations in Watertown,
New York. He was also a powerful political figure in the area.467 The third story was a
review o f research on the effects of cross-media ownership.468 It was as thorough a
package as More had ever put together on a single subject, and one that was very much
representative o f the sort of media consolidation that was going on all over the country in
1977. M ore would run a similar package of stories a few months later, looking at press
freedom in South Africa. The other major stories in the October issue are a profile o f the
owner of Variety, a story about an American reporter who was kicked out o f the United
Kingdom for violating the Official Secrets Act, and a story by Poliak about the
developing law suit that a group o f women had brought against The New York Times.
The next month, More returned to coverage o f Rupert Murdoch, but this time
Friedman and writer Rinker Buck got Murdoch to talk. Friedman remembered how
difficult Murdoch was to deal with. Murdoch would not talk to More unless he was able
to see the story beforehand, and approve his quotes. Friedman told him that journalism
did not work that way. Eventually, he was able to get Murdoch to agree to a compromise:
he could see the story before publication, but could not make any changes.469 Murdoch

466 W.H. Masters, “Media Monopolies: Busting Up a Cozy Marriage,” M ore: The M edia
Magazine, October 1977, 12-13.
467 Rinker Buck, “Watertown, N.Y.: Suitable Grounds for Divorce?” More: The Media
Magazine, October 1977, 14—20.
468 Peter M. Sandman, “Cross-Ownership on the Scales,” More: The M edia Magazine,
October 1977, 21-26.
469 Robert Friedman, interview with the author, January 17, 2014.

238

agreed to quite a long interview and answered questions about the tabloid’s coverage of
the Son o f Sam murders (Murdoch directed much o f the coverage himself), about press
monopolies (he claimed he had no ambition to grow, but admitted that there was a lot of
room for growth), and about accusations that The P ost’s news coverage blatantly favored
candidate Ed Koch against Bella Abzug in the recent New York City mayoral election (he
denied it). But More, in keeping with its tradition o f independence, analyzed the actual
coverage and found that Murdoch was either lying, uninformed, or just wrong. The
analysis found zero unfavorable articles about Koch after the day The Post endorsed
him.470
The departments covering advertising, television, and all o f the various other media
are notably missing from the first few issues under Friedman. Only Hellbox, Rosebud
and the catch-all Furthermore remain. The other media are still covered—they have not
disappeared completely—but they aren’t the focus that they used to be.
More continued to attract big name authors in its last few issues. Roy Blount, Jr.
contributed apiece about weathercasters in April 1978,471 and Christopher Hitchens also
wrote a piece that month, about an editor who became a terrorist target after
accompanying Egypt’s Anwar Sadat on a trip to Israel. 472 Todd Gitlin and Michael Arlen
were contributors to the same issue. But in the unintentional tradition o f prophetic cover
lines, the May 1978 issue declared: “And Then There Was On qT More would go out of
business after the June issue.

470 Rinker Buck, “Can The ‘Post’ Survive Rupert Murdoch?” M ore: The Media
M agazine, November, 1977, 11-23.
471 Roy Blount Jr., “Weathercasters: Getting to Snow You,” More: The M edia Magazine,
April, 1978,30-35.
472
Christopher Hitchens, “Assassination in Nicosia,” More: The M edia Magazine, April,
1978, 22-23.

239

The editorial staff must have been living in dread of the end, because James Adler
had been shopping the magazine around since at least April. Adler had been sick,
hospitalized for a month. Adler claimed that he had fielded several offers, though he
didn’t tell The Washington Post whom those offers were from.473 The editors were
equally desperate to find a new owner to keep the magazine in business, and were happy
to talk to the press. Poliak, Friedman, Rubin and senior editor Karl M anoff told The New
York Times that More had lost $1.3 million in its existence, and probably needed
$750,000 over three years to be saved.474 Adler put the number at between $300,000 and
$600,000.475 But while Adler and the editors looked for more than a month to find a
savior, they were unable to find anyone willing to take on the project, without
compromising M ore’s principles, and at a price that wouldn’t lose too much money for
Adler.
More put out its June issue, featuring a cover story by Nicholas von Hoffman
previewing the Supreme Court case in which WBAI, the New York City Pacifica Radio
station which was challenging FCC sanctions. WBAI had aired some of the comedian
George Carlin’s “Seven Dirty Words,” and the type and quantity o f the “dirty” words had
offended a few listeners. In the same issue, Noam Chomsky looked back on the Tet
Offensive, ten years later. But there was lighthearted material too— a piece about how
The New York Times covered animals, and a bit of black humor about how media outlets
in New York City would respond to a neutron bomb going off in Midtown.

Nancy C ollins,4M ore Magazine for Sale,” The Washington Post, April 25, 1978, B4.
474 Philip H. Dougherty, “Backer for More Sought,” The New York Times, May 8, 1978.
475 “Publisher of More Seeking to Sell His Monthly Review of Journalism,” The New
York Times, May 24, 1978.

240

But then, in July, the obituaries came. July 22, 1978, in both The Washington Post
and M ore's longtime nemesis The New York Times. More would be ending publication
and selling its subscription list to its stodgy older rival, The Columbia Journalism
Review. Edward Barrett, the publisher of CJR, said that there would be no editorial
changes as a result o f the merger.476 The Post wrote a more perceptive article about the
sale, noting the “touch o f irony” that left some staff members bitter about the sale, since
(MORE) was originally meant to be an alternative to The Columbia Journalism Review.
Adler chose Columbia because he had lost $400,000, and he was donating the magazine
to Columbia, which is a tax-exempt institution. That would allow him to take a tax
exemption for the donation. Though Adler and the editors had been looking for a buyer
since April, only two real offers had emerged. Adler turned down one from a commercial
publisher that had sought to turn More into a sort of gossip magazine. The other had
come from the liberal opinion magazine The Nation, which had wanted to turn More into
a press section of the magazine. Adler had turned down that offer because they had not
offered enough money 477
Tony Lukas was bitter about the donation. He called CJR stodgy and out o f touch
with younger journalists, and had a special contempt for Adler: “For Adler to not only
destroy the magazine, but then hand it to the magazine to which it was supposed to be an
alternative, is the ultimate irony and the ultimate obscenity,” Lukas told the Post. He said
that in ten months, Adler had done nothing to support the business side of the magazine.
He called asking Adler to take over “the single biggest mistake” that the editorial staff of

476 “More Magazine Ends Publication to Join Journal at Columbia,” The New York Times,
July 22, 1978.
477 Larry Kramer, “ [MORE] Journalism Review Donated to Publisher of Its Rival,” The
Washington Post, July 22, 1978, A7.

241

More had ever made. But the magazine was probably never commercially viable, and its
end was probably inevitable, even if it had not come at the hands of James Adler. The
Post article mentioned that The Columbia Journalism Review was in talks with at least
one M ore staff member to come on board.

478

And with that irony, More came to an end. There had been 58 issues under the
original ownership. Michael Kramer had overseen 13 issues. Robert Friedman had put
out nine issues under the ownership o f James Adler. There had been six conventions, four
in New York, one in Washington D.C. and one in San Francisco. Circulation had peaked
at a little more than 20,000. Thousands more had attended the conventions. And maybe
the magazine had influenced the press that it covered. Certainly, it had managed to annoy
the media, the primary role o f a gadfly. The following chapter looks at two case studies of
the relationship between (MORE) and its primary target, The New York Times, to examine
the complicated influence that the journalism review had over the press.

m ibid.

242

Chapter 5: The Loyal Opposition: (MORE) and The Times
From the moment that (MORE) debuted in 1971, it was clear to some observers that
the new journalism review existed in large part to antagonize The New York Times. A
Newsweek article announcing the new review said that the lack of a journalism review
prior to (M ORE)’s launch was “a notable lapse for a city that is the nation’s television
center as well as the home o f its two leading newsmagazines and two o f its most
important dailies, The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal.” Newsweek (which,
yes, did call itself one o f the nation’s leading newsmagazines) then quoted Richard
Poliak, the founding editor, who said, “This is the town where the the targets are.”
Though none o f the major articles in the first issue o f (MORE) were specifically about
the Times, co-founder Tony Lukas had helped establish the magazine in part owing to his
frustration with the constraints of the institution that the Times had become, reinforcing a
particular culture o f un-self-questioning professionalism that a certain breed of reporter
found stifling. And in addition to Lukas and his former Times colleague David
Halberstam, the issue also featured an article by Charlotte Curtis, the editor of the paper’s
women’s page, as the section was still called in 1971.
Though none o f the major stories in the first issue o f (MORE) directly addressed the
Times, the interplay between the venerable watchdog newspaper and the gadfly that
would circle around it for the next eight years began with a short item in (MORE)’s
“Hellbox” column. Homer Bigart, the respected war correspondent who, (MORE) noted,
was a year from retirement, had covered the court martial of Lieutenant William Calley,
who had been convicted for his role in the My Lai massacre. The Hellbox column ran
Bigart’s original copy and the edited line that ran in the Times side by side. In the

243

original, Bigart made the point, in two paragraphs, that despite being convicted of the
heinous crime, he had been treated gently by the army as he was escorted out of court.
The edited version was a single line saying that Calley had not been handcuffed, but
without any of the nuance or context that Bigart had put into his report. The editing
incident at the Times has clear connections to some o f the battles Lukas had with his own
editors at the paper, and also foreshadows the snarky relationship that (MORE) and the
Times would have over the next eight years.
A.M. Rosenthal, the managing editor of The New York Times in the period, kept
several files on (MORE), and an examination of those files, along with other sources,
including oral history interviews with (MORE) editors and contributors, shed some light
on the relationship between an organ of press criticism and the mainstream publications
that it covers. That relationship is complicated, at times indirect and subtle, but also
influential. This chapter argues that (MORE) did, in fact, influence the behavior of its
favorite and most consistent target in significant ways. Though the chapter will outline
(M ORE)’s coverage of the Times in general, it focuses on two case studies about which
substantial records can be found: the influence (MORE) had on the standardization o f the
New York Times correction policy and (M ORE)’s revealing of the identities o f Times
employees who had participated in a confidential academic book project by a scholar of
organizational behavior— a book project that found the paper’s hierarchy to be stubbornly
resistant to change and self-examination, in exactly the ways that Tony Lukas and Homer
Bigart might have complained about.
One might expect that the organized press would be less than thrilled about
having to deal with a new publication that existed almost entirely to point out its flaws.

The New York Times, in its relationship with (MORE), was certainly no exception to this.
But the nuanced relationship that the Times, led editorially by managing editor A.M.
Rosenthal, differs to some extent from the relationships that (MORE) had with some of
the other news organizations it covered regularly. One point o f contrast, The New York
Post, is instructive.
Dorothy Schiff had been an early, if conflicted supporter o f (MORE), seemingly
proud that Woody Woodward, a protege o f hers, had left to become the publisher of his
own magazine, while also making sure to distance The Post from whatever editorial
policies this new anti-institutional journalism review might espouse. That caution appears
to have proven immediately effective, as (M ORE)’s publication o f a memo from their
reporter Ted Poston (detailed in chapter two o f this dissertation) ended any sympathy she
might have had for it. She drafted a two-page letter to the editor which she never sent.
Her main complaints are that Poston’s name was misspelled, that Poston’s letter and her
response were quoted in part, and that she had never said that The P ost’s defense o f the
case might cost more than $100,000 in legal fees, as a sidebar had claimed.479 A few days
later, Schiff received a memo from her assistant, Jean Gillette, saying that a reporter
named Claudia Dreifus had called, asking for comment on a story she was writing about
employment conditions for women in the media 480 Even though her inquiry had nothing
directly to do with Artis/Poston case, Dreifus became the first (MORE) reporter to be
flatly turned down for an interview by Schiff. Once she had been angered by the Poston

479 Dorothy Schiff, Letter to the Editor o f (MORE) (Draft), September 22, 1971, Dorothy
Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4—1977,
May 23. New York Public Library Archives and Manuscripts Division.
480 Memorandum from Jean Gillette to Dorothy Schiff, September 28, 1971. Dorothy
Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4—1977,
May 23. New York Public Library Archives and Manuscripts Division.

245

piece, she shut (MORE) out completely. Schiff called Dick Poliak that afternoon and
asked her assistant to monitor and transcribe the call. In the transcript, the estimate of The
P ost9s legal fees is her main concern. Poliak stood by his reporter, but offered to correct
the mistake. Schiff replied that she was “going to write you a letter anyway, because there
are many, many other things in the article I need to correct.”
Poliak: In other words, you no longer will speak to anyone associated with
(MORE)
Schiff: On the grounds that I don’t dare to since this happened and I don’t
know how experienced these reporters are, because if they are going to get things
that terribly wrong and damaging, I can’t take the chance. Normally, being in this
business, I talk to reporters because I don’t like it when people w on’t talk to us,
but I can’t take the chance.”481
Schiff drafted another version of her letter, which was significantly terser and
more curt than her first draft. It was only a series o f questions to which she demanded yes
or no answers. The article, this draft asserted, was “replete with factual errors, half truths
and unchecked statements. Because so much space would be required to call attention to
all the mistakes, I shall confine m yself to a half a dozen questions.”482 This letter upped
the ante from her earlier draft, which had been written before her conversation with
Poliak. She and Post editor Paul Sann exchanged memos that afternoon about revisions to
the draft, but by the next day, she had changed her mind about sending it. “Why make a
contribution to (MORE), even in the form o f a letter signed by me?” she said in a memo
sent to Sann and James Wechsler. And she hand wrote on top of the memo: “Not going to

481

Transcript o f telephone conversation between Dorothy Schiff and Richard Poliak,
September 22, 1971, Dorothy Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE)
Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23. New York Public Library Archives and
Manuscripts Division.
482 Dorothy Schiff, Letter to “Hellbox” (Draft), October 4, 1971, Dorothy Schiff Papers,
Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23. New
York Public Library Archives and Manuscripts Division.

246

dignify by contributing a letter.”

483

And Claudia Dreifus, who was a freelance reporter,

found herself cut off from The Post entirely, no matter who her employer at the time. At
the end of the same month, Dreifus called on assignment from Ms. When the memo
reached Schiff’s desk, she scrawled across it in dull pencil: “She’s from “More.” Do not
call her back. No reply.”484
When Abe Rosenthal of the Times first encountered the upstart journalism review
(MORE), he also bristled at the idea that these journalists— one o f whom was the reporter
J. Anthony Lukas, whom he had supervised— would try to tell him how to run his
newspaper, the great trust that he had been asked to take care of. But he never reacted
quite as strongly as Dorothy Schiff did, in the way that she cut off all access to The Post.
Instead, the ideas that (MORE) advocated eventually found their way into the pages of
The Times. Not directly, but subtly and through a process o f negotiated levels of
authority. This chapter looks closely at two instances of interaction between (MORE) and
The Times to demonstrate how that relationship worked. (M ORE)’s influence was
indirect, but real, and these two episodes give examples of how the process worked. The
first looks at (M ORE)’s attempt to get The Times to run corrections in a dedicated space
on a prominent page o f the paper every day, as a show o f accountability and transparency.
The second incident involves a (MORE) article that put names to a confidential study of
the management style o f The Times. This section shows the overlap between the
academic findings of a scholar who studied the newspaper and the journal o f press

483

Dorothy Schiff, Memorandum to Paul Sann and James Wechsler, October 4, 1971.
Dorothy Schiff Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4 1977, May 23. New York Public Library Archives and Manuscripts Division.
484 Missed phone call memorandum to Dorothy Schiff, October 29, 1971. Dorothy Schiff
Papers, Editorial Files, Box 38, Folder (MORE) Magazine, 1971, May 4-1977, May 23.
New York Public Library Archives and Manuscripts Division.

247

criticism that pursued a similar goal o f press reform. It shows that the public
accountability to which (MORE) could hold The Times was more effective in showing
the newspaper that it could not exempt itself from the kind of scrutiny it applied to the
rest o f the world. (MORE) did for The Times what The Times did to other institutions. It
forced The Times to scrutinize itself.

A Culture of Self-Correction: A.M. Rosenthal, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Press
Criticism and the Birth of the Contemporary Newspaper Correction in The New
York Times
Richard Poliak, the founding editor of (MORE), has said that the most tangible
accomplishment of that journalism review was to pressure the Times to standardize its
corrections policy, and while it might seem odd at first that the paper of record was not
regularly publishing corrections as late as 1971, the fact is, they were not. To newspaper
readers who don’t remember the 1960s, newspaper corrections, run in some semiprominent spot in the paper, seem like an institution, something as old as letters to the
editor or box scores. It doesn’t take much research however, to discover that this is
wrong. A quick flip through the go-to book on corrections, Craig Silverman’s Regret the
Error, will tell you that the modern newspaper correction began in The New York Times
in 1972, two years after a memorandum that A.M. Rosenthal, whom Silverman identifies
as the paper’s executive editor, sent to his department heads calling for such a move.
From 1972 on, in Silverman’s account, “the paper anchored its corrections in one place
inside the paper: on the inside o f the front page. Now, the logic went, people knew where
to find them every day.” The problem with this story, as irony would seem to dictate, is

248

that it is in need o f at least three corrections, two o f which don’t affect the broader
cultural and professional significance o f the story. But that third needed correction
provides an opportunity to more fully explore how The New York Times came to begin
running corrections regularly, in a prominent place in the paper, under a consistent
headline.
For the record on those first two, factual corrections: The corrections that ran
beginning on June 2, 1972 (the birthdate o f the contemporary newspaper correction),
were published not on page A2 o f the Times, but instead in the last column o f the paper’s
news summary and index, on the now-defunct “second front” of the paper, the first page
o f the paper’s second section, before it moved into the more familiar multi-section format
o f today, where each news department gets its own physical division o f the paper. The
corrections section didn’t move to pages A2 and A3 until almost 15 years later— on
October 6, 1986. And while Abe Rosenthal did, o f course, serve as executive editor o f the
Times, he didn’t assume that title until 1977. From 1970 to 1977, he was the paper’s
managing editor (though for most o f his term as managing editor, the title of executive
editor was nonexistent, making Rosenthal the top editor, regardless o f title).
But those are somewhat minor factual corrections. Had they occurred in the
Times, they could have been dealt with in the regular corrections box without much
trouble. They don’t change the point o f the story—that something new was going on
here, a format for corrections that had never (or at least only rarely) been seen before. As
Silverman puts it:
At the time, the Times, like many other publications in North America, ran its
corrections throughout the paper. They would appear in every section, in different
places, written in different ways, and often under different headings. If you read
the initial error, the chances o f your happening upon the correction were slim. It

249

was accuracy roulette.485
Regardless of whether the corrections ran on A2 or on the second front, the point remains
that their consolidation changed their meaning in the paper, and it is unimportant for that
story whether Rosenthal was managing editor or executive editor. However, the third
required emendation o f Silverman’s account of the birth o f corrections would need more
than a simple correction. It would need something more like the Editors’ Note, a format
Rosenthal introduced to the paper in 1983 (after he had become the executive editor). The
Editors’ Note allows for the paper to “amplify articles or rectify what the editors consider
significant lapses o f fairness, balance or perspective.” And the simple story that
Silverman tells lacks perspective and context. Abe Rosenthal does deserve credit for
standardizing the format for corrections, but the idea did not spring fully formed from his
forehead like Athena from the head o f Zeus, despite the versions o f the story told by
Silverman; by former assistant managing editor Allan Siegal (Silverman’s main source)
and even by Rosenthal’s Associated Press obituary.
Silverman’s idea that Rosenthal’s 1970 memo led to the standardization of
corrections likely stems from assumptions he made after reading his source, the
introduction to a 2002 compilation o f amusing New York Times corrections called Kill
D uck Before Serving. Former Times assistant managing editor and standards editor Allan
Siegal wrote the introduction. Though Siegal gets his former boss’s title and the location
o f the original corrections right, the way he describes the relationship between the 1970
memo and the regular printing of corrections “two years later” may very well have led
Craig Silverman to conclude that there was a direct connection, even though Siegal likely

485

Craig Silverman, Regret the Error: H ow M edia Mistakes Pollute the Press and
Imperil Free Speech (New York: Sterling, 2007), 229.

250

intended only to note a temporal relationship, not a causal one:
Perfect accuracy is elusive, but accountability need not be. Years ago, reporters
sometimes appeased a complainer by burying a correction in their next story. No
longer. In 1970, A. M. Rosenthal, then managing editor, told his department heads
that “corrections or denials or amplifications don’t really catch up with the
original because they are not given proper display.” Two years later, he created a
reserved space where readers could always find the corrections, just below the
News Summary (then on the front o f the second section, since moved to Page 2).
The publisher, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, wondered in a memo whether “we are not
over-penalizing ourselves,” but he overcame his misgivings after The Times won
applause in the industry and other newspapers followed its lead.486
This brief account seems to have become the basis for our understanding o f the advent of
regular corrections in the Times, and it is not incorrect—though it is incomplete. A fuller
version o f the story brings together Rosenthal, two rival journalism reviews and Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, at the time an adviser to Richard Nixon. And this version of the story
puts the story o f corrections in the context o f broader movements toward press
accountability and self-criticism that have broadened and continued even up to the
present. For the purposes o f this dissertation, the story o f how The New York Times began
to standardize its corrections policy also demonstrates the subtle, indirect way in which a
journal of criticism can affect the publication it is intending to make better through that
criticism. The Times does not want to be seen taking the advice of the anti-institutional
journalism review, even if it sees the wisdom in that advice, and so a slow process o f idea
filtering, almost as if to launder it from its source, takes place. While credit for the idea
may actually be due to a venerable scholar and politician, the direct suggestion came
from (MORE), and the Times didn’t want to pay attention to (MORE) or give it anything
to gloat about.
486 Allan M. Siegal, Introduction, in K ill D uck Before Serving: R ed Faces at The New
York Times, ed. Linda Amster and Dylan Loeb McClain (New York: St. M artin’s Griffin,
2002), xiv.

251

Moynihan’s scholarly tantrum and the rather adolescent journalism review
One o f the stories in the pilot issue o f (MORE) was a long response to an essay
published in Commentary a few months earlier, written by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who
was then working as an adviser to the Nixon administration.

487

The main (MORE) essay,

titled “Moynihan’s Scholarly Tantrum,” was written by George Reedy, who had served as
press secretary to Lyndon Johnson. But (MORE) also ran a second, shorter item based on
Moynihan’s essay— an editor’s note, on the inside back page of the newsprint magazine,
at the end o f a column (MORE) called “Hellbox” :
Although much of Daniel P. Moynihan’s Commentary essay on the Presidency
and the press seems at best wrongheaded and at worst petulant..., his final plea
that the press establish a systematic method of self-correction is altogether valid.
The editorial, which was written by (M ORE)’s editor, Richard Poliak, 488 then
quotes from Moynihan’s essay before continuing:
Traditionally, newspapers, magazines and television stations have been
reluctant to run corrections for fear of losing credibility with their readers and
viewers. But a system o f self-correction, o f course, would have just the opposite
effect, conceding (to no one’s shame) that journalism even at its finest is an
inexact art. Equally important, a regular process of correction (at the end o f the
network news shows, at the beginning of each day’s “A” wire, on page two o f the
Times every day) would make reporters and editors far more accountable than
they now are and help put an end to much o f the sloppy journalism that pervades
the press.
By way o f setting what we hope will not be too frequent an example, in
future issues we will devote this final Hellbox item to correcting our own
mistakes.489

487

Daniel P. Moynihan, “The Presidency & the Press,” Commentary, March 1971, 41—

52.
488

Richard Poliak in discussion with the author, February 21, 2012.
489 Hellbox, (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1971, 23.

252

This editorial goes beyond Moynihan’s essay to suggest a format for prominently
displaying corrections—the “standing head,” or regular column and headline, and
(MORE) may be the first publication to have done so.
Just over a year later, another Hellbox item in (MORE) called attention to the fact
that the scrappy magazine’s main adversary, The New York Times, had finally realized
that a corrections box, published in a predictable part o f the paper under a recurring
headline, would actually add credibility to the paper, rather than detract from it. The
editorial’s tone is hardly crowing though, and only the first sentence gives any suggestion
that (MORE) might have been taking any credit for the innovation: “When we started
(MORE) eleven issues ago, we promised to devote this final Hellbox item to the
systematic correction o f our own mistakes,” it reads, then quotes from its own earlier
editorial, in which it challenged other publications to follow its lead. The overall tone is
congratulatory (if snarky):
There has not exactly been a pell-mell rush in the media to establish fixed, highly
visible correction boxes. But at least The New York Times has now come along.
Until several weeks ago, Times policy (if that is the word) called for the running
o f corrections in easily overlooked nooks and crannies o f the paper under the type
o f headline usually reserved for fillers. Now, managing editor A.M. Rosenthal has
instructed that corrections appear regularly under a bold, boxed headline at the
end o f the index on the second front page. And if the correction requires more
space than that portion o f the index permits, it will be keyed to another page in the
paper and run there at length. The rest o f the media, please copy.490
There is not much self-satisfaction here, but more than 40 years later, Richard
Poliak remembered this as one o f (MORE)’s most important accomplishments. “I think
we helped start a movement that has taken hold and the press is better for it,” Poliak said.
I think the movement o f self-criticism, which has become established throughout
journalism today was basically started by the early journalism reviews, and I think

490 Hellbox, (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1971, 21.

253

we are partly responsible for the correction movement that began after
Moynihan’s piece. Because he didn’t really throw down the gauntlet, and we did.
We said w e’re gonna do it, starting at the next issue, and you guys should too.
And eventually they did.491
Could Poliak be correct? Could (MORE) have pressed the Times into running
corrections under a standing headline? Was Rosenthal even aware o f the startup
magazine? Poliak has a point in that his editorial does directly challenge other
publications in a way that Moynihan’s Commentary essay does not. Instead, Moynihan
weaves together a complicated argument about objectivity, epistemology and
ombudsmen, and even his two examples o f mistakes that should have been corrected take
three whole pages o f the magazine to explain. The closest Moynihan comes to a
prescription for correcting corrections is this: “As to the press itself, one thing seems
clear. It should become much more open about acknowledging mistakes.”492 Because
Moynihan, who was more scholar and policy wonk than newspaperman, is vague in his
prescriptions, the (MORE) Hellbox item may actually be the first statement of the idea
that corrections should always run in the same place.
Moynihan’s quasi-scholarly essay is important for the development o f correction
policies however, in that it does provide the intellectual framework for the arguments
about the ethics of correction. Moynihan puts it this way:
The final, and by far the most important, circumstance o f American journalism
relevant to this discussion is the absence o f a professional tradition o f self­
correction. The mark o f any developed profession is the practice of correcting
mistakes, by whomsoever they are made. This practice is of course the great
invention o f Western science. Ideally, it requires an epistemology which is shared
by all respected members o f the profession, so that when a mistake is discovered
it can be established as a mistake to the entire professional community. Ideally,
also, no discredit is involved: to the contrary, honest mistakes are integral to the

491 Richard Poliak in discussion with the author, September 8, 2011.
492 Moynihan, “The Presidency & The Press,” 51.

254

process o f advancing the field. Journalism will never attain to such condition.
Nevertheless, there is a range of subject matter about which reasonable men can
and will agree, and within this range American journalism, even of the higher
order, is often seriously wide o f the mark.493
These are the same sentiments that have made their way through (MORE) and
through Rosenthal’s high-minded memos right up to the language Craig Silverman uses
in describing Rosenthal’s accomplishments in his book Regret the Error.
Unquestionably, Rosenthal knew of Moynihan’s essay. Rosenthal’s papers
indicate that he and Moynihan exchanged several letters both before and after the
Commentary essay. Furthermore, Rosenthal received a copy of a long letter from fellow
Times editor Max Frankel to Moynihan in response to the Commentary essay. Frankel’s
response is balanced in much the same way as Moynihan’s essay, with corrections getting
only a small bit of attention toward the end o f the 15-page, single-spaced typescript. “In
one sense, o f course, we correct ourselves every morning, a requirement and an
opportunity that most other institutions, including the Presidency, lack,” Frankel writes.
For the most part, he dismisses Moynihan’s arguments, but does acknowledge that “there
is need, in another sense, for more correction or expansion and amendment o f what we
report.”494 More importantly though, the copy o f the letter in Rosenthal’s files shows that
he was aware o f Moynihan’s essay, and Frankel’s attached handwritten note on Times
stationery also indicates that Rosenthal had been thinking of the essay even before
Frankel shared his response. “This went off just an hour before you called about

4yi Ibid., 46^17.
494 Max Frankel to Daniel Patrick Moynihan, March 5, 1971. New York Public Library,
New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929, Box 30,
Folder 42: Daniel Patrick Moynihan.

255

Moynihan’s piece tonight,” Frankel’s note, which is dated March 15, 1971, begins.495
This is the same month that “The Presidency & The Press” was published, and three
months before (MORE) would make its debut. Also, perhaps not coincidentally, this is
about two weeks before Rosenthal would issue his reminder to the news staff about
corrections policy, the one that focused more on high-minded ideals o f journalism ethics,
and that closed with this: “What I am trying to do, simply, is to insure attention in each
case to the elemental but essential question o f journalistic fairness.”496 And as far as
Moynihan’s influence on Rosenthal, Allan Siegal, Rosenthal’s former deputy, writes that
“Rosenthal was an admirer and friend of Moynihan, and he tended to adopt suggestions
from people he admired, though he did not often convey the source to his associates.”497
But M oynihan’s essay and Rosenthal’s subsequent memo were about ideals, not
policy, and if (MORE) did pioneer the idea o f the regular corrections column, and if Abe
Rosenthal had been thinking about corrections for at least two years, and if he knew of
(M ORE)’s idea, why would he not implement it in the summer o f 1971, when Richard
Poliak proposed it, instead o f waiting a year? The simplest answer would be that in the
spring and summer o f 1971, Rosenthal was preoccupied with preparations for and dealing
with the legal and cultural aftermath o f the publication o f the Pentagon Papers. A dense
section of Rosenthal’s journals contains a detailed account of the months o f research
leading up to publication. Additionally, a letter from Rosenthal to, coincidentally,

495 Note from Max Frankel to Abe Rosenthal March 15, 1971, New York Public Library,
New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929, Box 30,
Folder 42: Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
496 Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to: Mr. Topping; Bullpen; Mr. Greenfield; Mr.
Gelb; Mr. Roberts; Mr. Mullaney; Miss Curtis; Mr. Roach; Mr. Shepard, December 21,
1970, A.M. Rosenthal Papers 1959-2004, MssCol 17930, New York Public Library.
Series II: Journals, 1971-1986, Box 4, Vol. 1: 1971.
497 Allan M. Siegal, e-mail message to the author, March 14, 2012.

256

Moynihan, in response to one from Moynihan praising the Times'?, writing quality,
alludes to the pervasiveness of the Pentagon Papers in Rosenthal’s professional life: “I
must admit that in the last week or so, I haven’t paid a hell o f a lot of attention to literary
style,” Rosenthal wrote on June 24, 1971, “except as expressed by various benches.”498
Another possibility is that Rosenthal was reluctant to take a suggestion from
(MORE), a magazine he was aware of, at least by the time of the new corrections policy
in 1972, if not necessarily at its 1971 debut. As Allan Siegal writes in an email, “I believe
Rosenthal was NOT an admirer of (MORE), which he associated with New Left
sympathies that were anathema to him in the 60s and 70s 499 In addition, one o f the
founders o f (MORE) was J. Anthony Lukas, a Times reporter who had butted heads with
his editors when he was covering the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial in 1969.500 His
experience of being constrained by his editors led directly to conversations with Poliak
about starting (MORE).501 David Halberstam was also a contributor to the first issue of
the magazine, and Halberstam had also clashed with the Times over his reporting. Quite
possibly though, Rosenthal missed the first issue o f (MORE), distracted as he would have
been by the Pentagon Papers. By the following summer, however, the magazine had
forced its way into his consciousness. In a memo to his deputy Seymour Topping,
Rosenthal noted that he would be away from the paper during the American Newspaper

498 A.M. Rosenthal to Daniel Patrick Moynihan, June 24, 1971. New York Public
Library, New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929,
Box 30, Folder 42: Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
499 Allan M. Siegal, e-mail message to the author, March 14 2012.
500 Lukas published a more complete account of the trial in his book The Barnyard
Epithet and Other Obscenities: Notes on the Chicago Conspiracy Trial (New York:
Harper & Row, 1970).
501 Richard Poliak, in discussion with the author, September 8, 2011.

257

Publishers’ Association meeting (which he was not attending). During the ANPAmeeting,
(MORE) planned to hold a “counter-convention” across town.
As I have written to Arthur Gelb, we ought to cover the “More” thing on a strict
news basis. I would appreciate it if you would watch the copy on this. There will
be a number o f people like Halberstam, Zion and Lukas, who will be spouting off.
If they have anything important to say, we should print it. But we should feel
under no obligation to print something just because they are talking. Nor should
we feel that simply because they attack the papers, probably including this one,
that we have an inherent obligation to print what they have to say. We should be
fair but not allow ourselves to be used by them.
Halberstam, Lukas and Sidney Zion, who had also written for the Times, were all
scheduled to appear on a panel called “Why Journalists Leave Daily Newspapers.” 5 02 In
1971, Zion had also publicly revealed the identity o f Daniel Ellsberg, the source o f the
Pentagon Papers. Rosenthal never grew to respect (MORE)’s work. In a 1976 letter to
Michael Kramer, the new editor-publisher who took over from Poliak and Lukas, he
called (MORE) “professionally rather adolescent” and said that its coverage was less a
reflection o f reality than “o f the psychic problems and nastiness o f some o f the people
who used to put out” the magazine.503
Perhaps, then, Rosenthal’s lack o f respect for (MORE) made it difficult for him to
accept the magazine’s suggestions, even if he liked those suggestions, and even if they
fell in line with his own thinking on corrections. Or perhaps the Pentagon Papers
distracted him from making policy changes at a time when other crises faced the paper.
But Rosenthal had read Moynihan’s essay, which introduced some o f the ideas he

502

Program for the A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention, (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1972, 23.
503 A.M. Rosenthal to Michael Kramer, October 6, 1976. New York Public Library, New
York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929, Box 87, Folder
8: MORE (Magazine) 1972-1976.

258

incorporated into his own explanations of the Times'?, correction policy, and he knew of
(MORE), which first called upon the paper to publish them under a standing headline.

The Rosenthal record: The Times timeline on corrections
The first anchored correction in The New York Times ran on June 2, 1972, a
Friday. Except for its place in newspaper history, the correction itself seems less than
momentous:
The obituary of Theodore L. Bates in yesterday’s New York Times reported that
Mr. Bates had once briefly served as a consultant to Investors Overseas Services.
Actually, it was T. Rosser Reeves, a former chairman of Ted Bates & Co., who
worked for the mutual fund organization.504
The correction appeared, as A1 Siegal described, at the end o f the News Summary
and Index, a feature the Times had been running for some time on the second front o f the
paper. On June 2, 1972, that meant page 39 o f the paper over all, but the placement was
prominent for two reasons: first, because of the way the paper was produced at the time,
there were no sections in the same way there are in 2012. Arts, sports and business news
appeared in discrete areas of the newspaper, but they did not each get their own pullout
section. They were folded together into two folios o f paper, which made the second front
the second most prominent page in the paper (because the Times is a broadsheet, the back
pages o f the sections aren’t quite prime editorial real estate the way they would be in a
tabloid). Although the first correction appears at the bottom of the page, it is noticeable,
under a boxed headline, reading “correction” in all caps. The other reason the location
chosen for corrections was prominent is that editors knew that people sought out the
News Summary.

504 Correction, N ew York Times, June 2, 1972.

259

Over the first five months of 1972, before the new policy went into effect, the
paper had followed its usual practice o f scattering corrections throughout the paper,
though there was obviously some logic behind their placement, at least sometimes. A
correction running on the television listings page on March 9 corrected a mistake that had
run on the television listings page (the actress Peggy Ashcroft had been misidentified in a
photo caption as Helen Haye).505 But sometimes, the placement seemed to be dictated as
much by where filler was needed, as in the case o f a dateline correction for an
international news item that was sandwiched between the bottom of the bridge column
and an ad for a captain’s bed.506
On June 1, the day before the new corrections policy went into effect, the Times
ran three corrections, and true to practice, they were scattered throughout the paper. One
was a correction of the misidentification o f Burt Kennedy as the director of “Fool’s
Parade” (it was actually Andrew V. MacLaglen), running on the same page as the film
and theater listings.507 Another listed the wrong winner of the discus throw in a sectional
championship o f the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association, and ran eight pages
after the film listings, on a sports page beneath a story on Lee Trevino’s performance at
the Kemper Open. 5 08 Another seven pages after that, between business stories and public
notices of stock offerings, the final item corrected a typo in a story about a lawsuit
concerning franchisees of Chicken Delight, Inc.509 So when the new policy went into
effect the next morning, these somewhat haphazard-seeming corrections would have been

505 New York Times, March 9, 1972. n.b.: not the better known actress Helen Hayes.
506 New York Times, January 15, 1972.
5i)1 New York Times, June 1 1972.
508 Ibid.

260

consolidated— losing their attachment to the general subject matter they were associated
with, but gaining visibility and predictability.
Rosenthal began the process o f changing to the new style in a memo to several
news department editors: Seymour Topping, Lewis Jordan, Lawrence Hauck and Socrates
“Chick” Butsikares. He laid out what appears, from the memo, to be his own, original
idea o f consolidating the corrections, and asks for suggestions about implementation:
Every editor is entitled to a few bugs and I’m buggy about corrections.
Actually, this is a matter that concerns a great many readers as my mail shows. I
don’t think we have done right by corrections and I think it would be to The
Times ’s credit if we took some leadership in this.
I think that we are a little too stingy about printing corrections. I think that
they are too small under the K-head format, that they tend to get buried at the
bottom of columns, and that they are difficult to find. I think we have an
obligation to our readers to do something about this.
I have some suggestions in mind that I am putting to you. Perhaps you
have better ones, and I hope you do.
I think we should have a new typographical format for corrections, either a
box head, or preferably something distinctive and confined only to corrections,
perhaps an overline type thing.
I also think that we should have an anchored place in the paper for
corrections— someplace fairly prominent, perhaps page two or the op-obit page,
or even the second front so that reader would know where to look to find any
correction.
This would not preclude us from giving more prominent display to
corrections o f a substantive matter when we consider it necessary.
Please do put your minds to this as soon as possible. I would like to put
some variation o f this into effect within a week.510
The process, as it turns out, took less than a day to implement; the memo is dated
June 1. Another memo, dated the next day, went out from Lewis Jordan, one o f the
editors Rosenthal sent the first memo to, but addressed to all of the paper’s news desks,
as well the editors o f the news summary and index and to the composing room, where the
paper’s layouts were pasted up:

510 Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to Mr. Topping, Mr. Jordan, Mr. Hauck and Mr.
Butsikares. June 1, 1972. Private collection o f Allan M. Siegal.

261

From now on, all brief corrections of errors that have appeared in the
paper will, whatever their nature and whatever desk is the source, be carried at the
end o f the News Summary and Index (as one was in today’s paper).
Such corrections should first be called to the attention of an editor in the
Bull Pen. Then they should be sent to the composing room marked indent and
with the following slug line:
INDEX - add at end
In the case o f certain longer corrections that require more prominent
display than can be provided in the Index, a short paragraph giving the subject
and the number of the page on which the actual correction appears will be carried
under the CORRECTION head in the Index. A reference paragraph might read as
follows:
A correction o f an error in a dispatch in the New York Times yesterday
concerning the fighting in Vietnam appears on page 10.
Reference paragraphs should also be called to the attention o f the Bull
Pen.
The desks will, o f course, continue to be responsible for checking the
corrections or the reference paragraphs in the Index in the first edition.511
And with this memo, a one-day experiment in how best to display
corrections became the policy o f The New York Times.
However, this leaves open the question o f the 1970 memo that Allan Siegal refers
to in the foreword to K ill D uck Before Serving, forming the basis for the story o f the
Times'?, correction policy. In an email, Siegal writes, “I wish I knew where that 1970
reference came from. Either it was a typo or there was another memo, now lost.” 512 But
Siegal has a reputation for being a careful editor— he was an editor of The New York
Times M anual o f Style and Usage. The memo he referred to appears to be one that
Rosenthal sent on December 21, 1970 to eight editors and the “bullpen,” the term the
Times used for an area where top editors collaborated to make decisions about the next
morning’s paper (and also to describe those editors). This memo is far removed in time

511 Memorandum from Lewis Jordan to ALL Desks and Summary— Thomas Ennis;
Index— Martin Drucker; Composing Room, June 2, 1972. A.M. Rosenthal Papers 19592004, MssCol 17930, New York Public Library. Series II: Journals, 1971-1986, Box 4,
Vol. 2: 1972.
512
Allan M. Siegal, e-mail m essage to the author, M arch 17, 2012.

262

and in specificity from the June 1, 1972 memo that spurred Rosenthal’s team o f editors
into creating the anchored corrections box, but it is not at all distant in intent:
One o f the problems that has troubled all of us, I think, is giving adequate
attention and display to corrections of stories that turn out to be wrong in whole or in
major part. It happens on The Times as on other papers that the corrections or
amplifications don’t really catch up with the original because they are not given proper
display.
I know we have all had this in mind and that our record is pretty good but pretty
good is not good enough. I would appreciate it if, from now on, all corrections, denials or
major amplifications o f important stories are brought to my personal attention so that a
careful decision can be made on how to play them. I am not talking about minor
corrections which will continue to be handled in the usual way but about stories involving
corrections o f substance.513
So while Rosenthal had apparently not hit on the idea o f consolidating corrections
by 1970, he had at least been thinking about the problem of how best to emphasize the
importance o f corrections that early in his career as managing editor. And it remained on
his mind between the 1970 memo and the 1972 memo: on March 31, 1971, he sent
another memo to several top editors that reads as much as a disquisition on the ethics of
journalism as it does a directive to his staff:
There are three areas involving fair play in which all newspapers, including our
own, do not, generally speaking, live up to their own standards.

513 Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to: Mr. Topping; Bullpen; Mr. Greenfield; Mr.
Gelb; Mr. Roberts; Mr. Mullaney; Miss Curtis; Mr. Roach; Mr. Shepard, December 21,
1970. A.M. Rosenthal Papers 1959-2004, MssCol 17930, New York Public Library.
Series II: Journals, 1971-1986, Box 4, Vol. 1: 1971.

263

One is making sure that a correction gets decent display. The second is making
sure that a denial o f a charge gets decently equal treatment with the charge itself. The
third is making sure that when a man is acquitted of charges against him, the acquittal
gets as much attention as the original charges.514
The memo goes on to remind the editors o f the policy of bringing major
corrections to his attention, but it is notable more for its high-minded tone than for any
policy change. The memo appears to be most directly triggered by a less-than-prominent
correction the times had given four days earlier, but certainly Rosenthal has already
decided that corrections are an important and underplayed part o f the newspaper he was
editing by the time he authored it. They were so important, in fact, that Rosenthal stapled
copies o f his December 1970 memo and this March 1971 memo into his personal journal,
a hodgepodge o f news clippings, memoranda and more traditional journal entries bound
into plastic three-ring binders that were assembled to document his time at the Times, and
perhaps done so with an eye to his legacy, o f which corrections have become a part, even
if, as the historical record shows, he didn’t invent the Times's new format out o f whole
cloth or entirely by himself.

Inducing labor
If The New York Times gave birth to a new corrections format on June 2, 1972, the
baby had been gestating at least since 1970, about a year after Rosenthal took the

514 Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to: Bullpen; Mr. Gelb; Mr. Greenfield; Mr.
Roberts; Mr. Alden; Miss Curtis; Mr. Frankel; Mr. Lieberman; Mr. Morris; Mr.
Mullaney; Mr. Roach; Mr. Shepard; Mr. Witkin, March 31, 1971. A.M. Rosenthal Papers
1959-2004, MssCol 17930, New York Public Library. Series II: Journals, 1971-1986,
Box 4, Vol. 1: 1971.

264

managing editor position. Birth is a labored metaphor, so to speak, but in this case, the
metaphor is Rosenthal’s. Presumably on June 1, 1972, someone named “Steph” (perhaps
a secretary or news assistant) gave Abe Rosenthal a copy o f a typescript written by
Edward W. Barrett, director of the Communications Institute. Barrett had written a piece
about corrections and Steph’s attached note asked Rosenthal to look over the draft by that
afternoon. Rosenthal’s detailed response is dated June 1:
I think that your piece about corrections touches on a most interesting and
important subject. But, as I said on the phone, I think that your thrust is a little
awry. The thrust is that The Times has not been doing anything about this and
should take leadership.
Actually, this is a subject that we have not only been talking about but
moving on in recent months. I share the feeling that The Times, like other
newspapers, has not given enough attention or prominence to corrections.
We have already taken substantial steps. We ran at least one correction on
the front page. We have run a variety o f corrections in box head form. Standing
instructions have gone out from me to all desks that any correction dealing with a
substantive matter must be taken up directly with me so that a decision can be
made as to whether the correction should get special attention and prominence.
Furthermore, we have been discussing entirely new techniques of
displaying corrections. What we will do is something that, as far as I know, no
other newspaper has done.
We have devised a special typographical format that will be used only for
corrections, abandoning the old K-head format. See the attached sample. We have
gone one step further, and an important one. We plan to anchor the corrections in
one o f the most prominent positions in the paper - the second front. I had the
sample made so that you can see that not only is the correction type prominent but
that the anchored position entirely changes the quality o f the correction, as far as
calling it to the reader’s attention is concerned. I think that before long people will
be turning to this to see what the correction o f the day is!
We have also decided that we will not allow this new prominence in type
and display to prevent us from giving even more prominence to a correction when
it deserves it. That is, if a correction deserves a spread display, we will give it that
space and call attention to the story under the correction box on the second
front.515

515 A.M. Rosenthal to Edward W. Barrett, Director o f the Communications Institute, June
1, 1972. New York Public Library, New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal
papers, MssCol 17929, Box 73, Folder 3: Errors, Complaints and Corrections: Policies
and Procedures.

265

The attached sample that Rosenthal refers to shows the corrections box at the end
o f the news summary and index, as it would appear the next day. But the text for the
sample is the correction about the director o f the film “Fool’s Parade,” a correction that
had appeared in print only that morning. Clearly, even if the staff of the Times had been
working on this project “in recent months,” this mock-up had only been prepared that
day. And of course, June 1 was also the day that Rosenthal sent a memo to his top editors
telling them o f “his” idea and asking for their feedback. So either the memo was merely a
reminder to his staff o f an ongoing project, or, as the memo seems to read, this was the
first time Rosenthal had mentioned these key typographical changes, and his insinuation
to Barrett that this had been a long time in coming was a face-saving exaggeration.
At the end o f his typewritten letter, Rosenthal scrawled a handwritten postscript:
“As you may have seen, we started tonight. The Times editors are the parents o f the new
approach but you certainly helped induce labor!”
When Barrett’s piece appeared, it ran in the July/August 1972 issue o f The
Columbia Journalism Review, the older, stodgier, more establishment-friendly rival to
[More].516 The draft copy o f the piece had included a call for ‘forthright, well-displayed
correction” o f errors, and points out that CJR had been advocating improvements in
corrections since 1968, though the earlier article is not specific about asking for a fixed,
prominent corrections box.517 Barrett added two paragraphs toward the end o f the final
printed article, applauding the beginning of its new corrections policy, and noting that
Rosenthal had been shown a draft o f the article. But he still wanted to see more, including

516 Edward W. Barrett, “Self-Coddling on Corrections,” Columbia Journalism Review,
July/August, 1972, 47-49.
517 Edward W. Barrett, “Editorial Notebook: Department o f Correction,” Columbia
Journalism Review, Spring, 1968, 35.

266

an “unfinished business” column that would allow for letters o f clarification to be printed
more regularly. It remains unclear whether or not Barrett had read either Pat M oynihan’s
Commentary essay or the subsequent (MORE) editorial, but he at least had read a
common ancestor, a piece o f press criticism written for The New York Times M agazine by
the Times editorial writer A.H. Raskin, an essay that Moynihan cites specifically, too. 518
At any rate, it was, in the end, a journalism review that pushed the Times to begin running
corrections regularly, but it w asn’t the impish (MORE), but the more palatable CJR that
finally got results from its prodding.
A.H. Raskin published his critique o f the press in The New York Times Magazine
in 1967, and that lofty platform allowed for Raskin’s essay to become one o f the
touchstones of the journalistic accountability movement. O f course, it wasn’t the
beginning of that movement. Notably, o f course, the Hutchins Commission report in 1947
had called for greater self-policing among members of the press, and also for the
development o f press councils, another movement of the 1960s and 1970s.519 Raskin
advocated for the institution o f ombudsmen, internal critics o f the newspapers who were
insulated from editorial pressure and answerable instead to the public. Pat Moynihan and
Edward Barrett both cite Raskin in their arguments for more internal criticism (and
against news councils as outside critics). But Norman Isaacs, the editor o f The Louisville
Courier-Journal and its evening counterpart, The Louisville Times, also picked up
Raskin’s essay, and in a 1986 book that is three parts criticism and one part memoir, he

518

A.H. Raskin, “W hat’s Wrong with American Newspapers? A Newsman’s Critique of
the Press. New York Times Magazine, June 11, 1967, 249.
519 A Free and Responsible Press: A General Report on Mass Communication:
Newspapers, Radio, Motion Pictures, Magazines, and Books (Chicago: Commission on
Freedom of the Press, 1947).

267

recounts how eight days later, his Kentucky papers appointed the first newspaper
ombudsman in the United States. 5 20 And though Rosenthal claimed to be unaware o f any
other paper publishing corrections in a dedicated space, Isaacs may also have beaten the
Times on that front, too.

Reactions and aftermath
Abe Rosenthal’s summer 1972 innovation in the presentation o f corrections did
not go unnoticed, either in the press; internally at the Times; among fellow publishers; or
among readers. Less than two months after corrections started appearing on the second
front, Newsweek’’s media column ran a piece on “a candid new tren d ... developing among
U.S. newspapers.” 521 But as any good editor will tell you, one anecdote does not make a
trend, even if that anecdote involves The New York Times— and Newsweek seems to have
found examples that predate the Times. In fact, while the Times development is important
for the level o f influence that it has over other newspapers and their best practices, it may
have been far from the first newspaper to run regular corrections in a prominent location.
Newsweek gives credit, in fact, to Norman Isaacs’s two Louisville papers for being the
first, with a feature called “Beg Your Pardon” that began three years earlier, which would
put their debut in 1969. And according to Newsweek, “Some 50 other U.S. newspapers
have already approached the Courier-Journal for advice about starting a similar feature.”
It’s unclear what Newsweek’s source is for this, though the author did interview Elmer
Hall, the Courier-JournaVs city editor. Perhaps he supplied the “some 50” number.

520

Norman E. Isaacs, Untended Gates: The M ismanaged Press (New York: Columbia,
1986), 132-133.
521 “Beg Pardon,” Newsweek, August 26, 1972.

268

Regardless of whether or not the Times was first, it had already established itself as the
“paper o f record,” and its editorial policy changes were widely noted and widely copied
in the newspaper industry.
Internally, Rosenthal sent a memo to the Times's publisher, Arthur O. “Punch”
Sulzberger on June 2, 522 though Sulzberger appears to have taken ten days to respond.
Sulzberger had several reservations about the new policy, wondering “if we are not over­
penalizing ourselves by always locating it within the Index.” He was worried that running
more than one or two corrections in a day would eat into the index space. But more than
that, he seems to have been worried that perhaps the corrections are too noticeable: “let’s
not always stick it in one spot,” he wrote to Rosenthal. “We will sure as fate be accused
o f something if we are obliged to relocate it in the future.” To his credit, Rosenthal stuck
by his policy, saying that if the editors had to cut items from the index, they would
eliminate “those items which are really not very important, such as baseball games.”
More importantly though, Rosenthal wrote that he had
heard so much favorable comment outside the office on its present position and
on the idea that The Times was saying all the time to the reader that if we have a
correction, you will know exactly where to find it, that it would hurt to shift so early in
the game.523
There is no immediately apparent record of this public and industry response, at
least in Rosenthal’s papers. But he refers to it again in 1973, in another memo to his staff:

522

Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to Mr. Sulzberger, June 2, 1972, A.M. Rosenthal
Papers 1959-2004, MssCol 17930, New York Public Library. Series II: Journals, 1971—
1986, Box 4, Vol. 2: 1972.
523 Memorandum from A.O. Sulzberger to Mr. Rosenthal, June 12, 1972, A.M. Rosenthal
Papers 1959-2004, MssCol 17930, New York Public Library. Series II: Journals, 1971—
1986, Box 4, Vol. 2: 1972.

269

“Our corrections policy is a good one, I think, and has attracted a lot o f favorable
comment in the business.”524 At least one note from a reader praising the corrections
policy did make its way into Rosenthal’s files, a handwritten note from someone named
Ric Cox, o f White Plains:
May I congratulate the Times on its policy to correct its errors in a prominent
position in the paper. Far from reducing the paper’s credibility, such display of
fairness constantly restores my faith in America’s press, the Times in particular. 525
This note so completely echoes Rosenthal’s reasoning for running corrections that
it almost seems suspect (or at least explains why this note meant so much to Rosenthal).
Despite Rosenthal’s lofty aim of correcting all o f the paper’s errors in order to
improve reader trust, he was responsive to issues o f aesthetics (a too-crowded news
index) and to Sulzberger’s suggestion that publishing too many prominent corrections
might be “over-penalizing.” In a brief 1973 memo to Lewis Jordan, he wrote, “On
corrections, I think that two is enough for any one day. Three really looks rather heavy.
Let’s stick to two unless there is a real pressing necessity for more.”526 He was obvious
willing, at times, to compromise his ideals, though he stood by the policy for years. In
1980, he defended the paper’s policy to Richard Gelb, chairman o f the Bristol-Myers
Company, who had written to complain about the Times and a correction about the link
between hair dye and cancer. “As a matter o f fact,” he wrote, “many readers, I have

524 Memorandum from A.M. Rosenthal to Mr. Gelb; Mr. Jones; Mr. Greenfield; Miss
Curtis; Mr. Mullaney, April 4, 1973, New York Public Library, New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929, Box 73, Folder 3: Errors,
Complaints and Corrections: Policies and Procedures.
59 5
Postcard from Ric Cox to AMR January 21, 1973, New York Public Library, New
York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929, Box 73, Folder
3: Errors, Complaints and Corrections: Policies and Procedures.
526 Memo from AMR to Mr. Jordan, April 2, 1973, New York Public Library, New York
Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal papers, MssCol 17929, Box 73, Folder 3:
Errors, Complaints and Corrections: Policies and Procedures.

270

found, turn to the second front to see what the corrections are for that day, almost before
they read anything else. I am one of these.” Also, he writes, “The Times’s emphasis on
corrections was noted in the journalistic community and written about. Since then, I
believe that others have followed suit.”
Others do seem to have followed suit. A 1973 study commissioned by the
American Newspaper Publishers Association found that “The practice o f printing
corrections under a standing head is popular and promises to be more so.”

527

Nine o f the

38 surveyed newspapers (24%) with circulations over 100,000 reported having a standing
head for corrections, though the numbers drop quickly at smaller circulation papers. 5 28
But change often comes from the top papers first, so it is not surprising that the practice
hadn’t yet filtered down from papers like the Times. Even in 1983, the practice was
considered “new.” 529 But the Courier-Journal and the Times seem to have started
something, with studies o f corrections and their ethics proliferating after 1972.530
In 1986, Rosenthal brought out the Editors’ Note for more complicated
clarifications. In May 2003, the Times published perhaps the lengthiest and most famous
correction story, thoroughly investigating itself after the paper learned that its reporter
Jayson Blair had been fabricating stories. But, as Silverman points out in his book,

527

Keith P. Sanders, “What Are Daily Newspapers Doing to Be Responsive to Readers’
Criticisms? A Survey o f U.S. Daily Newspaper Accountability System, in News Research
fo r Better Newspapers, ed. By Galen Rarick, Vol. 7 (Washington, DC: American
Newspaper Publishers Association Foundation, 1975), p. 167.
528 Ibid, Page 151
529
Steve M. Barkin and Mark R. Levy, “All the News That’s Fit to Correct: Corrections
in the Times and the Post.” Journalism Quarterly 60(2), 1983, 218-225.
530 See, for example Barkin and Levy, 1983, cited above; Charles Whitney, “Begging
Your Pardon: Corrections and Corrections Policies at Twelve U.S. Newspapers”
(Research report, 1986); Stephen Hess, “Corrections: When the News Media Make
Mistakes,” Press/Politics 3(1): 122-125; and Michael Bugeja, “Making Whole: The
Ethics of Correction.” Journal o f M ass M edia Ethics 22(1): 49-65.

271

newspaper corrections policies have basically been unchanged for the 40 years since the
Times began consolidating them in its news summary and index. The real innovation has
been online, where technology allows for noting corrections in the text of an original
story as well as consolidating corrections into a single column or even an RSS feed.
Writing for The Columbia Journalism Review's website, Silverman singles out the online
magazine Slate for being particularly inventive.531
So the tradition o f earning reader trust through the regular, visible publication of
corrections continues. It is a tradition that was most prominently started by Abe
Rosenthal and The New York Times. But while Rosenthal should get credit for being a
pioneer, he should not stand alone. Richard Poliak, the editor of (MORE), one o f those
two journalism reviews put it in terms that were as feisty as any that Rosenthal himself
might have used: “It’s hard for me to believe that it was never discussed prior to 1971 in
the halls o f The New York Times by somebody,” Poliak said o f the idea o f running regular
corrections under a standing head and in a prominent place in the newspaper. “But I
would hesitate to give Abe— I was never a big fan of Abe, and vice versa—but I would
never just reflexively give credit to him for th is.... even if h e’s willing to take it.”

532

Poliak is both right and wrong. Rosenthal deserves credit, though perhaps not as much as
he was willing to give himself. Even on June 1, 1972, the idea for a fixed corrections box
was part o f a lineage o f journalistic accountability that began at least as early as the
Hutchins Commission report, ran through A.H. Raskin, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, at least

531 Craig Silverman, “Slate Shuts the Window,” CJR.org. September 24, 2010.
http://www.cjr.org/behind_the_news/slate_shuts_the_window/
532
Richard Poliak in discussion w ith the author, February 21, 2012.

272

one other newspaper and two journalism reviews. The idea was already part o f the culture
o f journalistic criticism. Rosenthal just made it happen in the Times.
So what, in the end was the role o f (MORE) in the birth of the contemporary
newspaper correction? The short answer is that it is not entirely clear what effect
(M ORE)’s call to the publications it covered had in pushing them toward the adoption of
more visible corrections boxes. There is no direct connection clearly, since such a clear
connection exists between (M ORE)’s sleepy rival, The Columbia Journalism Review. But
perhaps the answer lies exactly in CJR9s stodginess, a layer o f insulation from the
comparatively rowdy and unpalatable troublemakers at (MORE). It took the more
respectable CJR to take the idea the last mile, but I would argue that (MORE) having
plucked the idea out of Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s essay brought the idea into the
discussion that working journalists were having with each other in a way that an essay
published in Commentary would not have, particularly in 1971, when journalism was still
very much a career for smart people who did not necessarily see themselves as thought
leaders. They were newsmen. They wrote stories. Ideas were for thinkers. (MORE)
helped to change that anti-intellectual attitude in the press.

Publishing Clark Kent’s Name: (MORE) Lifts the Veil of Confidentiality on an
academic study of The Times
In 1974, the somewhat sleepy academic publishing house Jossey-Bass released
titles in some o f their core strengths. There was the scintillating Analysis o f Groups:
Contributions to Theory, Research and Practice as well as the sure best seller Developing
Programs fo r Faculty Evaluation: A Sourcebook fo r H igher Education. And of course the

273

new edition of Sociological Methodolgy, 1973—1974.533 Joking aside, Jossey-Bass
published serious work by scholars, mostly in the areas o f sociology and the academic
study of business and organizational behavior, not thrillers or scandalous romans-a-clef
But among those 1974 releases, the publishing house also printed the latest work by a
scholar of organizations named Chris Argyris, who had moved from a position at Yale
University to one at Harvard’s business school a few years earlier.534 Argyris’s previous
works had studied other kinds o f organizations and the ways that their management and
workers interacted with each other to get things done. His working style involved both
study and intervention. He was not an entirely dispassionate academic who observed and
wrote; instead he studied organizations and then diagnosed their problems for them
before working to actively improve the organizational atmosphere within them. He had
worked with IBM, Polaroid, GE, the United States State Department, the National
Institutes of Health and even the Defense Department, which would seem to be an
organization that would not be particularly amenable to a pointy-headed academic poking
his pointy head into its business and telling them that their hierarchical system wasn’t
working right.535 And this was in the 1950s and 1960s, at the height o f the Cold War. His
new book was about a major metropolitan daily newspaper and the way that its publishers
and top editors interacted with each other and with the people they supervised. On the
surface, that seems to be very much in line with his previous work, and with the other
books that his publisher was putting out at the same time. But even though Argyris

533 Catalog o f Copyright Entries. Third Series: 1974: January—June, Book 1974. Library
o f Congress Copyright Office, 1974, 1866.
534 Chris Argyris, Behind the Front Page: Organizational Self-Renewal in a Metropolitan
Newspaper (San Francisco, Jossey-Bass: 1974).
535 David M. Rubin, ‘“ Behind the Front Page,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1974, 7.

274

attempted to disguise the identities o f the people he wrote about, and even though he
referred to the paper as The Daily Planet (the fictional newspaper from the Superman
comics), and even though he thought no one outside the academy or maybe some in the
business world would be very interested in the book— despite all o f that, his book was
really about The New York Times, and (MORE) figured that out. And when they did, they
tried to make a big deal o f it, in a way that probably brought more change to the
organizational dysfunction at The Times than Argyris’s study would have on its own.
Originally, The Times invited Argyris to give some lectures on management, but
Argyris declined, saying that he rarely found lectures to be effective. The study that
resulted was his counter-offer to The Times.536 According to the preface to Behind the
Front Page, Argyris began his study with two objectives which were, he said,
independent o f each other. The second o f those objectives “was to add to our knowledge
o f the processes needed to enhance organizational health and to create effective, on-going
renewal activities within organizations.”537 This was Argyris’s life work, even in 1974 (he
died in 2013 at 90), and for the purposes o f a study o f press criticism, there might be
some interest in seeing how the theories of organizational communication can help critics
o f the press influence the large organizations that were increasingly constituting that
press. But the real interest really lies in Argyris’s first objective: “to discover what must
be done to create newspapers that are self-examining and self-regulating.”

538

This second

goal, while it might put a review like (MORE) out of business, would also have been the
sort o f objective that would have pleased Dick Poliak and Tony Lukas, since their goal

536 Ib id ,!.
537 Argyris, ix.
538 Ibid.

275

was never to make money, but to induce some real reform in the highest levels o f the
press in the United States.
Argyris was inspired to examine what might make a newspaper self-examining
not by his own professional interests but by a combination o f civic-mindedness and the
coincidence that had him in the midst o f his study o f The Times just as The Twentieth
Century Fund released a report on the press calling for a national press council to regulate
the press.539 Argyris had really chosen The Times because he wanted to challenge himself
and his previous findings. He writes that he had mostly studied healthy institutions and
how they can best be designed and managed, and found that continual self-examination
and self-renewal— hallmarks o f an intellectual approach to professionalism— were the
best guarantors o f a healthy organizations. But he had a suspicion that the press had little
interest in those activities. “The Planet, I had been told by my informants, would be
especially resistant to a behavioral science inquiry. ‘To put it mildly,’ said one informant,
‘they would consider your views to be nonsense.” ’540 That challenge led Argyris to his
second reason for studying The Times', he wanted to see what sort o f effect his methods
would have on an organization that w asn’t receptive to them. Finally, he wanted to see
whether or not the necrotic management attitudes at the paper would have any effect on
the output— whether or not there was any relationship between thought and action at the
paper.
Even though the Twentieth Century Fund report had identified The Times as one
o f the most credible newspapers in the country, Argyris had heard from his sources that it

539 Alfred Balk, A Free and Responsive Press (New York: Twentieth Century Fund,
1972).
540 A
Argyris, x.

276

was still suffering from certain credibility problems. And by that time, Argyris had spent
enough time inside the newspaper to that those problems were directly linked to internal
issues o f trust and competition:
Moreover, many members of the newspaper expressed a genuine sense of
helplessness about changing these internal conditions, which included the winlose dynamics among reporters and between reporters and copywriters,
management by crisis and with hypocrisy, and the conception o f advocacy
journalism held by many of the top young reporters. If the public feels helpless in
relation to newspapers, newspapermen themselves feel the same way. “Not you or
anyone else will ever change this place” was a prediction I heard often at The
Daily Planet— and it was backed up by serious offers to bet large sums o f money
on it.541
Tellingly, Argyris writes that unlike most o f his studies o f organizations, the bulk of this
book would be devoted to detailing his process o f winning cooperation from the
management of The Times,542
Argyris spent several years on his study. The first phase alone lasted for a year. In
this period, The Times granted him a spectacular amount o f access. The top 40 executives
and editors at the paper granted him unlimited access for this period. He was free to tape
record any meeting that occurred naturally and he interviewed all o f these editors and
executives for long sessions. He came and went as he pleased, and varied his visits so that
he covered all o f the days o f the week.543 Then he retreated in order to make his
diagnosis, which he prepared and presented to The Times. The report ran to 73
typewritten pages, and he delivered it to the paper in June, 1969.544 This seems to be the
first moment when Times managing editor Abe Rosenthal first became concerned about

541 Ibid., xi.
542 Ibid., x.
543 Ibid., xiv.
544 Preliminary report o f New York Times study by Chris Argyris. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.

277

the editorial activities o f the paper being aired. He appears to have mentioned it to James
Reston, either in a memo or just by speaking to him. Reston responded by memo:
I think we had better leave bad enough alone on this one. The commitment is
quite explicit, it seems to me, for not only "a study o f the Times' top
management" but also o f its "news activities." If we try to raise the question o f the
original agreement, it seems to me that we can only get ourselves into an even
more awkward situation.545

Rosenthal does seem to have left “bad enough alone” for a few years, since his file on
Argyris falls silent, except for a collection of bills from Argyris. Though he does seem, in
the same fit o f pique, to have asked for a copy o f the original agreement from the paper’s
publisher, Arthur O. Sulzberger, Jr., who sent along the agreement and a letter from
Argyris that clearly stated the terms: “Any written reports will be sent to you for
examination, correction, and any editing appropriate to maintaining your institution's
integrity and secrecy. However, in agreeing to cooperate there is also a commitment on
the part o f the Times not to veto a publication o f some sort.”546 One can imagine
Sulzberger grumbling at this news, but there is no documentary evidence o f his reaction,
except that the study continued. No one at The Times seems to have recorded any reaction,
positive or negative, to the Argyris study again—until they received a draft o f Argyris’s
manuscript for the book. That’s when panic set in.
When Abe Rosenthal read the draft manuscript that described all o f this, in 1973,
he could only get halfway through before he felt compelled to write a letter to Argyris

545 Memo from James Reston to A.M. Rosenthal, September 19, 1969. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.
546 Letter from Chris Argyris to A.O. Sulzberger. November 6, 1968. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.

278

with his complaints.547 But an executive actually put those complaints more eloquently,
and despite the fractious atmosphere that Behind the Front Page described, The Times
was able to put on a unified face in opposition to the book itself The executive who
wrote to Argyris on behalf o f the paper was Harding Bancroft, who in 1973 was elevated
from executive vice president to vice chairman o f the paper. He told Argyris that of
course they would abide by the agreement and not veto his right to publish a book based
on his research. But he expressed the newspaper’s concern that it was too closely
identified in the book. In fact, Bancroft wrote, The Times was requesting that he not
identify the newspaper as a newspaper at all, but maybe just as a media institution.
Bancroft’s letter to Argyris is worth quoting at length:
I don't think we need here to elaborate on the reasons why identification of
The Times as the subject of your study would be a most harmful disservice to the
paper. We are already too much in the news and much too frequently analyzed.
Hardly a week passes that some periodical does not have a piece that recounts
some real or fancied internal event that has taken place within our organization, or
that scrutinizes adversely or otherwise the generation o f policy decisions or news
judgments in terms o f personalities on our staff. Your book would surely give
momentum to this trend, excite further curiosity, generate more rumors, and
unnecessarily provoke embarrassment or worse to The Times or members o f its
staff....
Accordingly, our first and most imperative answer to the problem is to urge an
adequate disguise; a disguise that hides our identity not only from scholars and
students of organizational behavior and from the lay citizen, but also from the in­
group o f participants and close observers o f journalism in this country.
We don't know if such an adequate disguise is possible at all, but we are
convinced that it is not possible if the subject o f your publication is identified as a
newspaper.
548
Moreover, we don't see why for your purposes it need be.

547 Letter from A.M. Rosenthal to Chris Argyris, May 15, 1973. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.
548
Letter from Harding Bancroft to Chris Argyris, June 13, 1973. N ew York Times
Com pany Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, N ew Y ork Public Library.

279

It seems willfully naive for executives at The New York Times to not understand why
identification o f The Times as a newspaper is essential to the project that Argyris was
then undertaking. Perhaps the paper saw the original agreement between itself and
Argyris as functioning something like a search warrant— where The Times had agreed
that he could come into their premises and search for evidence o f organizational
inefficiencies, much as he had in his previous studies. But when he came, he found
serious problems not only with management style, but also with the ability to provide an
accurate and comprehensive news report to its readers. However, The Times saw that as
being outside the scope o f the original warrant. The paper doesn’t make that argument to
Argyris directly, though one later internal memo makes it clear that some people within
the Times's hierarchy felt that Argyris had changed the terms of the agreement on them.
After Argyris had responded to Harding Bancroft, Abe Rosenthal wrote to Bancroft: “I've
read Argyris' letter and it seems to me designed, consciously or unconsciously, to
rationalize the fact that a couple o f years after he discussed the thrust o f his book, he
decided that it would take an entirely different direction.”549 More likely though,
Rosenthal and Bancroft and whichever other Times executives and editors were involved
in discussions were particularly sensitized to criticism, since the last five years or so had
opened the paper up to public scrutiny in a way that it never had been before. The
publication o f Gay Talese’s The Kingdom and the Power had opened the floodgates in
1969, and (MORE) had been a constant gadfly since 1971. Together, they had made it
suddenly interesting and acceptable to write about the inner workings o f the press, and

549 M emo from A.M. Rosenthal to Harding Bancroft, July 16, 1973. N ew Y ork Times
Com pany Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, N ew Y ork Public Library.

280

the upper management at The Times had not yet gotten comfortable with that state of
affairs. Even more so, the newspaper did not at all like the picture of itself that it found
reflected in Argyris’s book. Bancroft wrote:
Moreover, the picture that emerges of The Times is one of a childish, badly
administered, and petty group who somehow, miraculously, puts out a good paper.
The study naturally looks diagnostically at the things that are wrong and even
pathological, tensions and immaturities o f the "living style" and organizational
and administrative ineptitudes. Given your own interests, we would not expect
you to picture a happy band of editors, reporters and executives whistling on their
way to work with their arms about each other's shoulders. But, if we are to be
identified directly or inferentially, we think we have a right to have presented a
balanced picture of our strengths and weaknesses, o f the normal and sound
relationships that exist, as well as the morbid.550

While Bancroft admitted that The Times could not exert its editorial control over
Argyris’s manuscript, he asked Argyris to make a better effort to disguise the paper. He
closed with the request to obscure the fact that it was a newspaper at all.
Argyris responded to Bancroft with a description o f how he came to the main
“thrusts” o f his argument, a description that is very similar in its logic to the preface of
the final published book. He also tells Bancroft that he thinks The Times may be
overreacting: “I honestly believe that some o f the Times people may be a bit more touchy
than warranted.” He may have been right about their reaction to being called “a childish,
badly administered, and petty group who somehow, miraculously, puts out a good paper,”
though one can see why they may have been insulted. But Argyris turned out to be wrong
if he thought that the executives at The Times were being too touchy about whether or not
their paper could be identified.

550 Bancroft to Argyris, June 13, 1973.

281

Though Harding Bancroft spoke on behalf o f The Times, Rosenthal also sent
along a letter o f his own. He said that he didn’t have much to add, but he did want to
spend a few paragraphs, apparently, disparaging Argyris’s work as a scholar of the press:
I never would have given my time and confidence to a project such as yours if I
had known the "thrust," because I do not believe that you can write about the
whole issue of credibility and the council simply with the tools and information
you had as a result o f your particular method o f inquiry.
The issue of credibility goes far beyond questions of management and into the
nature of the press, the nature of government, the nature o f secrecy, the structure
o f our society and an infinite number of other things on which you do not even
touch. As presented, I think that the issue o f credibility is a distorted one.551
While Rosenthal is correct that the issue o f press credibility is much more complex than
the version that Argyris presents in his book, there is also certainly value in his criticisms.
Institutional in-fighting certainly could lead to the kinds o f credibility issues that Argyris
describes, and his approach is a valid one, if not a complete one. Perhaps a media scholar
covering the same material would have contextualized that material better, but Argyris’s
approach is sound, and from an ethnographic point o f view, his conclusions are valid.
So far o f course, none of this involves (MORE). Argyris finally came up with a
system o f obscuring the names o f the Times editors and executives. It was not one that
made the paper entirely happy, but it certainly makes the book difficult to read. Each
editor or manager is identified by a single capital letter. So one person is “X” and one is
“A” and one is “C.” Argyris transcribes whole conversations that sometimes involve
several of these unidentified people interacting with each other and even mentioning third
parties who aren’t present in the conversation. Each is identified with a different letter.
To make matters worse, at least one o f the editors, John Oakes, demanded that his letter

551 Letter from A.M. Rosenthal to Chris Argyris, July 23, 1973. N ew Y ork Times
Com pany Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, N ew Y ork Public Library.

282

be switched midway through the book, to further throw potential decoders off the trail.

552

On the one hand, it is easy to see why Argyris felt that he had adequately disguised the
participants in the study. That’s especially true, given the limited and academic audience
that he expected the book to have.
On the other hand, said David Rubin, who wrote a story about the Argyris book
for (MORE), said that Dick Poliak “asked me to decode the book, which wasn't all that
hard to do, then put names to the people and the situations that had been in the book,
which I did. And I interviewed Argyris, and he basically admitted that it was the New
York Times that was his subject.”553 So Rosenthal was right to doubt the security of
Argyris’s system o f concealment, especially when (MORE) got hold o f the book and
decoded it. At the time, David Rubin was an assistant professor o f journalism at New
York University, and was also one o f (M ORE)’s contributing editors.
In the lead to the piece he wrote for the cover of the November 1974 issue, he lays
out his justification for publishing the names associated with the piece, breaching the
confidentiality that The Times had negotiated with Argyris, saying that while it is clearly
not a sequel to The Powers that B e, it could have been, and might even have been a more
powerful and revealing book about the way The New York Times operates than Talese’s
book was. But Argyris was his own worst enemy— especially because o f his adherence to
the standards o f academic ethics:
Argyris has vitiated his own material by cloaking the name o f the paper and
blurring the identities o f his interviewees. In doing so, he has robbed the book
both of cogency and impact. With a few names restored, however, his work

552 Rubin, “Behind the Front Page,” 7.
553 David Rubin, interview with the author, October 19, 2011.

283

becomes what it could have been: a laser beam on the considerable management
problems at the Times,554
Rubin leads the next logical step unspoken, but it is here that the power o f the gadfly
press critic really comes through: (MORE), in “decoding” and publishing excerpts from
Argyris’s book, did as critics what Argyris felt was not within the realm o f propriety.
(MORE) took the information that Argyris had hidden between the covers o f a fairly dry
academic book and turned it into a useful critique o f the paper. By publishing the piece,
(MORE) forced the Times to confront this study in a way that it might not have, had the
paper’s identity never been revealed. As the Times itself certainly understood, publicly
confronting institutions with their shortcomings was a powerful way to induce change.
To be sure, (MORE) sensationalized the coverage a bit, perhaps overcorrecting
from Argyris’s tendency toward confidentiality and academic sobriety. The dust jacket o f
Behind the Front Page contains only the title, the author’s name and a geometric pattern
that looks as if it is being turned back, like a page being turned. There is no jacket copy,
except for a description o f the book inside the flaps. No blurbs from authors. Not even a
subtitle to give a bookstore browser any idea what might be inside. Though as Argyris
told The Times, his book wouldn’t be sold in bookstores anyway.555 (MORE) on the other
hand, trumpeted the scoop on its cover, which had switched over from an all-text front
page to an image-based cover one issue earlier. They called these “The New York Times
Transcripts,” and ran a few juicy excerpts right on the cover: A.M. Rosenthal telling
editorial page editor John Oakes that his jibes make him “go home and get mean to my

554 Rubin, “Behind the Front Page,” 7.
555 Memo from Harding Bancroft to Sulzberger, Oakes, Rosenthal, Veit, December 4,
1973. New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder:
Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 1968-1975, New York Public Library.

284

wife.” It has Oakes saying that he feels some reporters at the Times are becoming too
much like editorial writers, and that he “would fire some of those bastards.”556
But the incidents that Rubin picks out o f Behind the Front Page for his examples
are not just juicy insider gossip about the Times. He pinpoints the trouble (following from
Argyris) in the gestation process for the newspaper’s much-lauded Op-ed page, the
opinion page opposite the editorial page, which gives space for columnists and outside
contributors’ opinion pieces. Argyris revealed that debate over the page (which w asn’t
named in his book, o f course, as that would identify the true identity o f The D aily Planet)
had raged on for four full years. But when Argyris sat down the various parties and talked
them through, the specifics o f the page’s content and who would be in control o f it were
hashed out in 30 minutes of frank discussion. In addition, reporters and lower level
editors were afraid to speak out at open meetings. Staff members were afraid to criticize
articles that had been praised by executives. Criticism was personalized, and every
decision was portrayed as a win-lose proposition, which turned people against each other,
creating fiefdoms and an air o f defensiveness. Argyris also identified the insulation o f the
newsroom from the concerns o f profit as a major impediment to improvement at the
Times, which led to the feeling o f intractability felt by the staff that he interviewed for his
research project.
In the end, the excerpts that (MORE) chose to print are not particularly substantial
(though perhaps this is for reasons of copyright). The text amounts to about a page and a
half o f (M ORE)’s tabloid-size pages, a spread illustrated with a tongue-in-cheek antique
portrait o f some well-dressed swells out for a picnic in their suits and corseted dresses,

556 Cover, (MORE): A Journalism Review, N ovem ber 1974.

285

labeled with a caption identifying them as Times executives on a management retreat.
The first section (MORE) reprints is an argument between publisher Arthur Ochs
Sulzberger and editorial page editor John Oakes about the level o f control that the
publisher should have in setting the topics for editorials. This is followed by a
conversation between Oakes and Abe Rosenthal, in which they criticize each other’s
judgment and clash over the direction o f the Op-ed page. They finally find common
ground in the problem o f the leftward drift of the paper’s news coverage, and the rise of
advocacy journalism, which they saw as pernicious (and which the Times continues to see
as anathema to its view o f the purpose o f j oumalism, as is discussed in chapter six o f this
dissertation). The final set o f discussions is between Argyris, Sulzberger and one or more
executives to whom Rubin was unable to assign a name. They are discussing a problem
that Argyris identified: the fact that Abe Rosenthal was surrounded by a group o f “yes
men,” who were unwilling to contradict him and also unwilling to talk to each other,
preferring instead to meet with Rosenthal one on one. Sulzberger was able to see this as a
problem, but unable to solve it. In the end though, he says that he is willing to dismantle
the management structure of the newspaper and start over, if he has to.557
Rubin concludes his piece by saying that while the Times is notoriously resistant
to the views o f outsiders, something will need to change if the paper is going to succeed
in matching the changes in media that are happening around it. He suggests that in the
end, fear o f competition— from cable television and from something Rubin calls “the
home information utility,” which sounds awfully like the internet, in retrospect—will

557 Rubin, “Behind the Front Page,” 8-9.

286

force the paper to change. But it is also the thesis of this dissertation that (MORE) did
have an effect on the paper it so often scrutinized.
The Times seems to have first heard that (MORE) was working on an article when
Rubin contacted John Oakes for comment and confirmation. Oakes sent a memo to
Harding Bancroft, who forwarded it along to several other editors and executives:
It was quite evident from his questions that he knew that it was and in fact he said
to me he had had this point confirmed by other people he had talked to. However,
I politely but adamantly refused to discuss this aspect o f the Argyris book in any
way, shape or form. I did not lie to him (particularly as he obviously knew what
the facts were!) but I told him that I simply wouldn't discuss this matter, though I
readily admitted that I was familiar with the book as I said anyone interested in
current journalism would be. 558
Though o f course, that last bit was something of a lie. Not anyone who was interested in
current journalism would have heard o f the Argyris book, which was obscure from the
point o f view o f mass circulation. And even when (MORE) published its article, only
20,000 or so journalists would have seen the story, and most of them were at the elite
levels o f the profession. It took some filtering for the (MORE) story to have an effect
even lower down the chain o f newspaper editors. One editor, a man named Ray Jenkins,
found out that the Times had been recorded when he was solicited to run a syndicated
story about the Times transcripts. The author of that story had clearly built on David
Rubin’s work in decoding the book. Rosenthal did not retain the syndicate’s story for his
files, but even the pitch makes it clear that this was the work of (MORE):
Enclosed is an article that reveals the bickering and jealousies among the Times
management, with verbatim conversations.
The Times tried its best to suppress the identities of the principals involved,

558

M emo from John B. Oakes to H arding Bancroft, October 8, 1974. N ew Y ork Times
Com pany Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, N ew Y ork Public Library.

287

but a journalism professor has "decoded" them.559
Rosenthal’s response to this editor dismisses Argyris, with whom he was clearly annoyed,
calling his methods “tricky.” But the second half o f the letter shows that Rosenthal had
warmed to Argyris’s management consulting process, if not his academic publishing:
I'm not at all sorry, though, that we went into the experiment, although it made us
look a little silly in the end. There was a group o f quite conscientious and
dedicated and serious people trying to do what you quite rightly say is so rarely
done in our business— communicate with each other. We certainly weren't
entirely successful, but we certainly did come to understand each other's minds
better. Obviously, there was a lot o f intramural chit-chat, but the fact is that we
did approach issues o f journalism that meant something to us.
Rosenthal does not even seem to be particularly disturbed by the (MORE) coverage, so
much as he is by Argyris. In other letters he sends to friends and colleagues who assume
he must be sore about the decoding, he seems to feel more and more that there is nothing
embarrassing in what was said, and that the Times had grown from the experience.560
Argyris, on the other hand, sent at least two more defensive letters to Rosenthal, one of
them saying that he had asked Rubin for a retraction o f quotations that made it seem as if
he had cooperated with Rubin in the decoding, and saying that he is willing to take legal
action if necessary.561 Rosenthal dismisses this as “a piece o f unbecoming piety.”562

559 Letter from Ray Jenkins to A.M. Rosenthal and enclosures, undated. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.
560 Letter from AMR to Andy Fisher, dated January 3, 1975. New York Times Company
Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 1968-1975, New
York Public Library.
561 Letter from Argyris to AMR, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, Chairman and President, James
Reston, Vice President, Sydney Gruson, Executive Vice President, Harding F. Bancroft,
Vice Chairman, John Oakes, Editor, Editorial Page, November 6, 1974. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Folder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.

288

But one last thing that Argyris sent to Rosenthal does resonate with the mission of
(MORE) to force the Times to engage in self-scrutiny in the way that it engages in
scrutiny of other institutions o f power. In closing the last letter that he seems to have sent
to Rosenthal, he writes: “Someday, we should sit down together with the article that you
wrote on the corrosive impact o f censorship in the White House and apply it to our
relationship and the living system o f the New York Times.”563 Rosenthal does not seem
to have responded or to have taken Argyris up on his offer. On the other hand, the Times
under Rosenthal did undertake some massive changes in the 1970s and early 1980s. The
paper began running regular corrections on its second front page, and eventually on page
A2. It consolidated its Sunday and daily editorial staffs into a single newsgathering
organization. The paper began publishing in four separate sections. It introduced a
“Living” section. Business Day and Science Times debuted. The Op-ed section began. It
was a time o f huge changes at the Times. How much o f that was a result o f the goading
and prodding o f Chris Argyris and David Rubin and Dick Poliak and Tony Lukas? It’s
impossible to quantify. But these gadflies did force the Times to re-examine itself and its
practices, and that is, to a large extent, the role o f press criticism and the role o f the
journalism review.

562 Letter from AMR to Chris Argyris (Bcc: Sulzberger, Reston, Gruson, Bancroft,
Oakes), November 12, 1974. New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal
Papers, Box 2, Lolder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 1968-1975, New York Public Library.
563 Letter from Chris Argyris to A.M. Rosenthal, November 20th, 1974. New York Times
Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, Box 2, Lolder: Argyris, Chris (Prof.) 19681975, New York Public Library.

289

Chapter 6: Gawker, Content, Bloggers, Spy: The Legacy of (MORE)

(MORE) was a part o f the intellectual world o f working journalists in the 1970s.
Particularly at the most elite levels o f j oumalism, it would have been nearly impossible to
avoid the magazine’s existence. If you were working as a journalist in New York or
Washington, and in many o f the other cosmopolitan urban centers o f the United States
between 1971 and 1978, (MORE) would have been one of the primary ways in which
you connected to your profession, whether it be through reading the monthly issues that
you subscribed to, or borrowed a copy that had been floating around your newsroom, or
whether you attended one or more of the A.J. Liebling Counter-Conventions to meet your
journalistic idols or just hang out with your friends in the industry. At its peak of
circulation, (MORE) reached somewhere between 20,000 and 25,000 paid issues, with a
pass-along rate that was likely significantly higher than that. For a magazine, 20,000 is a
small circulation number (the smallest circulation category for the National Magazine
Awards is “under 100,000), but 20,000 journalists is still a lot o f journalists. If (MORE)
was able to influence only those 20,000, and those journalists brought some o f the ideas
o f (MORE) to their newsrooms and to their own work, which was read by millions more,
then it is very possible that the reach o f (M ORE)’s ideas was much wider than those raw
circulation numbers indicate. (MORE) started a conversation in the nation’s press, and
the nation’s press leads the conversation o f the nation.
The three editors who led (MORE) each assessed the magazine’s legacy. Richard
Poliak believes that the journalism review was part of an important moment in the selfregard o f the press:

290

I think over the long haul we were influential, because we helped start a movement
that has taken hold, and the press is better for it. I think the movement toward selfcriticism, which has become established throughout journalism today was basically
started by the early journalism reviews.564
Poliak and his co-founder Anthony Lukas started the magazine to counter what they saw
as the rampant anti-intellectualism in the press, an entrenched belief among publishers
and editors that the press operated in a certain way, always had operated in a certain way,
and existed to sell newspapers, not to stimulate questions about how the institutions that
determined American life functioned. And certainly not for the press to stimulate
questions about itself. They knew that they could not change the entire ecosystem o f the
American press, that the vast majority of newspapers did exist to deliver baseball box
scores and comic strips and community news. But they set out to change the attitudes of
the highest levels of the press, hoping that at least those who operated the most serious
“thought leader” publications had a responsibility to keep the public as well-informed as
possible, and to operate as a check on the power of authoritative institutions of
government and big business. It was an attitude that was firmly rooted in the anti­
institutionalism of the late 1960s, but it was also an attitude that stemmed from the
personal experiences o f the founding editors. Certainly Poliak’s own experience validated
that attitude:
I was the editor of the Honolulu Star-Bulletin, and I sent m yself to Vietnam
during the Tet Offensive, and I wrote ten or twelve pieces from there and then I
wrote a full op-ed page piece, titled “My Country is Wrong.” And I got some
feedback on that, but nowhere near the feedback I got when we ran the answers to
the Jumble two days in a row. The whole island lit up to tell us we made that
mistake. And that was a lesson to me. And that’s demoralizing. Because if you
want to do really first-rate work, you can’t do it in most places.565

564 Richard Poliak, interview with the author, September 9, 2009.
565 Ibid.

291

For his co-founder Tony Lukas, he saw that even at the best o f newspapers—for him, it
was The New York Times—there were limits to the kind of work that good reporters could
do. They were constrained by the editorial policies o f their publications, and forced into
restrictive definitions of acceptable journalistic objectivity. Poliak described the
experience of three former Timesmen, including his friend, Lukas, (MORE) contributor
David Halberstam, and Gay Talese, the author of The Kingdom and the Power, the book
about the inner workings of the Times in the 1960s:
The combination o f the staff not having any real intellectual depth and the
management not having any real intellectual depth, or at least not feeling any
demand for it, is why a lot o f people leave the profession. It’s why Halberstam,
and Lukas and Talese leave. They can’t do the long form. They hit a ceiling
beyond which you can’t go— I don’t mean in terms o f money or promotion— I
mean in terms o f intellectual elbowroom. You just can’t do it at a magazine or a
newspaper, and I think that happens to anybody who has any real intellectual
curiosity.566
For Poliak then, the effect o f (MORE) was at those highest levels. He believes that The
New York Times did learn from its management issues in the 1970s, and is a better place
for good reporters to do their best work than it was when he was running (MORE), the
primary gadfly to the Times in that period. (MORE) was able to open up some
“intellectual elbowroom” at the elite publications, and start a conversation that led to selfcriticism at these publications. And self-criticism is a hallmark o f intellectualism.
For Michael Kramer, the second editor o f (MORE), the matter was a simple one
o f the journalism review fulfilling the same watchdog function toward the press that the
press had toward other institutions of power, as well as building a community among
journalists. “I think it gives people the impression that their profession is a profession and

566 Ibid.

292

that people are watching. And maybe it made people a little bit more careful,” he said.567
So if for Poliak, (MORE) was a gadfly to the watchdogs o f powerful institutions,
constantly pushing the Times and other news organizations o f its ilk toward better
standards o f performance, then for Kramer, (MORE) was more of a watchdog to the
watchdogs, making sure that they maintained certain levels o f performance, rather than
pushing for progress. It is still a valuable approach to the role of the press critic, if a more
conservative one. Perhaps in some ways that is a product o f the individuals who were
running the magazine, but it is also likely a reaction to the time. Poliak ran (MORE)
when it was building on the anti-institutional attitudes of the 1960s. Kramer took over
after the successes of Watergate, when the press was feeling proud of its
accomplishments and basking in a new celebrity. The institutional press felt as if it could
hardly get any better, so a journalism review bent on maintaining performance standards
fits the ethos of the year or so in the mid 1970s when Kramer was in charge.
Robert Friedman sees the effects o f (MORE) on the professional press to be a part
o f changes that were taking place in journalism in the 1970s, not necessarily driving them,
but participating in them, and perhaps helping to propel those changes forward. Like
Kramer, Freidman ran the magazine in the post-Watergate era. But rather than just using
(MORE) as a way to try to keep the press honest, Friedman saw that Watergate and its
aftermath opened journalism up as an alluring career path for young people with an
idealistic and intellectual tendency:
With the popularity engendered by All the President’s Men, I think that’s the first
time I can think o f that reporters sort o f became popular heroes, and what did they
do? They brought down a president, so that was significant. It’s not just that they
567 M ichael Kramer, Interview w ith the author, January 23, 2013.

293

wrote some good stories or covered a war well, but they actually had a huge
impact. And I think that changed the attractiveness o f journalism as a profession
and lured a lot o f people into the business who might not have gone into it earlier.
And I think that new blood that came into the business helped make it better and
more in tune with the kind o f journalism that (MORE) magazine supported and
thought should be done. Now, across the nation, newspapers still tended to be
owned by conservative owners; editorial pages continued to support the war until
the bitter end. But in certain mainstream institutions, I think there was a sea
change that happened in the mid ’70s. What role did (MORE) play in that?
Probably less than more, but some. And I think it served as a good adjunct to
those changes that were happening and helped push them and propel them and
that’s great.568
Some o f the changes in the way the press talked about itself were already underway even
before (MORE) began publishing in 1971. The ombudsman movement had started. The
regional journalism review movement had been underway. The underground and
alternative press had been seeking ways to report the stories that the mainstream press
was not adequately representing, in their opinion— stories about minority experience,
stories about women, stories questioning the received wisdom that American capitalism
was an unquestionable good, and that the government was a benign institution that
always worked for the good o f individual Americans. But many o f these ideas were too
radical for the mainstream press. (MORE) served as a bridge to bring some of these fresh
ideas to the mainstream.
As the 1970s ended, and (MORE) finally disappeared, Friedman (like both Poliak
and Kramer before him) feels that the magazine did have a lasting influence on the way
that the media are discussed in the press. Prior to (M ORE)’s existence, there was very
little writing about how publications or broadcasts were assembled and delivered to their
readers or viewers. There were a few critical studies, and a smattering o f in-house

568 Robert Friedman, interview w ith the author, January 17, 2014.

294

ombudsmen, but the 1970s saw the quantity o f this sort o f writing skyrocket. “I think
(MORE) did change the dialogue about media coverage, how people think and talk about
the media,” Friedman said. “And I think a lot o f it got absorbed into the media, so that
you’ve got people who, only after that period o f time were hired to write about the media
as a beat, who were hired as ombudsmen, to think about the foibles o f the publication and
to write critically about the media.”569
This chapter attempts to assess the claims of (MORE)’s influence made by its
editors. It applies some of the standards for assessing the effectiveness o f press criticism
that were laid out by other scholars that are described in chapter one o f this dissertation,
and it also describes some o f the press criticism that has followed in the wake o f (MORE),
drawing parallels between those publications and (MORE), showing the influence that
the magazine had, whether those parallels were intentional or not.

Wendy Wyatt’s Discursive Press Criticism and Intellectual Self-Scrutiny
Wendy Wyatt argues that true press criticism could only come from outside the
press, from critics who are not situated in the knowledge of the operations o f the
institutional press. For Wyatt, press criticism functions when discourse exists between a
peripheral “critical public,” a self-appointed group o f critics outside the press, in
conversation with that critical public, and with the institutional press at the core o f her
model. Wyatt pictures this model as concentric circles, with the press at the core, the

569 ib id .

295

critics representing the concerns of the public in a ring around them, and the concerned
public, feeding those concerns to the critics in a ring at the periphery.570
In W yatt’s model, the writing in (MORE) would exist almost exclusively at what
Wyatt calls “third level criticism.” In third level criticism, ideas for reform are introduced
by the press itself, and discussed within the profession, what could be called selfcriticism. W yatt’s model requires that these ideas then be shared with the critical public
at the periphery o f her model. One shortcoming o f this model is that it fails to account for
the fluidity with which people move from one level to another of her model in American
society. As there is no licensing or regulatory system for who can and cannot work as a
journalist in the United States, people are simultaneously journalists and concerned
citizens. And from the standpoint of individual press institutions, (MORE) made sure that
its writers were outsiders at least to those institutions about which they were writing.
They may have been journalists, by and large, but they were not journalists for the
particular institutions that they were covering. Their intent, in most cases, was to induce
the sort o f self-criticism that Richard Hofstadter saw as central to intellectualism.
So while (MORE) did function as third level critical discourse, facilitating the
conversation among members o f the working press, it also served to encourage the sort of
searching and quest for self-betterment that Hofstadter describes. The difficulty would be
in trying to create the public that would be interested enough in the operations of the
press to engage with the same ideas that concerned these self-examining reporters. The
incarnation o f M ore that Michael Kramer created attempted to reach this audience,

570 Wendy Wyatt, Critical Conversations: A Theory o f Press Criticism (Cresskill, N.J.:
Hampton Press, 2007, 145-149.

296

aiming its coverage and criticisms of the press not just at the press itself but also at an
imagined interested public. However, it quickly found that no such public existed, or at
least not enough of one to make a general-interest media magazine a profitable enterprise.
The popularity o f journalism and journalists at the height o f the A ll the President’s Men
era might have been the best opportunity to foster that sort of public. But given the lack
o f interest in the general public, (M ORE)’s attempts to foster discussion within the
profession seems to be as strong an effort as could have been made in the 1970s. At least
the journalism review was able to spur self-criticism, and to help incorporate whatever
little outside criticism (such as Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s analysis of the press) into that
discussion. Wyatt also sees press criticism as a form o f regulation for the press, but one
that the press would find more palatable than outside regulation from bodies such as press
councils, which journalists tend to find as reprehensible as government regulation. The
discursive critical process allows for journalists to have a discussion about the values
they want to support and how they can best serve the public interest.571 Given Richard
Poliak’s repeated arguments against the idea of a national press council, he would likely
agree with W yatt’s assessment.

511 Ibid., 149-150.

297

Arthur L. Hayes’s Criteria for Judging Press Criticism
As described in chapter one of this dissertation, Arthur L. Hayes proposed a ninepart test of the effectiveness o f a press critic.

cn

^

This section will address those questions,

as applied to (MORE), one by one.
1. Has the critique led to the dismissal, resignation, or reassignment of a reporter,
broadcast public affairs personality, editor, or news executive?

(MORE) certainly got people fired in the course of its existence, though it was rarely for
the reasons that the magazine intended. A reporter was fired from The Philadelphia
Inquirer for attending the first A. J. Liebling Counter-Convention (see chapter 3), and
another was fired from The New York Times for supplying a copy o f a rejected manuscript
to (MORE) via Rolling Stone. But there are few if any examples of (MORE)
demonstrating the incompetence or malfeasance of someone in the press, and that
person’s employer firing him or her for the offense. Though this seems like an arbitrary
criterion forjudging the success o f an institution o f criticism.

2. Has the critique led to content or programming changes consistent with widely
acknowledged journalism ethical standards?
3. Has the critique led to a reform o f a news organization’s standards and practices?
As chapter three of this dissertation argues, (MORE) had substantial, if indirect effects on
its primary target, The New York Times. Whether or not that change can be directly
attributed to the call to action that (MORE) published in its first issue, the Times certainly
changed its policy on corrections in the 1970s. The direct mover may have been The
Columbia Journalism Review, but (MORE) initiated the idea. To some extent, that offers
cn

^

Arthur S. Hayes Press Critics are the Fifth Estate: M edia Watchdogs in America
(Wesport, Connecticut: Praeger, 2008) 4.

298

an answer to Hayes’s question three more than it does question two. But (MORE) was
less concerned with forcing individual institutions to adhere to “widely acknowledged
journalism ethical standards” and more concerned with establishing those standards in the
first place.

4. Has the critique spurred public debate in public forums and in the news media
about news media performance or the business o f mass media, helping to shape
public opinion on the issue?
(MORE) found itself covered by general interest news media on several occasions,
though most consistently for the A. J. Liebling Counter-Conventions. (MORE) likely had
little direct influence on the way the public at large viewed issues of ethical standards for
the press, but most o f that is attributable to the fact that the public had little interest in
establishing ethical standards for the press. Perhaps through a sort of two- or three-step
process, (MORE) did have some effect on how the press was viewed by the public at
large, but that would have been filtered through changes in the behavior of the press,
either from direct agitation from the journalism review, or through following the lead of
national news outlets such as The New York Times

5. Do news media outlets quote the individual or organization as an authority on
news media ethics and performance?
Nearly every reference to (MORE) in the press identifies the magazine as an influential
voice of press criticism.
6. Does the individual or organization have a longtime and substantial following,
measured in viewers, books [sic] sales or Web-site hits?
(MORE) reached a circulation of more than 20,000 at its peak, which is a substantial
number for such a niche publication. And the attendance at its annual conventions

299

indicated that the magazine had a very devoted following, if not a large one by the
standards o f general-interest publications. Though the magazine lasted for only eight
years, that can be seen as a surprisingly long time, given the publication’s narrow content
and the lack o f advertising support for most of its history.

7. Has the individual or organization inspired a movement?
This is a difficult question to answer, since, during (M ORE)’s run, there was certainly a
change in the way that journalists thought about themselves and about the institutional
press that employed them. It is very hard to say how much of that is attributable to
(MORE) and how much (MORE) was just chronicling a movement that was already
underway. (MORE) was not the first journalism review, though it was the one within the
movement that had the broadest mandate and the most nationwide appeal. Robert
Friedman, the magazine’s final editor, argued that (MORE) was a part o f the reason that
there was an influx o f talented young journalists in the 1970s, who helped to shape the
journalism o f the forty years that followed, but without survey evidence, it would be
difficult to substantiate that claim.
8. Has the individual or organization established standards of inquiry, analysis or
proposals used by other critics?
9. Have the individual’s critiques gained currency among other critics and scholars
who point to the individual as a groundbreaking activist or thinker in news media
criticism?573
(MORE) has had a broad influence in the ecosystem o f press criticism that has persisted
in its wake. The remainder o f this chapter looks at some of the organizations and
individuals that have followed in (M ORE)’s footsteps, whether consciously or not. The

573 Hayes, 4.

300

development o f reportorial coverage o f the press as well as press criticism owe much to
the example set by (MORE) from 1971 to 1978.

The Inheritors of the (MORE) Legacy
Very few of the journalism reviews that sprang up around the country before or
during (M ORE)’s run remain today. The Columbia Journalism Review is the most
prominent o f these. Even though the founders o f (MORE) saw a bitter irony in having
their subscription list donated to CJR when their own magazine went out o f business in
1978, the (MORE) approach to press criticism has eventually come to influence the more
conservative, institutionally-minded magazine to which they saw themselves as an
alternative. When (MORE)’s subscription list was being sold to CJR, The Washington
Post reported that the Columbia review was in talks with one o f (M ORE)’s staff members
to join its own staff. That staffer was (M ORE)’s final senior editor, Robert Manoff, who
did in fact take a job at CJR, and eventually served as editor. Later, Victor Navasky, who
had been a friend of (MORE) and an occasional contributor became the chairman o f CJR,
a post which he retains as o f the writing of this dissertation. M anoff and Navasky (as well
as other (MORE) contributors who eventually wrote for CJR) helped to bring some o f the
(MORE) approach to press criticism— a more freewheeling, impish, and critical way of
looking at the media—to (MORE)’s former rival.
The 2013 issues o f CJR, which is published every other month, illustrate some of
those changes. Cover stories include the very (MORE)-like “How Can We Improve
American M edia’s Coverage of Race, Class, and Social Mobility?”574 an article about the

574 Farai Chideya, Colum bia Journalism R eview , M arch/A pril 2013.

301

serious dangers of bad personal health reporting,575 and a survey o f journalists and
academics that attempted to come to an answer (or a range o f answers) on what the true
purpose o f journalism is.576 The cover for the last o f those articles also contained a very
(MORE)-like gesture in that it reprinted one reporter’s answer to the title question: “What
is Journalism For?” That answer was “It’s not fucking rocket science.” The very bold
word “fucking” was placed just above the UPC code on the cover, not far from where the
address label would be placed. It is reminiscent of (MORE)’s coverage o f obscenity
regulation, and the early headline that contained the playfully “censored” word
“b

shit.”
A few o f the regional journalism reviews remain as well. And at the national level,

the Washington Journalism Review eventually became The American Journalism Review,
published by the Philip Merrill College o f Journalism at the University of Maryland. In
2013, the magazine ceased print publication, but publishes online at http://ajr.org/.
Perhaps (MORE) could have made a similar transition, saving itself the tremendous cost
o f printing, if the Internet had existed in 1978.
Columbia Journalism Review and American Journalism Review are the only print
publications devoted to coverage and criticism o f the press that have published
consistently since (M ORE)’s demise. But there have been other attempts to launch
similar publications. In fact, in 1990, several of the journalists involved with (MORE) at
various stages, as well as a few other likeminded journalists attempted to launch a new
magazine that would very much have continued (MORE)’s legacy. The magazine would

575 David H. Freedman, “Survival o f the Wrongest,” Columbia Journalism Review,
January/February 2013.
576 “What is Journalism For?” Columbia Journalism Review, September/October 2013.

302

have been called Mercury, though according to a New York Times article about the
project, no one involved really loved the name (others that had been floated included Tell,
M edia Watch, and Gadfly). The “inner circle” o f the nascent magazine was Ken Auletta,
who had written for (MORE), J. Anthony Lukas, Frances Fitzgerald, and the venture
capitalist Arthur Dubow. Other (MORE) alumni and friends o f the magazine, including
Richard Poliak, David Halberstam, Bill Kovach, Robert Caro and Bill Moyers became
involved. The idea had come from a public relations person named John Scanlon, who
had told Ken Auletta that there was a need to revive a magazine like (MORE), but with a
broader appeal and focus. Perhaps it would have been more like the late-era (MORE) that
attempted to cover more o f the media than just the news. At that early stage though, the
main players in this magazine were not optimistic that the $6 million they needed to
launch the magazine could be raised in what was then a very weak magazine market.577
Nothing ever came o f the proposal, though it was the closest attempt to reviving (MORE)
that has happened in the more than 35 years since it went out o f business.
The attorney and journalist Steven Brill had made a splash with his creation of
The American Lawyer and the Court TV network when he decided that the country was
ready for another general-interest magazine about the media. That magazine was B r ill’s
Content, which debuted in the summer o f 1998 and ran until fall of 2001. Brill wrote the
cover story himself, a 25,000-word opus indicting the media’s coverage of the Bill
Clinton/Monica Lewinsky sex scandal. But he also hired veteran reporters to work for
him, including (MORE) alumni such as former editor Michael Kramer and contributor

577 Alex S. Jones, “The Media Business: Media Critics are Seeking to Turn Talk into
Print,” The New York Times, July 2 1990. Accessed online at
http://www.nytimes.eom/1990/07/02/business/the-media-business-media-critics-areseeking-to-tum-talk-into-print.html, March 21, 2013.

303

Calvin Trillin. Brill spent lavishly to promote the magazine too, reportedly spending
about $1 million to attract attention to the first issue.578 Brill intended to market the
magazine to a general audience, in much the same way that Kramer had hoped to do
when he took over (MORE). But Kramer had hoped to reach 30,000 subscribers; Brill
was aiming for half a million.579 B r ill’s Content did approach a circulation o f nearly
300,000, but as Arthur Hayes argues, Brill ran up against the same two problems that face
all publications devoted to coverage and criticism o f the media: an overestimation of
public interest in the subject, and a lack o f desire to advertise to whatever that market is.
“Nevertheless,” Hayes writes, “reform-minded media professionals cannot seem to part
with the idea that there is a substantial readership beyond those who subscribe to trade
publications willing to spend money to read about how the sausage gets made in the news
media business or to read critiques o f press performance.” 580 No one has attempted such a
publication since, but that does not mean that press criticism or coverage o f the press
have languished because of this.
In the 1980s and 1990s, Spy magazine, a satirical monthly founded by Kurt
Anderson and Graydon Carter, ran a column under the pseudonym J. J. Hunsecker, which
was the name of the press agent character in the movie Sweet Smell o f Success. Whoever
was writing the articles was, appropriately, a spy inside The New York Times, and while
most o f the Hunsecker columns were not really press criticism intended to prod the paper
into better coverage, the puckish stories are reminiscent of some o f the more sophomoric

578

4B r ill’s Content. “An Inside-the-Sausage-Factory Look at Media for People Who Eat
Sausages, Not Those Who Make Them,” in Press Critics are the Fifth Estate: M edia
Watchdogs in America (Wesport, Connecticut: Praeger, 2008), 86-87.
519 Ibid., 87.
5*°Ibid, 93.

304

pranks that (MORE) undertook. Hunsecker and Spy were mostly interested in the
romantic life of Abe Rosenthal, who was still in charge of the news division of the Times
in 1987. So even though the aim was not at all high-minded in Spy, that magazine’s
editors obviously took some o f the same delight in prodding Rosenthal that (MORE)’s
did. And Rosenthal apparently expressed as little interest in Spy as he did in (MORE). 581
In somewhat of the same snarky, sophomoric vein, but also with what seems to be
a real, if occasional, intent to better the media through criticism, the blog Gawker has
been mixing outrage, gossip and real news about Manhattan media since 2003. Mostly,
Gawker is nothing like (MORE), except that it is a New York City-focused publication
that claims to focus on media news and gossip. Gawker mostly interests itself now with
posts that will drive web traffic, but will also address real issues o f press coverage from
time to time. In 2012, for instance, Gawker ran a series o f insider articles written by a
then-anonymous employee o f Fox News Channel, who called him self the Fox News
Mole. Fox quickly identified him as a producer named Joe Muto, but his dispatches
describing the working atmosphere inside the most successful national cable news
network created a brief stir, and are a direct descendent of Spy’s J. J. Hunsecker.582 Very
little o f Gawker’s content addresses the media anymore, but they are a part o f the
ecosystem o f media coverage and criticism that has evolved online, and were an early
and vociferous participant in the social media conversation about the press.

581

Katina Alexander, “Modem Striking; Spies in the Press,” Chicago Reader, August 6,
1987. Accessed online at http://www.chicagoreader.com/chicago/modem-striking-spiesin-the-press/Content?oid=870959, January 22, 2014.
582
John Cook, “ ‘Fox M ole’ to Plead Guilty to Misdemeanor Charges Over Gawker
Posts,” Gawker, May 9, 2013. http://gawker.com/fox-mole-to-plead-guilty-tomisdemeanor-charges-over-498575781. Accessed January 22, 2014.

305

Much o f that conversation takes place now over Twitter, where a significant
community has been built up. That community is an ideal version of the sort of
community ofjoum alists that coalesced around (MORE) in the 1970s, except that instead
o f being able to meet and discuss ideas with each other once a year at the A. J. Liebling
Counter-Conventions, press critics, press junkies, members o fthe press andjoum alism
and media professors can all interact with each other, share ideas and articles, and
instantly react to the latest developments in media news. On a typical day, one might find
the New York University professor and press critic Jay Rosen linking to a long essay
about the role of the press on his PressThink blog or discussing his role as an adviser to
the new publication being started by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar and journalist Glenn
Greenwald, who helped bring to light the revelations of National Security Agency leaker
Edward Snowden. Or perhaps City University o f New York journalism professor Jeff
Jarvis is discussing his reaction to a published conversation between Greenwald and
former New York Times editor Bill Keller over whether the Times paradigm of objectivity
or Greenwald’s preferred advocacy journalism is a better model for the future of
journalism.

583

Or maybe it is Jack Shafer, the press critic who writes for the Reuters news

service, engaging with David Carr, a media columnist for, o f all publications, The New
York Times. Or maybe one o f them is discussing an issue on On the Media, a weekly
radio show on NPR. The Times also now has a “public editor,” their version o f an
ombudsman, and while the quality o f their work has been variable, the current public

583 Bill Keller, “Is Glenn Greenwald the Future o f News?” The New York Times, October
27, 2013. Accessed online at http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/28/opinion/aconversation-in-lieu-of-a-column.html, January 22, 2014.

306

editor, Margaret Sullivan, has been an active and inquisitive writer and critic, often
forcing the Times to be more introspective.
The Internet has opened up a realm o f debate and discussion that was never really
available in the days o f (MORE), when journalists had to subscribe to a 32-page
newsprint tabloid to see what the latest news of their profession was, or had to travel to a
hotel in New York City in order to hear the most thoughtful and provocative journalists of
their day have a heated debate about the issues that they were facing in their work. The
diffusion o f press criticism has allowed it to survive, too. Unlike (MORE) or B r ill’s
Content, which relied on expensive printing and distribution, the Internet allows for press
critics to work anywhere, and for the discussion to continue without the pressures of
filling a monthly magazine. The world o f press criticism is as robust now as it was in the
heyday of (MORE), with as many interesting topics in flux as journalism works through
another huge moment o f transition, much as it did in the 1970s.

Coda: What Happened to the Staff of (MORE)
Robert Friedman, the last editor o f (MORE), went on to edit The Village Voice,
and later worked as an editor at Life and Fortune before he became an editor at
Bloomberg News, where he manages and edits long-term, in-depth coverage of global
n-

tinance.

584

Michael Kramer, who preceded Friedman as editor, went back to writing political
commentary after he sold the magazine. After working at Time, he turned to being a

584

“Bloomberg Link: Robert Friedman.” http://www.bloomberglink.com/people/robertfriedman/. Accessed January 22, 2014.

307

playwright, having his play Divine Rivalry, about Leonardo da Vinci and Niccolo
Macchiavelli, produced by the Hartford Stage. 5 85
Malcolm Frouman, (MORE)’s second art director, left the magazine to work for
The New York Review o f Books, which had also been designed by his predecessor at
(MORE), Samuel Antupit. Frouman went on to be the long time art director of
BusinessWeek magazine until it was sold to Bloomberg.586
Longtime contributor and senior editor David Rubin continued to teach at New
York University, until he left to become the dean o f Syracuse University’s S.I. Newhouse
School o f Public Communication. He retired as dean in 2008. 5 87
Claudia Cohen, (MORE)’s second assistant editor, left the magazine to pursue a
career as a gossip columnist, first with The New Y o rkP o sf s Page Six, beginning in 1977,
and eventually moving on to being a broadcast entertainment reporter. She was a regular
on WABC, and then on the syndicated talk show “Live with Regis and Kathie Lee.” She
married and divorced Ronald O. Perelman, the chairman of the cosmetics company
Revlon. After the divorce, she received a settlement o f $80 million. When Cohen died of
ovarian cancer in 2007, Perelman donated a large sum of money to have a building
named in her honor at The University o f Pennsylvania, her alma mater. 588

585 Anita Gates, “Two Artistic Giants, and the Man Who Manipulated Them,” The New
York Times, March 12, 2011. Accessed online at
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/13/nyregion/13theatct.html, January 22, 2014.
586 Malcolm Frouman, Interview with the author, October 27, 2011.
587
Newhouse Faculty: David Rubin, http://newhouse.syr.edu/faculty-staff/david-rubin,
accessed January 22, 2014.
588
Margalit Fox, “Claudia Cohen, 56, Socialite and a Reporter o f Gossip, Is Dead,” The
New York Times, June 16, 2007. Accessed online at
http://w w w .nytim es.com /2007/06/16/nyregion/16cohen.htm l, January 22, 2014.

308

Cohen’s predecessor as assistant editor, Terry Pristin, worked for more than a
decade at The Los Angeles Times, where she covered Hollywood, among other topics.
She eventually moved to The New York Times, where she covers commercial real estate,
and continues to write for other publications as well.

589

Kathy Jones, who arranged several o f the A. J. Liebling Counter-Conventions, left
(MORE) to work for The New York Review o f Books, where she rose to be associate
publisher and advertising director. Despite not having any journalism experience, she
surprised herself by marrying a journalist, New York Times reporter Clyde Haberman. She
is now the director o f special projects for Human Rights First, where she manages
relations with donors and, true to her Counter-Convention experience, arranges major
events for the non-profit organization.
Brit Hume, (M ORE)’s Washington, D.C. correspondent, left for a long career in
television news. He spent over two decades with ABC News, and is now a political
analyst for Fox News.
O f the three members o f Rosebud Associates, the founders of (MORE), only
Richard Poliak is still alive. William “Woody” Woodward added to the trail o f tragedy in
his family in 1999. His mother had shot and killed his father, and then killed herself after
being portrayed as guilty by Truman Capote, even though she had been officially
exonerated. Woodward’s younger brother, Jimmy, killed him self by jumping from a hotel
window. Woody Woodward ran for public office, seeking the support o f his old mentor
Dolly Schiff, and later worked as a bureaucrat for New York State, supervising the

589

Terry Pristin, interview w ith the author, D ecem ber 17, 2011.

309

banking system. But at age 54, he jum ped from the window of his apartment on the
Upper East Side o f Manhattan and fell 14 stories to his death.590
J. Anthony Lukas continued to write as a freelancer and book author, achieving
his highest level o f fame— and his second Pulitzer Prize—for the book Common Ground,
which chronicled the stories o f several Boston families in their struggle over their city’s
government-imposed school busing. Shortly after he finished his last book, Big Trouble,
however, Lukas, who had been battling depression, killed him self at home, tying a cord
around his neck and strangling himself. Terry Pristin’s husband, Clyde Haberman, wrote
Lukas’s obituary for the Times.591 The Columbia University Graduate School of
Journalism gives two annual prizes named in his honor.

592

Richard Poliak served as a literary editor and executive editor at The Nation, and
wrote several books, including an account o f an around-the-world trip on a container ship
after the 9/11 attacks, and The Creation o f Dr. B: A Biography o f Bruno Bettelheim. He
recently published a memoir about the death of his brother when they were children. He
lived for many years on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, but recently moved to
Portland, Maine with his wife Diane Walsh, a concert pianist.593

590 Jim Yardley, “Heir to a fortune, and to Tragedy; Suicide Ends the Life o f a Wealthy,
and Haunted, Man.” The New York Times, May 8, 1999. Accessed online at
http://www.nytimes.eom/1999/05/08/nyregion/heir-fortune-tragedy-suicide-ends-lifewealthy-haunted-man.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm, January 22, 2014.
591 Clyde Haberman, “J. Anthony Lukas, 64, an Author, is Dead.” The New York Times,
June 7, 1997. Accessed online at http://www.nytimes.com/1997/06/07/nyregion/janthony-lukas-64-an-author-is-dead.html, January 22, 2014.
592
The Lukas Prizes, Columbia Journalism School.
http://www.joumalism.columbia.edu/page/169-lukas-prizes/170, accessed January 22,
2014.
593 Richard Poliak: Bio. http://www.richardpollak.com/bio.htm, accessed January 22,
2014.

310

Several other (MORE) staff members still work in various capacities in the press,
and dozens or hundreds o f the magazine’s readers have taken their experiences of
professional journalism from the 1970s into their careers. And those experiences were
likely colored by the magazine that chronicled it all.

311

Bibliography
Adamo, S.J. “The Press: Perils of Self-Criticism,” America, February 1972, 130-131.
Addis, M. “A Study o f the Surface Accuracy o f The Columbia Journalism Review and
M O RE (M.A. thesis, Central Michigan University, 1974).
Adler, James B. “Under New Management,” M ore: The M edia Magazine, October 1977,
2.

Adler, Renata. “The Perils o f Pauline,” The New YorkReview o f Books, August 14, 1980.
Advertisement for the 5th A. J. Liebling Counter-Convention, More: The M edia
Magazine, November 1976, 36-37.
Advertisement for Liebling III, (MORE): A Journalism Review, May 1974, 32.
Advertisement for Liebling IV, (MORE): A Journalism Review April 1975, 11.
Advertisement for Mobil. (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1974, 15.
Advertisement for (MORE): A Journalism Review. New York Times Book Review, May
30, 1971, BR12.
“The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention,” Chicago Journalism Review, May, 1972, 3.
Alexander, Katina. “Modem Striking; Spies in the Press,” Chicago Reader, August 6,
1987. Accessed online at http://www.chicagoreader.com/chicago/modemstriking-spies-in-the-press/Content?oid=870959, January 22, 2014.
Argyris, Chris. Behind the Front Page: Organizational Self-Renewal in a Metropolitan
Newspaper (San Francisco, Jossey-Bass: 1974).
Aronson, James. “On Assignment with WFBI,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1972, 1.
--------- . “On the Banquet Trail o f the Failure o f American Journalism,” In These Times,
January 5-11, 1977, 23.
Asher, Thomas. “Smoking Out Smokey the Bear,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1972, 12-14.
Astor, Gerald. “The Gospel According to Mobil,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April
1976, 12-15.
Auletta, Ken. “How Carter Plays the Press,” More: The M edia Magazine, October 1976,
12 2 2
-

.

Bachrach, Judy. "Countering: [MORE] Than a Convention," The Washington Post, May
13, 1974, B4.
Bagdikian, Ben. “The American Newspaper is Neither Record, Mirror, Journal, Ledger,
Bulletin, Telegram, Examiner, Register, Chronicle, Gazette, Observer, Monitor,
Nor Herald o f the D ay’s Events.” Esquire, March 1967, 124; 138-142.
Balk, Alfred. A Free and Responsive Press (New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1972).
Balk, Alfred and James Boylan, editors, Our Troubled Press: Ten Years o f the Columbia
Journalism Review (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1971).
Banning, Stephen A. “The Professionalization o f Journalism: A Nineteenth-Century
Beginning,” Journalism History, 24'A, 1998, 157-163.
Barkin, Steve M. and Mark R. Levy, “All the News That’s Fit to Correct: Corrections in
the Times and the Post.” Journalism Quarterly 60(2), 1983, 218-225.
Barrett, Edward W. “Editorial Notebook: Department of Correction,” Columbia
Journalism Review, Spring, 1968, 35.

312

--------- . “Self-Coddling on Corrections,” Columbia Journalism Review, July/August,
1972, 47^19.
“Beg Pardon,” Newsweek, August 26, 1972.
“Best Bets,” New York, May 24 1971, 52.
“The Big Apple: Games Timesmen Play?” (MORE): A Journalism Review, November
1972, 10.
“The Big Apple: Good News, Bad News.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, February
1973, 11.
Birkhead, Douglas. “The Power in the Image: Professionalization and the
‘Communications Revolution,9” American Journalism, 1(1984).
“Bloomberg Link: Robert Friedman.” http://www.bloomberglink.com/people/robertfriedman/. Accessed January 22, 2014.
Blount, Roy, Jr., “Weathercasters: Getting to Snow You f More: The M edia Magazine,
April, 1978,30-35.
Bradshaw, Jon and Richard Neville, “Killer Bee Reaches New York: The Sensational
History o f Rupert Murdoch,” M ore: The M edia Magazine, February, 1977, 12—
23.
Branzburg v. H ayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972).
Braudy, Susan. This Crazy Thing Called Love: The Golden World and Fatal Marriage o f
Ann and Billy Woodward. (New York: St. Martin’s Paperbacks, 1992).
Brick, Howard. Age o f Contradiction: American Thought and Culture in the 1960s
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell, 1998), 37-39.
Bridge, Peter J. “In Defense of Newsmen’s Rights.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1972, 3-4.
Brown, Lee. The Reluctant Reformation: on Criticizing thePress in America. (New
York: David McKay, 1974).
Brownmiller, Susan. Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1975).
. “Brownmiller Reviews M ailer... Almost,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
October 1971, 1, 16.
Buck, Rinker. “Can The ‘Post’ Survive Rupert Murdoch?” More: The M edia Magazine,
November, 1977, 11-23.
--------- . “Watertown, N.Y.: Suitable Grounds for Divorce?” More: The M edia Magazine,
October 1977, 14-20.
Bugeja, Michael. “Making Whole: The Ethics o f Correction.” Journal o f M ass M edia
Ethics 22(1): 49-65.
Carey, James W. “Journalism and Criticism: The Case o f an Undeveloped Profession,”
The Review o f Politics 36 (Apr., 1974), 227.
Carr, David and Ashley Parker, “House o f Cards: What Happens When a Reporter
Becomes an Army o f One?” Yew York Times Media Decoder blog, February 28,
2013. http://mediadecoder.blogs.nytimes.eom/2013/02/28/house-of-cards-whathappens-when-a-reporter-becomes-an-army-of-one/
Cassidy, Robert. “Stripping Out the Facts,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April 1972,
3-5.
Catalog o f Copyright Entries. Third Series: 1974: January—June, Book 1974. Library of
Congress Copyright Office, 1974, 1866.

313

Chideya, Farai. “How Can We Improve American M edia’s Coverage o f Race, Class, and
Social Mobility?” Columbia Journalism Review, March/April 2013.
Claussen, Dane. Anti-Intellectualism in American Media: Magazines & Higher
Education (New York: Peter Lang, 2004).
Cockbum, Alexander. “Death Rampant! Readers Rejoice,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, December 1973, 1.
. “Here’s to Old Blue Eyes (59),” (MORE): A Journalism Review, September
1974, 17.
. “How to Earn Your Trench Coat,” (MORE): A Journalism Review. May, 1974,
24.
. “Press Clips,” The Village Voice, May 16, 1974.
Cohen, Claudia. “The Big Apple: Top Secret,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, October
1973, 12-13.
Collins, Nancy. ‘M ore Magazine for Sale,” The Washington Post, April 25, 1978, B4.
Cook, John. “‘Fox M ole’ to Plead Guilty to Misdemeanor Charges Over Gawker Posts,”
Gawker, May 9, 2013. http://gawker.com/fox-mole-to-plead-guilty-tomisdemeanor-charges-over-498575781. Accessed January 22, 2014.
“Convention Discriminates, NOW Says.” The Washington Post, May 5, 1973, C3.
Correction, New York Times, January 15, 1972.
Correction, New York Times, March 9, 1972.
Correction, New York Times, June 1 1972.
Correction, New York Times, June 2, 1972.
“The Counter-Convention (cont’d),” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1972, 21.
Cover, Washington Journalism Review, December 1981.
Cowan, Paul. “Slicking Over the Oil Industry,” (MORE), June, 1971, p. 9.
Crouse, Timothy. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1972, 1, 15-17.
Dabbous, Yasmine Tarek. “ ‘Blessed be the Critics o f Newspapers’: Journalistic Criticism
o f Journalism 1865-1930 (Ph.D. diss., Louisiana State University, 2010).
“Darts and Laurels,” Columbia Journalism Review,” July/August, 1972, 7.
Dennis, Everette E. Review of Stop the Presses, I want to Get Off1, Journalism Quarterly
52(4), December 1975, 780.
DeZutter, Henry. “The trial: You had to be there,” Chicago Journalism Review, March
1970, p. 3.
Diamond, Edwin. “The Cabal at the ‘New York Times’: Which Way to the Revolution?”
New York, May 18, 1970, p. 42^15.
. “Fishing in Ellsberg’s Wake,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January 1972, 1,
13-16.
Dicken-Garcia, Hazel. Journalistic Standards in Nineteenth-Century America (Madison:
University o f Wisconsin Press, 1989)
Dorfman, Ron. “Battling the Myths in Chicago,” (MORE), June, 1971, p .18.
--------- . “Truth, Justice and the American Way,” Revue Frangaise d Etudes Americaines
3 (October 1978): 183-191.
Dougherty, Philip H. “Backer for More Sought,” The New York Times, May 8, 1978.
Draper, Robert. Rolling Stone Magazine: The Uncensored History (New York:
Doubleday, 1990.

314

Dunbar, Ernest. “Notes from the Belly o f the Whale.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1972, 1.
Durbin, Karen. “Journalists at Play: The (MORE) the Merrier?” The Village Voice, May
19 1975, 7-9.
Editor’s note, (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1971, 2.
Emery, Michael, Edwin Emery, & Nancy L. Roberts. The Press and America: An
Interpretive H istory o f the M ass Media, 9th ed. (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2000).
“The Enemy Within,” Newsweek, May 8, 1972, 61.
Epstein, Joseph. “Furthermore: The Media as Villain.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1974, 24.
“The First Annual Anchorman Face-O ff’ (MORE): A Journalism Review, April, 1976,
16-17.
Fisher, Shelley M. “La Participation.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October 1972, 8 11 .
Fishkin, Shelley Fisher. From Fact to Fiction : Journalism & Imaginative Writing in
America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985).
Folsom, Tom. The M ad Ones: Crazy Joe Gallo and the Revolution at the E nd o f the
Underworld (New York: Weinstein Books, 2010), 5.
Fox, Margalit. “Claudia Cohen, 56, Socialite and a Reporter o f Gossip, Is Dead,” The
New York Times, June 16, 2007. Accessed online at
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/16/nyregion/16cohen.html, January 22, 2014.
Frankel, Anita, producer. “For [MORE] Inform ation...” February, 1975. Courtesy o f the
Pacifica Radio Archive.
Frankfort, Ellen. The Voice: Life at The Village Voice, A n Unauthorized Account (New
York: William Morrow and Company, 1976).
A Free and Responsible Press: A General Report on Mass Communication: Newspapers,
Radio, Motion Pictures, Magazines, and Books (Chicago: Commission on
Freedom of the Press, 1947).
Freedman, David H. “Survival of the Wrongest,” Columbia Journalism Review,
January/February 2013.
Friedman, Larry. Review o f Stop the Presses, I Want to Get O ff Tales o f the News
Business From the Pages o f (MORE) Magazine, Library Journal 100 (10), May
15, 1975,979.
Gans, Herbert. Deciding W hat’s News: A Study o f CBS Evening News, N BC Nightly
News, Newsweek, and Time (Evanston, 111.: Northwestern University Press, 2004).
Gates, Anita. “Two Artistic Giants, and the Man Who Manipulated Them,” The New
York Times, March 12, 2011. Accessed online at
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/13/nyregion/13theatct.html, January 22, 2014.
Gitlin, Todd. The Whole World is Watching (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2003).
Goldberg, Mark, producer. “The White House: W ho’s Kicking Whom Around? June 12,
1973. Courtesy o f the Pacifica Radio Archive.
Goldstein, Tom. Killing theMessenger: 100 Years o f M edia Criticism, revised edition
(New York: Columbia, 2007).
“The Good, the Bad & the Boring,” The Village Voice, May 16, 1974, 25.

315

Goodman, Edwin A. “On 44 Hours in Civil Jail.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April
1972, 12-14.
Graham, Fred P. “Will Earl Caldwell Go to Jail?” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June
1972, 1, 14-16.
Green, Mark J. “Talking Back to the Hucksters,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
October 1973, 6-9.
Greenwald, Marilyn. A Woman o f the Times: Journalism, Feminism, and the Career O f
Charlotte Curtis (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1999).
Haberman, Clyde. “J. Anthony Lukas, 64, an Author, is Dead.” The New York Times,
June 7, 1997. Accessed online at http://www.nytimes.com/1997/06/07/nyregion/janthony-lukas-64-an-author-is-dead.html, January 22, 2014.
Halberstam, David. The Powers That Be (New York: Knopf, 1979).
. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December
1972, 1, 15-17.
Hale, Grace Elizabeth. A Nation o f Outsiders: How the White Middle Class Fell in Love
with Rebellion in Postwar America (New York: Oxford, 2011).
Hallin, Daniel. The Uncensored War (Berkeley: University o f California, 1989).
Harris, Richard. “The Strange Love o f Dr. Kissinger,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1972, 1, 14-16.
Harrison, Stanley L. “‘The Wayward Press’ Revisited: The Contributions of Robert
Benchley,” Journalism History 19:1 (1993), 19-27.
Haskell, Thomas L. The Emergence o f Professional Social Science (Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2000).
Hayes, Arthur S. Press Critics are the Fifth Estate: M edia Watchdogs in America
(Wesport, Connecticut: Praeger, 2008).
“Hellbox,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June, 1971, 2, 23.
“Hellbox,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, August 1973, 2.
“Hellbox: ‘Are We Sure They’re Just Eating With Their Hands, Bem ie?” ’ (MORE): A
Journalism Review, November 1973, 12-13.
“Hellbox: Blackout?” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January, 1973, 18.
“Hellbox: Cupid, Changes atN ew sday, and That Penthouse Boy,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, January 1973, 8-9.
“Hellbox: The Phoenix (cont’d).” (MORE): A Journalism Review, August 1972, 2, 16.
Hentoff, Nat. “ .. .and on the Printed Page,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January
1972, 9-11.
. “Broyard & (MORE),” The Village Voice, May 13, 1971, 19-20.
Hess, Stephen. “Corrections: When the News Media Make Mistakes,” Press/Politics
3(1): 122-125.
Hill, Norman. “The Growing Phenomenon of the Journalism Review,” The Saturday
Review, September 11, 1971, 59-60.
Hitchens, Christopher. “Assassination in Nicosiaf More: The M edia Magazine, April,
1978, 22-23.
Hofstadter, Richard. Anti-Intellectualism in American Life (New York: Vintage, 1963).
Howard, Jane. “No. 3274 Looks Back,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, January 1973, 4.
. “‘Stay Right Where You are, Geraldo is Coming!” ’ (MORE): A Journalism
Review, September 1974, 11.

316

Howard, Pamela. “Watch Your Language, Men.” (MORE): a Journalism Review,
February 1972, 3.
Hume, Brit. Death and the Mines: Rebellion and M urder in the UMW (New York:
Grossman, 1971).
. Inside Story (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1974).
. “The Mayor, The Times, and the Lawyers,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
August 1974, 1, 16-18.
Hynds, Ernest C. American Newspapers in the 1970s (New York: Hastings House, 1975).
Ireland, Doug. “Rupert Murdoch Comes to Town A More: The M edia Magazine, January,
1977, 18.
Irwin, Will. The American Newspaper: A Series First Appearing in Collier’s, January—
July 1911. Edited by Clifford Weigle and David G. Clark (Ames, Iowa: The Iowa
State University Press, 1969).
Isaacs, Norman E. Untended Gates: The M ismanaged Press (New York: Columbia,
1986), 132-133.
Jacqueney, Theodore. “Nibbling at the Bureaucracy,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
October 1973, 15-17.
Jefferson, Thomas. Letter to Dr. James Currie, January 28, 1786. Library o f Congress
American Memory Collection, Selected Quotations from the Thomas Jefferson
Papers. Accessed online at hdl.loc.gov/loc.mss/mtj .mtjbib001765
Jones, Alex S. “The Media Business: Media Critics are Seeking to Turn Talk into Print,”
The New York Times, July 2 1990. Accessed online at
http://www.nytimes.eom/1990/07/02/business/the-media-business-media-criticsare-seeking-to-tum-talk-into-print.html, March 21, 2013.
“Journalism’s In-House Critics,” Time, December 6, 1971, 80-81.
“Journalism’s Woodstock,” Newsweek, May 8, 1972, 96.
“The Journalists’ Movement,” Columbia Journalism Review (July 1973): 5.
Kaplan, Jim. “The Big Apple: Preserving Dignity on 43rd Street,” (MORE): A
Journalism Review, December 1973, 12.
Kaplan, Justin. “The ‘Literature o f Exposure,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1973, 3-6.
Kaplan, Peter. “The Big Apple: Baptism.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October
1973,13.
Keller, Bill. “Is Glenn Greenwald the Future of News?” The New York Times, October
27, 2013. Accessed online at http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/28/opinion/aconversation-in-lieu-of-a-column.html, January 22, 2014.
Kempton, Murray. “An Effort to Break With Tradition,” (MORE), A Journalism Review,
April 1972, 6-7, 17-20.
Kilday, Gregg J. “Meet the Press,” The Harvard Crimson, May 4, 1972.
. “The Short, Unhappy Life o f L A . f (MORE), A Journalism Review, February
1973,7-9, 16.
Killen, Andreas. 1973 Nervous Breakdown: Watergate: Warhol, and the Birth o f PostSixties America (New York: Bloomsbury, 2006).
Kluger, Richard. The Paper: The Life and Death o f the New York Herald-Tribune (New
York: Knopf, 1986.
Knoll, Erwin. “New Journalists, Old Journalism,” June, 1972, 38.

317

Kochevar, John, Gilda LePatner and James Inglis. “Critic Power: Who Has it7 ' More:
The M edia Magazine, July/August 1977, 23-25, 29-34.
Kovach, Bill. “Fighting Over Boston’s Phoenix.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July
1972, 8.
Kovach, Bill and Tom Rosenstiel, The Elements o f Journalism (New York: Three Rivers
Press, 2007).
Kramer, Larry. “ [MORE] Journalism Review Donated to Publisher o f Its Rival,” The
Washington Post, July 22, 1978, A7.
Kramer, Michael. “The Great New York Newspaper 'Wax,” More: The M edia Magazine,
January 1977, 12-13.
. “New Lead,” M ore: The M edia Magazine, July/August 1976, 2.
Krassner, Paul. Untitled column. D.C. Gazette, July 1973, 22.
Kutik, William. “Competition for the Post?” (MORE), A Journalism Review, January
1973,7, 10.
Kuttner, Bob. “The Politics o f Leaksmanship,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1973, 1, 14-16.
. “Television Turns on Nixon,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December 1973,
5-6.
Landau, Jack S. “Harassing the Press,” ,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December
1972, 8-11.
Levenstein, Alan. “ITT’s Big Gamble on a Ten-Year-Old Kid,” More: The M edia
Magazine, September 1976, 22.
Lewis, Anthony. “Bad Time for Civil Liberties,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1972, 8-11.
Liebling, A.J. “The Wayward Press: Do You Belong in Journalism?” The New Yorker
(May 14, 1960), 109.
Lippmann, Walter. Liberty and the News (New York,: Harcourt, Brace and Howe, 1920).
, Public Opinion (New York: Free Press, 1997).
“Literati: ‘M ore’ Deserves Encore,” Variety, May 26, 1971, 54.
Long, Charles. “The A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention Colossus,” The Quill, June, 1972,
34.
Lukas, J. Anthony, The Barnyard Epithet and Other Obscenities: Notes on the Chicago
Conspiracy Trial (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).
--------- . “Disorder Erupts at Chicago Trial After Judge Jails a Defendant for Using a
Vulgarity,” The New York Times, February 5, 1970, p. 18.
. “Life in These United States,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1971, 3-4.
. “The Limits o f Self-Criticism,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, September
1972,3, 15, 17.
--------- . Oral History Memoir. The American Jewish Committee Oral History Collection.
Dorot Jewish Division, New York Public Library. Interviewed by Erik Bamouw,
June 29-30, 1971. Edited and approved December 23, 1972.
. “The Prince o f Gonzo.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, November 1972, 4—7.
. “Say It Ain’t So, Scotty” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May 1973, 1, 17-22.
. “Taking Our Cue From Joe,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May, 1972, 1.
. “The Two Worlds of Linda Fitzpatrick,” The New York Times, October 16, 1967.

318

. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December
1972, 1, 15-17.
The Lukas Prizes, Columbia Journalism School.
http://www.joumalism.columbia.edu/page/169-lukas-prizes/170, accessed January
22, 2014.
Lumsden, Linda J. “Press Criticism,” in American Journalism: History, Principles,
Practices, ed. W. David Sloan and Lisa Mullikin Parcell (Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland & Co., 2002).
McCormally, John. “Who Cares About the Pulitzer Prize?” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, May 1972, 9-11.
MacDougall, A. Kent. “Boring From Within the Bourgeois Press: Part One,” Monthly
Review, November 1988. Part Two: December 1988.
. “For Kraft Cheese, How About a Cow?” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1971, 8-9.
--------- . “Memoirs o f a Radical in the Mainstream Press.” Columbia Journalism Review,
March/April 1989, 36-39.
. “Up Against The Wall Street Journal.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October
1972, 1, 12-18.
MacDougall, A. Kent, ed. The Press: A Critical Look from the Inside (Princeton: Dow
Jones Books, 1966-1972).
MacPherson, Myra. “Meet the Press,” The Washington Post. May 7, 1973, B3.
Mailer, Norman. Letter to the editor. (MORE): A Journalism Review, November 1971,
16, 18.
Marzolf, Marion Tuttle. Civilizing Voices: American Press Criticism 1880-1950 (New
York: Longman, 1991).
Masters, W.H. “Media Monopolies: Busting Up a Cozy Marriage,” M ore: TheM edia
Magazine, October 1977, 12-13.
McAuliffe, Kevin Michael. The Great American Newspaper: The Rise and Fall o f the
Village Voice (New York: Scribner, 1978).
McBroom, Patricia. “Seeds o f Revolution,” Philadelphia Journalism Review (June 1972,
3).
McCartney, Laton. “How IBM Spindles the Media,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1973, 1, 19-21.
McChesney Robert W. and Ben Scott, Introduction to The Brass Check: A Study o f
American Journalism, by Upton Sinclair (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
2003), ix-xxxiii.
McChesney Robert W. and Ben Scott, editors. Our Unfree Press: 100 Years o f Radical
M edia Criticism (New York: The New Press, 2004).
McGinniss, Joe. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1972, 1, 15-17.
McIntyre, Mark. “Muting Megaphone Mark.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July
1973, 5-6.
McMillian, John. Smoking Typewriters: The Sixties Underground Press and the Rise o f
Alternative M edia in America (New York: Oxford, 2011).
“The Media: Promising More,” Newsweek, June 14, 1971, 64.

319

Meehan, Thomas. “The Time Renata Adler Didn’t Dump Soup on Tom W olfe’s Head,”
Saturday Review, June 3, 1972, 22-24.
Midura, Edmund W. “A.J. Liebling: The Wayward Pressman as Critic,” Journalism
Monographs 33 (April 1974).
Mindich, Daniel T.Z. Just the Facts: How “Objectivity” Came to Define American
Journalism (New York: New York University, 1998).
(MORE) Advertising Rates advertisement, (MORE): A Journalism Review, March 1973,
17.
MORE A JOURNALISM REVIEW Trademark Details, serial number 72398753,
accessed via Justia Trademarks, wwwjustia.com.
“More Journalism Reviews,” Columbia Journalism Review, May 1970, 4-5.
“More Magazine Ends Publication to Join Journal at Columbia,” The New York Times,
July 22, 1978.
“More Monitors,” Columbia Journalism Review, March/April 1972, 7.
“More, the Review o f Journalism, Being Sold to Washington Group,” The New York
Times, August 30, 1977.
Mott, Frank Luther. American Journalism, 3rd ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1962).
Moynihan, Daniel P. “The Presidency & the Press,” Commentary, March 1971, 41-52.
Nachman, Gerald. “W ho’s Afraid o f the Broadway Critic N More: The M edia Magazine,
July/August 1977, 18-22.
“Nathan’s Employes [sic] End Their Strike; Agree to Arbitrate,” New York Times, May
19, 1972, 57.
Navasky, Victor S. “Substantiating the ‘Permissible Lie,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism
Review, December 1972, 5-7.
“Need Help?” Chicago Journalism Review, March 1970, p. 14.
Nelson, Madeline. “Money Makes the Press Go ‘Round,” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, March 1974, 1.
Newhouse Faculty: David Rubin, http://newhouse.syr.edu/faculty-staff/david-rubin,
accessed January 22, 2014.
“New York City Catches Up: Has a Journalism Review,” The Wall Street Journal, May
19, 1971, 16.
New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers, MssCol 17929. New York
Public Library Manuscripts and Archives Division.
New York Times Company Records, A.M. Rosenthal Papers 1959-2004, MssCol 17930,
Series II: Journals, 1971-1986, New York Public Library Manuscripts and
Archives Division.
News-Media Review Begins Publication,” The New York Times, May 19, 1971, 45.
Nobile, Philip. Intellectual Skywriting: Literary Politics & The New York Review of
Books (New York: Charterhouse, 1974).
Nolan, Martin. “Ron Among the Plastic Alligators,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1972, 11-13.
Norman, Marty. Accounting books. Private collection.
Northington, Kristie Bunton. “Media Criticism as Professional Self-Regulation: A Study
o f U.S. Journalism Reviews,” (Ph.D. diss., Indiana University, 1993).

320

Pauly, John J. “Finding Ourselves in the New Journalism,” in 1968: Year o f M edia
Decision, Robert Giles and Robert W. Snyder, editors (New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction, 2001).
Peck, Abe. Uncovering the Sixties: The Life and Times o f the Underground Press (New
York: Citadel, 1991).
Perry, James M. “ T See a Big White H ouse... (MORE): A Journalism Review, April
1974, 1.
Pinsky, Mark. “Riding the Airwaves to Washington,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
March 1973, 4-6.
Plato, Apology, trans. Benjamin Jowett. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Internet Classics
Archive, 1994). http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html
Poliak, Richard. “A Case Against Press Councils.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1973, 3.
. “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1973, 2, 14-15.
. “Column Two: The Firing o f Denny Walsh,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
September 1974, 2,
. “An Intra-Family Sort o f Thing,’ (MORE), October, 1971, p. 3.
. “Liebling IV,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1975, 14.
. “Trying to Remember Vietnam,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, March 1973,
8-9.
Poliak, Richard, ed. Stop the Presses, I Want to Get Off.1 Tales o f the News Business
From the Pages o f (MORE) Magazine (New York: Random House, 1975).
Richard Poliak: Bio. http://www.richardpollak.com/bio.htm, accessed January 22, 2014.
Porwancher, Andrew.“Objectivity’s Prophet: Adolph S. Ochs and the New York Times,
1^,96-1935F Journalism History 36:4 (2011): 186-195.
Pottker, Horst. “News and its Communicative Quality: The Inverted Pyramid— When and
Why Did it Appear? . Journalism Studies, 4:4, 2003.
Potts, Robert. “Surviving the TV Newsroom.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, March
1972, 6-8.
Povich, Lynn. The Good Girls Revolt: How the Women o/N ew sw eek Sued Their Bosses
and Changed the Workplace (New York: Public .Affairs, 2012).
Price, .Anderson. “How to Become a Reliable Source,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
May 1973, 11, 14-15.
Pristin, Terry. “The Big Apple: Progress Report.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
August 1973, 12.
. “The Big Apple: Up with People,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, August
1973, 13.
. “Column Two.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, August 1973, 2.
. “Esquire’s Black Pointy-Heads.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January 1973,
6-7.
. “Is Anybody Downtown Listening?” (MORE), October 1971, 6-8.
. “Singles Set,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July 1973, 12-13.
Program for the A.J. Liebling Counter-Convention, (MORE): A Journalism Review,
April 1972, 23.
“Publisher o f More Seeking to Sell His Monthly Review o f Journalism,” The New York
Times, May 24, 1978.

321

Quinn, Sally. “Countering the Publishers,” The Washington Post, April 24, 1972, B3.
--------- . “Journalism’s New Nation: New Journalism’s Counter-Convention: Egos and
Insult,” The Washington Post, April 26, 1972, D1-D2.
. “(MORE) Party.” The Washington Post, May 4, 1973, B l.
Raskin, A.H. “W hat’s Wrong with American Newspapers? A Newsman’s Critique of the
Press. New York Times Magazine, June 11, 1967, 249.
Reedy, George E. “Moynihan’s Scholarly Tantrum,” (MORE), June 1971, p. 7.
Reese, Stephen D. “The News Paradigm and the Ideology o f Objectivity: A Socialist at
The Wall Street Journal.” Critical Studies inM ass Communication 1 (1990), 390409.
Reeves, Richard. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1972, 1, 15-17.
“Reflections on Hollywoodstein” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April 1976, 7-9.
Reisig, Robin. “ ‘The Biggest Freeloaders Around.’” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
May 1972, 5-8.
. “Is Journalism an Air-Brushed Profession?” The Village Voice, May 16, 1974,
24.
“Review O f Press In Bow,” The New YorkPost, May 18, 1971, 10.
“A Review o f Reviews,” Columbia Journalism Review, March/April 1972, 4-7.
Richardson, Peter. A Bomb in Every Issue: How the Short, Unruly Life o f Ramparts
M agazine Changed America (New York: New Press, 2010).
Ridgeway, James. “Exploits o f ‘The New Adventurers,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism
Review, July 1972, 1, 18-20.
. “Trying to Catch the Energy Crisis,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January,
1974, 1.
Rigney, Daniel. “Three Kinds o f Anti-Intellectualism: Rethinking Hofstadter,”
Sociological Inquiry 61:4 (1991).
Roddy, Joseph. “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, October 1973, 2, 2 0 21 .
. “Judge Tyler’s New Mature Courtroom.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April
1973, 13-15.
. “The New Intellectuals,” (MORE), A Journalism Review, July 1973, 16-17.
--------- . “Notes from a Bargain Typewriter, (MORE), A Journalism Review, November
1971,3-5.
Rodgers, Daniel T. Age o f Fracture (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap, 2011).
Rose, Don. “New Voices o f Newsmen,” The Nation, January 10, 1972, 43^16.
Rubin, David. “ ‘Behind the Front Page,” ’ (MORE): A Journalism Review, November
1974, 7.
.“The Perils of Muckraking,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, September 1974,
5-9.
. “You Are What You Eat.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December 1973, 7 9.
Salcetti, Marianne. “The Emergence of the Reporter: Mechanization and the Devaluation
o f Editorial Workers.” In Hanno Hardt & Bonnie Brennen (Eds.), News Workers:
Toward a History o f the Rank and File (Minneapolis: University o f Minnesota
Press, 1995),48-74.

322

“Sale o f More Magazine Being Negotiated,” The New York Times, March 4, 1976.
Sanders, Keith P. “W hat .Are Daily Newspapers Doing to Be Responsive to Readers’
Criticisms? A Survey o f U.S. Daily Newspaper Accountability System, in News
Research fo r Better Newspapers, ed. By Galen Rarick, Vol. 7 (Washington, DC:
American Newspaper Publishers Association Foundation, 1975).
Sandman, Peter M. “Cross-Ownership on the Scales,” More: The M edia Magazine,
October 1977, 21-26.
Nora Sayre Papers 1940-2001. MssCol 4847. New York Public Library Manuscripts and
/Archives Division.
Sayre, Nora. Sixties Going on Seventies, (New York: /Arbor House, 1973).
. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December
1972, 1, 15-17.
Schickel, Richard. “The Truth W ent Thataway,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1974, 1.
Dorothy Schiff Papers, New York Public Library Manuscripts and /Archives Division.
Schudson, Michael. Discovering the News: A Social History o f American Newspapers
(New York: Basic Books, 1978).
Schulman, Bruce J. The Seventies: The Great Shift in American Culture, Society and
Politics (New York: DiCapo, 2002).
Schwartz, Tony. “Establishing the Levels o f the Game.” M ore; The M edia Magazine,
July/August 1976, 38.
George Seldes, Freedom o f the Press (Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1935)
. Lords o f the Press, (New York: Julian Messner, 1938).
Shafer, Jack. “The Church o f Liebling: The uncritical worshippers of/America’s best
press critic.” Slate, August 25, 2004. http://www.slate.com/id/2105627/
. “Move over Bezos, ESPN can do news better than you,” Reuters.com.
http://blogs.reuters.com/jackshafer/2013/10/23/move-over-bezos-espn-can-donews-better-than-you/ Published October 23, 2013. Accessed October 24, 2013.
. “The Rise and Fall o f the ‘Bus Plunge’ Story.” Slate. Posted November 13,
2006. Accessed August 15, 2013.
www.slate.com/articles/news_andjpolitics/press_box/2006/l l/the_rise_and_fall_
of_the_bus_plunge_story.single.html
Sherman, Scott. “The Long Good-Bye,” Vanity Fair (Web Exclusive), November 30,
2012. http://www.vanitvfair.com/culture/2Q12/ll/1963-newspaper-strike-bertrampowers
Sherr, Lynn. “Some M ad Predictions.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, April 1972, 8-9.
Siegal, Allan M. Introduction, in K ill Duck Before Serving: R ed Faces at The N ew York
Times, ed. Linda Amster and Dylan Loeb McClain (New York: St. Martin’s
Griffin, 2002).
Siegel, Barbara J. “ ‘He’ll Think You Baked All Day’.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
May 1972, 14. Barbara J. Siegel, “ ‘He’ll Think You Baked All Day’.” (MORE):
A Journalism Review, May 1972, 14.
Silverman, Craig. Regret the Error: How M edia Mistakes Pollute the Press and Imperil
Free Speech (New York: Sterling, 2007), 229.
. “Slate Shuts the Window,” CJR.org. September 24, 2010.
http ://www.cjr.org/behind_the_news/slate_shuts_the_window/

323

Smith, Robert M. “Why So Little Investigative Reporting?” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, November 1973, 7-9.
Sokolov, Raymond. Wayward Reporter: The Life o f A.J. Liebling (New York: Harper &
Row, 1980).
Solomon, William S. “The Site o f Newsroom Labor: The Division of Editorial Practices.
In Hanno Hardt & Bonnie Brennen (Eds.), News Workers: Toward a History o f
the Rank and File (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995), 116.
Starr, Paul. The Creation o f the Media: Political Origins o f M odern Communications
(New York: Basic Books, 2004).
Stephens, Mitchell. A History o f News (Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace, 1997).
Stillman, Deanne. “Make Way for the Show Biz Bards f More: The M edia Magazine,
October 1976, 23-31.
“(Still) Fighting over The Phoenix.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, September 1972, 2.
Stock, Ellen, ed., “Best Bets: The Press Gang,” New York, April 24,1972, 52.
Stone, I.F. “As Soon As You Want Something...” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June,
1972, 4.
Strainchamps, Ethel Reed. “Why We Can’t Say B
shit.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, July 1972, 8.
Talese, Gay. The Kingdom and the Power (New York: Random House, 2007).
Tebbel, John. Open Letter to Newspaper Readers (New York: Heineman, 1968).
“The 10 Worst,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May, 1974, 16-17.
Things to Do f D.C. Gazette, April 25, 1973, 9.
Thompson, Eric. “Lindsay Tosses Aurelio in Ring.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1972, 12-13.
Tifft Susan E. and Alex S. Jones, The Trust: The Private and Powerful Family Behind
The New York Times (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 1999).
“Tom Wolfe and his Dirigible,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, July, 1972, 11, 16.
Trillin, Calvin. “Further More: On Using Newspapers.” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1973, 24, 22.
. “U.S. Journal: Seattle, Wash.: Alternatives,” TheN ew Yorker, April 10, 1978,
118-125.
. “A Weekend in a Panel Colony,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, June 1974,
15.
Turner, Fred. From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth
Network, and the Rise o f Digital Utopianism (Chicago: University of Chicago,
2006).
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI Inflation Calculator.
http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm
Van Gelder, Lindsy. “The Passionate Parvenu: A Guide.” (MORE): A Journalism
Review, October 1971, 5-6.
Volz, Joseph. “Post-Ombudsman.” (MORE): A Journalism Review, January 1972, 3-5.
von Hoffman, Nicholas. “Pardon... Me.” The Washington Post, May 7, 1973, B l.
. “Where Not to Find Your New Car,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
November 1971, 1, 14.
Warren, Samuel D. and Louis D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy,” H arvard Law Review
4(5), December, 1890.

324

WBAI Folio, vol. 13, no. 4, April, 1972. Internet Archive, Pacifica Radio Archives
Digitized Folio Collection, http://archive.org/details/wbaifolio 134wbairich
“We Remember Dolly,” M ore; The M edia Magazine, January 1977, 14-17.
Welles, Chris “Soft Times for Wall Street,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, December
1971, 1, 10-13.
“What is Journalism For?” Columbia Journalism Review, September/October 2013.
White, Jean M. “More Changing Hands and Changing Goals,” The Washington Post, B l,
B12.
Whitney, Charles. “Begging Your Pardon: Corrections and Corrections Policies at
Twelve U.S. Newspapers” (Research report, 1986)
Whittemore, L.H. “The Plugging o f the President,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
February 1972, 4-6.
“Why a Counter-Convention,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, May, 1972.
Wilkins, Roger. “Underneath the Nixon Landslide,” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
December 1972, 1, 15-17.
Wills, Garry. “W hat’s Wrong With This Magazine?” (MORE): A Journalism Review,
June, 1975, 6-8.
Witcover, Jules. “Media in the Mirror,” The Progressive, July 1975, 28-29.
Wolfe, Tom. “The Birth o f ‘The New Journalism’; Eyewitness Report by Tom Wolfe:
Participant Reveals Main Factors Leading to Demise o f the Novel, Rise o f New
Style Covering Events,” Yew York, February 14, 1972.
. The New Journalism. (New York: Harper & Row, 1973).
Woodward, William. “Column Two,” (MORE): A Journalism Review, March 1973, 2.
Wyatt, Wendy. Critical Conversations: A Theory o f Press Criticism (Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press, 2007), 157.
Yardley, Jim. “Heir to a Fortune, and to Tragedy; Suicide Ends the Life o f a Wealthy,
and Haunted, Man,” The New York Times, May 8, 1999.
Zelizer, Barbie. “When Facts, Truth, and reality are God-Terms: On Journalism’s Uneasy
Place in Cultural Studies,” Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies, 1:1
(2004).

