PAST AND PRESENT MILWAUKEE CIVIL RIGHTS EDUCATION:
THE SIGNIFICANT ARENAS OF COMMUNITY ACTIVISM
AND CURRENT DIGITAL ARCHIVAL COLLECTION ASSESSMENT

by

Kathryn M. Otto

A Thesis Submitted in
Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of

Master of Arts
in History

at
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
May 2014

UMI Number: 1557891

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1557891
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT
PAST AND PRESENT MILWAUKEE CIVIL RIGHTS EDUCATION:
THE SIGNIFICANT ARENAS OF COMMUNITY ACTIVISM
AND CURRENT DIGITAL ARCHIVAL COLLECTION ASSESSMENT
by
Kathryn Otto

The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2014
Under the Supervision of Professor Jasmine Alinder
This thesis explores civil rights education as practiced by civil rights activists from
the 1960s to the present day using the city of Milwaukee as a geographical focus. The
first part of the thesis focuses on the civil rights historical narratives employed
throughout the second half of the twentieth century, with a focus on activists in
Milwaukee. The first chapter describes the various social realms in which activists
employed civil rights education including law, religious organizations, and schools. The
second chapter uses 1964 Milwaukee Freedom School curricula as a case study to
analyze a historically significant form of civil rights education. The second part of this
thesis analyzes the more recent creation of a digital collection as an effective and
increasingly relevant educational tool. The final chapter uses the March on Milwaukee
Civil Rights Project collection as a case study to consider how digital archival collections
can become effective educational tools in academic institutions and beyond. The final
chapter contributes to existing literature by modeling assessment methods specific to a
digital archival collection. The thesis argues that the March on Milwaukee digital
collection is distinctive because of its community outreach initiatives, which have
ii

extended a target audience beyond the confines of higher education to at-risk high
school students.
This thesis finds that local activists, teachers, and scholars have used civil rights
narratives to educate and motivate people residing in cities such as Milwaukee, WI, to
actively reflect on the causes of racial inequality as well as possible solutions. The case
studies involving the 1964 Milwaukee freedom school curricula and the current March
on Milwaukee digital collection provide specific evidence of community-driven
education that have successfully engaged people who have traditionally been
underserved by academic libraries and archives. The thesis analyzes a wide range of
primary sources, including archival documents and newspapers, in addition to germane
secondary works relevant to the history of race relations in Milwaukee and the United
states. This thesis also uses interviews, historical scholarship, and current assessment
models relating to digital collections. The evidence gathered from March on Milwaukee
developer interviews and secondary scholarship on digital collections supports the idea
that Milwaukee civil rights histories have evolved and continue to be relevant in 2014.
The thesis concludes that the success of future digital archival collections will
depend not merely on making information available to site visitors but also on the
ability of librarians and archives to reach out to communities through partnerships and
collaborations similar to those associated with the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights
Project. Assessment of engagement efforts of this kind will require librarians and
archives to complement quantitative measures with qualitative approaches that

iii

consider not just how many people access a site for how long, but also the extent to
which people engage meaningfully with the information and find it useful and relevant
for their own lives.

iv


Copyright by Kathryn Otto, 2014
All Rights Reserved

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract ..................................................................................................................... ii
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................. viii
Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1

Part I
Chapter One
Civil Rights History: Applications in Milwaukee from 1964-2013.................................. 5
Civil Rights Histories in Law and Politics ......................................................................... 7
Civil Rights Histories and Religious Organizations ........................................................ 12
Civil Rights Histories and Educational Reform .............................................................. 16
Chapter Two
1960s Milwaukee Civil Rights Movement Applications and Freedom Schools ............ 25
Civil Rights Histories applied in Freedom Schools ........................................................ 26
Histories Applied in School Desegregation Efforts by the Community......................... 33

Part II
Chapter Three
Digital Collections: Effective 21st Century Research Tools ......................................... 42
The Benefits of Using Digital Collections ...................................................................... 47
Considerations for the Creation of Digital Collections .................................................. 52
Chapter Four
The March on Milwaukee Digital Collection .............................................................. 58
Digital Archives Collection Purposes, Risks, and Opportunities ................................... 60
March on Milwaukee's Civil Rights Impetus ................................................................. 67
The March on Milwaukee Developmental Process and Key People Involved .............. 73
Establishing Policies and Guidelines ............................................................................. 75
Technical Considerations for Digital Archive Creation .................................................. 79
User-Focused Digital Collections ................................................................................... 82
Pedagogical Uses for Digital Collections ....................................................................... 85

vi

Chapter Five
Assessing Digital Archival Collections ........................................................................ 96
Digital Collection Assessment Strengths and Weaknesses ........................................... 99
March on Milwaukee Assessment Methods ............................................................... 105
Other Digital Collection Assessment Examples........................................................... 109
March on Milwaukee Assessment Results .................................................................. 112
Other Relevant Digital Collection Assessment Findings ............................................. 115
Digital Archival Assessment Limitations...................................................................... 117
Positive March on Milwaukee Assessment and Outreach Methods .......................... 118
Suggestions Based on Digital Collection Assessment Findings ................................... 122
Conclusion ..............................................................................................................131
Bibliography ............................................................................................................137

APPENDICES ............................................................................................................137
Appendix A .................................................................................................................. 146
Appendix B .................................................................................................................. 148
Appendix C .................................................................................................................. 149
Appendix D .................................................................................................................. 150
Appendix E................................................................................................................... 153
Appendix F ................................................................................................................... 154

vii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This thesis would not have been possible without the help and guidance of my
committee members. I am indebted to my thesis advisor Dr. Jasmine Alinder and
graduate advisor Dr. Aims McGuiness. Their professional guidance and encouragement
since 2009 has molded me into the researcher I am today. No two educators have
influenced my academic career more and I would like to express to them my deepest
gratitude. Special thanks to Dr. Rachel Baum who also sat on my committee and offered
several good suggestions and ideas to carry forward both my thesis and my career. As a
whole, my thesis committee offered suggestions and ideas that improved the depth and
quality of this thesis.
I would also like to thank the March on Milwaukee Digital Civil Rights Project
team who committed their time and energy to participating in interviews and giving me
invaluable assessment data. These individuals include: UWM Director of Urban Studies
Jasmine Alinder, UWM Archives Director Michael Doylen, UWM Associate Academic
Digitization Librarian Ling Meng, UWM Digitization Specialist Trevor Berman, UWM
Digital Collections Coordinator Ann Hanlon, former UWM Digital Collections Coordinator
Krystyna Matusiak, former UWM archivist Ellen Engseth, History graduate candidate
Luke Wolff, and Arts@Large Program Manager Ryan Hurley.
Finally, I would like to thank my parents, David and Mary Otto. They sacrificed a
lot of their time to read through rough drafts and have unconditionally supported my
educational aspirations. My graduate career would not have been possible without their
love and constant encouragement. My family and friends have given me the support to
help me accomplish many goals. They have been patient, honest, forgiving, and hopeful.
Thank you for challenging me and believing in me!

viii

1

Introduction
Narratives about civil rights history in the United States have often focused on a
few key figures who protested in the south, including Rosa Parks and Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Although less well known, northern civil rights protests also deserve a place in
the national historical record and are important for local understandings about struggles
for social justice. In order to tell those stories new narratives had to be created. This
thesis explores examples of how civil rights histories of Milwaukee, Wisconsin have
been created and used by local audiences.
Historical narratives are an engaging way to impart information about the past.
Historical narratives are especially engaging to public audiences and communities in the
way they share memory. Liberal theorists of memory and their ideas, which are
abundant in 20th century sociological scholarship, and terms like collective memory,
support that collectively shared memories can strengthen group solidarity.1 Collective
memory provides people connections between each other that have the power to
maintain history's relevance as a field to the public. Although collective memory helps
communities maintain traditions and can encourage unity, collective memory can also
introduce new historical narratives and disrupt old ones.
Many historians are cognizant of the relevance of relating past events to present
day events and are trained to interpret and record these histories to make arguments.

1

Mary Jo Deegan, The New Woman of Color: the Collected Writings of Fannie Barrier Williams,
1893–1918 (DeKalb: Northern Illinois UP, 2002), 47-51.

2

However, individuals in other professions and in the public compile and employ histories
too.
This thesis has two main purposes. First, it will explore the various forms of civil
rights education employed by civil rights activists throughout the second half of the
twentieth century to the present day using the City of Milwaukee as a geographical
focus. The second chapter specifically focuses on the 1964 Milwaukee Freedom School
curricula as an example of Milwaukee Civil Rights education. Second, this thesis will
analyze a contemporary outlet for educating the public on civil rights, a digital
collection, and will employ the University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee (UWM) managed
March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project as a case study. Milwaukee civil rights histories
implemented since 1964 have not only evolved into current narratives, but also supply
the primary source material to current educational tools such as the March on
Milwaukee Civil Rights Project digital collection.
Before the Internet, civil rights education manifested itself in various ways in the
United States. Examples of earlier civil rights education are in classrooms, organization
meetings, and community outlets including newspapers focused on civil rights topics.
The evolution of these analog educational forms conveys how academic and popular
audiences have reacted to trends in education and which mediums have been most
effective. For example, by understanding the significance and impact of Freedom
Schools in Milwaukee in the 1960s one can better understand the larger civil rights
movement at the time and why freedom school curricula helped empower a community

3

and simultaneously move racial equality forward. Civil rights education that transpired
in subsequent decades indicates Milwaukee's specific response to maintaining the
topic's relevance in the community and what efforts successfully engaged a diverse city
population.
Similarly, the impact of digital resources today communicates a current national
pedagogical trend. Digital technologies have challenged and irrevocably changed
scholarship and the way scholarly communities communicate internally and to the
general public.2 Moreover, digital collections with subject-specific agendas are often the
result of collaborative efforts despite limited budgets and resources. The March on
Milwaukee Civil Rights Project is a specific example of a successful and engaging digital
collection. Analyzing the development and progression of the March on Milwaukee site
will highlight the values of digital collections as educational tools and communicate
assessment and outreach methods as a future model for developmental processes.
Moreover, March on Milwaukee opens up a research conversation supportive of the
positive role electronic information has in regards to educating the public in library
classrooms and other academic settings. Although various forms of education convey
the significance of the 1960s civil rights movement in America, current digital collections
have a unique advantage disseminating civil rights education that informs an
increasingly diverse society. Digital resources can continue to help support current racial
equality efforts through promoting universal access to civil rights education materials.

2

Dan Hazen, "Lost in the Cloud: Research Library Collections and Community in the Digital Age,"
Library Resources & Technical Services 55, no. 4 (October 2011): 196.

4

Moreover, because digital collections are supported by libraries users are generally able
to publically access these materials in libraries and maintain those public resources'
relevancy. Education helps individuals convert information into knowledge and
electronic sources, such as the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project, are examples of
sources that are accessible to the public and effective at offering quality primary sources
to both popular and scholarly audiences.

5

Part I
Chapter One
Civil Rights History: Applications in Milwaukee from 1964-2013

Milwaukee's civil rights movement, particularly in the middle of the 1960s
consisted of multiple activist groups and largely focused on open housing and school
desegregation. Later in the 1970s and 1980s, the larger umbrella organizations of the
previous decade dissolved into smaller communities focused on specific goals unique to
the needs interpreted by each group.3 Since Milwaukee still suffers from hypersegregation and concentrated poverty, activists continue to work for racial justice.
However, activists today do so in a context of past activism that is accessible through
popular memory and the resources of the digital forms such as the March on Milwaukee
Civil Rights Project. Regardless of the era, disparate civil rights communities in
Milwaukee have challenged their local government and community to become more
racially just. More often than not, these activist groups employed civil rights education,
which I use interchangeably with histories throughout this analysis, in their efforts.
Although various communities have integrated civil rights histories in evolving and
disparate ways, those histories have consistently played a central role in facilitating
progress towards racial equality and maintaining the relevance of civil rights movements
over the last four decades, particularly in the city of Milwaukee.

3

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle: The Evolution of Black School Reform in Milwaukee,
(UNC Press, 2004), 194-196 .

6

American civil rights histories have evolved and been increasingly documented
by historians since the pivotal Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Supreme Court ruling.
Even prior to Brown, African American communities and white allies intentionally
articulated their past and current efforts in engaging and informative mediums,
including demonstrations and community efforts such as newspapers, in an effort to
achieve racial equality. Law, education, and religion are three key areas historians have
particularly focused research on in which communities witnessed civil rights education
manifest themselves. In Milwaukee particularly, these three social realms experienced a
high concentration of activism through lawsuits against racial inequality, educational
protests aimed at correcting insufficient education in schools with disproportionately
minority student populations, and religious organization demonstrations supporting
more racially just communities. Demonstrations against social injustice including school
protests or newspapers focused on racial equality topics were educational and
encouraged future activism among various communities. Using Milwaukee as a central
example, this analysis explores how historians have interpreted the ways these three
separate factions of society have continually enlightened communities by employing
civil rights histories germane to their activism in the 1960s, as well as in the 1970s and
1980s, and more recently in the current decade. Although many civil rights histories
exist and have evolved from 1964 to the present, historians have focused research on
civil rights histories applied in litigation, education, and religious groups to highlight
their dynamic nature and effectiveness in conveying the continued struggle for racial
equality across eras.

7

Civil Rights Histories in Law and Politics
In Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy
James Patterson highlighted how Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 initiated a push in
society that continued to challenge racial inequality in America.4 Brown itself was the
result of shared civil rights histories that provided evidence that America was legally
maintaining racial oppression and that separate was not equal. But in the years
following Brown, and after several federal bills in the early 1960s, the rest of America
had yet to catch up. Smaller communities had to challenge local legislation to persuade
the cities they lived in that integration was a priority.5 Additionally, in contrast to more
aggressive demonstrations in earlier years, demonstrations comparatively pacified in
the early 1960s. During this decade, activists initiated integration in steps, such as
African Americans still sitting on the back of the bus but only on a first-come basis.6
Smaller legal battles began appearing throughout the country, in effort to fulfill an
integration mission.
In Milwaukee, the struggle to end segregation in public schools was propelled by
the Milwaukee United School Integration Committee (MUSIC), led by Lloyd Barbee, in
the 1960s. Barbee was a University of Wisconsin Law School graduate and Milwaukee
civil rights activist who sat on the Wisconsin State Assembly and particularly supported
legislation to end housing discrimination and advance social justice. Barbee directed the
4

James T. Patterson and William Wilhartz Freehling, Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights
Milestone and its Troubled Legacy (Oxford University Press, 2001), Introduction.
5
Charles Olgetree, "All Too Deliberate," in The Unfinished Agenda of Brown v. Board of
Education, eds. James Anderson and Dara N. Byrne, (New Jersey: Diverse Issues In Higher Education,
2004), 45-50.
6
James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 118-119.

8

Amos vs. the Board of School Directors of the City of Milwaukee case and depended on
civil rights education including school case histories from 1960-1965. Barbee also relied
on data sheets listing bus routes and boundary violations spanning multiple decades to
help make his case that Milwaukee Public Schools were intentionally and
unconstitutionally segregated.7 Locally in other regions, Patterson highlighted multiple
cases that depended on the personal narratives of individual students who experienced
discrimination due to the neighborhoods they resided in determining the (inadequate)
schools they attended. For example, Sweatt v. Painter arose out of black student
Herman Sweatt's inability to get an education from the University of Texas Law School.8
By publicizing the personal stories of individuals civil rights communities related to each
other and came together to move litigation forward.
More broadly, in 1965 social scientist Patrick Moynihan composed a report
entitled, "The Negro Family: The Case for National Action" which uncovered the recent
history of many African American families and included unemployment rates, unequal
opportunities, and increased welfare those families disproportionately experienced
compared to the general population.9 The report's intended purpose was to challenge
federal litigation and initiate reform through its detailed and evidence-based narrative
on discrimination. Additionally, demonstrations including sit-ins and freedom rides (to
desegregate public accommodations), were led by leaders like Martin Luther King Jr.
and organizations such as SNCC and SCLC that built their group identities on shared past
7

Lloyd Barbee, papers, (Milwaukee Mss 16: Box 68, Folders 1 and 6), University of WisconsinMilwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
8
James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 17.
9
Ibid., 132.

9

discriminatory experiences and personal narratives exemplifying racial injustice.10
People listened to leaders who understood their battle against racism and wanted to
rebel against a society that treated them as second-rate citizens through unequal inner
school education and racially unequal legislation.
Later in the 1970s and in the 1980s, civil rights education applied in national
litigation became less dynamic. The pro-democratic role of justice-oriented national
organizations like the NAACP and local citizens’ groups faced resistance from a growing
conservative movement.11 Using the courts to challenge discrimination shows how
Milwaukee's black community prioritized desegregation. Barbee, for instance, continued
to lead MUSICs desegregation case by emphasizing the personal histories of several
Milwaukee Public School students such as Craig Amos. During one particular trial date
on September 26th, 1973 witness Marion McEvilly was asked by the court to describe
her own personal history by explaining her role as a UW-Milwaukee sociology instructor,
her son's experience at Washington High School in Milwaukee, and her involvement in
community education organizations such as the Sherman Park Association, among other
experiences.12 Her experiences allowed her to offer her credentials and degree of
familiarity with Milwaukee area schools, as well as state specific challenges of the way
the Milwaukee Public School system was running and potential solutions.

10

James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 120.
Vincent Harding, Hope and History: Why We Must Share the Story of the Movement, (New
York: Orbis Books, 1990), 34.
12
Lloyd Barbee, papers, Milwaukee Mss 16, Transcript Amos VS School Board: 1973 September
26, (Box 107, Folders 1-11), University of Wisconsin- Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
11

10

While court cases such as the infamous Brown vs. Board motivated many civil
rights activists, Patterson included the alternative perspective that the Brown decision
may not have been as revolutionary as originally perceived. In contrast, Patterson
argued that many communities throughout the nation began experiencing resistance
and set-backs in racial equality in the decades following the Brown ruling.13 More
specifically, Patterson described white flight from urban areas and local politics that
revealed America’s reluctance to work towards true racial equality and social change on
the local level. Instead, the narratives of white parents and their perceived struggles to
offer their children the best education and opportunities possible directed court action.
Patterson gave an example of a Boston parent who in September of 1999 argued at the
federal court that her daughter was denied admittance to a magnet school for being
white.14 Although this white reaction maintained resistance to racial equality by arguing
for reverse racism, and perhaps even instigated resegregation, African Americans and
their allies continued to advance activism by using civil rights history as a central
method. In the 1980s city leaders instated litigation that maintained racial balance by
reassigning students to make school quotas.15 However, as the 1980s played out,
conservative response pushed to slow government activism towards racial equality,
which included reversing court-ordered bussing, affirmative action, and supporting
public schools.

13

James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 206.
Ibid., 213.
15
Ibid., 158.
14

11

In 2003 a Staff Report of the U.S Commission on Civil Rights highlighted the lack
of litigation supporting "respect for the dignity of the human person," and the
prevalence of hate crimes and discrimination against minorities including Hispanics and
Native Americans among other groups.16 The top priorities for litigation to pursue listed
in the report were the achievement gap among minorities and healthcare. During a
Harvard Law interview, constitutional historian Tomiko Brown-Nagin stated:
The courts have changed in such a way that it’s hard to bring affirmative[racial]
claims, which is why I think one of the things that 21st century proponents of equality
have to be willing to do is to advocate and litigate around issues... Talk about the
environment, talk about food justice, talk about educational dollars, talk about
inequality in ways that can help to build coalitions and that can avoid triggering some of
the pathologies around our racial conversations —some of the deep resistance to
focusing on race qua race.17

In addition, in 2003 the Houston Chronicle published multiple front-page articles
explaining several Texas school districts that neglected to record dropout ratings.18 By
doing so the school boards involved helped maintain a lack of public knowledge,
activism, and subsequent legislation in favor of supporting students needing assistance.
With this context in mind, Brown-Nagin's statement implies that the new course for
employing civil rights histories in current era litigation will, as in previous eras, demand
taking relatable struggles that deal with unequal opportunity and persuading municipal
governments that their solutions are a priority.
16

"Civil Rights Challenges of the 21st Century: A View from the States," Staff Report from the
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, (Washington D.C., 2003), 12, available from:
http://www.law.umaryland.edu/marshall/usccr/documents/cr12c3522010.pdf
17
Alyssa Richardson and Elizabeth Hadaway, "Civil Rights Lawyering in the 21st Century: An
Interview with Tomiko Brown-Nagin," (Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review, 2013), Available
from: http://harvardcrcl.org/2013/07/16/civil-rights-lawyering-in-the-21st-century-an-interview-withtomiko-brown-nagin/.
18
Marco Portales, "A History of Latino Segregation Lawsuits," in The Unfinished Agenda of Brown
v. Board of Education, eds. James Anderson and Dara N. Byrne, (New Jersey: Diverse Issues In Higher
Education, 2004), 134.

12

Civil rights litigation and social reform movements historically have used civil
rights histories to further legal efforts and confront court systems. Amos vs. Board of
School Directors of the City of Milwaukee deemed that segregation existed in
Milwaukee Public Schools and was intentionally created and maintained by the school
board. From 1965 to 1979 the case drew on until MPS was ordered to implement a
school desegregation plan.19 By continuing to challenge national and local legal
interpretations communities made advancements in social reform favoring racial
equality. On the local level, community groups after Brown adapted the ruling by
furthering civil rights efforts in their community through their own legal efforts, as well
as within community organizing efforts including Freedom Schools, protests, and
marches.
Civil Rights Histories and Religious Organizations
Religion-focused environments have often proved conducive to sharing personal
and shared histories that foster community-building, and in the 1960s many religious
leaders and churches became vital to Milwaukee's civil rights movement. In Brown vs.
Board of Education Patterson noted the 1960s trends employed primarily by Christian
ideals, in contrast to successful legal cases such as Brown, which encouraged activists
and their allies to demonstrate nonviolently.20 Theological scholarship and history
supported activism that embraced racial equality as a religious concept and sought to
reorient church-community perspectives.
19

Howard Fuller, "The Impact of The Milwaukee Public School System's Desegregation Plan on
Black Students and the Black Community 1976-1982," Doctoral Dissertation (Marquette University, 1985),
abstract.
20
James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 120.

13

Since the early 2000s, historians of civil rights have shifted increasing attention
to areas of civil rights struggle beyond the U.S. South, including northern industrial
cities.21 Historian Patrick Jones’ book Selma of the North: Civil Rights Insurgency in
Milwaukee showcases civil rights histories prevalence in a religious setting. Prior to
Jones, historians’ focus on religion’s role in the struggle for racial equality was less
noticeable in scholarship that considered Northern cities in America. His narrative
described a Milwaukee civil rights movement that was propelled by religious leader
Father James Groppi in a series of housing protests in 1967-68. The religious
organizational events, marches, and protests for housing, education, and employment in
Milwaukee during that time all required civil rights histories as a foundation for
motivation and knowledge that activists wanted to articulate to their communities.
Moreover, Jones’ argued that much of that force came from the NAACP Youth Council,
advised by Groppi, who educated the teenagers in the council on the formation of
Milwaukee and the discriminatory practices involved. Groppi helped link the NAACP to
the Catholic Church. Groppi also informed Milwaukee youth on specific racist practices
in Milwaukee such as housing boundaries and unequal educational opportunities.22 For
example, not only did the NAACP provide facts and data sheets to the Milwaukee Youth
Council with statistics listing high school dropout and unemployment rates, but the
council also brought Milwaukee youth and teenagers together to reflect on what

21

A seminal work in this regard was Jeanne Theoharis and Komzi Woodward, eds., Freedom
North: Black Freedom Struggles Outside the South, 1940-1980 (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003).
22
Patrick D. Jones, The Selma of the North: Civil Rights Insurgency in Milwaukee, (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2009), 109-112.

14

inequality and civil rights meant to them.23 Whether at national conventions or at
weekly meetings, teenagers such as NAACP Youth Council leader Alberta Harris talked to
each other about their experiences including jail time, home life challenges, and racism
directed toward them.24 Teenagers and young adults educated themselves with civil
rights histories to give deeper meaning and increase their civic engagement and
activism. Those histories meant more to the youth Groppi mentored as he encouraged
them to hold discussions and debates that unveiled their personal histories. These
discussions built solidarity and fostered an identity among the Youth Council and its
leaders, called Commandos, inside St. Boniface Church.25
Throughout the following decades, religion continued to play a crucial role in
advertising the grievances of the poor publicly. Jones, for instance, described the
detrimental effects suburbanization and deindustrialization had on Milwaukee's African
American population in the 1970s-1990s, which had one of the highest unemployment
and poverty rates in the country.26 Historian Thomas Sugrue in Sweet Land of Liberty:
The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North highlights the Philadelphia Citizens in
Action (PCA) organization, the city's Nation of Islam chapter, and several Christian
organization's work which attempted to expand the welfare movement to an African
American municipal population that was disproportionately experiencing

23

Patrick D. Jones, The Selma of the North, 109-112.
Ibid., 109-112.
25
Ibid., 111-115.
26
Ibid., 256.
24

15

unemployment, high pregnancy rates, drug abuse, and homelessness.27 Although
Sugrue's focus was not on religion's role in northern civil rights movements, he
consistently included religious organizations' efforts throughout his work. Organizations
like the religiously affiliated Advocate Community Development Center in Philadelphia
helped people acquire adequate counseling, access to food pantries, and job training by
employing recent historical data and anonymous personal narratives to write grants and
advertise their cause for funding and volunteers.28 Together, quantitative and
qualitative data from past years not only supported the efforts that helped minorities
experiencing disproportionate homelessness and unemployment, but also advocated
social programs that would help reverse this inequality.
More recently, as religious organizations struggle to maintain relevancy and
funds themselves, their civil rights efforts have largely maintained objectives from
previous decades by extending service towards low income populations. However, these
populations still disproportionately consist of minorities, including African Americans as
well as Hispanics and immigrant populations, throughout the United States. In Long Way
to Go Jonathan Coleman emphasized the news as a strategy many religious and other
organizations applied to market civil rights-related endeavors, which includes civil rights
education.29 Church and community bulletins highlighted progress or regression in civil
rights efforts through personal narratives of families, or from educational statistics such

27

Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North
(Random House, 2008), 516.
28
Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty, 517.
29
Jonathan Coleman, Long Way To Go: Black and White in America (Atlantic Monthly Press,
1998), 385-390.

16

as poll results. For instance, a 1993 article entitled "The Struggle to Save the Black
Family" was published featuring data that explored the cyclic factors, such as the
achievement gap in education, that have formed a glass ceiling to African Americans and
more recently Hispanics populations in the country.30 At its foundation, religion and the
service that springs from it, is not confined to churches or other places of worship but
lives among the community and emphasizes the ideals of love and justice. Many
religious organizations are effective at creating safe atmospheres where people are
committed to embracing their best selves.31 By educating their community on events
since the 1960s that have maintained racial inequality in America, church organizations
and historical data they have employed continue to play a role in publicly addressing
discriminatory grievances in favor of justice.
Civil Rights Histories and Educational Reform
In addition to its role in litigation and religion, historians’ inclusion of civil rights
histories relevance in education has been prevalent in scholarship. Jack Dougherty’s
main argument in More than One Struggle: The Evolution of Black School Reform in
Milwaukee was that race struggles for educational reform took place over several
decades and included various campaigns for equality rather than being embedded in
one movement.32 Dougherty, like Jones, used Milwaukee as a case study but did so to
showcase the various groups that applied civil rights histories towards multiple
objectives in the decades after Brown. Dougherty’s main focus was Milwaukee’s fight

30

Jonathan Coleman, Long Way To Go,380-390.
Vincent Harding, Hope and History, 87.
32
Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 194-196 .
31

17

for racial equality in education. Although Dougherty explored a local community’s
interpretation of civil rights histories to reform education, he consistently integrated the
nation’s larger civil rights narrative throughout the book. As a result, concrete examples
made national issues more relatable to readers and in turn more engaging. Dougherty
described how the civil rights histories that once came largely from official spokespeople
in speeches and documents shifted in the 1960s to come from ordinary participants in
the movement in the form of personal stories.33 Collectively, the personal narratives of
everyday activists placed civil rights histories within new contexts and lenses such as
gender or profession, and assisted the movement by building solidarity and
participation among various communities.
Civil Rights histories played an important role in the Milwaukee Public School
Boycott in 1964, and in the curricula of the Milwaukee Freedom Schools. Everyday
activists' narratives appeared in Freedom Schools most notably in the staff listing.
Developers of the Freedom Schools chose instructors strategically and included
university professors, community musicians, professional teachers, local attorneys and
other professionally trained individuals who they thought would best articulate the
potential value the students could have in society, regardless of color, largely by
showcasing their own success in Milwaukee and personal pride.34 The Milwaukee
United School Integration Committee (MUSIC) papers show that (similar to civil rights
histories in other mediums, such as speeches or pamphlets); Freedom Schools
33

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 105.
Milwaukee United School Integration Committee, 1964 Freedom Day School and Public School
Boycott, Records, Milwaukee Mss 5, (Box 1, Folder 3),University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries,
Archives Department.
34

18

exemplified healthy civic action in favor of justice and equality.35 The boycott worked to
educate related communities in Milwaukee about current and past struggles for racial
equality and what continued progress meant for the future: a less ignorant and more
productive population, as well as a better functioning democratic society. In Hope and
History, Vincent Harding added to Dougherty's argument that in order to perceive
America as democratic society, black communities throughout the nation had to share
their own vision of racial equality through civil rights histories.36 In the 1960s, the
Milwaukee civil rights movements work in education was largely defined by Freedom
Schools in historical scholarship exploring that era. If Milwaukee activists in Freedom
Schools could define their past to younger generations, it would help those students
better understand the present and construct their ideas for their futures.
In the second half of the 1960s MUSIC, the umbrella organization, dissolved as
members disagreed about whether efforts should be focused on integration or school
quality. Dougherty explained two central Milwaukee communities in the 1970s and
1980s, one being black families who wanted to improve all-black schools such as North
Division High, and families who wanted to continue integration into predominantly
white schools such as Washington High.37 Obtaining equal opportunities meant different
things to contrasting activist communities who formed goals that were unique to their
needs.

35

Milwaukee United School Integration Committee, 1964 Freedom School and Boycott, Records,
Milwaukee Mss 5, (Box 1, Folder 3), University of Wisconsin Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
36
Vincent Harding, Hope and History, 41.
37
Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 132.

19

Attempting to integrate suburban schools meant presenting civil rights
education to school boards and emphasizing the value black students would add to that
school's population, or arguing for better resources in predominantly-black schools.
Most significantly in 1980, a newly constructed and predominantly black North Division
High School held a hearing on whether the former academic year's student demographic
should remain or if the board could relocate 1,000 African American students to other
schools so 1,000 white students could be integrated to the North Division magnet
school.38 At this 1980 hearing, 1958 North Division graduate Howard Fuller applied the
school and student body's history to a speech embedded within an argument declaring
that Milwaukee blacks again were sacrificing more than whites for integration.39 After
an unsuccessful debate, Howard Fuller built support to repeal the school board's
decision by employing his personal narrative, which began with him as southern migrant
who was the only black student at St. Boniface School.40 Later, Fuller became a
respected student leader at North Division, was later elected Senate President at the
then all-white Carroll College, and then in 1979 continued his leadership by rallying
differing communities of civil rights activists in Milwaukee.41 Fuller's story and drive
brought disparate groups of activists together and eventually won the fight in 1980 for
Milwaukee's black students to remain in their predominantly African American high
school. Thus scholarship on Milwaukee's civil rights movements impact on education in
the 1970s and 1980s and their uses of civil rights education is comprised of various
38

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 171.
Ibid., 171.
40
Ibid., 172-174.
41
Ibid.
39

20

groups with unique interpretations of what they thought was the ideal way to achieve
racial justice.
In more recent years, scholarship on Milwaukee civil rights histories employed in
education have been centered more on the achievement gap. While activism in previous
eras strove to integrate schools and obtain adequate resources in schools serving
predominantly black students, activists are now positing the unequal opportunities
outside of the school as detrimental to minority achievement. Boykin and Jones in "The
Psychological Evolution of Black Children's Education Since Brown" explained Howard
University's Center for Research on the Education of Students Placed at Risk's school
reform model called Talent Quest. Talent Quest considered historical factors that
influenced the contemporary achievement gap and strived to implement eight central
initiatives including: forming better professional development for teachers, frameworks
for classroom management and curricula, after-school programs, and enrichment
excursions for students and their families.42 Studies such as Talent Quest consider the
historical issues affecting current realities so they can initiate positive reform.
Additionally, parents and ally organizations such as Big Brothers Big Sisters (BBBS) apply
unique narratives shared by minority youth in Milwaukee and nation and how their lack
of educational resources outside of the school prevent them from performing as well
academically when compared to predominantly white students from higher income
families. For example, a current BBBS advertisement included the face of a Milwaukee
42

Wade A. Boykin and James M. Jones, "The Psychological Evolution of Black Children's
Education Since Brown," in The Unfinished Agenda of Brown v. Board of Education, eds. James Anderson
and Dara N. Byrne (New Jersey: Diverse Issues In Higher Education, 2004), 145-147.

21

African American student, and educated the audience on the central factors keeping the
student from achieving academic success including coming from a single parent home,
no at-home computer access, and lack of care for physical or learning disabilities.43 Just
as significant trends in Milwaukee communities in earlier decades helped determine
how civil rights histories were conveyed, they continue to do so in the greater context of
community needs.
Conclusion
Historians James Patterson, Patrick Jones, and Jack Dougherty have more
recently led scholarship explaining the direction and strategies of civil rights movements
in Milwaukee and the nation in the second half of the twentieth century. Patterson
employed an impressive bibliography with an abundance of secondary source research
that allowed him to make connections between larger national trends such as local
efforts and resegregation, and also explored specific cases and civil rights histories
employed by those larger efforts.44 However, by performing more primary research
Patterson might have been able to further his analysis of Brown’s effect on later civil
rights efforts and evaluate the decision's controversial nature more specifically and
certainly. Despite room for improvement Patterson effectively relayed how civil rights
history helped propel civil rights litigation forward nationally.

43

"Changing Lives One Story at a Time," Big Brothers Big Sisters of Metro Milwaukee, 2013,
available from:
http://www.bbbsmilwaukee.org/site/apps/nlnet/content2.aspx?c=8hKPI2MGIkI0E&b=6448833&ct=8968
847&notoc=1.
44
James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 263-269.

22

Historians Jones and Dougherty both used Milwaukee as case studies in their
scholarship. Using a specific location as a case study allowed for concrete examples of
local civil rights histories used in separate communities, and their unique perspectives
on the appropriate way to achieve racial equality. Jones’ Selma of the North was unique
in its analysis of youth actively engaging in civil rights efforts in conjunction with a white
priest in Midwestern America, but its narrow focus neglected other social factors that
affected Milwaukee at the same time. Who were the other key figures, within and
outside of religious organizations? Selma of the North could also have gone more indepth into other issues beyond real estate that prevented racial equality in Milwaukee.
Jones’ work had strengths as well. In contrast to Patterson, Jones utilized a substantial
amount of primary sources to support his narrative.45
Similar to Jones, one area of strength in Dougherty’s work was his extensive use
of interviews and primary research to support his thesis.46 Interviews also made the
narrative more relatable by applying specific and real perspectives to argue why
individual in Milwaukee acted the way they did or did not in regards to school
integration. The most obvious area in which More than One Struggle can improve is by
adding more assessment on current civil rights histories and activism. Dougherty could
also have incorporated more specific examples of successful or thriving educational
reform nationally in his conclusion, as he integrated national and local efforts well
throughout the book. Historian Jennifer Roady-Lawson in her review argued that
45
46

227-239.

Patrick D. Jones, The Selma of the North, 303-307.
Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle: The Evolution of Black School Reform in Milwaukee,

23

Dougherty stuck too strictly on white and black tension in Milwaukee in the 1950s.47
While I respect the critique that Dougherty could have included more race relation
comparisons that extended beyond the black and white binary, the piece was already
rich with layers including age, conflicting interpretations within the black community,
and the role class played in racial equality, that going beyond a black and white binary
may have convoluted the work. Most significantly, Jones and Dougherty each effectively
conveyed how multiple efforts in the same community utilized civil rights education and
history to further their perceived solution to inequality in Milwaukee.
Civil rights histories applied from legal, educational, and religious platforms are
not limited to the scholarship Patterson, Jones, and Dougherty, but have been covered
by many historians. While historians have completed sufficient scholarship on the way
local communities have applied civil rights histories in their struggles for racial equality,
historians could research the ways different communities have integrated efforts, as
well as discovering how communities assess previous efforts to improve future civil
rights activism.
The common theme among historians evaluating civil rights histories since the
middle of the twentieth century is that those efforts have been multi-dimensional and
are constantly evolving to the meet the needs of specific communities regardless of the
scale. Civil rights histories celebrated strength and built confidence in those communal
areas. This sentiment is evident in More than One Struggle where Dougherty described

47

Jennifer Roady-lawson, “More than One Struggle: The Evolution of Black School Reform in
Milwaukee,” from Michigan Historical Review 31, No. 2 (2005): 162-163.

24

community needs reinterpreting national litigation to drive activism in favor of school
reform and fair housing forward , and in Selma of the North where Jones explained how
religious leaders like Father Groppi organized minority youth to peacefully demonstrate
for racial justice. As Vincent Harding described in Hope and History, "Groups of young
and inexperienced radicals were driven by historical narrations of justice for races –
narratives spoke to poor and working-class blacks – gave them hope an identity."48
Especially recently, historians have emphasized Milwaukee as a city with leaders
educating their community on their multi-faceted civil rights histories in various ways to
inform and empower people to confidently participate in civil rights activism.
Subsequently, many within the community documented and celebrated efforts that
amounted to failures and success, so that future supporters could gain knowledge to
continue the fight for racial equality in Milwaukee. Additionally, others throughout the
nation are able to relate and realize Milwaukee’s unique struggle for racial equality in
comparison to the larger national narrative. Historians have described various ways
active citizens have integrated civil rights histories dependent on their unique
communities’ needs since the 1960s and the manifestation of these educations continue
to play a central role in facilitating progress and maintaining the racial equality's
significance to current communities.

48

Felicia Kornbluh, "Black Buying Power: Welfare Rights, Consumerism, and Northern Protest," in
Freedom North: Black Freedom Struggles Outside the South, 1940-1980, eds. Jeanne F. Theoharis and
Komozi Woodard, (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003), 215.

25

Chapter Two
1960s Milwaukee Civil Rights Movement History Applications and Freedom Schools

As stated in Chapter One, Milwaukee, Wisconsin's civil rights movement was
particularly active in the middle of the 1960s. During this decade activism by multiple
groups focused on open housing and school desegregation, and brought civil rights
initiatives to the forefront of municipal relations. These activist groups challenged the
local government to become more racially just, and more often than not they employed
civil rights histories and memories in their efforts. The personal and community histories
employed by activists engaged public audiences and shared memory. The collective
memory strengthened group solidarity, even when that collection of activists consisted
of multiple communities holding their own interpretations of what was their
movement's end goal. This assemblage of historical narratives among a larger
community is one explanation of why Milwaukee’s civil rights movement evolved and
preserved its significance into the next era. Groups affiliating their identities within
education, specifically in the 1964 Freedom Schools, law, and religious divisions at one
or more points in the overall 1960s Milwaukee civil rights movement worked together
and related personal stories to advance their multiple objectives of racial justice. The
ways these groups employed their civil rights histories evolved with their expectations
of the direction of the movement. Although Milwaukee civil rights leaders in the 1960s
integrated civil rights histories in varying ways that were dependent on their
communities’ needs, those histories played a central role in facilitating progress and
maintaining relevance in their struggles for racial equality.

26

Particularly in the middle of the 1960s, the groups involved in Milwaukee's civil
rights movement determined the overall movement’s contemporary direction by
reflecting on past events. Historian Jack Dougherty, for example, argued that the
personal narratives of everyday activists ultimately had more influence over
Milwaukee’s various civil rights struggles than political expressions by city leaders.49 The
individual histories of ordinary people in Milwaukee were often employed in areas of
litigation such as Milwaukee United School Integration Committee front man Lloyd
Barbee’s lawsuit against the Milwaukee Public School board, as well as in education and
by religious organizations. While sub-communities within legal efforts, education, and
religious organizations in Milwaukee integrated their movements at alternating times
and for disparate reasons in the 1960s, they often shared a strategy that involved
reflecting upon previous events and experiences to strengthen solidarity and push the
struggle for racial equality forward.
Civil Rights Histories applied in Freedom Schools
From 1963-1965 Milwaukee civil rights activists largely directed their efforts
towards desegregating Milwaukee Public Schools in favor of equal education for all
students, regardless of color. Within education, activists creatively applied civil rights
education to add context and meaning in various stages, such as in group program
orientations, small meetings, or large boycotts on public schools. The Congress of Racial
Equality's (CORE) Milwaukee Chapter specifically distributed flyers in 1963 and 1964
reporting facts, definitions, and consequences of Milwaukee racial segregation and its

49

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 125.

27

effect on area schools.50 One particular handout stated that Milwaukee Public Schools
had 23 schools populated with predominantly non-white students, and 11 with student
bodies that were 99% African American.51 Furthermore, the sheet addressed the fact
that 76% of non-white teachers taught in those 23 schools, and continued on to define
de facto segregation, meaning due to social factors instead of litigation, and listed the
negative effects segregation had on non-white students, such as inferior resources.52
The statistics CORE shared provide an example of how statistics framed by a historical
context germane to that group's experience helped fuel the city's movement for school
integration.
Jack Dougherty in More than One Struggle used Milwaukee as a case study to
showcase the various groups that applied civil rights histories towards multiple
objectives in the decades after Brown vs. Board of Education in 1954. Dougherty
described how the civil rights histories that once came largely from official spokespeople
in speeches and documents shifted in the 1960s to come from ordinary participants in
the movement in the form of personal stories.53 Collectively, the personal narratives of
everyday activists placed civil rights histories within new contexts and lenses such as
gender or profession, and assisted the movement by building solidarity and
participation among various communities.54 Everyday activists' narratives appeared in
Freedom Schools, or alternative schools, available to students during school boycott

50

Congress of Racial Equality. Milwaukee Chapter, records, PICKET record sheet, Milwaukee MSS
27 (Box 1, Folder 3), University of Wisconsin Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
51
Congress of Racial Equality. Milwaukee Chapter, records, PICKET record sheet.
52
Ibid.
53
Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 105.
54
Ibid., 106.

28

days, and most notably in the staff listing. The freedom school coordinators chose
instructors strategically and included university professors, community musicians,
professional teachers, local attorneys and other professionally trained individuals who
they thought would best articulate the potential value the students could have in
society, regardless of color, largely by showcasing their own success in Milwaukee and
personal pride.55 In Hope and History Vincent Harding added to Dougherty's argument
that in order to perceive America as democratic society, black communities throughout
the nation had to share their own vision to racial equality through civil rights histories. 56
If activists could define their past, it would help them better understand the present as
well as assist in determining their future. Moreover the movement’s emphasis on
personal experience held individuals accountable to their future involvement with the
movement, as many times they publicly stated the outcome they desired from their
community’s activism. Freedom Schools constructed a new civil rights narrative that
took the focus off of heroes such as Martin Luther King Jr., and local hero Groppi, and
made the youth in the schools feel more empowered as civil rights activists.
Civil rights histories employed in racial equality efforts within the realm of
education are clearly represented in 1964 and 1965 Milwaukee freedom school
curricula. Marilyn Morheuser, MUSIC secretary and a leader in creating the curricula,
described Freedom Schools as positive programs that desired to improve African
American education in Milwaukee through integration and by "increasing black
55

Milwaukee United School Integration Committee, 1964 Freedom Day School and Public School
Boycott, Records, Milwaukee Mss 5, (Box 1, Folder 3),University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries,
Archives Department.
56
Vincent Harding, Hope and History, 41.

29

students’ pride in their history and sense of value."57 Even in the elementary level
freedom school curriculum the main message to instructors was to facilitate student
discussion, and much of this discussion revolved around civil rights histories. For
example, the elementary freedom school curriculum incorporated short narratives on
individual African American heroes like Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass, or Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., who activists felt were kept out of traditional history textbooks in
public schools, into student discussion groups.58 The Freedom Schools encouraged
historical narratives so that classes could take that information, share their experiences,
and interpret those ideas into relatable knowledge to build upon together. This
collaborative effort between activists and students strengthened the intentionally
peaceful movement and highlighted ways to continue efforts after the boycott.
Overall, the May, 1964 Freedom School (the first of three Freedom School days
from 1964 to 1965) had approximately 11,000 student participants who attended to
learn about Black History, a subject largely lacking in their current high school curricula.
Activists intended for the Freedom Schools to encourage free thought and a supportive
environment for students. Students participated in "buzz groups" where they shared
their interracial experiences and how those memories affected current struggles and
accomplishments in their lives and society.59 Freedom school content not only
continued students' education on that day, but offered students a new perspective on

57

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 112.
Helen Barnhill Papers, School Curricula, Milwaukee Mss 4, (Box 1, Folder 6), University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
59
Helen Barnhill Papers, School Curricula, Milwaukee Mss 4, (Box 1, Folder 6).
58

30

history and current events that challenged them to think more actively and critically
about the world around them.
The school desegregation movement in the middle of the 1960s used varying
civil rights histories and community needs to bring multiple Milwaukee civil rights
communities together for one cause. One particular flyer advertising the May 18, 1964
school boycott relayed to the reader histories of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and CORE organizations' unsuccessful efforts
directed at school integration over the past year.60 These histories supported why the
Freedom Schools were necessary to advance the communities' struggle for racial justice.
Recognizing the need for a more organized effort, Milwaukee United School Integration
Committee (MUSIC) facilitated the gathering of disparate African American and ally
communities for one cause. Seemingly insignificant artifacts such as freedom school
posters from May 18, 1964 indicate the solidarity upheld by activists as they worked
together not only to develop freedom school curricula and teach students, but also to
consistently inform themselves and surrounding communities of their efforts. 61 As that
particular movement continued, however, those dissimilar communities took what they
needed from the school desegregation cause and continued to interpret their demands
for racial equality in different directions. As Dougherty evaluated, the mid-1960s
educational reform movement in Milwaukee faded due to the various directions African

60

Milwaukee United School Integration Committee, 1964 Freedom Day School and Public School
Boycott, Records, Milwaukee Mss 5, (Box 1, Folder 3),University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries,
Archives Department.
61
Freedom Day School Withdrawal Poster, UWM Mss 268, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Libraries, Archives Department.

31

American communities decided to initiate to fulfill the unique interpretations they
formed to reach a racially just society.62
The freedom school curricula are examples of civil rights histories that
manifested in the Milwaukee Public School Boycott in 1964. The boycott worked to
educate related communities in Milwaukee about current and past struggles for racial
equality. In contrast to other civil rights histories contemporary to that time, such as
bulletins or newspaper articles that served a more free-standing purpose to their
intended audiences, the Freedom Schools' curricula were more integrated to the
standards of formal education. The result was a series of events that helped assemble,
educate, and motivate a community to refine them in a broader civil rights history and
actively work towards a more equal community.63 Milwaukee civil rights leaders in the
mid-1960s most effectively integrated civil rights histories within freedom school
curricula and community bulletins in an effort to encourage a more informed and
civically active community of African Americans and allies.
In areas of education beyond Freedom Schools, Milwaukee civil rights activists
employed histories in less obvious ways. For instance, Elizabeth Holmes, a member of
the Special Committee on Equality of Educational Opportunity in 1963 recorded minutes
to a November 19th meeting that included three presentations including shared
narratives that related to the changes community members desired to enlist in

62
63

Boycott.

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 129.
Milwaukee United School Integration Committee, 1964 Freedom Day School and Public School

32

Milwaukee Public Schools.64 The main requests were creating a structured after-school
study center for inner city public schools, employing parent and special student
counselors, developing a homeroom occupations program, and implementing a
vocational guidance program.65 Holmes' papers highlight the Milwaukee Civil Rights
movement's demand at that time for equal opportunity and are based off of personal
experiences and perspectives of dissatisfied citizens. If Milwaukee intended to make
education more equal the school system would have to attend to the needs of inner
school students and the home environments they lived in. What did African American
and inner city students need and what were their past experiences that indicate those
as needs? Enough students needed increased academic and extracurricular
opportunities like vocational guidance programs that the sum of those needs made
them significant to the school system as a whole. For example, one parent arguing for a
vocational guidance program mentioned city facts on unemployment and the
irrelevance of many courses offered to students that did not prepare them for a
significant portion of the Milwaukee jobs realistically available to them, such as in
factories or skill-specific industries.66 In this case the parent also mentioned how other
groups in the past had dealt with this inexperience because they had vocational
programs directed at young adults.67 The more significant trends in Milwaukee
communities at the time helped determine how civil rights histories were conveyed in
the greater context of community needs.
64

Elizabeth Holmes, papers, correspondence, Milwaukee Mss 118, (Box 1, Folder 6), University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
65
Elizabeth Holmes, papers, correspondence, Milwaukee Mss 118, (Box 1, Folder 6).
66
Ibid.
67
Ibid.

33

Histories Applied in School Desegregation Efforts by the Community
News outlets by television or in published representations were an effective way
for Milwaukee civil rights activists, particularly those working towards school
desegregation, to inform their communities and gain allies. An October 1965 edition of
the Milwaukee Star, a newspaper that focused information largely on civil rights events
in the city, announced an impending school board debate involving desegregation issues
and past events that would place the debate in context.68 Essentially the newspaper was
highlighting recent civil rights historical events germane to the Milwaukee area, such as
Milwaukee Public schools evolution and demographic formation, to persuade readers to
understand their perspective in favor of desegregation and support the cause. Histories
placed in sources like newspapers had the ability to reach a broader audience and relate
to the reader by emphasizing common ground and humanizing seemingly radical
movements that proposed change.69 Moreover, well-established civil rights
organizations such as the NAACP could communicate articulate updates on the status of
their specific initiatives, such as teen pregnancy or drug programs and individual
narratives on those topics that worked to get people invested in the cause.70
The MUSIC publication Countdown itself was a form of a civil rights education
that informed an already established community of activists and allies in Milwaukee.
Author Barbee's sentiments again helped place the movement's contemporary context

68

Milwaukee United School Integration Committee, 1964 Freedom Day School and Public School
Boycott, records, Milwaukee Mss 5, (Box 1, Folder 3),University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries,
Archives Department.
69
Vincent Harding, Hope and History, Introduction -5.
70
Jonathan Coleman, Long Way To Go: Black and White in America, (Atlantic Monthly Press,
1998), 86.

34

into the overall civil rights historical timeline, and also continued evolving the
movement after Freedom Schools to include, more strongly than in previous years,
bussing measures and equal educational opportunities for young generations. In a 1965
edition, Countdown focused on desegregation efforts one year after the May 18th, 1964
freedom school. The document stated that the public school's bussing system was
maintaining school segregation through intact bussing,71 which meant that the
Milwaukee Public School system bussed an entire classroom of students and their
teacher from an overcrowded school to a more accommodating school and back each
day. In some instances, African American students were even bussed back to their
neighborhood schools for lunch each day in an effort to prevent them from integrating
into the student body of the other school.72 President of MUSIC, Lloyd Barbee stated.
"They won't do anything on their own initiative, so we will have to persuade them, with
the help of officials and citizens who know that the school board must meet its
constitutional and educational responsibilities, to develop our most precious resource-our children."73 Multiple events experienced by many individuals, such as the personal
events and histories they shared, built up the list of inadequacies they perceived their
communities were experiencing in public education; and together they challenged those
systems of inequality. For instance, by using young students' unequal school
experiences, such as Craig Amos' unequal treatment in Milwaukee Public Schools,
Barbee and MUSIC were humanizing their resources to support the freedom

71

Helen Barnhill Papers, School Curricula, Milwaukee Mss 4, (Box 1, Folder 6),
Ibid.
73
Ibid.
72

35

movement.74 Barbee and MUSIC used past civil rights events from Milwaukee and
beyond, such as the Freedom Schools, other demonstrations, and marches to help
persuade and inform community members of the extent of current activism and gain
allies.
Newspapers throughout the country also humanized civil rights with specific
narratives efforts so that readers could connect emotionally to the cause. For example
in "Exposing the Whole Segregation Myth," author Adina Back described a Harlem black
publication in 1958 coining a group of African American mothers the "Little Rock 9 of
Harlem" to increase movement support.75 The personal histories the nine mothers
experienced eventually propelled their court case to national news.76 Activists used civil
rights education to meet the demands of what their community perceived necessary at
that time to further the movement. Another example is when the Young Lords division
in New York City, a group of young African American males, emphasized the struggle of
poor black classes in the late 1960s and gave the city's civil rights movement the energy
and press time to reignite and continue forward.77 At the same time in Milwaukee,
school desegregation brought many activist groups together, but historian Jack
Dougherty argued in More than One Struggle that eventually the civil rights groups
within the city's desegregation effort in 1964 would continue to pursue dissimilar

74

Vincent Harding, Hope and History, 5.
Adina Back, "Exposing the 'Whole Segregation Myth'", 65.
76
Adina Back, "Exposing the 'Whole Segregation Myth', 65.
77
Johanna Fernandez, "Between Social Service Reform and Revolutionary Politics: The Young
Lords, Late Sixties Radicalism, and Community Organizing in New York City," in Freedom North: Black
Freedom Struggles Outside the South, 1940-1980, eds. Jeanne F. Theoharis and Komozi Woodard, (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003), 275-277.
75

36

directions they perceived racial equality continuing in.78 Therefore by 1966 the larger
school desegregation movement led by MUSIC and its allies faded. Despite inevitable
divisions, shared narratives among various groups and the relatable grievances
embedded in them were highlighted in news publications and allowed Milwaukee's civil
rights movement to develop surges at different points in its history.
While publications and handouts employed civil rights histories, the groups that
created those mediums congregated and focused meetings that often relied on
discussing personal and shared histories to define their groups' identity and goals.
African American women, for instance, began assembling together in the early
twentieth century to help educate each other in clubs and women's leagues that
regularly met and allowed participants to learn and discuss that knowledge together. 79
Additionally, black men and women became members of associations or attended
national conventions on racial equality that provided environments that marketed the
successes of African Americans, whether that meant hearing about college graduation
experiences, or how one club was able to trace the genealogy of multiple African
Americans families in their community.80 More broadly, the 1964 Civil Rights Act had
nearly 80 organizations crossing racial, economic, and religious lines put together one of
the most disciplined and effective lobbying efforts recalled by congressional

78

Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 129.
Mary Jo Deegan, The New Woman of Color: the Collected Writings of Fannie Barrier Williams,
1893–1918, (DeKalb: Northern Illinois UP, 2002), 30-34.
80
Mary Jo Deegan, The New Woman of Color, 36.
79

37

observers.81 Thus, communities coming together by shared memories and common
objectives reflected on civil rights histories in order to fuel their movements.
Beyond the area of education, the Milwaukee and national civil rights
movements also saw civil rights education implemented in civil rights litigation and
social reform movements to further legal efforts and confront court systems. For
example, this thesis has already introduced that Lloyd Barbee's Amos vs. the Board of
School Directors of the City of Milwaukee case depended on civil rights education
including school case histories from 1960-1965 and data sheets listing bus routes and
boundary violations spanning multiple decades to help Barbee make his case that
Milwaukee Public Schools were intentionally and unconstitutionally segregated.82 By
continuing to challenge national and local legal interpretations community leaders like
Barbee sacrificed significant amounts of time in an attempt to make advancements in
social reform favoring racial equality.
On the local level, community groups after Brown adapted the ruling by
furthering civil rights efforts in their community through their own legal efforts, as well
as within community organizing efforts including Freedom Schools, protests, and
marches. For example, Patterson used the example of the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
school district in North Carolina that operated a dual school system to maintain
segregation until citizens such as the Swann family, who were told by school officials
their eldest child had to attend the all-black school, spoke out. In Swann vs. Charlotte81

Beryl A. Radin, Implementation, Change, and the Federal Bureaucracy: School Desegregation
Policy in HEW, 1964-1968, (Columbia University: Teachers College Press, 1977), 143.
82
Lloyd Barbee, Papers, (Milwaukee Mss 16: Box 68, Folders 1 and 6), University of WisconsinMilwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.

38

Mecklenburg the family's story gained supporters who encouraged the case's appeal,
which eventually led to Judge James McMillan's order that the school system use busses
to integrate students.83 Those shared perspectives rallied a community of activists who
shaped their desired out comes together based on those memories.84
Similar to civil rights organizations, civil rights education employed by religious
groups have traditionally strived to take shared experiences structured around racial
inequality and use them to work for progress in their communities. Religious
organizations and leaders such as Reverend Albert B Cleage Jr. from the Central
Congregational Church in Detroit in 1967 supported that humans have equal rights and
deeply embedded his ideologies within the historical practices of ministers, labor
unionists, and political militants from the generations just before him.85 Employing
history in this way supported activism that "embraced racial equality as a religious
concept and sought to reorient church-community perspective."86 Through this
perspective religion could be interpreted as liberating and forgiving, and also
encouraged peaceful resistance. African Americans who felt unable to identify with
many areas of urban life in America could turn to a forgiving and welcoming unit to
share their experiences and struggles.
In contrast to civil rights organizations, religious conglomerates may more
abundantly include many allies who cannot relate to those shared experiences, but do

83

James T. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, 155-158.
Beryl A. Radin, Implementation, Change, and the Federal Bureaucracy, 6.
85
Angela Dillard, "Religion and Radicalism: The Reverend Albert B. Cleage, Jr., and the Rise of
Black Christian Nationalism in Detroit." in Freedom North: Black Freedom Struggles Outside the South,
1940-1980, eds. Jeanne F. Theoharis and Komozi Woodard, (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003), 154.
86
Angela Dillard, "Religion and Radicalism," 170.
84

39

share group objectives that demand a more racially just society. In Sweet Land of
Liberty, Thomas Sugrue described the efforts black and white churchwomen like Anne
Arnold Hedgemen, a white woman who listened to poverty-stricken African Americans
stories to help resolve their struggles and improve race relations in their specific
communities.87 In this way and others religions role in uncovering personal narratives
also facilitated greater community building within African American populations, and
inter-racial religious groups. Religion at its foundation is not confined to churches or
other places of worship but among the community and the idea of love and humanity
can help nurture an individual to be their best self.88 African Americans and their allies
have been able to research their cities' histories and recognize the facts and inequalities
that they are able to challenge through organizing and activism, especially within the
confines of religious organizations.89 In regards to the civil rights movement, religious
organizations have demonstrated their use as learning centers in addition to spiritual
ones.
Conclusion
The ways various communities have implemented histories in their efforts is not
limited to boycotts, publications, organizations, or litigation. Instead civil rights
narratives, reflections, and personal and shared memories have been effectively
manifested in a multitude of ways, particularly in the 1960s. For example, the March on
Washington for Jobs and Freedom in 1963 included speeches grounded in civil rights
87

Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North,
(Random House, 2008), 4.
88
Vincent Harding, Hope and History, 87.
89
Jonathan Coleman, Long Way To Go: Black and White in America, 389.

40

history and progress, and paid respect to past civil rights movement heroes such as
Daisy Bates and Rosa Parks.90 Even the works of more current historians have obviously
employed histories to keep racial equality relevant today. Jack Dougherty’s work
included an extensive list of interviews and primary research that supported his
argument that civil rights struggles have not taken one, but many forms.91 Interviews
also made Dougherty's narrative more personal by applying specific and real
perspectives, such as Cecil Brown Jr., founder and former chairman of Milwaukee's
Congress of Racial Equality personal experiences and struggle to hire more black
teachers in the Milwaukee Public School system. 92 These personal narratives helped
argue why individuals in Milwaukee acted the way they did, or did not, in regards to
school integration.
Milwaukee civil rights leaders sought not only to form a community to further
the civil rights movement, but initiated strategic practices and events to better educate
and train that community to continue to be productive members valuable to society.
This realization is significant because it positions civil rights histories and their
motivations in a new perspective that emphasizes a greater democratic and
knowledgeable society for all, and not just improving one group within that society.
Whether activists sought to better educate students, implement after school programs
that improved students' educational resources, or contextualize their current moment

90

Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty, 3.
Jack Dougherty, More than One Struggle, 227-239.
92
More Than One Struggle Oral History Project Records, 1939-2004, (Oral History Interview with
Cecil Brown Jr. and Loretta: August 9, 1995, part I), UWM Manuscript Collection 217, University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
91

41

in civil rights within a greater local and national historical narrative, it challenged
individuals to think more critically and empathically across time. Although the civil rights
history presented to students in the 1964 Freedom Schools supported a contemporary
civil rights movement to integrate Milwaukee schools, the history also helped
contextualize current events for students in a relatable and thought-provoking way that
emphasized their value to society and how they could work to continue Milwaukee's
civil rights narrative toward an improved future for all. In addition, civil rights education
applied throughout Milwaukee's various civil rights communities whether in the context
of education, litigation, or religion, helped stabilize groups and created environments
that fostered sharing memories which built group perspectives that led the direction of
their activism.
The reality that civil rights histories today include more interactive and digital
platforms supports their continued relevance to America's history and current events.
Individuals and groups still identify with the past and allow it to help direct their futures.
As our culture becomes more reliant on assessment that considers how civil rights
education is disseminated and reacted to, historical scholarship might begin to include
move evaluation on its analysis of civil rights narratives in the movement's larger
history.

42

Part II
Chapter Three
Digital Collections: Effective 21st Century Research Tools
The first part of this thesis explored 1964 Milwaukee Freedom School curricula
as an example of Milwaukee Civil Rights education, as well as civil rights education
evident in various social outlets including in law, education, and in religious
organizations throughout the 1960s (with some examples taken throughout the second
half of the twentieth century). Next, this thesis will analyze the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee (UWM) managed March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project as a
contemporary outlet for educating the public on local civil rights history. Milwaukee civil
rights histories implemented since 1964 have not only evolved into current narratives,
but also supply the primary source material including newspaper clippings, photographs,
and oral histories, that are offered in current educational tools such as the March on
Milwaukee digital collection. Before describing the developmental process of the March
on Milwaukee site, it will be necessary to gain a firm understanding of what digital
collections are and what their significance is to society and academia.
Much of the popularity and effectiveness of Freedom Schools in Milwaukee and in the
nation during the middle of the twentieth century relied on community activists instilling African
American students pride in their history. In fact, the Freedom Schools often times helped
students recognize African American history that their textbooks largely failed to offer to them
in their classrooms. The Freedom Schools and civil rights education that were abundant in
Milwaukee in the 1960s and 1970s had an agenda to include African American history and its
significance in the larger American historical narrative.

43
Similar to the earlier Freedom Schools, the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project
seeks to recover and preserve histories that continue to be ignored or marginalized in
mainstream culture and educational curricula, including the history of Freedom Schools
themselves. Unlike the Freedom Schools, however, March on Milwaukee is not itself an explicit
part of a civil rights campaign that seeks to foment change in the present. The issues people
addressed in the 1960s are still with us, including racial and economic segregation, and in some
ways those challenges have intensified. March on Milwaukee presents the primary sources that
conveys Milwaukee's civil rights narratives, but offers a more neutral tone that displays and
contextualizes those sources. This choice of a neutral tone is not a reflection of the developers
lack of commitment to social justice. Rather, it stems from a commitment to let users
experience history on their own terms and to develop their own insights, without
inappropriately heavy-handed or intrusive manipulation by the creators of the site. The March
on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project did not manifest as an explicit attempt to grow a
contemporary activist movement, but March on Milwaukee offers users a different type of
empowerment, one that encourages users to experience evidence firsthand and thus to become
historians in their own right.

Information and collections of primary and secondary sources exist in several
forms. For instance, not only are libraries physically located within public and university
communities, but libraries of all types and their collections are increasingly manifesting
as databases, digital repositories, or as electronic publications.93 The development of
digital collections, or digital repositories, is a relatively new trend in organizing and
promoting pools of related sources. Digital collections are particularly useful educational
93

Edward A. Fox, Robert Akscyn M., Richard Furuta K., and John Leggett, "Digital Libraries,"
Communications of the ACM 38, no. 4 (1995): 22-28.

44

tools in that they offer trustworthy information to students and scholars in a time when
an overload of information has become problematic to learning in that too much
popular information makes finding quality information more difficult.94 Digital
collections, such as those created by a community archives, recognize clusters of related
information, digitize those selections, and make them available electronically to users.
The University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Libraries and partners have digitized multiple
collections of Milwaukee civil rights primary sources for example, which include sources
such as freedom day curricula and Father Groppi hate mail explored earlier in this thesis
during the analysis of civil rights education. This Milwaukee civil rights digital collection,
titled March on Milwaukee, will be analyzed later in this thesis as a case study for
assessing a civil rights education medium in the form of a digital resource. Access to
digital collections, particularly archival sources, allows users to navigate images,
documents, oral histories, film footage, and memoirs of the people involved in specific
historical events 24/7 on the Internet.95 Digital collections provide new opportunities for
users to build knowledge in an increasingly accessible way that was previously
unavailable to the public.
Digital collections, especially those related to the digital humanities, have been
relevant to Library and Information Studies scholarship over the last two decades. Even
prior to the turn of the twenty-first century Michael Hart distributed an electronic
version of the Declaration of Independence which initiated Project Gutenburg in 1971,
94

A. Blanford, "Interacting with Information Resources: Digital Libraries for Education,"
International Journal of Learning Technology,2, no. 2.3 (2006), 185-202.
95
Lyndon Ormond-Parker, and Robyn Sloggett, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the
Digital Age," Archival Science 12, no. 2 (2012), 192.

45

and in the 1980s the Library of Congress started digitizing and storing images of text.96
Since 1990, an increasing number of academic journals have been electronically
published and the turn of the twenty-first century witnessed the establishment of
official support for scholarly digital efforts such as the National Endowment for the
Humanities creating an Office for Digital Humanities.97 For reference throughout the
duration of this thesis, humanities-related fields include academic subjects such as
history, English, anthropology, geography, political science, and art history. Early efforts
to encourage digitizing humanities-related journals and collections that paralleled the
growing reliance of the general population on electronic tools indicates that prominent
individuals in academic fields, including those dedicated to the humanities and
traditionally paper-reliant subjects, accepted that it was necessary to become
electronically relevant. Without participating in the digital trend, paper sources such as
journals and books risk becoming inaccessible and irrelevant to users who anticipate
immediate access to sources.
Physical archival materials are still valuable and relevant to library collections.
Moreover, Digital Humanities projects, such as the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights
Project, are distinct from Digital Libraries in that they adhere to metadata standards but
also provide contextual information alongside their materials.98 Digital Humanities
projects also encourage public engagement without losing any research value as
96

Project Gutenberg Consortia Center, "Project Gutenberg," http://www.gutenberg.us/
(accessed 2/17, 2014).
97
Fox, "Digital Libraries," 22-28.
98
Sheila Brennan and T. Mills Kelly, "Why Collecting History Online is Web 1.5," Center for
History and New Media (1996-2014), http://chnm.gmu.edu/essays-on-history-newmedia/essays/?essayid=47.

46

evidence, which is what makes digital collections like March on Milwaukee valuable as
education and curricula tools. In contrast, digital libraries more commonly offer
metadata without educational context on individual collection materials. Historians
Brennan and Kelly argue that library and archival collecting could not exist in a solely
digital capacity, and therefore posit that collecting history online "floats in a world
between the uneditable, didactic Web 1.0 and the completely open and editable Web
2.0, leaving us with a place we are calling, 'Web 1.5.'"99 As librarians and historians
continue to digitize history collections the roles of digital and physical collections will
continue to shift in the way they are accessed and valued depending on their use as
educational and recreational information sources.
Digital libraries and the collections within them offer users immediate contact
and therefore become more applicable to their research needs. On par with the
popularity of the Internet, in 1993 federal legislation in concert with various funding
sources marked the digital library as a priority in journal discussions.100 In the years
following, tutorials, panels, workshops and conferences developed that directly related
to the subject of digital libraries and their application to the humanities, government
information, and scholarship. Since 2008 the Office for Digital Humanities currently lists
203 projects it has funded. Additionally the Office for Digital Humanities has increasingly
supported connecting users to appropriate collections and has prioritized instigating

99

Brennan and T. Mills Kelly, "Why Collecting History Online is Web 1.5."
Fox, "Digital Libraries," 22-28.

100

47

conversations on access and preservation to its receptive community.101 The
significance of digital collections to humanities-related communities will only become
more prominent.
The Benefits of Using Digital Collections
A humanities-related digital collection's most notable characteristic is the
immediate access to primary and secondary sources it offers to users. More specifically,
in an archives the historical material can be fragile and requires limited handling and
view time. In contrast, digital representations of that source may be viewed more freely
and for an indefinite time range.102 Digital collections are also introducing humanities
sources and topics to a new audience who may have never stepped into an archive.103
Therefore digital resources can work to expand the population of users who are
exposed to digital collections by being listed in links on websites or on web searches.
Archival and humanities collections in digital form evolve into new information
resources online. Not only do digital versions of collections require new approaches to
acquisition, storage and preservation, cataloguing, and organizing among other
processes,104 but those physical collections in digital representations are perceived
differently by the user. Users interact differently with digital sources in that they are
able to navigate and interact with more sources relevant to their needs rather than
101

Geoffrey Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository: Using Technology in Special
Collections," The Journal of Academic Librarianship 38, no. 3 (2012): 172-174.
102
Jonathan Weber, "Shoestring Digital Library: If Existing Digital Library Software Doesn't Suit
Your Needs, Create Your Own," Library Journal 131, no. 12 (2006): 30-32.
103
Michael Doylen (UWM Archives Director), interview with Kate Otto, January 29, 2014.
104
Peter Brusilovsky, Lillian N. Cassel, Lois M. L. Delcambre, Edward A. Fox, Richard Furuta, Daniel
D. Garcia, Frank M. Shipman, et al., "Social Navigation for Educational Digital Libraries," Procedia
Computer Science 1, no. 2 (2010): 2889-2897.

48

flipping through numerous archival folders. Digital collection users are in more control
over their search strategies when sorting through information organized electronically
and therefore come into contact with more relevant sources. Moreover, digital
resources are redefining the ways information organizers, scholars, and their audiences
consider and use archival papers and personal records.105 These once physical sources
are now digitized and categorized in changing ways that reach users differently and thus
can potentially manifest into different applications of the material.106 For example, an
assortment of newspaper clippings that is organized in an archival folder may reach a
user differently when presented to that same user digitally online by a list of newspaper
article titles. Instead of skimming through each clipping the user is able to pick which
titles seem most relevant to their research purpose. The immediate access and
organization of electronically presented information is a significant characteristic of a
digital collection that alters the user experience and also consequently the way the
material is retained by that user.
Although digital collections allow immediate access to resources previously
unavailable to users, or to those who were unaware those physical collections existed,
digital collections also allow more opportunities for individuals to access that
information in person. UWM Archives Director Michael Doylen stressed that users are
introduced to more sources online and consequently are able to make more efficient

105
106

Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository," 172-174.
Ibid., 172-174.

49

use of their time in the archives when they know exactly what they desire to see.107
Thus, scholars can peruse material online ahead of time to gain an idea of the exact
sources they choose to view in the archives and make efficient use of their time. In
contrast, users who were formerly unaware an archives existed may be exposed to a
local archives digital collection and therefore go to that archives to view a specific
source.108 Additionally, more sources can be acquired digitally for institutions limited by
space. For instance, faculty desiring specific photographs for their instruction uses can
be satisfied more easily by digital collections.109 However, one sacrifice digital access is
subject to, is the lack of direct content with the original document. Increased access
supplies an abundance of opportunities for individuals to gain more knowledge and
develop understandings of various topics relevant to their community or their research.
Digital collections also allow new opportunities for groups of people to define or
employ the information they acquire. Users, or distinct communities, can view
information simultaneously together or apart, gain a collective impression of the
information offered online, and employ it according to their groups' mission. Within the
humanities digital collections vary in their subject matter and similarly the diversity of
their sources exist in unique and interesting formats such as historical photographs,
newspaper clippings, or government documents that can be applied in a town
newsletter, a downtown walking tour, or a public official's speech.110 The variety of uses

107

Doylen , interview, 2014.
Doylen , interview, 2014.
109
Joan E. Beaudoin, "Specters in the Archive: Faculty Digital Image Collections and the Problems
of Invisibility," Journal of Academic Librarianship 37, no. 6 (2011): 488-494.
110
Weber, "Shoestring Digital Library," 30-32.
108

50

digital sources offer due to increased access can facilitate increased evidence in both
scholarly and popular materials. Digital collections can promote knowledge of products
and information, empower communities who identify with histories, images, or related
materials, and can find freedom in developing their perceived context of the material
according to their use as an individual or a group.111 More access and interaction with
materials due to digitization and the creation of topical collections more often than not
means more application of those materials by the general public. If people are
introduced and apply high quality sources to their objectives, their efforts can be more
informed and accurate, and may reach more people who are responsive to detailed,
evidence-based information.
In comparison to other fields including the sciences, the humanities were initially
resistant to digitizing efforts in that archival digital collections have been created only
more recently in the last 20 years that digital collections have been popular. However,
digital endeavors including the creation of databases like JSTOR and Archive Americana,
as well as numerous digital collections which began in the 1990s, have dramatically
increased into the twenty-first century. Digital collections related to the humanities
employ information technology ranging from data visualization, textual analysis, geospatial mapping, and to support research and learning in those fields.112 Wilensky and
Schatz et al. describe digital collections as a network of multimedia information and
information services supporting materials deemed of high value that gain quality

111
112

Ormond-Parker, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the Digital Age," 191-212.
Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository," 172-174.

51

through electronic services.113 Furuta et al. elaborated that digital collections "develop a
knowledge base and object database with the aid of text analysis and parsing, network
editing and enrichment."114 The context of creating digital collections emphasizes the
evolving access and perspectives of those sources now available to users.
Digital collections become particularly useful to academic instruction, as well as
to community learning. Now, students of various levels can access primary materials in a
new resource through high quality learning objects.115 In "Specters in the Archives"
author Beaudoin stated "with institutionally created and managed collections we can
examine what specific images (are) available for teaching and research."116 Both textual
sources and photographs are able to supplement the curriculum of courses and the
faculty research interests. Moreover, digital representations of images and text can
emphasize a more equal reliance of images for researchers to reference in their
humanities-related works which traditionally have relied more heavily on text-based
sources.117 Additionally, what academic institutions include in digital collections
designed for their curricula broadcasts the level and scope of their course designs to
their community and potentially to other academic communities interested in what that
institution is currently teaching.118

113

B. Schatz, H., B. Schatz, and Hsinchun Chen, "Building Large- Scale Digital Libraries," Computer
29, no. 5 (1996): 22-26.
114
Fox, "Digital Libraries," 22-28.
115
B. Tally and L.B. Goldenberg, "Fostering Historical Thinking with Digitized Primary Sources,"
Journal of Research on Technology in Education 38 no. 1 (2005),
116
Beaudoin, "Specters in the Archive," 488-494.
117
Ibid., 488-494.
118
Ibid., 488-494.

52

Digital collections can encourage inter-departmental as well as cross-institutional
collaboration. Not only do these collections offer windows into the future of evolving
renditions of learning, current work practices, and electronic publishing, but they offer
bridges between communities and increase communication and workflow between
disparate centers of intellect.119 Within institutions more information needs are realized
and met when the scope of information is more transparent,120 and increased access to
academic sources facilitate more efficient learning processes and increase research
production within the academic community. In addition, increased collaboration can
only serve to further evolve the state of digital collections and drive innovation.
Considerations for the Creation of Digital Collections
Digital collections undergo several stages in development to provide electronic
sources to their users. For documents that are not originally in digital form, the
appropriate individuals, whether archivists or designated faculty, select sources
including images, print items, and other content to be digitized. For images and texts,
digitizing means scanning with as little as a desktop scanner and an image-editing
program for resolution and image file format purposes.121 Operating knowledge of web
design, programming software, and competence developing metadata using MARC,
Dublin Core, or another scheme based on established standards, is the minimum
necessary for creating a digital collection.122 For the purposes of describing the
developmental process, our case will consider a university library as the creator,
119

Fox, "Digital Libraries," 22-28.
Ibid., 22-28.
121
Weber, "Shoestring Digital Library," 30-32.
122
Ibid., 30-32.
120

53

therefore assuming the minimal requirements are easily met due to standardized
university policies and software. Other considerations for creating a digital collection for
a library require that policies (such as source selection guidelines) are established before
the creation, as well as creators acknowledging copyright and subscription limitations.123
For example, a hate letter addressed to Milwaukee Civil Rights leader Father Groppi will
require approval from the person who wrote the letter, unless the letter is anonymous
or a copyright orphan, before publishing the source on a digital collection.
In addition to technological and bureaucratically related processes, aesthetics
and usability factors are also important. Particularly in 2014, regular users of the
internet expect decent performance, organization, and functionality when navigating
websites.124 The easier it is for a user to navigate and become comfortable accessing
information from a digital collection, the more likely they will adapt those sources into
knowledge used to communicate with others in their research conversations that will
likely expose that collection to more users.125 Several considerations and stages take up
significant time before a collection, which in our case is an archival collection, can be
previewed and deemed fit for digital publication.
A digital format may imply easier preservation of the involved sources when
compared to preserving the original source. In contrast, many scholars have indicated
that preserving digital documents is at least as difficult and must be backed up and

123

Brusilovsky, "Social Navigation for Educational Digital Libraries," 2889-2897.
Ibid., 2889-2897.
125
Ibid.
124

54

accounted for.126 Moreover, once established digital collections require continued and
potentially increased support which ranges from improving the quality to contemporary
technological standards to formatting the collection for potential collaborations and
meta-collections.127 A significant constraint to digital humanities projects or other
academic library digital collections is that they are expected to sustain themselves
through limited funding, one or two faculty advocates, and the limited work time of one
or two web programmers.128 In addition, institutions have to keep up with development
and maintenance costs, which can demand faculty time spent on grant applications and
community fundraising.129 However, one could argue such outreach could grant the
project more exposure and invite increased interest among the community. Long-term
digital collection can require significant funding, with one specific example being a
national museum life sciences virtual project that provides desktop access to plant,
animal and rock artifacts from around the world budgeting 4.5 million dollars. 130 If the
collection is part of an academic institution its upkeep as a research resource demands
technological, source, and relevancy maintenance. The traditional library may be
increasingly constraining, but if digital representations of collections fail to evolve they
will also be limited to who the users they reach and will fail to remain relevant.
Another challenge to digital collection creation is a lack of standards regulating
this relatively new digital resource phenomenon. Previously, several examples of poorly
126

Weber, "Shoestring Digital Library," 30-32.
Wayne Kondro and Elizabeth Pennisi, "Boom in Digital Collections Makes a Muddle of
Management," Science 308, no. 5719 (2005): 187-189.
128
Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository," 172-174.
129
Doylen , interview, 2014.
130
Kondro, "Boom in Digital Collections Makes a Muddle of Management," 187-189.
127

55

published academic digital collections have arisen devoid of a "uniformly professional
level of skill."131 An abundance of inadequate digital collections can confuse
inexperienced users such as K-12 students. The general public is already exposed to an
overload of information, and the resources that seem to project more visually
sophisticated technologies are more likely to experience more popular use.132
Moreover if a scholarly institution develops a collection of electronic sources what use is
that resource if it is neglected, created with obsolete software, or not productively
advocated?133 Thus the lack of standards in place for academic institutions to reference
when developing digital collections is problematic in that an abundance of low quality
digital collections amass in cyberspace. Standards that offer an official framework and
reference models, and potentially national or organizational certification can inform
users which digital collections are updated and accurate. If the populace seeks out high
quality digital collections noticeably created from novel software and interactive
technologies that encourage the dissemination of the information they hold, those
sources will be more easily absorbed and more readily accepted by the audience.134 A
poorly digitized source may be better than no source at all to a couple of dedicated
researchers, but most sources are more accessible and useful if they are adequately
digitized and well organized in an electronic platform.
Institutions that allocate adequate funds and staff time to write grant
applications and dedicate significant work-time into quality digital projects are more
131

Beaudoin, "Specters in the Archives."
Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository," 172-174.
133
Ibid.
134
Ormond-Parker, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the Digital Age," 191-212.
132

56

likely to create digital collections that successfully facilitate quality research, promote
data access, and advocate source preservation. If libraries or collaborating institutions
save and maintain stand-alone digital collections that would otherwise be discarded
they must organize, sort, and make sense of the purpose of that collection.135 Primarily,
those academic institutions should have an audience, particularly their student body,
which is competent in computing and has electronic research skills that keep them
motivated to look to those digital collections as quality research resources.136 It is up to
the institution not only to consider the ways in which they employ their professional
efforts in developing collections, but also to decide what collections they maintain.
Digital humanities and electronic collections of sources will continue to remain in
the mainstream of information distribution. Digitizing archival documents and
developing digital collections supply academic and popular communities with innovative
ways to access information. This relatively new way of engaging with knowledge on a
digital level empowers researchers and communities with the ability to analyze histories
and manage contexts of historical documents in a more efficient way unrestricted by
time.137 While organizing and summarizing digitized material is a substantial endeavor
by the professional staff involved, users are able to gain knowledge, clarify the context
of specific topics, critically analyze, and connect events and evidence in more accessible
ways that facilitate increased research conversations. As Beaudoin argued, digital
collections have the ability to amplify scholarly acceptance of visual information as an
135

Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository," 172-174.
Kondro, "Boom in Digital Collections Makes a Muddle of Management," 187-189.
137
Ormond-Parker, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the Digital Age," 191-212.
136

57

acceptable form of evidence.138 It is important to note that although digital
representations of sources are convenient and accessible; these collections are also
subject to new and expensive software revisions, format shifting, physical collection
threats, funding cuts, among other factors.139 Additionally, even though standards are
needed to regulate digital collection developments those same policies may dismiss the
validity of some current successful collections. Regardless of the benefits and risks
involved in creating and maintaining a digital collection, this recent trend in source
organization will only increase in prevalence as physical sources witness budget cuts,
limited space, and competition with digital representations that users find more
immediate and more convenient to their research needs.

138

139

Beaudoin, "Specters in the Archive," 488-494.
Ormond-Parker, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the Digital Age," 191-212.

58

Chapter Four
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project is a digital collection composed of
825 primary source items from the archives of the University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee
Libraries and the Wisconsin Historical Society.140 Overall, this digital archive contains
2000 pages of text documents, as well as video footage, oral histories, photographs, and
contextual materials.141 The project was, and is still, overseen by project leader and the
UWM Director of Urban Studies/Coordinator of Public History Jasmine Alinder in
cooperation with historians, archivists, digital librarians, students, and partner
organizations who built a digital collection from the idea of creating a resource
dedicated to showcasing primary source material and contextual materials related to
Milwaukee Civil Rights history. The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project launched in
September of 2010 as a result of the developers' ideas to create a digital resource that
influenced users, particularly area students, to view the city they live in through a
different perspective. This digital collection co-exists among a growing number of civil
rights era-focused digital collections but is distinct in its subject matter pertaining to a
northern city's civil rights experience. The project designers intended for the collection
to be used primarily as a pedagogical tool for collegiate and Milwaukee secondary
school research. However, the site also serves as a significant collective history of the
City of Milwaukee's past and present road to racial equality. March on Milwaukee is a
compilation of primary sources from over a dozen collections, including oral histories,
140

Ann Hanlon (UWM Libraries Digital Collections Coordinator), interview with Kate Otto,
February 7, 2014.
141
Hanlon, interview, 2014.

59

interviews, news footage, personal papers, community group papers and documents,
government materials, and photographs from various stages of the city's civil rights
movement. These combined historical narratives work in concert as a current example
of a civil rights historical narrative that educates the surrounding community
(Milwaukee) in a way similar to the civil rights narratives previously discussed in this
thesis. Equally significant is that March on Milwaukee is included on the University of
Georgia's Civil Rights Digital Library (http://crdl.usg.edu/?Welcome), which advertises a
long list of high quality civil rights related digital collections, and therefore serves as a
reference to and aggregator of the nation's larger civil rights experience.
Project leader Jasmine Alinder took on a significant challenge when she gathered
a team of archivists, digital librarians, students, and historians with varying
commitments and schedules to create March on Milwaukee as a digital archival
collection. Although academic institutions are increasingly designing digital collections in
educational formats to serve the humanities, the project team formally agreed to design
the collection to be applicable to the Milwaukee community. March on Milwaukee is
unique because not only did the project originally partner with the Milwaukee Public
Library, but they also partnered with a local arts organization, Arts@Large, where they
worked with a dozen students from a school for at-risk youth to extend the collection's
purpose to include serving the Milwaukee community. March on Milwaukee stands as a
digital collection that not only fosters research, but also has shown how to use digital

60

collections in an outreach program that encompasses a service learning initiative.142
Although many forms of civil rights education exist to preserve the materials associated
with the movement throughout various decades, the fact that March on Milwaukee is a
digital collection supports the growing relevance and significance that digital archival
collections have in academic and public communities due to their unique ability to
collect, organize, and preserve primary sources and educational materials from multiple
institutions on a single, accessible resource.
Digital Archives Collection Purposes, Risks, and Opportunities
Just as a local historical society might market their most unique collections by
digitizing those sources, libraries and other public preservation institutions electronically
organize and publish their special collections to satisfy current users and potentially
attract new users. The concept of a digital repository has been defined in various ways
throughout the Information and Library Science field, but Marek Sroka satisfactory
described it as "an online database of digital or digitized objects designed to collect,
organize, preserve, and share those items with local and global communities."143 The
March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project is an example of one of the over 30 digital
collections that is hosted by the UWM Libraries that organizes and preserves topical
collections with the university's surrounding academic and public communities.144
Digital archival collections are characterized by their preservation of primary materials

142

Ryan Hurley (Arts@Large Program Manager), interview with Kate Otto, February 10, 2014.
Marek Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish
Digital Collections," Slavic & East European Information Resources 12, no. 2 (2011): 175-187.
144
Ling Meng (UWM Libraries Associate Academic Digitization Librarian), interview with Kate
Otto, January 31, 2014.
143

61

and historical data. The March on Milwaukee site qualifies as a digital archival
collection. Other examples include the Library of Congress American Memory Project,
the 50th Anniversary of the March on Washington
(http://50thanniversarymarchonwashington.com/), and the Voices of Civil Rights
(http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/civilrights/). The historical community is increasingly
introduced to sources and educational material digital collections as more scholars cite
digital collections in their bibliographies. As Sinn argued in his article "The Use and
Context of Digital Archival Collections," this bibliographic information will be useful in
the future when digital repository architects assess which digital collections are used by
scholars.145 Digital archival collections may serve as interesting popular sources, but the
goal for institutions such as UWM will be to create reliable, scholarly resources that can
be applied to their own faculty's research and potentially extend to global academic
research.
In addition to their contribution to scholarship, digital collections may serve as
the research product of a scholar in the field.146 The March on Milwaukee site was a
project undertaken by UWM Professor Jasmine Alinder who conceived the value in
creating a digital Milwaukee Civil Rights collection as an educational tool for UWM and
surrounding community. Alinder, as a humanities subject specialist, collaborated with
UWM and Wisconsin Historical Society archivists, and technically skilled librarians to

145

Donghee Sinn, "The use Context of Digital Archival Collections: Mapping with Historical
Research Topics and the Content of Digital Archival Collections," Preservation, Digital Technology &
Culture 42, no. 2 (2013): 73-86.
146
Jim Martin, Hitoshi Kamada, and Mary Feeney, "A Systematic Plan for Managing Physical
Collections at the University of Arizona Libraries," Collection Management 38, no. 3 (2013): 226-242.

62

electronically launch a collection as a scholarly product that not only offers community
history but pushes the civil rights topic further in historical research conversations.
Unrestricted by the confines of a bibliography to direct researchers to evidence, Alinder
and her collaborators have built an interactive space where users can not only view
specific primary sources but actually connect related sources together on a digitally
displayed, heterogeneous collection. In fact, UWM's Digital Collection Coordinator at
the time of the March on Milwaukee launch in 2010 stated that it was the first UWM
digital collection that prioritized digitizing multiple mediums of sources and providing
contextual materials.147 Just as a user can go to Amazon.com and find unrelated
purchases, a scholar may go on March on Milwaukee and find primary sources from
multiple archives distantly located from each other and in various forms including
videos and newspaper articles.148 Additionally, rather than spending time in library
microfilm units or flipping through archival folders, the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights
Project has related materials already digitized and uploaded for the user to access
immediately. UWM Digitization Librarian Ling Meng commented that March on
Milwaukee is a convenient resource in that "you don't have to go to the archives...24
hours and seven days a week it is open to all users. It allows for multiple users to do
research on the same item at the same time where as the physical object cannot do."149
As stated by Beaudoin et al., digital collections have the power to "support the
development of knowledge, clarify concepts, communicate inexpressible ideas (through
147

Krystyna Matusiak (University of Denver LIS Professor and former UWM Digital Collection
Coordinator), interview with Kate Otto, February 18, 2014
148
Dinesh Katre, "Digital Preservation," IFLA Journal 37, no. 3 (2011): 195-203.
149
Ling Meng, interview, 2014.

63

images), provide inspiration...develop skills of critical analysis, and connect people and
provide evidence."150 Digital archival collections meet the specialized scholarly needs of
researchers of multiple levels and often reflect the curriculum, specializations, and work
of institutions.
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project was a collaborative project led by
Alinder who sought out UWM archivists Michael Doylen and Ellen Engseth, and UWM
Digitization Librarians Krystyna Matusiak and Trevor Berman, as well as many students.
As the project manager, Alinder created a framework of what she ideally wanted
educational users to get out of the site and provided the vision for the team to create a
digital collection made up of digitized Milwaukee civil rights primary sources with
contextual materials suited for educational purposes.151 March on Milwaukee's
development was unique because prior to this project UWM had never created a digital
collection with more than a couple of librarians involved, with multiple formats from
multiple collections, or had included contextual information into a digital collection.152
Although working with multiple people and their ideas is challenging, UWM Libraries'
Digital Collection Coordinator in 2010, Krystyna Matusiak, commented that it turned out
beneficial to gather the ideas of experts from various fields. The project became more
dynamic and well-rounded.153 Alinder also stated, "There's a pretty wide ranging skill set
that you need to build a site like this. There was a lot of discussion in order for us to
determine what to include and to share ideas. I can have an idea of what I want
150

Beaudoin, "Specters in the Archive," 488-494.
Alinder, interview, 2014.
152
Matusiak, interview, 2014.
153
Ibid., 2014.
151

64

something to look like but I needed Krystyna and Trevor to tell me what was
possible."154 Moreover the project, as do many digital projects, gave a handful of UWM
undergraduate and graduate students research and professional experience. UWM
doctoral student Lucas Wolff was an undergraduate History student at UWM in 2010
who helped work on the project. From Wolff's perspective March on Milwaukee helped
him develop his historical skills. Wolff stated,
"I read secondary literature and researched to get familiar with the topic
so I could write the key terms on the website, people, places, and events. I wrote
those. I also helped with oral history transcriptions. It shaped my research
interests and how I think about education as a whole. My experience as an
intern, hands-on experience working with archivists and historians and grad
students so it was relatively diverse groups of people so diversity of ideas and
people talking about things. Seeing how it was applied I'm always thinking about
how curriculum and historiography can be applied and how students learn."155
March on Milwaukee sought out student perspectives and used student research and
collaborative ideas to create the site. Additionally, UWM Libraries Digitization Specialist
Trevor Berman stated that collaboration also worked well for designing this particular
digital collection mainly because it expanded the professional base that advocated the
resource to users.156 The more people who invested their time and efforts to March on
Milwaukee, the more likely other people linked to them to view the site.
Collaboration can blend in outreach when more than institution invests
resources into a project. March on Milwaukee was a collaborative project led by Alinder
and the UWM Libraries in partnership with the Wisconsin Historical Society and a list of
154

Alinder, interview, 2014.
Lucas Wolff (UWM History Doctoral Student), interview with Kate Otto, February 12, 2014.
156
Trevor Berman (UWM Libraries Digitization Specialist), interview with Kate Otto, January 27,
155

2014.

65

several additional contributors. Because the project team added a greater variety and
quantity of sources from more locations, such as from UWM and the Wisconsin
Historical Society, the March on Milwaukee site has introduced sources and narratives
on the site to people from different geographical locations. Institutional collaborations,
such as those between museums and libraries, have helped grow the number of digital
collections and have increased their popularity.157 In fact, topics including digital
preservation and access within information studies are at the forefront of research in
the field and encourage collaboration in creating scholarly and substantial collections
that are relevant and meet users' research needs.
The chief risks involved with creating a digital archival project such as the March
on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project are funding and maintenance. Additionally, Matusiak
commented that creating metadata and controlled vocabulary for civil rights primary
sources proved to be extremely challenging and time consuming.158 Large research
collections housed in academic institutions like a university seemingly have the greatest
chance for success assuming they have a large staff and comfortable budget.159
Moreover, if a digital collection can gain academic institutions notoriety the more
motivation the museum, college, or county historical society has for dedicating the
resources to that project. Fortunately, March on Milwaukee creators were able to direct
valuable work time to the project because it furthered the mission and responsibilities
of most of the individuals involved. For example, in Professor Alinder's case her
157

Katre, "Digital Preservation," 195-203.
Matusiak, interview, 2014.
159
Weber, "Shoestring Digital Library," 30-32.
158

66

humanities specialization allowed for a public and scholarly project, and for the
archivists involved including Michael Doylen and Ellen Engseth the UWM Archives
materials were being displayed through a new medium and reaching more people. In
regards to maintenance, many institutions rely on collaborations to keep digital projects
going and to remain fresh to users.160 Many times funding and upkeep efforts take just
as much resources and beginning a project.161 Often, this pressure can be alleviated by
budgeting future project efforts before starting the project. Additionally, partnering up
with the UWM Libraries allowed the digital archival collection the ongoing infrastructure
to maintain the site. March on Milwaukee creators wisely applied for several grants and
established partnerships to in the initial stages of the project to offset resource
obstacles down the road.162
Digital collections are beneficial to humanities-related subjects in that the
sources they preserve are useful to both scholars and popular users. The March on
Milwaukee site offers this open characteristic in that it organizes primary sources
related to Milwaukee civil rights and also offers educational resources, such as an
interactive timeline to help put the sources in context for younger users or scholars less
versed in the topic. It is important for digital collection creators to recognize who uses
digital collections because those statistics offer librarians and faculty contextual
information about the real use of these digital resources. This recognition is valuable

160

Geoffrey Little, "We are all Digital Humanists Now," The Journal of Academic Librarianship 37,
no. 4 (2011): 352-354.
161
Little, "We are all Digital Humanists Now," 352-354.
162
Doylen, interview, 2014.

67

when administrative leaders consider if the institution will maintain those resources.163
As collaboration becomes more valuable, the next trend in digital collections Marek
Sroka predicted will be "their unification and the development of digital tools allowing
for the comparison of images not only within a particular collection, but also among
other, similar collections worldwide."164 The March on Milwaukee format as a digital
collection is significant in that it is already partaking in this trend with its inclusion on
the University of Georgia's Civil Rights Digital Library (http://crdl.usg.edu/?Welcome)
digital humanities project list. Furthermore, although March on Milwaukee is a
humanities-related collection in general, users and scholars researching in other fields
such as education, the arts, or Psychology could find the collection's materials useful for
their scholarly works. Knowing user behavior is another benefit to March on Milwaukee
existing as a digital collection in that it allows the faculty involved to develop methods
and set criteria for revisions and future projects165. The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights
Project's format generally encourages research by combining the research materials and
interactive qualities of multiple institutions and models to offer a well-rounded
comprehensive edition of easily accessible materials on Milwaukee Civil rights.
March on Milwaukee's Civil Rights Impetus
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project's civil rights subject matter is
significant in that racial equality in Milwaukee has a substantial historical narrative,
particularly since the 1964 Freedom Schools previously discussed in this thesis.
163

Sinn, "The use Context of Digital Archival Collections," 73-86.
Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish Digital
Collections," 175-187.
165
Sinn, "The use Context of Digital Archival Collections," 73-86.
164

68

Obstacles in education, housing, and employment have continually denied many
Milwaukee minorities the opportunities disproportionately enjoyed by whites.
Moreover, even after the demonstrations and Freedom Schools of the 1960s, the
economic plight of the city’s minorities worsened into the 1990s. Although Milwaukee
whites believed minorities had equal opportunity to succeed after the demonstrations
of the late 1960s, minorities continued to experience housing segregation and
inadequate schooling, and high levels of unemployment.166 White Milwaukeeans may
have no longer waved Confederate flags at African Americans, but due to racial
segregation many rarely saw African Americans at all. Outright opposition to racial
equality was largely replaced by apathy or rationalizations for racial inequality that did
nothing or worsened the underlying causes of racial injustice in the city.167
As the United States advances into the twenty-first century racial segregation
continues to be a major issue. Milwaukee ranks as one of the most racially segregated
cities in the United States. While marginal improvements have been made in areas of
housing and education, minorities in the city still experience increasing economic
obstacles that help maintain a poverty-ridden lifestyle. One March on Milwaukee
project designer stated,
"Today, there are vast sloths of this town that are not any good...it
makes me think about why that is and it makes me hopeful that someone will
make something happen. It doesn't have to be this way, and I hope in some way

166

Kathryn Otto, "Segregation, civil rights, and white resistance to racial equality in Milwaukee"
(undergraduate thesis, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, 2010), introduction.
167
Otto, "Segregation, civil rights, and white resistance to racial equality in Milwaukee,"
introduction.

69

this site will help someone see that way and that their community is malleable
and they don't have to just live where they live because that's the way it is."168
Another March on Milwaukee developer commented, "The civil rights movement is not
some far off thing, it's still very real and very significant to our city. And it can explain
why we still see some of those lines of segregation. It brings it home."169 The March on
Milwaukee site serves the community as an evidence-based reminder of the events that
have maintained distinct socio-economic racial disparities that continue to plague
Milwaukee, and the site preserves and makes accessible this historical record to a
variety of user research levels and purposes.
When asked how she came up with the idea to create March on Milwaukee,
Professor Jasmine Alinder stated,
"Originally Peggy Rozga - a professor at UW-Waukesha, and the wife of
Father James Groppi, contacted Michael Gordon and myself and invited us for
coffee and asked if we would be interested in collaborating with her to
commemorate the 40th anniversary of Milwaukee's open housing marches. We
met in 2005 and the 40th anniversary was in 2007. Peggy convened a city-wide
committee to begin planning events around the 40th. That included WHS, Vel
Phillips, Michael Gordon and I from UWM, Marcus White head of the Interfaith
Conference of Greater Milwaukee, Mario Hall from the Milwaukee YMCA, and
others - 20 some people from a lot of different service organizations, educational
institutions, and nonprofits. So we planned for a year, and we planned for an
exhibition at the Wisconsin Black Historical Society. Peggy wrote a play called
March on Milwaukee based on their experiences protesting. I was in charge of
coordinating a conference - civil rights history conference at UWM and Dick
Gregory was a speaker for that. We had people march over the bridge - people
walked from the north and south side of the bridge and met in the middle. So
that was - the whole project came from Peggy.
When I first went to Michael about wanting to do this, (Peggy was in the
NAACP in the 60s) Peggy was attending the funerals of friends this time and she
168
169

Berman, interview, 2014
Hanlon, interview, 2014.

70

felt like their activism was going unmentioned. Her motivation was to make sure
that this story wasn't lost and that it was particularly communicated to
Milwaukee's youth. The 40th anniversary weekend was in September of 2007.
Hundreds of people participated in one or more of these events. It made an
impact.
But then the weekend was over. What do you do? I knew there
were really good resources located in the UWM archives on Milwaukee civil
rights history and Michael Gordon had created many oral histories for the
40th anniversary weekend. So I knew there were good records and I wanted to
make them accessible so we could continue the story even though the
weekend's over.
So I planned on creating the website myself actually. I had created the
March on Milwaukee weekend site myself. I thought I could make it work. But
then I thought maybe I should talk to my friends in the archives. So I talked to
Michael Doylen and Michael was really interested in the project and thought the
archives would take it on. Ewa the (UWM Libraries) director was also interested.
They were developing their online collections but they had never done anything
this scale before. They were willing to invest their resources into this project." 170

The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project is specific to the City of
Milwaukee's civil rights historical narrative. This geographical focus gives the collection a
unique identity and purpose, and also offers scholars an educational contribution point
for sharing the history and the experiences of people involved in the story.171 The
primary sources collected by the project team and digitally preserved are accessible for
researchers and community members alike to relive historical events and discover other
individuals' perspectives on those same events. March on Milwaukee users can come in
contact with family and personal histories that intersect with their family's own
memories, and such a community identity can strengthen and initiate other educational

170

Alinder, interview, 2014.
Marilyn Von Seggern, Alex Merrill, and Lihong Zhu, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections,"
OCLC Systems & Services: International Digital Library Perspectives 26, no. 4 (2010): 273-282.
171

71

tools and programs to keep their history relevant.172 The March on Milwaukee site is a
sufficient example of a recent history that families and community members, as well as
scholars can communicate about and build from it ideas on the city's past and current
civil rights efforts. Similarly, researchers can use the site to compare the regionally
focused civil rights history to other national historical narratives and civil rights
educations. Digital collections of primary source documents and digital images
encourage a worldwide interest in presenting histories.173
To use another example, the Australian Aboriginal Communities Archives uses
information technology to build digital repositories that link the histories of aboriginal
communities and strive to empower that community.174 Similarly, scholar Marek Sroka
focuses his information technology research on the digitally preserved prewar and
wartime photographs of Polish Jews during the Holocaust to gain worldwide interest
and to maintain public awareness on the subject.175 People related or became
emotionally connected to those histories and therefore continued to use those sources.
Due to exposure and significant interest, the Polish archives are listening to its users and
are prioritizing digitizing their collections to maintain relevancy. For example, their
Warsaw National Digital Archive has over 15 million photographs and has 150,000

172

Ormond-Parker, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the Digital Age," 191-212.
Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish Digital
Collections," 175-187.
174
Ormond-Parker, "Local Archives and Community Collecting in the Digital Age," 191-212.
175
Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish Digital
Collections," 175-187.
173

72

images digitized since 1996.176 Likewise, the March on Milwaukee digital collection
encourages scholarly and community users to acknowledge Milwaukee's civil rights
narrative and maintain awareness on the lingering racial inequality that is still present in
the city.
March on Milwaukee as a city-specific digital collection provides users
with distinctive primary sources unique to that area's historical narrative. At one access
point users can interact with text, visual, audio, and geospatial primary sources related
to Milwaukee civil rights that further evolve user knowledge on the subject.177 One
project leader stated,
"It seems to bring a lot of materials together in a way that provides a lot
of context so it's not just a bucket of materials. (The Milwaukee Public Library)
might have materials also, but what is especially right about (March on
Milwaukee) is that you get the film and oral histories where people walk you
through what they went through - which is unique. The timeline is interactive
and puts it in the broader context of the larger movement; it limits the amount
of materials so you're not overwhelmed, and it focuses on a set of people and
events so you can really zero in on that topic with some understanding of what
happened in the city. So it's what people are able to do with the materials
collectively and not the materials themselves."178
The format digital collections offer to users has redefined the research experience and
enriches knowledge with context.179 In addition, digital collections provide sources 24/7
to a limitless amount of potential users, an objective that is particularly significant to
information technologists and humanities faculty in fields that demand public interest to

176

Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish Digital
Collections," 175-187.
177
Seggern, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections," 273-282.
178
Hanlon, interview, 2014.
179
Christopher A. Lee, "Taking Context Seriously: A Framework for Contextual Information in
Digital Collections," UNC SILS TR-2007-04 (2007).

73

maintain relevancy. In contrast with actual UWM Archives hours, users can access
information immediately and more easily make connections between sources. As an
example of a digital archives collection, March on Milwaukee serves as more than a
compilation of primary sources as it offers context, search strategies, and source
connections to a population of users with wide ranges of research skills and subject
specialties.
The March on Milwaukee Developmental Process and Key People Involved
The research process for completing this thesis included conducting multiple one
to two hour interviews with the individuals involved in developing the March on
Milwaukee Civil Rights Project. The people interviewed were UWM Director of Urban
Studies Jasmine Alinder, UWM Archives Director Michael Doylen, UWM Associate
Academic Digitization Librarian Ling Meng, UWM Digitization Specialist Trevor Berman,
UWM Digital Collections Coordinator Ann Hanlon, former UWM Digital Collections
Coordinator Krystyna, Matusiak, former UWM archivist Ellen Engseth, 2010 UWM
Research Assistant Luke Wolff, and Arts@Large Program Manager Ryan Hurley. Among
the organizations who contributed to the site include Arts@Large, Friends of the Golda
Meir Library, the Milwaukee Public Library (MPL), the Wisconsin Historical Society
(WHS), as well as other UWM and Milwaukee community organizations that are
regularly mentioned throughout this thesis.180 Nine separate personal interviews were
conducted overall and each responder acknowledged that although Alinder articulated
the idea, the digital collection project was open to the ideas of all the developers. The
180

"About," March On Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Libraries, http://www4.uwm.edu/libraries/digilib/march/ index.cfm.

74

March on Milwaukee project was originally, and still is, a collaborative effort among
various active UWM and Milwaukee community members.
The group of developers named above created the March on Milwaukee Civil
Rights History Project in stages. Initially, Alinder brought UWM Archives Director Doylen
and the UWM Libraries Digital Collection Coordinator who was then Krystyna Matusiak
together to sketch and brainstorm the project.181 Alinder and Doylen coordinated and
mediated between all parties involved, initiated outreach plans, and also fostered
learning experiences by managing research assistants and library graduate interns who
participated in the site's development. Matusiak focused more on the technical aspects
of the product and managed her digitization team to convert the primary sources that
UWM archivist Ellen Engseth and Alinder selected. Matusiak specifically oversaw the
digitization conversion of materials, created a project in CONTENTdm software, trained
and supervised students in scanning and metadata creation process, coordinated the
technical aspects of the project, created metadata for video records, and conducted
quality review of the digital records.182 Community outreach with Arts@Large Program
Manager Ryan Hurley would come later in the developmental process, and included
user evaluation and Milwaukee Public Schools (MPS) outreach to highlight the site as an
educational resource.

181
182

Matusiak, interview, 2014.
Ibid.

75

Establishing Policies and Guidelines
While collaboration allows for a creative and open environment, the March on
Milwaukee Civil Rights Project lacked formal policy making, but did have structured
meetings with formal agendas. Information Technology scholar Dinesh Katre noted in
"Digital Preservation" that when first developing a collection several needs extend from
the medium's principle characteristic: access. Katre specifically listed education and
professional practice, collection development, preservation, administration, and
sustenance as vital factors supporting digital preservation methodology.183 As indicated
in interview responses, development for the March on Milwaukee project did not
always include formal objectives or policy making that addressed specific professional or
education goals, collection development beyond the confines of the topic,
administrative policies, or specific maintenance measures and a timeline. The objectives
and directions for development were broader and individuals apart of the site's
development were allowed to attend to their creative process when using their specific
skills.184 The project's web designer responded,
"We did have diverse subsets of librarians and library science people, and
then history students and faculty - coming at it from different interests. Luke
liked oral history, and some were given more direction. The interesting part was
that everyone was very flexible from their perspectives and open minded.
Everyone had preferences and specific design elements, but (their approaches)
were also give and take so the creative process was dynamic. If someone had an
idea with substantial back up as how it applied to this (project) then it was ok to
go for it and do it and test it."185

183

Katre, "Digital Preservation," 195-203.
Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
185
Ibid.
184

76

While this is a positive process in regards to creativity and innovation, future academic
projects will continue to lack standardized models that they might have been able to
acquire from March on Milwaukee recording their structural development models.
Fortunately, the March on Milwaukee developmental team was well-versed in their
individual skills. March on Milwaukee designers were also able to depend on set UWM
digital collection and Archives policies that made development run more smoothly.
Without set standards, digital collection cultivation, such as in March on Milwaukee's
case, is prone to developers neglecting to establish set policies, methods, and objectives
that are necessary to direct collection development.
Adding to the need for formalized policies and documentation are the
professional principles and ethical considerations necessary for archival and information
science practices. For example, digital materials are dependent on the applications that
digitize and electronically publish them. Depending on the creator, they are prone to
corruption or misidentification if the materials are poorly described or coupled with
insufficient metadata.186 Museums, archives, and library collections all require formal
policies when developing digital collections, or any collection. Although the archivists
involved in the March on Milwaukee project used their institution's metadata and
cataloguing schemes, it is important for digital collection development teams to
formally agree upon those methods, in addition to official acquisition, preservation, and
maintenance policies publically to all members to ensure stability and a group vision

186

Seamus Ross, "Digital Preservation, Archival Science and Methodological Foundations for
Digital Libraries," New Review of Information Networking 17, no. 1 (2012): 43-68.

77

that adheres to professional standards. Meaning, it is important for the digital collection
creators to establish acquisition methods, copyright issues, digital preservation
strategies, metadata methods, privacy and confidentiality, revenue sharing models, and
sustainability models among a list of other considerations for developing a repository.187
UWM Archives Director Doylen adhered to these standards and was specifically in
charge of copyright issues. For example, when selecting overtly racist hate mail to
digitize, Doylen selected only anonymous or copyright orphan letters.188 A core Library
and Information Studies dependency is "to guarantee the authenticity, integrity,
interpretability, and context of a digital material across systems, time, and context."189
Moreover, information professionals are trained to recognize that official processes
must direct policy making and formulation, and that they must establish assessment
criteria to improve the quality of strategic planning so that qualitative criteria are
followed during the formulation process.190 The March on Milwaukee developmental
process was successful in maintaining a group vision through holding regular meetings
during the collection's creation,191 but might have benefited from more formally
coordinated collaboration to support the need for digital collection standardization and
more structurally communicated cultural knowledge to be accountable to users.
UWM Archivist Ellen Engseth followed guidelines when choosing the sources and
archival collections to have digitized. Alinder created a conceptual framework with
187

Katre, "Digital Preservation," 195-203.
Alinder, interview, 2014.
189
Ross, "Digital Preservation, Archival Science and Methodological Foundations for Digital
Libraries," 43-68.
190
Ramy Abboud ,"National Digital Content Policies," IFLA Journal 39, no. 4 (2013): 294-310.
191
Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
188

78

general arenas of activism including churches, legislature, the streets and sites where
activists demonstrated, as well as school and open housing.192 Alinder commented that
they branched out from these central frameworks and then chose collections to digitize.
However, she noted that some collections, such as the Lloyd Barbee Papers are
voluminous and required careful selection. Engseth helped in those situations and
became the primary selector due to her close knowledge of the analog sources, her
experience with those sources instructional use, and her awareness of the popularity of
the sources.193 Engseth also had to consider any legal limitations and the opinions and
suggestions of other faculty and librarian involved with the project. Engseth commented
on the process by saying,
"I was one of many involved in general vision for the site, discussions
over structure (I remember story boarding with post-it notes on large tables with
Alinder), and the setting of goals for the site. We considered throughout the
process both our goals and the potential interest and use of the user
community."194

The collaborative process required that Engseth consider her colleagues opinions and
approval when selecting sources, as well as core guidelines for selecting source for the
March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project. Specifically, Engseth considered the sources
usefulness to the process of learning with primary sources, the sources connections to
digital collection's events, the information richness of the sources and their format

192

Alinder, interview, 2014.
Ellen Engseth, interview with Kate Otto, February 21, 2014.
194
Engseth, interview, 2014.
193

79

types, and the past popularity of sources in the physical archives.195 Additionally,
Engseth and her peers had to consider the legal restrictions, privacy issues, and other
administrative concerns pertinent to online publishing to make sure the sources were
ethically launched with the site.
Technical Considerations for Digital Archive Creation
Beyond the administrative obligations digital library collections require, more
technical developmental procedures such as web design and programming were vital to
the creation and success of March on Milwaukee. The infrastructure for creating a
digital collection is the foundation from which the digital service works. Therefore the
infrastructure must be extendable and upgradeable for resource maintenance and
credibility.196 UWM Libraries Digitization Specialist Trevor Berman was responsible for
developing the website design for March on Milwaukee. Berman used UWM's specific
content management system: CONTENDdm, which is basically software that fosters the
uploading, organizing, and managing of digital documents.197 Content management
systems are updated overtime, so digital collections require long-term maintenance to
evolve with the limitations of those systems. The graphical web browser and software
that are chosen for a specific digital service should both be easily useable by the
intended users, and also meet quality technology standards so the end product is
acceptable, such as being searchable via Google.198 Berman indicated that CONTENTdm

195

Engseth, interview, 2014.
Roy Tennant. "Digital Library Infrastructure." Library Journal 123, no. 11 (1998): 32.
197
Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
198
Roy Tennant, "Personalizing the Digital Library," Library Journal 124, no. 12 (1999): 36.
196

80

is a user-focused software but lacked many interactive features that he will need to add
to the site over time, such as an interactive map.199 Berman stated,
"We originally wanted more interactive features on website. But they
were hamstrung by design constraints of the time that depended on the
content management system. Over time there are updates to the content
management system. The content management system is a standardized
system that is used across libraries and museums and cultural heritage
institutions, but is not responsive to the changing technologies of the internet.
So for the design aspect you can dream big but you have to pack it into a tight
box. From a designer perspective that means you are limited to the ideas you
can make happen."200
March on Milwaukee was fortunate in that the project was supported by UWM.
Meaning, the digital collection was able to use the software and development tools
already established for previous digital collections.201 Had March on Milwaukee failed to
use web design software that was useable or updateable the service would risk being
obsolete in the near future as technology is continually advancing.
Academic library content management systems are restricted by their
standardized characteristics, but those resources still offer that institution's users a
familiar and easily navigated platform to perform their research. Efficient research and
site navigation are greatly supported by decent metadata. Metadata is data about data.
More specifically, metadata "is structured information that describes, explains, locates,
or otherwise makes it easier to retrieve, use, or manage an information resource."202
Basically, this descriptive data applies structured classification and terminology typically
199

Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
Ibid.
201
Ibid.
202
National Information Standards Organization, "NISO Standards,"
http://www.niso.org/standards/ (accessed 2/17, 2014).
200

81

germane to a library to the contents of a digital collection. Metadata aids in making
digital sources searchable and easily accessible to users.203
Metadata is another digital collection aspect that is routinely established in
academic libraries, including the UWM Libraries where two of the March on Milwaukee
sites archivists and three librarians work. Bruce and Hillman listed "completeness,
accuracy, provenance, conformance to expectations, logical consistency and coherence,
timeliness, and accessibility" as critical characteristics of appropriate metadata.204
Former UWM Libraries Digital Collection Coordinator Matusiak and the current UWM
Libraries Digital Collection Coordinator Ann Hanlon worked with CONTENTdm and
Dublin Core qualified elements. Matusiak commented that the metadata process
involved with March on Milwaukee's development was extremely challenging and time
consuming.
"The challenge with metadata was primarily vocabulary. The content you
put into describing those objects so we used a variety of controlled vocabulary
for digital collections, but especially for civil rights collections it's really
challenging because it's so limited. What we did is we created our own
vocabulary - proper names, events, and keywords. For example, for "civil unrest"
the recognized term is "riot" so we created lists of keywords. There are multiple
topical subject fields, and the process was very extended. What starts with 15
(Dublin Core) elements amounted to about 40 field. It was very interesting
intellectually when you are describing the collection. The names of people were
challenging because we really wanted to create our own controlled vocabulary.
So we had to do some research and check names. It took a great deal of time." 205

203

Shannon Bohle, "The New Digital Awareness: The Choices You make Extend Beyond Delivering
Digital Content (INFOTECH FEATURE)," Library Journal 133, no. 12 (2008): 26.
204
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
205
Matusiak, interview, 2014.

82

Without shareable metadata, digital projects like the March on Milwaukee site would
not be able to connect source metadata together in a manageable way. 206 If people
cannot access information and create relationships between sources that information
becomes irrelevant. Acceptable metadata, in addition to the policies and procedures
that regulate digital collection development; serves to work in concert to earn trust
from the user community.207 Because the March on Milwaukee site used a familiar
metadata schema (Dublin Core), users are consequently able to more easily navigate the
site and be introduced to related sources.
User-Focused Digital Collections
Metadata is just one aspect of how digital collections can become user friendly.
A principle objective March on Milwaukee creators agreed upon was to prioritize
launching a user-friendly site.208 As a research and educational service, March on
Milwaukee had to appear visually pleasing and offer search features that appealed to
students and faculty alike. Matusiak relayed that in contrast to other UWM collections
that are more straight forward with matter-of-fact organization and minimal
description, March on Milwaukee was unique in that
"The purpose of the site was to educate undergraduates on civil rights, so
we felt it was important to provide context. The goal was to increase the use of
primary sources by undergraduate students. We even assessed a combination of
user and usability study. Testing on students is also not typically done but it was

206

Seggern, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections," 273-282.
Ross, "Digital Preservation, Archival Science and Methodological Foundations for Digital
Libraries," 43-68.
208
Doylen , interview, 2014.
207

83

very beneficial. After the first couple of user-studies we did modify the site and
the design to make it more usable."209
The undergraduate researcher target audience meant that March on Milwaukee
designers had to make the site engaging particularly to teenagers and young adults.
Visual aesthetics are important particularly when considering the heavily reliance
millennials place on visual cues in online searches.210 Since March on Milwaukee was
designed not only for academic researchers, but also for middle and high schools
students and community members, site creators prioritized building a strong visual
presence to represent the collection. Zimerman et al. noted that digital natives, or users
who have grown up with digital technology, are "special, sheltered, confident, team
oriented, conventional, pressured and achieving,” and consequently react positively to
visually pleasing web design and immediate access to information.211 Digital collections
are able to offer users both of these qualities. In fact, digital collections can go one step
further. One key feature of the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project is that it
organizes materials according to folder, which are labeled just as one would see in the
physical archives. This organization is important in that it offers visual aesthetic to digital
native users who have potentially never visited a physical archive.212 This organizational
model is also effective because it mimics how sources are organized according to box
and folder in a physical archive, which is beneficial to users who have traditionally

209

Matusiak, interview, 2014.
Don Zimmerman and Dawn Bastian Paschal, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation of Colorado
State University Libraries' Digital Collections and the Western Waters Digital Library Web Sites," Journal of
Academic Librarianship (35, no. 3) 2009, 227-240.
211
Don Zimmerman and Dawn Bastian Paschal, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation of Colorado
State University Libraries' Digital Collections and the Western Waters Digital Library Web Sites," 227-240.
212
Doylen , interview, 2014, and Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
210

84

researched in physical archives. Adhering to concepts of traditional archival science adds
value to the design and delivery of digital libraries by aligning them with more
traditional approaches.213 The more user friendly a digital resource such as the March
on Milwaukee digital collection is, the more used and relevant it becomes to its
community and therefore to multiple research conversations.
Much scholarship in relation to digital collections and user behaviors exists.
However, as Sinn argued, "there is not much research on how digital archives have
contributed to historical scholarship and why historians use them."214 In an effort to
maintain relevancy, March on Milwaukee creators follow up with UWM researchers,
MPS teachers, and area organizations dealing in the field of education to discover ways
the site can be more beneficial to their research and instruction needs.215 Investing in
March on Milwaukee assessment not only supports finding what services can be added
to the site to make it more effective for educators, but also supports it being a
legitimate scholarly resource that is appropriate for citing. By increasing their presence
in scholarly bibliographies, March on Milwaukee and other digital collections can gain
academic validity and adapt assessment methods.216
The development of the March on Milwaukee digital collection was a substantial
undertaking by project leader Jasmine Alinder, UWM archivists, UWM librarians, and
other contributors. In regards to maintenance all parties have temporarily stepped away
213

Ross, "Digital Preservation, Archival Science and Methodological Foundations for Digital
Libraries," 43-68.
214
Sinn, "The use Context of Digital Archival Collections," 73-86.
215
Doylen , interview, 2014.
216
Sinn, "The use Context of Digital Archival Collections," 73-86.

85

from the site with the understanding that regular improvements and source additions
would be made.217 Although assessment will be talked about more in-depth later in this
thesis, their dedication to gaining feedback in person or from the link on the lower righthand corner of the site suggests the creators' goal to remain relevant, improve their
resource, and develop the collection further. The collection as it currently exists serves
to educate users on Milwaukee's struggle to achieve racial equality. As a place-based
digital collection, March on Milwaukee serves to generate geographical and educational
interests that extend its audience beyond Milwaukee and purely scholarly research.218
The process to digitize the variety of sources available on the site maintained the
meaning of the materials, as well as its sources provenance and authenticity that
influence how users employ them in their own research.219 Guided by institutionally
available materials, March on Milwaukee development was regulated by standardized
technology that were then creatively applied by a handful of professionals from various
fields with a variety of skills. The creative outcome that amassed from this collaboration
unveiled an unfinished, yet comprehensive collection of materials, which provide
detailed insight to the many perspectives of Milwaukee civil rights' historical narrative.
Pedagogical Uses for Digital Collections
March on Milwaukee developers primarily intended users to employ the site for
educational purposes. Over the last decade, educators have consistently used digital
resources more in their instruction. Moreover, the reliance librarians, academic faculty,
217

Doylen, interview 2014, and Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
Seggern, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections," 273-282.
219
Steven P. Morris, "Geospatial Web Services and Geoarchiving: New Opportunities and
Challenges in Geographic Information Service," Library Trends 55, no. 2 (2006): 285-303.
218

86

and teachers will place on digital collections as pedagogical tools in the future will only
continue to increase. Not only will students need to become competent in using digital
collections for school work and research purposes, but instructors will need to be able
to demonstrate and understand how these emerging technologies work. Classes no
longer must relocate to the library for a primary source lesson, as these classes can
access an even wider range of digitized primary materials online.220 For example, one
developer commented that “The digital resources are convenient. I've used things in
presentations from the website because it's easily accessible. (Alinder) pulls footage
from there frequently when she's talking about the website."221 As a result, digital
collections and similar resources are changing the ways humanities subjects and their
materials have traditionally been taught. Primary and higher education students who
were once limited by location in their primary research can now obtain relevant
electronic versions of primary sources.222 Similarly, academic faculty can broaden the
scope of their instruction to introduce new concepts and evidence to students. A fivemonth study at Cornell University Library discovered a relationship between library
pedagogical technologies being integral to quality faculty course websites. 223 Digital
resources will not only become central to information literacy in the future but will also
give individual courses more opportunities to engage students with relevant educational
technologies.
220

James Mussell, "Using Digital Resources in Class," Journal of Victorian Culture 16, no. 1 (2011):

83-83.
221

Lucas Wolff, interview, 2014.
Mussell, "Using Digital Resources in Class," 83-83.
223
Oya Y. Rieger, Angela K. Horne, and Ira Revels, "Linking Course Web Sites to Library
Collections and Services," The Journal of Academic Librarianship 30, no. 3 (2004): 205-211.
222

87

As these digital resources are still relatively new, there is room for pedagogical
development and experimentation on their pedagogical uses. The March on Milwaukee
Civil Rights Project was created with the primary objective that it would become a
pedagogical tool used in secondary school and college classrooms.224 Therefore, the
site's creators completed test sessions with UWM students and faculty to get a sense of
the site's effectiveness as a pedagogical tool. These tests were necessary in that the
ways librarians and faculty members use a site like March on Milwaukee are different
than how students would use that site.225 Creators observed teachers using March on
Milwaukee as a research aid during instruction, and then observed students explore the
site to see if the digital collection was an effective educational tool.226 By understanding
how students interact with digital resources, pedagogical strategies using these
technologies can become more sensitive to user needs in how they interact with
digitized materials.227 Currently, students are increasingly using digital collections like
the March on Milwaukee site for research. Additionally, digital resources may offer
students an outlet from which to publish their research and collaborate in the
construction of digital technology projects.228 For example, research assistants might
participate in digital collection development, student works can be published in digital
collections, or student discussion forums can be housed in those collections. In this
context educating students on how to perform research using digital collections
224

Alinder, interview, 2014.
Ibid.
226
Doylen, interview, 2014.
227
Rachel Singer Gordon and Jessamyn West, "Data and Desires: What Users Really Want," tech
tips for every librarian (column), Computers in Libraries 28, 1 (2008): 42.
228
Bastian, "From Teacher to Learner to User: Developing a Digital Stewardship Pedagogy," 607622.
225

88

becomes more important in that digital research will likely become an increasingly
necessary professional development tool in the future.
Another important factor to making digital collections pedagogically relevant is
educating instructors on instructive technologies. Incorporating those resources into
lectures will not only help make digital collection more relevant to students, but will also
assist in making course material more engaging to students. Digital collections as
electronic resources may make sources more relatable to digital natives, also known as
users who have grown up using the internet. More specifically, digital natives, and
students today who are more dependent on digital resources in general, expect to find
sources and library services virtually and as quickly as possible.229 Today, electronic
information exchanges are changing the expectations of how and where people find
information. A user can instantly access a source online through a website, database, or
an e-book organized in an online catalog.230 The way information is presented has
changed the publication industry and the expectations of users, redefining information
access tools and the way people are educated on research strategies. Most important,
the way data is created digitally today or how users expect information presented to
them in an engaging ways has changed due to electronic formats.231 Educational tools in
the classroom do not need to involve handheld devices or social networking, but many
instructors are using those strategies with students. Virtual visitors to library online
229

Rieger, Angela K. Horne, and Ira Revels, "Linking Course Web Sites to Library Collections and
Services," 205-211.
230
Geoffrey Little, "Teaching with Technology: Library Instruction in a Digital Context," The
Journal of Academic Librarianship 38, no. 4 (2012): 242-243.
231
Bastian, "From Teacher to Learner to User: Developing a Digital Stewardship Pedagogy," 607622.

89

resources are surpassing physical library visitors in numbers, and library blogs, classes
that tweet, and digital collections partaking in tagging are attracting positive
attention.232 Digital collections that are interactive, such as March on Milwaukee's
virtual timeline, answer the user call for engaging resources, even if those users are not
digital natives.
Digital natives, March on Milwaukee's target user group, are significant to digital
technology development and pedagogy because they are the greatest percentage of
users partaking in primary and higher education. Moreover, digital natives are
significant to library and course instruction trends in that this group tends to adopt new
technologies and devices quickly and easily.233 More important to pedagogical
developments are the characteristics this unique group of users commonly
demonstrates. The current generation of students in the new millennia is that they are
hyper-attentive and multi-task on several projects at once in contrast to the "deepattention" trait traditional librarians and faculty are experienced to teaching where
individuals dedicate long periods of time to one task. 234 This distinction between
student generations is relevant to pedagogical designers in that today's students retain
knowledge in different ways. Moreover the role of libraries and universities is no longer
primarily promoting reading literacy and self-improvement, but now revolves around
digital literacy and community engagement.235 Digital resources, including digital

232

Ian Mcshane, "Public Libraries, Digital Literacy and Participatory Culture," Discourse: Studies in
the Cultural Politics of Education 32, no. 3 (2011): 383-397.
233
Little, "Teaching with Technology," 242-243.
234
Ibid.
235
Mcshane, "Public Libraries, Digital Literacy and Participatory Culture," 383-397.

90

collections allow users to access information efficiently and communicate with peers
and colleagues on a global scale.
A challenge to the growing dependence on digital resources to supplement
education are that institutions with rare special collections and archival materials do not
yet have digital access to many or most of their materials. Therefore while access to
primary sources has significantly increased, there are still holes in this new digital
foundation, whether due an institution's lack of resources to digitize material or due to
their philosophies about what users they want using their materials.236 This access
debate is ongoing in the field of Library and Information Studies and varies from
institution. A conflicting challenge digital pedagogical tools face is the vast amount of
digital resources, such as a digital collection, that are available to the population.237
Without standards to structure digital collections it will be difficult for students and
instructors to note which resources are acceptable research tools.
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project defies challenges many institutions
housing digital resources face. March on Milwaukee was founded on the same
standards the UWM Libraries, a major research institution, place for all their digital
collections. Additionally, UWM Archives Director Michael Doylen stated that a
significant outcome of the March on Milwaukee launch is not necessarily that more
people can access the archives material online, but that more users are actually entering

236

Michelle Visser. "Perspectives on... Special Collections at ARL Libraries and K- 12 Outreach:
Current Trends," Journal of Academic Librarianship 32, no. 3 (2006): 313-319.
237
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.

91

the physical archives because the site introduced them to these materials.238 The March
on Milwaukee site has therefore expanded the audience of UWM and WHS archival
materials, and has witnessed an increase in use of the physical materials.
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project opened opportunities for the UWM
Libraries and the faculty involved to experiment with the site as a pedagogical tool.
Information literacy and course-integrated instruction topics have created the bulk of
scholarship relating to digital education tools. In contrast, there is relatively less
research on digital resource applications in college and K-12 education classes.239 The
potential use digital collections can serve to K-12 and college humanities classes in
particular supplies the Library and Information Studies and History fields with incredible
possibilities for future scholarship. How instructors showcase digital collections and
similar resources as practical applications to student research can supply researchers
with topics on user behavior and digital interactions with increased student learning and
competency in digital skills.240
March on Milwaukee is a prime example of a collection of digital primary sources
that can significantly enhance college and K-12 historical research on local civil rights
topics. Current UWM Libraries Digital Collection Coordinator Ann Hanlon stated, "The
civil rights movement is not some far off thing, it's still very real and very significant to
our city. And it can explain why we still see some of those lines of segregation. It brings

238

Doylen , interview, 2014.
Visser, "Perspectives on," 313-319.
240
Bastian, "From Teacher to Learner to User: Developing a Digital Stewardship Pedagogy," 607239

622.

92

it home."241 Alinder commented that March on Milwaukee's contextual materials give
Milwaukee civil rights a life. In contrast to digitizing sources and listing them
electronically, March on Milwaukee connects sources and makes that source
information understandable.242 The varying ways K-12 and college students
meaningfully interact with March on Milwaukee, what sources dissimilar levels of
students rely on when performing research, or which interactive features users employ
will help creators understand how instructors can best implement the site as a
pedagogical tool in their classroom.
By emphasizing the value of the sources housed in digital collections to K-12 and
undergraduate level students, librarians and instructors are maintaining the relevancy of
those sources to education and as digital dependency increases. For example, UWM
Archives Director Doylen holds regular workshops for UWM faculty and area teachers
that demonstrate how to use digital collections to access primary sources in classes, and
he uses March on Milwaukee as his example.243 Teachers can structure digital
collections as accessible means to primary sources and articulate how those sources
new digital formats offer them greater research possibilities and access to more
materials.244 In addition to highlighting the value of digital resources pedagogy involving
digital resources will need to instruct students how to "identify, evaluate, and
responsibly use information resources."245 The quantity of information available,

241

Hanlon, interview, 2014.
Alinder, interview, 2014.
243
Doylen, interview, 2014, and Hanlon, interview, 2014.
244
Visser, "Perspectives on," 313-319.
245
Little, "We are all Digital Humanists Now," 352-354.
242

93

particularly online, requires user judgment when evaluating digital resources and their
materials.
To better substantiate digital resources' roles in 21st research, the institutions
that created them must advocate and demonstrate the effective use of these resources.
As previously mentioned, prior to the launch March on Milwaukee developers took the
site preview to both UWM undergraduate and graduate classes. Outreach to the
internal and surrounding community is especially effective for academic units that
typically receive less attention,246 such as the UWM Archives. UWM Archives Director
Michael Doylen stated that he and his staff personally call and visit Milwaukee area
schools and organizations to demonstrate digital services, and also invite groups in to
see the archives and recognize the different services available at the UWM Libraries.247
Moreover March on Milwaukee project leader and Director of Urban Studies Jasmine
Alinder advertised the site to UWM faculty and applied for several grants and awards to
draw increased attention to the collection. To date, March on Milwaukee has received
substantial funding and has accumulated three awards, including the Society of
American Archivists' (SAA) 2011 Philip M. Hamer and Elizabeth Hamer Kegan Award,
which "recognizes outstanding efforts to increase public awareness of archival
documents for educational, instructional, or other purposes."248 Employing outreach for
quality digital resources, such as the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project, not only

246

Visser, "Perspectives on," 313-319.
Doylen , interview, 2014.
248
Ibid.
247

94

invites more users to the resource, but also builds bridges throughout academic and
local communities that support active learning and institutional support. 249
While March on Milwaukee offers a variety of educational services including
interactive maps, a feedback link, source connections, and quality visuals, digital
collections can go further than these examples in their pedagogical reach. Offering a
space for commentary on a digital resource invites user feedback and reflection, and
also engages academic conversation.250 Information Studies scholar McShane supported
that user-generated content establishes a relationship between users and the resource
that can lead to increased reliance and trust on that resource.251 In contrast, informal
conversation could potentially result in researchers becoming skeptical of a digital
collection's scholarly credibility. However, marketing a digital resource as a place to
discuss, or as a resource that includes a section where students can submit their work,
can build relevance and purpose. Likewise, including user-friendly media such as
YouTube, tutorials, Skype sessions, or webcasts that engage students to that digital
resource make it a more accessible educational tool. This "embedded librarian
approach" is gaining popularity and has been practiced most heavily in medical librarian
instruction, where it has been successfully received as an effective pedagogical
strategy.252 Students in other disciplines who undoubtedly respond positively to social
media might benefit from more digital resources applying these more interactive tactics.

249

Visser, "Perspectives on," 313-319.
Mussell, "Using Digital Resources in Class," 83-83.
251
Mcshane, "Public Libraries, Digital Literacy and Participatory Culture," 383-397.
252
Little, "Teaching with Technology," 242-243.
250

95

The information and academic professionals that create digital resources include
specific resources have the opportunity to tailor digital collections to the way today's
students learn. Collaboration among colleagues and similar institutions or programs will
best advance the effective pedagogical aspects of digital resources.253 Many academic
institutions are actually employing committees to investigate the potential applications
of features and services digital collections can offer to attract learners.254 UWM Archives
Director Michael Doylen has his graduate interns observe instruction sessions not only
for instruction practice, but also so those interns can recognize how students are
absorbing information and navigating the March on Milwaukee site.255 Digital
collections are the future for many physical collections and are changing how students
obtain information, learn, research, and how they think of the library and related units.
A largely accepted model among academic institutions currently is for that education
center to create a participatory culture where student gather knowledge in innovative
ways and engage with materials by creating practical scholarly products they can share
with their community.256

253

Little, "We are all Digital Humanists Now," 352-354.
Rieger, Angela K. Horne, and Ira Revels, "Linking Course Web Sites to Library Collections and
Services," 205-211.
255
Doylen , interview, 2014.
256
Mcshane, "Public Libraries, Digital Literacy and Participatory Culture," 383-397.
254

96

Chapter Five
Assessing Digital Archival Collections

This thesis adds to current scholarship on digital resources in that it addresses
how assessment and outreach methods can improve digital collections as relevant
pedagogical tools. To date, research on digital collections has largely focused on their
technological services and practical applications,257 as well as some usability evaluation
research within the last five years.258 However, less research exists on ways to target
regular digital collection users, or on how to advocate particularly humanities-related
digital collections to specific communities of digital collections users. By using the March
on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project as an example of an educational resource, one can
evaluate the current assessment and outreach methods the site developers have
initiated to this point, and recognize how to maintain and improve those efforts.
March on Milwaukee's assessment and outreach since 2010 has been unique in
that it has directed both efforts by using higher education students in user-focused
evaluation studies and students from at-risk schools in outreach programming.259
Although the March on Milwaukee site is only one example of a digital archive
collection, its effective assessment and outreach implementations to date make it a
valuable case study, in concert with current scholarship, that supports increased

257

Christine L. Borgman, from Gutenberg to the Global Information Infrastructure: Access to
Information in the Networked World MIT, 2000.
258
Sudatta Chowdhury, Monica Landoni, and Forbes Gibb, "Usability and Impact of Digital
Libraries: A Review," Online Information Review, 30, 6 (2006): 656-80.
259
Jasmine Alinder, "Turning Students into Historians," (TeachingHistory.org, January 29, 2013),
2010 - 2014 Created by the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media at George Mason
University with funding from the U.S. Department of Education.

97

assessment and outreach methods used for pedagogical digital archival collections are
valuable to their sustainability as educational resources.
At the turn of the twenty-first century, digital collections and their evaluation
were still being shaped by the Library and Information Science community. In fact, until
2005, scholarship on digital resource assessment was largely absent. In "Usability and
Impact of Digital Libraries" Chowdhury stated,
"Although there were relatively few evaluation studies during the first
period of development of digital libraries, this area of research has attracted
significant attention over the past few years. The last five or so years may be
considered as the first era of digital library evaluation where researchers have
used different methods and techniques with the specific objectives of assessing
usability and the impact on the target users."260
The emergence of digital preservation is still relatively new and therefore
standardization and assessment measures directed towards digital resources are still in
their advent. Libraries for an arguable amount of centuries have played a critical role in
the dissemination of information, and librarians and other information liaisons since the
1990s have been playing catch up as they strategically decide the order in which they
digitize the materials they house.261 In fact, using digital collections pedagogically or for
research purposes has only recently become commonplace among academic
communities.262 Therefore, focusing research on an undeveloped user conduct was not
yet relevant to the Library and Information Science or humanities-related fields.

260

Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
Ross, "Digital Preservation, Archival Science and Methodological Foundations for Digital
Libraries," 43-68.
262
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
261

98

Today, however, digital resource assessment is becoming more prominent in
digital collection research as scholars are increasingly connecting the quality of digital
resources to regular maintenance measures structured around assessment.263 More
specifically, as argued by Norberg, usability testing will gain importance as a method to
identify areas where digital collections can improve those resources so they give
positive first impressions, are easy for users to navigate, and encourage users to use the
site again.264 Meaning, what makes people want to use digital collections? Blandford
and Buchanan in 2003, when digital collections started to become credible research
tools, noted five criteria that position digital resources as user-oriented. The criteria
include: collection developers recognizing how effectively and efficiently can the user
achieve their goals with a system, how easily can the user learn to use the system, how
well the system helps the user avoid making errors or recover from errors, how much
the user enjoys working with the system, and how well the system fits within the
context in which it is used.265 Additionally, according to Seggern, a newfound
appreciation for outreach and community relevancy is a growing trend in regards to
information literacy and digital resources.266 Following this trend a need for scholarship
on specific digital collection outreach measures will likely manifest and propel digital

263

Don Zimmerman and Dawn Bastian Paschal, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation of Colorado
State University Libraries' Digital Collections and the Western Waters Digital Library Web Sites," Journal of
Academic Librarianship 35, no. 3 (2009): 227-240.
264
Lisa R. Norberg, Kim Vassiliadis, Jean Ferguson, and Natasha Smith, "Sustainable Design for
Multiple Audiences: The Usability Study and Iterative Redesign of the Documenting the American South
Digital Library," OCLC Systems & Services 21, no. 4 (2005): 285-299.
265
A. Blandford, and G. Buchanan, "Usability of Digital Libraries: A Source of Creative Tensions
with Technical Developments," IEEE Technical Committee on Digital Libraries Bulletin (2003).
266
Seggern, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections," 273-282.

99

resources as highly regarded pedagogical tools in academic libraries, universities, and in
K-12 arenas.
Digital Collection Assessment Strengths and Weaknesses
A significant obstacle obstructing digital collection assessment is that standard
guidelines and competencies for digital resources have not been developed, nor have
ways to convincingly measure user impact. Earlier in the short existence of digital
collections, Saracevic concluded that the main challenges digital resource evaluation
faced were that they are complex and therefore hard to evaluate, still in the early stages
of development, experienced limited user interest and investment, and lacked relevancy
to people to take the time to evaluate.267 Still, today as digital collections continue to
gain significant scholarly popularity as research tools, their diverse contents and user
demographics (i.e. location, interests, purposes) make assessment measurement
extremely difficult.268 One universal assessment benchmark is problematic in that
specific users use various digital libraries for different interests and activities. Thus, it
would be more beneficial to establish general standards for different types of digital
collections, such as universal evaluation methods for digital archive collections and
another set of guidelines for a science-related digital collection.
Assessment in the context that creators want a digital collection to be userfriendly and an outreach tool is dependant on the resource's usability characteristics.
Usability in this context refers to how efficient and effective an information service is in

267

Tefko Saracevic. "Digital Library Evaluation: Toward an Evolution of Concepts." Library Trends
49, no. 2 (2000): 350-69.
268
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.

100

regards to its access to information, as well as how satisfied the user is with the
efficiency and lay out of a particular interface.269 More specifically, digitization librarian
Ann Hanlon supported that usability in regards to digital archival collections depends
largely on providing users sufficient context to sources and offering a visually pleasing
and interactive resource.270 How easily users can interact with a digital collection to find
useful information makes that resource relevant and purposeful. As research relies
more on digital collections to create scholarly work, more assessment models and
statistic monitors relating to search counts, page views, or interactive tool use are
necessary to encourage user satisfaction.271 Norberg argued it would be beneficial for
evaluators to conduct large-scale studies on the length it takes to learn how to navigate
a site or how responsive users are to web design and interactive tools.272 Furthermore,
the methodology for selecting sample populations will work to advance standardization
in the field.
Despite a lack of professional guidance, some professional institutions wellversed in knowledge on digital resources have recently produced principles. For
example, the University of California - Los Angeles has adopted a list of criteria to "aid in
evaluating whether project will be a good return on investment, and to help in
establishing a strong rationale when requesting support from internal or external

269

Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
Hanlon, interview, 2014.
271
Seggern, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections," 273-282.
272
Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
270

101

sources."273 One example is that the digital project must provide substantial support for
the institution's research and instruction.274 These criteria support that digital
collections hold a central mission as research and pedagogical tools for academic
institutions. This educational purpose will maintain digital collections relevance as a
necessary information service in the future. Additionally, institutions have created
guidelines for assessment criteria. Chowdhury in "Usability and Impact of Digital
Libraries" noted key evaluation methods as including observation, interviews, document
analysis, and task analysis. These main assessment methods will give scholars direction
as to what methods are applicable to the digital collections. Cornell University's Human
Computer Interaction Group published a criteria for evaluating digital resources that
was made up of three categories: backstage concerns (e.g. metadata, copyright issues),
collection maintenance and access (e.g. collection scope and access), and usability.
Usability is one area scholars have largely neglected to research in the past, until the
current day when the information era has positioned user-centered resources as
necessary to maintaining relevancy.
Maintaining relevancy and assessing digital collections' usability are necessary
because an increasingly diverse population of students, instructors, and community
members are relying on these resources to meet their information needs. If Information
professionals can better determine the behaviors and needs of collection users they can

273

UCLA Libraries, "UCLA Library Criteria for Digital Projects,"
http://digital2.library.ucla.edu/criteria.html (accessed 2/17, 2014).
274
UCLA Libraries, "UCLA Library Criteria for Digital Projects,"
http://digital2.library.ucla.edu/criteria.html (accessed 2/17, 2014).

102

create better resources.275 According to Zimmerman, students and faculty using digital
collections have a large scope of research needs and skill levels using technological
resources, and in order for information specialists to create easily searchable sites they
must implement usability testing.276 Moreover evaluating resources are imperative to
the formal commitments institutions promise their communities. An early version of the
eValued Project Toolkit suggested that digital resource evaluation is carried out for five
main reasons. First, for strategic planning with respect to services; second, for day-today management of a service; third for investigating uses and impact of a service; fourth
for improving services; and finally for justifying services.277 These reasons imply that
formal meetings and standards developed by an institution are necessary to guide
digital collection development. It would be unprofessional and potentially unethical to
create a digital resource without formal regulations that adhere to the institution's
mission and vision.
Assessment on digital collection usability is only starting to gain traction in the
field of Library and Information Science and within the humanities. Furthermore,
outreach methods related to framing digital archival collections as pedagogical tools
barely exist at all. Although different models and guidelines for evaluating digital
resources exist, universal standardization for at least different types of methods are still
developing. Using the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project as a case study, the

275

Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
Don Zimmerman, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation," 227-240.
277
Evidence Base, "eValued Toolkit," http://www.evalued.bcu.ac.uk/ , (accessed 2/17, 2014).
276

103

remainder of this thesis will explore the ways a digital pedagogical tool can be assessed
and presented in outreach efforts.
Methodologies for evaluating web sites and their designs have been well
established by researchers over the last three decades.278 However, similar to models
guiding their development, digital collection evaluation methods are also still gaining
standardization. Chowdhury offered a list of approaches to evaluation that are central
to effectively assessing different aspects of digital resources including user-centered
evaluation, which focuses on cognitive interaction with information retrieval, systemcentered evaluation on the web system's efficiency, formative evaluation to assess the
resource during its development, and finally summative evaluation that evaluates the
resource at its completion.279 Within these assessment subfields are traditional
quantitative and qualitative methods for evaluating the end product. System and user
statistics are examples of quantitative methodologies that can reveal how quickly a
system uploads a document or how many users are visiting a site at a given time.
Qualitative methods might be observing users in lab or natural settings using a digital
resource, as well as surveys, interviews and focus groups, or feedback pages on the
website to get user feedback.280 Qualitative evaluation methodologies are valuable to
digital collection assessment in particular because direct user perspectives on their
experience and satisfaction can help collection designers improve that resource directly
based on the intended audience. This feedback is best obtained through user samples

278

Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
280
Vicki Tobias, Web Survey on the use of Digital Resources in Instruction and Research, 2009.
279

104

that appropriately reflect the site's intended audience. For example, a purposeful
sample could be gathered from creating what Norberg called a "screen script" that
ensures each participant matches the audience the sample must represent.281 Therefore
if a digital archive collection is intended for historical researchers and some women's
studies researchers, gathering historians and women's studies scholars would be ideal
for evaluating that resource.
In the March on Milwaukee digital collection's case to become a better
pedagogical resource to faculty, college students, teachers, and K-12 students,
developers decided that usability, or user-centered, evaluation was the best
methodological framework for developers to assess the site. From this framework,
qualitative methods that gain feedback from the user and gather their perspectives will
help creators understand what will make the site more efficient at supplying
information, as well as how the site can offer a more pleasant and interactive
experience to the user. Zimmerman explained that the Digital Knowledge Center at John
Hopkins University conducted user testing that included remote user testing, testing
diverse user groups, testing parts of on digital collection (rather that the entire
collection), and testing in both natural and laboratory settings.282 Tobias differentiate
that web-based surveys gather data about trends and general information, while
interviews and focus groups gather ideas about opportunities for the site.283 March on
Milwaukee would benefit from observing a sample of university faculty and K-12

281

Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
Don Zimmerman, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation," 227-240.
283
Vicki Tobias, Web Survey on the use of Digital Resources in Instruction and Research, 2009.
282

105

teachers using the site in their curriculum, as well as observing college and K-12
students navigating the site for research or with an educational worksheet in an activity
similar to a scavenger hunt.
Developers can also obtain direct feedback through interviews, focus groups, or
less visible methods including a feedback or "Contact Us" link on their site. 284
Quantitative testing that addresses usability might go beyond demographic and page
statistic data and instead reveal what documents are downloaded most, or for how
many seconds or minutes did the average user stay on one page. Digital collection
assessment is best served by implementing multiple evaluation methods to ensure the
results will represent a greater population sample. Digital resources are widely
accessible, therefore the more feedback the better. Additionally, regular evaluation
even after designers launch the site will mean that highly visited sites will evolve with
technology to meet user expectations and maintain user statistics.285 Digital collections
are useful because they are relevant to their users’ education and research needs. If
those resources neglect to improve, users will look to other sites that are potentially
more interactive and provide more contexts.
March on Milwaukee Assessment Methods
Prior to the launch of March on Milwaukee, the site's developers were invested
in assessment. In fact, UWM Libraries' Digital Collection Coordinator in 2010, Krystyna
Matusiak, was interested in getting feedback and led the implementation of multiple
class observations, surveys, and interviews before launching the collection to ensure
284
285

Seggern, “ Sense of Place in Digital Collections," 273-282.
Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.

106

that it would be a practical educational tool.286 According to March on Milwaukee Web
Designer Trevor Berman, the main site creators researched professional scholarship for
methods and survey questions that they distributed to the Milwaukee community.
Furthermore, Alinder recognized the need to create a bridge between March on
Milwaukee and the community and coordinated assessment and outreach efforts with
Milwaukee Public Schools and Arts@Large classrooms. Thanks to Arts@Large, the
March on Milwaukee project team observed the ways K-12 teachers and community
instructors used the digital collection as a pedagogical tool, and also how students
navigated the site for their research.287
Matusiak's case study during the UWM Spring 2010 semester served to examine
the ways UWM faculty used digital collection primary sources, and also to explore
faculty needs and expectations for the future use and integration of digital collections
into course integrated library instruction curricula. The research project was named
“User Interaction with Digital Collections of Archival Primary Sources: Evaluation of the
March On Milwaukee - Civil Rights History Project." The purpose of the study was to test
the prototype site of the March On Milwaukee - Civil Rights History Project in order to
"gather students’ opinions about the site, to identify usability issues, to modify the
organization and presentation of the collection, and to improve the design of the site
based on the students’ feedback."288 The study protocol was UWM Institutional Review
Board-approved on February 1, 2010, and employed qualitative methodology in
286

Doylen , interview, 2014.
Trevor Berman, interview, 2014.
288
Krystyna Matusiak, "Digital Future Proposal," University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee (March 4,
287

2010).

107

addition to class observations, an online survey, focus group discussion, and document
analysis as data techniques methods. The classes the study included were English 150:
Multicultural America (two sections), History 294: Seminar on Historical Method:
Research Techniques, History 600: Race and Law in the United States, and History 717:
History of New Media.289
The evaluation methodology specific to this study largely involved gathering
qualitative data. March on Milwaukee project leaders introduced students to
Milwaukee civil rights history and collections of related sources available to them at
UWM. The designers then demonstrated key pages of the March on Milwaukee
collection followed by students completing specific assignments that guided them
through the site. March on Milwaukee developers observed students as they interacted
with the site in a natural classroom setting and focused on students’ resource discovery,
their ways of interacting with digital representations of archival documents, and the
usability problems that students encountered with the collection interface. 290 After the
observation, student feedback was also gathered through an online survey, during focus
group discussions, and by student reflection papers from two of the classes. Faculty
from those classes were also asked to participate in a focus group. The study results
were used to redesign the collection in order to make it more usable and useful to
students’ needs. Former UWM Libraries Digital Collection Coordinator Matusiak stated
that, "testing on students is also not typically done but it was very beneficial." A second

289
290

Matusiak, "Digital Future Proposal," UWM.
Ibid.

108

phase of the study involved study creators gathering faculty teaching needs. From
faculty results, the UWM Libraries will possibly create workshops that will focus on
developing curriculum guides for implementing the March on Milwaukee digital
collection into relevant UWM courses.291
March on Milwaukee assessment questions varied in nature depending on their
interview, survey, or focus group format. For the main student online survey, questions
were short and there were few open ended questions that involved writing in contrast
to checking a box. For example, one question read "Visually, the March on Milwaukee
site is..." and students could choose to respond very unattractive, unattractive, neither
unattractive or attractive, attractive, or very attractive.292 A more open ended question
example is "Please describe your difficulties using the materials."293 The length of a
question and the number of total questions in a survey is important because assessment
designers will want to keep the responder focused. Considerable reading and room for
writing is unappealing and may not receive quality feedback. Focus group questions
were more open-ended and organized by topic, such as ease of use or material formats.
An example of a faculty focus group question was "What expectations do you have for
online archival collection? Do you expect to find entire archival collections online or
selected items? In your opinion, what is the ideal model? What is the minimum

291
292

2010.

293

Matusiak, "Digital Future Proposal," UWM.
"My Report," University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Libraries Digitization Unit, September 22,
"My Report," UWM Digitization Unit, September 22, 2010.

109

acceptable model?"294 Questions asked in person ideally should be specific to that
audience to get specific feedback relevant to the mission of the assessment.
Other Digital Collection Assessment Examples
There are other notable real-life examples of digital collection case studies
performing effective assessment measures. For example, in 2009 Colorado State
University Libraries initiated a digital collection usability evaluation where 18
participants completed 11 usability tasks to assess two websites followed by a
questionnaire. This study was problematic in that that all participants rated the sites
positively but approximately one-third could not complete all 11 tasks.295 This response
inconsistency supports that designers must implement multiple assessment methods for
accuracy.
Usability evaluation involves various levels, and apart from navigation and
context levels, information retrieval accuracy allows collection designers knowledge of
whether the site's search function is accessible to diverse user search terms. In one
particular case, Petrelli described the evaluation of a historical image archive prototype
to determine a cross-language information retrieval's usability. In the study, users had
to perform 16 searches for images provided to them, "a known-item search task."296 The
study highlighted the diversity in requests for similar descriptions of visual content, and
the weaknesses of the Information Retrieval system to supply similar results in response

294

"Faculty Survey," University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Digitization Unit. (please refer to
Appendix A).
295
Don Zimmerman, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation," 227-240.
296
Daniela Petrelli and Paul Clough, "Analysing User's Queries for Cross-Language Image
Retrieval from Digital Library Collections," The Electronic Library 30, no. 2 (2012): 197-219.

110

to those searches.297 This study is relevant to digital collections in that search services
are information retrieval systems that must accurately respond to user queries. A usercentered resource must have an information retrieval system that attends to user
behaviors rather than that system requiring the vast diversity, levels, and backgrounds
of digital collection users know the exact terms to search.
Information retrieval systems vary differently in their efficiency, and particularly
in how many relevant sources systems list in response user search queries. In a
University of Wisconsin (UW) System digital collection user study, faculty were observed
using digital resources including Google, Google Scholar, YouTube, Flickr, and a UW
System digital resource. The study coordinators had hypothesized that UW System
faculty would be comfortable searching and navigating Google and social networking
tools.298 Study coordinators were surprised, however, to discover how little awareness
faculty had of library tools and academic online resources.299 Most faculty responses
indicated their frustration with department websites, and their lack of familiarity with
scholarly databases, digitized maps, and library guides. Faculty likely had more
experience with Google resources and therefore used those research tools to find their
information more quickly than they believed they would from another resource with an
information retrieval system less comfortable to them. The study concluded that faculty
need more assistance with copyright issues, help managing their personal digital

297

Petrelli and Paul Clough, "Analysing User's Queries,"197-219.
Vicki Tobias, Digital Resources in Instruction and Research: Assessing Faculty Discovery, Use
and Needs - Final Summary Report, 2009.
299
Tobias, Digital Resources in Instruction and Research, 2009.
298

111

materials such as photographs, and help creating visual and audio sources. 300 Library
workshops and more professional development sources would create a platform for
faculty to learn new digital resource strategies in a safe environment structured for
academic purposes.
In addition to the UWM student and faculty evaluation study, the site's
assessment efforts also involved the Milwaukee community nonprofit Arts@Large and
Milwaukee Public School (MPS) teachers and students’ observation and feedback.
Arts@Large is a nonprofit organization that originated from the MPS Art Curriculum
Specialist Director developing an outlet where teachers could attend workshops relating
to integrating creativity in their curricula, and where students could combine their
academic work with personal creative expressions. In particular, for the March on
Milwaukee evaluation study local activists involved with the March on Milwaukee
primary sources and oral histories and an MPS teacher wanted to get the community
more involved by introducing them to the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project.
After a series of meetings, MPS students took a trip to UWM and met with UWM
Archives Director Michael Doylen to learn how to analyze primary sources as well as
how to use the website. After this visit, students broke into teams at school and
performed investigative research by recording their primary source research and then
by actively seeking out former Milwaukee civil rights activists and NAACP youth council
commandos.

300

Tobias, Digital Resources in Instruction and Research, 2009.

112

March on Milwaukee Assessment Results
In sum, March on Milwaukee gathered assessment data from 89 UWM
undergraduate and graduate students, UWM faculty, and a K-12 teacher and her
students. From the MPS users, the March on Milwaukee developers largely recognized
the site's potential as an educational tool for K-12 students. Arts@Large Program
Director Ryan Hurley commented that he would like to see March on Milwaukee
continue to spread as an "educational resource, and hopefully at some point we'll be
able to host more specifically educational curriculum documents connected to the site
so teachers have best practices and case studies and a variety of tools they can
access."301 Developers observed that students positively interacted with the digital
collection and used it to apply the content to their exhibit research. Lucas Wolff was an
undergraduate student in 2010, and after reflecting on what he observed from the MPS
students exhibit he commented,
"Seeing how it was applied I'm always thinking about how curriculum and
historiography can be applied and how students learn. If they're using the
website to make this art - they made a play and were singing songs - I think those
applications are more effective ways to learn. People are always talking about
radical changes to education but I think these are relevant ways too. The Arts
aren't always regarded as good ways to learn like the sciences, but they work
and are relevant."302

One teacher who visited the site stated how impressed they were that the March on
Milwaukee materials applied to the curriculum standards of their Language Arts

301
302

Ryan Hurley, interview, 2014.
Wolff, interview, 2014.

113

course.303 After being taught how to use the site, MPS students easily navigated March
on Milwaukee and applied it to their research. Their success as a class supports that the
digital collection can be used in other MPS classrooms.
The UWM student and faculty study also positively supported March on
Milwaukee as a user-friendly pedagogical tool. Student online survey responses
indicated that students found the site easy to use and helpful to their class work. More
specifically, 76% of students stated they were more knowledgeable about Milwaukee's
civil rights movement after visiting the site.304 Moreover, almost 70% of student
respondents stated that they found their research resources quickly and efficiently and
would return to the website soon.305 And 89% of students positively rated the site by
giving March on Milwaukee either a 4 or 5 on a 1 to 5 scale with a 5 being most
positive.306 One History 294 student responded, “The oral histories were very interesting
because you got to hear a person’s story as they recalled it (ex. Arlene Johnson). Also,
the pictures and video help give you an idea of the emotions and tension felt during that
time.”307 Another undergraduate student commented,
"Being able to see actual interviews and footage of events happening in
our city, and actually being able to put yourself in the situation and time is an
amazing experience. I watched a few videos including announcements by the
mayor and footage of the aftermath of the riots.”308

303

Jasmine Alinder, "Turning Students into Historians."
"My Report," UWM Digitization Unit, September 22, 2010.
305
Ibid.
306
Ibid.
307
Ibid.
308
Ibid.
304

114

To many UWM student respondents, Milwaukee civil rights became significantly more
relevant to them after browsing the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project. March on
Milwaukee presented civil rights sources that helped students understand the reasons
for the current issues that affect Milwaukee. UWM students were able to acknowledge
that activists in the city they live in struggled to obtain racial equality. In focus groups,
students indicated that the variety of document formats (i.e. letters, articles) were
essential to understanding the context of the videos and they wanted to see more
context and sources added to the site.309
The study results more importantly indicated areas for improvement. Usability
problems were the most significant and specific student grievances included poor
navigation away from the homepage, confusing results organization, and the awkward
structure of the documents.310 As previously mentioned, no established model for
digital archival management currently exists. Therefore, March on Milwaukee
developers had to observe and consider student feedback to pinpoint the best ways to
improve the site. The result of the student focus groups also unveiled various areas for
improvement. Specifically students wanted a FAQ section, tutorials for the site, an aska-question via email service, and more educational tools.311 Students were also unaware
that they had the option to see typed versions of hand-written documents, and would
have liked more help information when browsing March on Milwaukee.312

309

"Focus Group Summary," University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Digitization Unit, March 22,

2010.
310

"My Report," UWM Digitization Unit, September 22, 2010.
"Focus Group Summary," UWM Digitization Unit, March 22, 2010.
312
Ibid.
311

115

The purpose of the March on Milwaukee UWM student and faculty study was to
assist developers in improving the collection's design from a user-centered perspective.
The majority of graduate student responses indicated that March on Milwaukee needed
to improve its layout and navigation to become more useful to their research. One
History 717 student responded, “More consistency in the overall layout would help with
navigation. It would be nice if the sources were summarized in the search screen so the
viewer could find sources more easily without having to open and browse through so
many."313 From this feedback, the homepage navigation has already been re-designed
and shortly after UWM Libraries digitization staff worked to re-design the variety of
formats and the multiple collections. The site has also created a search cloud in
response to feedback that guides searches by listing relevant keywords.314 Moreover,
more key term entries, help pages, access points, and an interactive timeline have been
implemented to make the site more user-friendly and visually appealing.315 According to
Matusiak, "The study became an important element of building the online collection
and improving its design. It also helped the project staff to better understand students’
expectations for a digital collection of archival materials and focus on improving the
collection in light of students’ needs and information seeking behaviors."316
Other Relevant Digital Collection Assessment Findings
Other study results support the connections the March on Milwaukee user study
made between site ease of use to a diverse population of users being linked to quality
313

"My Report," UWM Digitization Unit, September 22, 2010.
Alinder, interview, 2014.
315
Hanlon, interview, 2014.
316
Matusiak, interview, 2014.
314

116

information retrieval systems and substantial inclusion of source context. UWM
Archives Director Michael Doylen and UWM Libraries Digitization Librarian Ann Hanlon
emphasized that March on Milwaukee offers connections between sources, source
format variety, and interactive features (i.e. the timeline on the site that offers the users
sources for each date) puts the sources in the broader context of the large Milwaukee
and national civil rights movements.317 With more source context, users with a wider
variety of research experience can satisfactorily search the site. Zimmerman explored a
study that found that all users focus on usability and information retrieval relevancy,
while novice users uniquely focus on content, intermediate users on categorization of
sources by subject, and advanced users on whether or not a digital collection was
structured like a physical library. In this context usability and information retrieval
systems serve as common denominators for positive user experiences, while content
includes users with basic digital resource experience finding a site pleasing. In addition,
Norberg's findings suggested that visual appeal is key to securing user attention, and a
site's first impression will determine if a user will even continue searching the
resource.318 If a digital collection exists as a pedagogical resource, ensuring that its
usability pleases all levels of users is important. However, the intermediate and
advanced users’ desire for source categorization and structure in the study Zimmerman
explored also supports a need for ranking and placing sources in context. Regardless of a
user's digital resource experience, content in most cases increases a user's satisfaction
with the site's usability.
317
318

Hanlon, interview, 2014, and Doylen , interview, 2014.
Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.

117

Digital Archival Assessment Limitations
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project's evaluation study was effective in
that it gathered multiple pools of students' and their teachers' responses to surveys on
using the site, which offered site designers’ firsthand feedback on specific site usability
questions. However, the study lacked a broader user pool. For instance, the site could
go further to get a greater sample of MPS teacher feedback, as well as UWM faculty,
librarian, and undergraduate and graduate student survey responses. In fact, the
designers could partner with UWM Research and Instruction Librarians to hold quarterly
library workshops for students and community members, as well as professional
development workshops for faculty and teaching assistants that involved demonstrating
the website followed by time to observe and answer user questions on the site.
Additionally, those workshops could set aside time for participants to answer a survey
or supply general feedback. March on Milwaukee might also benefit from broadening
their geographical reach to suburban and private schools in the Milwaukee area. A
broader regional population of users increases the diversity and perspectives of user
feedback which can help broaden the site's accessibility. The limitations of the March on
Milwaukee evaluation study revolved around its small, specific, and narrowly located
user sample.
Many usability testing examples exist, but as previously mentioned none have
been standardized or fine-tuned to make up for current assessment method limitations.
In general, digital resources are different from each other in regards to their subjects,
target users, and sources that usability testing cannot adequately compare digital

118

collections or rely on a universal evaluation model.319 Moreover, many studies are
focused on a specific digital resource example. Petrelli et al. noted that although their
findings on information retrieval usability would likely be applicable to other digital
repositories, it was still limited in its scope and related to one digital collection.320 It is
also important to note, that digital resources are still in their advent. Meaning, long
term preservation strategies and user perspective studies have not yet been accounted
for by site managers.321 More studies on cross-resource user behavior will need to
happen within library science and humanities related fields to further establish generally
effective usability-centered assessment methodologies.
Positive March on Milwaukee Assessment and Outreach Methods
Despite its limitations, the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project was
successful in focusing its evaluation methods on student and teacher user samples that
complemented its pedagogical purpose. Thus, the March on Milwaukee digital collection
was purposefully made, rather than created solely for the sake of digitally preserving
sources, and assessed based on that purpose. As the collection endures, it can evolve
the scope of its sources and educational services based on regular evaluation that
includes larger and geographically broader user population samples.
The March on Milwaukee UWM student study that took place in February of
2010 uniquely included teaching faculty perspectives regarding digital collections. It
focused on investigating current practices in using digital collections to support
curriculum, as well as faculty’s interests and needs for using digital collections for
319

Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
Petrelli and Paul Clough, "Analysing User's Queries,"197-219.
321
Little, "We are all Digital Humanists Now," 352-354.
320

119

teaching purposes. The digital librarians intend to use the March On Milwaukee Civil
Rights History Project as a case study and to develop practical tools to integrate this
unique digital archive of primary sources into the curriculum of online and on-site
classes taught on the UWM Campus. Including the teacher’s perspective in planning
digital projects increases the likelihood of creating collections relevant to instructors
and students and contributes to their effective use in the classroom. 322 By engaging
faculty and students in constructive conversations on digital archives sources as
teaching materials, college-level curricula can be better developed to support
instructors who use digital resources in their courses.
For the K-12 students from NOVA middle school and high school, their research
eventually amounted to the students creating exhibit projects out of the materials they
studied. Over the course of one year, students developed creative responses to their
research that manifested as oral reflections, poetry, presentations, or as visual
representations including photographs and sculptures. The end product was an exhibit
held for three months at the Arts@Large building in Milwaukee's Walkers Point
neighborhood, with a significant grand opening held during Milwaukee's popular Gallery
Night. Gallery Night involves city galleries opening their doors on a Friday night from 59pm. Including the student's work as a Gallery Night featured exhibit meant that
hundreds of community members would be introduced to the March on Milwaukee site
and Milwaukee civil rights historical narratives. Through this exhibit, the March on

322

J. Hendry, "Primary Sources in K-12 Education," American Archivist 70 (2007), 114-129.

120

Milwaukee site's primary source material not only educated the students, but also
hundreds of people from the city of Milwaukee.
By partnering with Arts@Large, March on Milwaukee designers effectively
integrated substantial outreach with their assessment efforts. Outreach is necessary in
that it expands digital collection users and awareness which essentially brings in more
feedback and direction, as well as motivation to actually continue to manage a highly
visited site. Norberg et al., suggested marketing digital collections through libraries
distributing bookmarks, advertising in campus-wide emails or the library website, and by
librarians and faculty including digital collection content in presentations at conferences
or on-campus professional workshops.323 However, Alinder went further by building
bridges from the sources to her target audience. The site exists, but by partnering with
Arts@Large and investing the time to show teachers and students how to make use of
the March on Milwaukee materials, Alinder and the project team emphasized K-12
engagement for the digital collection. Moreover by partnering with the Milwaukee
Public Library, the project team was able to gain an investor who regularly met with
them and gave them feedback on how to improve the site.324 The Milwaukee Public
Library also hosted the March on Milwaukee launch event, which extended the digital
collection's reach to the community.
Marketing faculty training sessions and library resource tours are also examples
of smaller on-campus outreach methods that can include flyers and brochures for
participants. Again, however the project team went further and the UWM Archives
323
324

Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
Alinder, interview, 2014.

121

developed several community workshops for faculty and teachers that demonstrate
March on Milwaukee as a high quality primary source digital resource.325 Tobias et al.
found that more faculty are now asking for assistance in using and even managing
digital resources, and by campuses increasing faculty awareness of digital resources
workshops can better encourage their faculty's digital competence and productivity.326
Faculty with significant digital resource capabilities can research more effectively and
may help contribute to specific digital collection's content. Additionally, including a
digital collection pathway from a library research guide or website page, as well as on
social networking platforms like a library's YouTube or Facebook page serves to invite
more users to the site.327 March on Milwaukee has a Facebook page, and in concert with
their initial primary outreach efforts, all parties involved have established a solid
education-focused user base.
Seeking user interest in digital collections, as well as overcoming the funding and
maintenance constraints previously addressed, can be alleviated through outreach
efforts. Generally, digitizing materials opens them up to the widest possible audience:
the internet, which advocates interest and outreach on a basic level.328 However,
actively communicating with related communities about the project is also a productive
outreach effort. For March on Milwaukee's case, the creators wanted to involve the
community by asking area students and organizations to use the site for educational

325

Ryan Hurley, interview, 2014.
Tobias, Web Survey on the use of Digital Resources in Instruction and Research, 2009.
327
Little, "We are all Digital Humanists Now," 352-354.
328
Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish Digital
Collections," 175-187.
326

122

purposes even before the September 2010 launch date.329 This was a critical outreach
strategy in that a significant digital collection challenge many times is the lack of
knowledge by community and academic institutions on a digital repositories'
educational value. If March on Milwaukee, a resource communicating Milwaukee's
struggle for racial equality, had gone unnoticed by the Milwaukee community, a
significant audience would be lost. By initiating discussion and demonstrating the
educational tools digital archival repositories offer, the more value area academic staff
and community educators will place on these resources. March on Milwaukee
developers including project lead Alinder demonstrated the site's educational features
to Milwaukee Public School (MPS) classes, and also to area organization Art@Large,330
where the developers could market the site as well as gain valuable feedback and
assessment data before the collection's launch. Digital collections are informative and
usually interactive ways to engage the surrounding community about a relevant topic,
and in March on Milwaukee's case the Milwaukee community now has a scholarly tool
to educate users on Milwaukee's civil rights historical narrative.
Suggestions Based on Digital Collection Assessment Findings
One significant area March on Milwaukee can improve in terms of evaluation is
to prioritize assessing who is using the site. From a broad perspective, libraries want to
find out what specific user groups utilize digital resources to better develop those
resources from those results.331 If libraries can discover what digital resources are more

329

Doylen, interview, 2014.
Alinder, interview, 2014.
331
Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
330

123

valuable to a greater population of users, then librarians can accordingly focus their
digitization priorities, as well as where to implement increased marketing of digital
collections that experience low user statistics.
March on Milwaukee would benefit from user statistics so that designers know
what pages would benefit from more sources, content, or interactive services. Alinder
indicated that March on Milwaukee, similar to many digital collections, is limited by
copyright issues and also by what they have in the UWM Archives.332 In response to
limited sources, March on Milwaukee does supply users with a bibliography that can
point them to other resources and sources. Web masters should be able to gather user
data to pinpoint what collections users are visiting and in what numbers and time
frames.333 In November of 2013 March, a little over two years after its launch, March on
Milwaukee began collecting user statistics with Google analytics.334 Since tracking user
statistics since September 1, 2013, results organized by city have revealed that almost
4,800 users have visited the site for an average of 4:18 minutes.335 More than half of the
site views have come from Milwaukee area (over 2,000 views), Madison (262), Chicago
(137), and Waukesha (104) areas, and users view an average of four pagers per visit.336
Other notable cities outside of Wisconsin include Minneapolis (32), Los Angeles (25),
and several areas in the state of Washington (32) and in the United Kingdom (61) and

332

Alinder, interview, 2014
Rachel Singer Gordon and Jessamyn West, "Data and Desires: What Users Really Want," tech
tips for every librarian (column), Computers in Libraries 28, 1 (2008): 42.
334
Hanlon, interview, 2014.
335
Ling Meng, "March on Milwaukee GA Statistics by City," unpublished Google Analytics results
from September 1, 2013 to February 28, 2014.
336
Ling Meng, "March on Milwaukee GA Statistics by City."
333

124

Canada (13) countries.337 It is important to note that because March on Milwaukee was
launched and marketed in the fall of 2010, these statistics reveal data taken a significant
time after the project team initiated key outreach programming. User statistics will
likely increase substantially after the March on Milwaukee project team resumes
outreach and adds lesson plans.
March on Milwaukee could also go further in better implementing its social
networking efforts. Although social networking demands significant upkeep time, it
creates relationships with users and keeps digital resources popular and relevant. March
on Milwaukee project leader Jasmine Alinder stated that while March on Milwaukee
does have a Facebook page, it is not regularly used to inform members on site
updates.338 Furthermore, social networking provides access to patron demographics
that previously have been unaccounted for including relationship status, political
affiliation, and recreational decisions among other characteristics that may or may not
help drive marketing initiatives.339 The UWM Libraries has an all-encompassing blog for
its more than 35 digital collection. However, in regards to a blog specific to March on
Milwaukee most of the developers agree that a specific blog is challenging to keep
updated. However, if March on Milwaukee gains attention in the future, dedicating staff
time to posting a copy of a particular photo or new educational tool added to the site
will grab users attentions and might also spark more comments. UWM Libraries
Digitization Specialist Berman commented,

337

Ling Meng, "March on Milwaukee GA Statistics by City."
Alinder, interview, 2014.
339
Gordon and Jessamyn West, "Data and Desires: What Users Really Want," 42.
338

125

"I think in technical terms, (a blog) would be cool in that it would be
adding fresh content to (March on Milwaukee) and spark conversations instead
of leaning as a place strictly for research. Instead it would be more of a place to
interact. In technical terms the content management system has a force field
and Google doesn't do a good job of accessing the information behind there and
allowing results. So most library collections you never see in search results so it
becomes a silo of information. But if you link it up with a well-maintained blog
that Google allows, anyone can use it. It will come up in searches and people will
become of aware that it exists."340

By inviting faculty, students, and even community members to comment and contribute
to a blog, March on Milwaukee could develop more of a following. Interacting with
users and establishing virtual relationship in this way does serve to develop a great
familiarity and level of trust with users.
All project members agreed that March on Milwaukee would benefit from
including curriculum tools. She indicated her main regret from the first part of the site's
development was not creating a lesson plan from the Arts@Large outreach program
Alinder commented,
"My one regret right now is there isn’t - the outreach part with Arts@
large was phenomenal, but there's no lesson plan from it. We didn't know how it
was going to go and it was unfamiliar. I wish we had built into the project
curriculum from 4th grade to the university level. I would like to have readymade
guidelines for it so someone who is unsure of how to use the site is more
comfortable. We don't have any curriculum on (the site), and I know many
professors use the site and build assignments based on it. I've tried to find
someone from the School of Education to help but it didn't work out. We just
don't have anyone with the expertise."341
In the next phase, the March on Milwaukee project team can prioritize making
relationships with K-12 education professionals and upload lessons plans, assignments,

340
341

Berman, interview, 2014.
Alinder, interview, 2014.

126

and tutorials germane to the Milwaukee civil rights sources on the site. This second
phase effort will better develop March on Milwaukee as a pedagogical tool to 4th grade
to university students.
While March on Milwaukee has succeeded in initiating several significant
outreach efforts, the team could always participate in more collaborative efforts to
maintain use. Currently, the site is included on Library Research Guides, the UWM
Archives site, and the University of Georgia's Civil Rights Digital Library. March on
Milwaukee could go further by including its presence on MPS digital resources and other
community and city government sites, in addition to other national civil rights digital
efforts. Sroka et al. explained The Steve Project, which is a collaborative effort of
museum professionals who believe social tagging will evolve the ways collections are
described and accessed.342 Likewise the University of Iowa Libraries is implementing
"crowd sourcing" to advance the use of their collections. Meaning, the institution is
allowing academic and professionally qualified users to undertake specific projects such
as transcribing their collection of civil war diaries or other paper collections.343 This
invites more participants to help develop the site, and for each person involved with a
site the more people linked to them will visit the digital resource. Even including a
discussion forum on a digital collection can positively evoke conversation around the
issues the collection presents and the link it provides between past and present

342

Sroka, "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in Polish Digital
Collections," 175-187.
343
Little, “A Place of Connection More than Repository," 172-174.

127

events.344 These examples of trending movements are more social, rather than
scholarly, approaches that share sources on popular networks like Flickr, Instagram, or
social media foras. However, public institutions can form more meaningful relationships
and consequently become more relevant to users. In fact, the Wisconsin Historical
Society's Freedom Summer Digital Collection maintains a page that posts a photograph
with a quotation multiple times in one week to attract user attention.345 This keeps the
collection relevant and garners relationships with its users. March on Milwaukee
creators might want to consider retaining a Facebook, blog, or Instagram page after
their next significant update to remind users of their value and advertise their visual
collections in a thought-provoking way.
Conclusion
Based upon March on Milwaukee developers’ feedback, they have agreed on
vaguely constructed goals and a vision for the collection. Because the site is primarily a
pedagogical tool, Alinder and other UWM and Milwaukee community March on
Milwaukee site designers want to incorporate classroom curriculum documents,
worksheets, and educational services to make accessible to instructors teaching civil
rights history in Milwaukee and beyond.346 In "March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History
Project" historian Patrick Jones specifically suggested that project leaders might
consider "adding curriculum ideas for teachers, inviting scholarly perspective through

344

Ryan Hurley, interview, 2014.
Ibid.
346
Ibid.
345

128

brief video interviews, or publishing a series of short essays on key issues."347 Every
developer response included that they plan to implement more interactive features to
the site. Ultimately the main improvements currently being applied to the collection
include some digital maintenance of files and building new tools and contexts. More
specifically, designers are conceptualizing an animated map that illustrates the 200
nights of marches in a way that is visually understandable to users.348 Like the recently
revised interactive timeline, the map will ideally show the march routes, and then either
student art that related to a location or a primary source such as an oral history. This
map and the collection itself have the potential to be more relevant to the community
and collaborate with other university students or city officials who can use the site as
historical context to frame their current public efforts. For example, UW-Milwaukee
Epidemiology faculty is currently undergoing a research project titled "Social
Inequalities and Toxic Air Pollution Exposures in Milwaukee, WI" which links racial and
socioeconomic geographies with patterns in air toxins.349 March on Milwaukee could
certainly collaborate with Epidemiology faculty on this project by relaying how
Milwaukee neighborhoods and segregation have evolved over the past decades, and
give the project a historical perspective that can help their current perspective to spur
people into action. This collaboration would introduce March on Milwaukee to a new
group of users. As a final March on Milwaukee initiative, developers plan to continue
current workshop and UWM archive instruction and outreach efforts, and potentially
347

Patrick D. Jones, "March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project," The Journal of American
History, March (2013): 1134.
348
Hanlon, interview, 2014.
349
Zibler School of Public Health, "Epidemiology," (UW-Milwaukee),
http://www4.uwm.edu/publichealth/research/research-epidemiology.cfm (accessed 2/17, 2014).

129

broaden their community educational foundation to surrounding Milwaukee schools.350
Employing UWM's new Digital Humanities Lab or the UWM Libraries instruction rooms
is a great central resource for instructors to hold regular instruction sessions for
students and faculty to become more familiar with UWM digital resources, and
principally advocating that March on Milwaukee is the default digital collection to use
for these purposes is relevant because the collection discusses a Milwaukee community
topic from which most participants can relate to at least geographically.
The main evaluation for March on Milwaukee, or any digital collection, to
prioritize is to regularly assess the resource. In order for a digital resource to discover if
it is meeting its target user population’s needs, and to ensure that new problems have
not been introduced, collection designers must continually assess and test the sites
usability through consistent test methods and also with redesigned methods. 351 March
on Milwaukee managers have neglected to improve or upkeep the site over the last six
months. Nevertheless this disregard will not devastate the site, and realistically most
digital collections will experience cyclical maintenance to exist with other institutional
resources. Still, March on Milwaukee creators should meet and formally list their vision
and next steps to evolve the collection. In Jones' review he commented that the March
on Milwaukee site is generally aesthetically pleasing, but also emphasized that the
digital world is constantly improving and leans toward visual elements.352 March on
Milwaukee project developers might consider adding more images from newspaper

350

Doylen , interview, 2014.
Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
352
Jones, "March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project," 1134.
351

130

sources and implementing more recent designs or interactive tools. Additionally, their
next improvements should be documented on social networks and online institution
platforms such as the UWM Libraries' website and involve collaboration with
appropriate partners. Examples of collaboration could be other community Facebook
pages advertising March on Milwaukee upgrades, or national repositories updating the
ways they list the site on their repository in response to any added content.

131

Conclusion
Digital collections are a part of the new trend in scholarly research and
pedagogical tools. Their relevancy and popular use for educational purposes will only
continue to grow in the coming years. Therefore, investing in the assessment of current
digital collection to ensure their long-term existence and to produce better quality
development and evaluation models for other collections to build from is relevant and
necessary for academic institutions. Earlier in the advent of digital collections, scholars
pinpointed four central principles to apply when creating a higher education digital
collection: create scholarly value by exploiting distinctive technological features, create
coherent and interactive collections, protect and foster an intellectual commons for
scholarly and education use, and be realistic about costs for development, outreach,
and maintenance.353
Digital collections have significantly increased in numbers over the past two
decades, causing digital resource evaluation to become a growing trend particularly in
the last five years. Because educationally-focused digital collections are created for
pedagogical and research purposes, users should be at the center of any evaluation
study. Moreover, information needs and user behavior and purpose should drive the
assessment of particular digital collections.354 Who is using particular digital collections
and recognizing how web design encourages or discourages use will reveal how to best

353

D. Waters, "Developing "Digital Libraries: Four Principles for Higher Education," EDUCAUSE
Review SEPT/OCT, (2001): 58-59.
354
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.

132

develop or improve sites.355 If a digital collection is not easy to navigate or aesthetically
pleasing, users will use other resources. More recently digital collections offer services
that recommend sources for users while they browse and offer more user-friendly
search results largely due to recent assessment efforts.356 Additionally, re-evaluation
will drive digital collection maintenance. March on Milwaukee will have another
opportunity to evaluate its collection this year as Arts@Large is creating another exhibit
based off of the Wisconsin Historical Society's (WHS) Freedom Summer digital collection
in July. March on Milwaukee designers can borrow effective strategies that the WHS
collection employs and come up with ways the two collections can work together.
Users, the target audience of a digital collection, drive that collection's development and
maintenance, necessitating that user-focused evaluation ideally should be the primary
framework for assessment.
Digital collections are making unique and primary sources more accessible to the
general public in an advantageous and unrestrictive way. Digital collections expand
research services, reduce handling risks, and promote library resources.357 To academic
institutions specifically, digital collections are becoming a new stage in the research
process and offer opportunities for educational institutions to foster new relationships
between their collection materials and researchers. March on Milwaukee goes one step
further in this context to offer the city's community at large the opportunity to gain new
perspectives on their racial history and development as a highly segregated

355

Norberg, "Sustainable Design for Multiple Audiences," 285-299.
Chowdhury, "Usability and Impact of Digital Libraries: A Review," 656-80.
357
Don Zimmerman, "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation," 227-240.
356

133

municipality. One UWM History 294 student responded in an online survey that, "The
most glaring difference between the digital archives and the physical archives was the
sensory experience. One cannot pick up an original historical document and not think
about the people that handled the document before them."358 March on Milwaukee is
able to form these connections to public users because the collection gives context and
meaning to its sources. Historical narratives are offered in various formats from
documents to videos to audio that connect events and related factors to help users
understand the material and form that information into knowledge. Through a digital
collection, fragmented documents and primary source perspectives are directly
connected to news clippings or news footage.
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project has the potential not only to be a
highly regarded and useful pedagogical resource for schools, and also to community
members and public officials. March on Milwaukee is a unique example of a digital
collection that has extended its purpose beyond academic research by actively
producing a publicly exhibited educational project run in collaboration with local
students that applied the collection's contents to address and provide historical context
to contemporary racial challenges Milwaukee continues to battle. Alinder and project
team members introduced students who had little interest in Milwaukee history to
March on Milwaukee's various primary sources and slowly witnessed those same
students relate to the sources they read, listened, or watched. Students as a result
became invested in the subject matter that March on Milwaukee as a Milwaukee Civil
358

"My Report," UWM Digitization Unit, September 22, 2010.

134

Rights education source supplied to them. Just as students participating in 1964
Freedom Schools became invested in the city's struggle for racial equality, students in
MPS schools today are now able to easily access Milwaukee civil rights histories and
become aware of Milwaukee's historical narrative leading up to its current state of
segregation. The historical context March on Milwaukee supplies users in terms of civil
rights and city segregation can help individuals and the community at large address
current statistics involving segregation, unemployment, and public health realities in
Milwaukee. Academic Institutions and the Library and Information Science field at large
are recognizing the value in using digital collections to foster high quality research
projects. They are globally accessible to scholars, and easily used by a wide variety of
users. As March on Milwaukee and other digital archival collections acknowledge user
feedback and assess their technological shortcomings they can then improve the quality
and quantity of their content and remain relevant educational tools to an extended
audience.
The Milwaukee Freedom Schools in the 1960s and the 2010 March on
Milwaukee Civil Rights Project both foster empowerment and help students and
community members recognize the city's unique civil rights narrative. However, the
original Freedom Schools empowered community activism while March on Milwaukee
encourages community engagement and impartial user involvement with primary
sources that are put in context with historical events. Just as the Freedom Schools
educated their attendees on neglected aspects of African American history, the March
on Milwaukee Civil Rights Project helps users to find their way into neglected or ignored

135

chapters in the city's history by offering access to primary sources and contextualizing
those sources, offering the potential for a transformational experience. Users can
become historians and teachers themselves and educate others with the site's material.
My identification of March on Milwaukee's unique use of outreach and
community engagement is useful for other people who are interested in digital archival
assessment. There is still much debate in regards to quantitative and qualitative
measures of digital archival assessment. Some groups focus on quantitative data, such
as page visits, Facebook likes, and Google Analytics data, while other groups maintain
that conversations and in-person feedback, focus groups, or survey response are more
valuable. By creating a community partnership with Arts@Large, March on Milwaukee
not only demonstrated the site's practical value as an educational tool, but also gained
valuable student and staff feedback that created a foundational assessment framework
to build from in future partnerships. Digital archival collection assessment does not
need to be limited to the measurement of how many people visit a site and for how
long. The qualitative question of how people engage with a site is also important. March
on Milwaukee succeeds as a digital archival collection in part because it engages with its
users and is an interactive educational tool. The site is distantly related to the
Milwaukee Freedom Schools of the 1960s in that the language of the website is not
overtly campaign for a cause, but rather that its users, whether students, teachers, or
artists use the site's materials to create their own language and to emerge education
and activism more organically. To date, scholarship has focused primarily on
quantitative assessment measures. However, this thesis maintains that as librarians and

136

historians continue to create digital humanities projects, they would do well to
complement quantitative measures with qualitative methods. Simply making
information available via the Internet does not in itself ensure meaningful engagement.
Outreach to community organizations, such as March on Milwaukee's partnership with
Arts@Large, can draw increased attention to library and archival resources, resulting in
collaborative projects that can produce information and feedback that can be used, in
turn, to keep digital archival collections relevant and valuable to their users. As founders
of Freedom Schools realized in the 1906s, access to information is vital to freedom. But
it is not enough simply to make information available. Information must be made
accessible in ways that users find engaging and relevant to their lives. Many of the
problems that confronted civil rights activists remain with us, including racial and
economic segregation, inequality, and unequal access to resources, including
information about the past. March on Milwaukee's combination of added context, userfriendly interface, search capabilities, and projects for community engagement make it a
model for libraries and archives that seek to engage users in a new era, one in which
access to information remains vital for the practice of freedom.

137

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary:
Alinder, Jasmine (UWM Director of Urban Studies). Interview with Kate Otto. February
19, 2014.
Barbee, Lloyd. Papers. Milwaukee Mss 16. Box 68, Folders 1 and 6. University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
Barbee, Lloyd. Papers. Milwaukee Mss 16. Transcript Amos VS School Board, 1973
September 26. Box 107, Folders 1-11. University of Wisconsin- Milwaukee
Libraries, Archives Department.
Barnhill, Helen. Papers. School Curricula, Schedules, and Records of MUSIC (selections).
Milwaukee Mss 4. Box 1, Folders 1-11. Barnhill Papers. University of WisconsinMilwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
Berman, Trevor (UWM Libraries Digitization Specialist). Interview with Kate Otto.
January 27, 2014.
Congress of Racial Equality. Milwaukee Chapter. Records. Milwaukee Mss 27. Box 1,
Folders 1-5. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
Doylen, Michael (UWM Archives Director). Interview with Kate Otto. January 29, 2014.
Engseth, Ellen (University of Minnesota Research Collection Archives Head, former
UWM Archivist). Interview with Kate Otto. February 17, 2014.
"Faculty Survey." University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Digitization Unit.
Freedom Day School Withdrawal Poster. UWM Mss 268. University of WisconsinMilwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
"Focus Group Summary." University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Digitization Unit. March
22, 2010.
Hanlon, Ann (UWM Libraries Digital Collections Coordinator). Interview with Kate Otto.
February 7, 2014.
Hart, Kathleen Mary. Milwaukee Public Schools Desegregation Collection. UWM Mss 90.
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.

138

Holmes, Elizabeth. Papers. Milwaukee Mss 118. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Libraries, Archives Department.
Hurley, Ryan (Arts@Large Program Manager). Interview with Kate Otto. February 10,
2014.
Matusiak, Krystyna (University of Denver LIS Professor and former UWM Digital
Collection Coordinator). Interview with Kate Otto. February 18, 2014.
Meng, Ling (UWM Libraries Associate Academic Digitization Librarian). Interview with
Kate Otto. January 31, 2014.
Meng, Ling. "March on Milwaukee GA Statistics by City." Unpublished Google Analytics
results from September 1, 2013 to February 28, 2014.
Milwaukee United School Integration Committee. Records. Milwaukee Mss 5. Boxes 1-3.
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department.
More Than One Struggle Oral History Project Records, 1939-2004. Oral History Interview
with Cecil Brown Jr. and Loretta: August 9, 1995, Part I. UWM Manuscript
Collection 217. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives
Department.
"My Report." University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Libraries Digitization Unit. September
22, 2010.
"Real Life Stories." Big Brothers Big Sisters of Metro Milwaukee, 2013. Available from
http://www.bbbsmilwaukee.org/site/c.8hKPI2MGIkI0E/b.6448785/k.7758/Chan
ging_lives8212one_story_at_a_time.htm.

139

Secondary
Abboud, Ramy. "National Digital Content Policies." IFLA Journal 39, no. 4 (2013): 294310.
Alinder, Jasmine. "Turning Students into Historians." TeachingHistory.org, January 29,
2013. 2010-2014 Created by the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
Media at George Mason University with funding from the U.S. Department of
Education.
Black, Adina. "Exposing the 'Whole Segregation Myth': The Harlem Nine and New York
City's School Desegregation Battles." In Freedom North: Black Freedom Struggles
Outside the South, 1940-1980, 65-91. Edited by Jeanne F. Theoharis and Komozi
Woodard. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Bastian, Jeannette Allis, Michèle Valerie Cloonan, Ross Harvey, Jeannette Allis Bastian,
Michèle Valerie Cloonan, and Ross Harvey. "From Teacher to Learner to User:
Developing a Digital Stewardship Pedagogy." Library Trends 59, no. 4 (2011): 607622.
Beaudoin, Joan E. "Specters in the Archive: Faculty Digital Image Collections and the
Problems of Invisibility." Journal of Academic Librarianship 37, no. 6 (2011): 488494.
Blandford, A. and G. Buchanan. "Usability of Digital Libraries: A Source of Creative
Tensions with Technical Developments." IEEE Technical Committee on Digital
Libraries Bulletin (2003).
Bohle, Shannon. "The New Digital Awareness: The Choices You make Extend Beyond
Delivering Digital Content.(INFOTECH FEATURE)." Library Journal 133, no. 12 (2008):
26.
Borgman, Christine L. from Gutenberg to the Global Information Infrastructure: Access to
Information in the Networked World MIT, 2000.
Boykin, Wade A., and James M. Jones. "The Psychological Evolution of Black Children's
Education Since Brown." In The Unfinished Agenda of Brown v. Board of
Education, edited by James Anderson and Dara N. Byrne, 138-150. New Jersey:
Diverse Issues In Higher Education, 2004.
Brennan, Sheila and T. Mills Kelly. "Why Collecting History Online is Web 1.5." Center for
History and New Media, 1996-2014. Available from:
http://chnm.gmu.edu/essays-on-history-new-media/essays/?essayid=47.

140

Brusilovsky, Peter, Lillian N. Cassel, Lois M. L. Delcambre, Edward A. Fox, Richard Furuta,
Daniel D. Garcia, Frank M. Shipman, et al. "Social Navigation for Educational Digital
Libraries." Procedia Computer Science 1, no. 2 (2010): 2889-2897.
"Changing Lives One Story at a Time." Big Brothers Big Sisters of Metro Milwaukee,
2013. Available from:
http://www.bbbsmilwaukee.org/site/c.8hKPI2MGIkI0E/b.6448785/k.7758/Chan
ging_lives8212one_story_at_a_time.htm.
Chowdhury, Sudatta, Landoni, Monica, and Forbes Gibb. 2006. Usability and Impact of
Digital Libraries: A Review. Online Information Review 30, 6 (2006): 656-80.
"Civil Rights Challenges of the 21st Century: A View from the States." Staff Report from
the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Washington D.C., 2003. Available from:
http://www.law.umaryland.edu/marshall/usccr/documents/cr12c3522010.pdf
Coleman, Jonathan. Long Way To Go: Black and White in America. Atlantic Monthly
Press, 1998.
Deegan, Mary Jo. The New Woman of Color: the Collected Writings of Fannie Barrier
Williams,1893–1918. DeKalb: Northern Illinois UP, 2002.
Dillard, Angela. "Religion and Radicalism: The Reverend Albert B. Cleage, Jr., and the
Rise of Black Christian Nationalism in Detroit." In Freedom North: Black Freedom
Struggles Outside the South, 1940-1980, 153-175. Edited by Jeanne F. Theoharis
and Komozi Woodard. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Dougherty, Jack. More than One Struggle: The Evolution of Black school Reform in
Milwaukee. UNC Press, 2004.
Earhart, Amy E. "The Digital Edition and the Digital Humanities." Textual Cultures: Texts,
Contexts, Interpretation 7, no. 1 (2012): 18-28.
Evidence Base. "eValued Toolkit." http://www.evalued.bcu.ac.uk/ (accessed 2/17,
2014).
Fernandez, Johanna. "Between Social Service Reform and Revolutionary Politics: The
Young Lords, Late Sixties Radicalism, and Community Organizing in New York
City." In Freedom North: Black Freedom Struggles Outside the South, 19401980, 255-285. Edited by Jeanne F. Theoharis and Komozi Woodard. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Fox, Edward, A., Robert Akscyn M., Richard Furuta K., and John Leggett. "Digital
Libraries." Communications of the ACM 38, no. 4 (1995): 22-28.

141

Gordon, Rachel Singer, and Jessamyn West.."Data and Desires: What Users Really
Want." (tech tips for every librarian)(column). Computers in Libraries 28, 1
(2008): 42.
Harding, Vincent. Hope and History: Why We Must Share the Story of the Movement.
New York: Orbis Books, 1990.
Hendry, J. "Primary Sources in K-12 Education." American Archivist 70 (2007), 114-129.
Jones, Patrick D. "March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project." The Journal of
American History, March (2013): 1134.
Jones, Patrick D. The Selma of the North: Civil Rights Insurgency in Milwaukee. Harvard
University Press,2009.
Katre, Dinesh. "Digital Preservation." IFLA Journal 37, no. 3 (2011): 195-203.
Kondro, Wayne, and Elizabeth Pennisi. "Boom in Digital Collections Makes a Muddle of
Management." Science 308, no. 5719 (2005): 187-189.
Kornbluh, Felicia. "Black Buying Power: Welfare Rights, Consumerism, and Northern
Protest." In Freedom North: Black Freedom Struggles Outside the South, 19401980, 199-220. Edited by Jeanne F. Theoharis and Komozi Woodard. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Lee, Christopher A. "Taking Context Seriously: A Framework for Contextual Information
in Digital Collections." UNC SILS TR-2007-04 (2007)
Little, Geoffrey. "“A Place of Connection More than Repository”: Using Technology in
Special Collections." The Journal of Academic Librarianship 38, no. 3 (2012): 172174.
———. "Teaching with Technology: Library Instruction in a Digital Context." The Journal
of Academic Librarianship 38, no. 4 (2012): 242-243.
———. "We are all Digital Humanists Now." The Journal of Academic Librarianship 37,
no. 4 (2011): 352-354.
Malkmus, D. J. "Primary Source Research and the Undergraduate: A Transforming
Landscape." Journal of Archival Organization6, no. 1 (2008), 47-70.
March On Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project. University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Libraries. http://www4.uwm.edu/libraries/digilib/march/ index.cfm.

142

Martin, Jim, Hitoshi Kamada, and Mary Feeney. "A Systematic Plan for Managing
Physical Collections at the University of Arizona Libraries." Collection Management
38, no. 3 (2013): 226-242.
Matusiak, Krystyna. "Digital Future Proposal." University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee.
March 4, 2010.
Mcshane, Ian. "Public Libraries, Digital Literacy and Participatory Culture." Discourse:
Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education 32, no. 3 (2011): 383-397.
Morris, Steven P. "Geospatial Web Services and Geoarchiving: New Opportunities and
Challenges in Geographic Information Service." Library Trends 55, no. 2 (2006): 285303.
Mussell, James. "Using Digital Resources in Class." Journal of Victorian Culture 16, no. 1
(2011): 83-83.
National Information Standards Organization. "NISO Standards."
http://www.niso.org/standards/ (accessed 2/17, 2014).
Norberg, Lisa R., Kim Vassiliadis, Jean Ferguson, and Natasha Smith. "Sustainable Design
for Multiple Audiences: The Usability Study and Iterative Redesign of the
Documenting the American South Digital Library." OCLC Systems & Services 21,
no. 4 (2005): 285-299.
Ormond-Parker, Lyndon, and Robyn Sloggett. "Local Archives and Community Collecting
in the Digital Age." Archival Science 12, no. 2 (2012): 191-212.
Otto, Kathryn. "Segregation, civil rights, and white resistance to racial equality in
Milwaukee." Master's thesis, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, 2010.
Patterson, James T., and William Wilhartz-Freehling. Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil
Rights Milestone and its Troubled Legacy. Oxford University Press, 2001.
Petrelli, Daniela, and Paul Clough. "Analysing User's Queries for Cross-Language Image
Retrieval from Digital Library Collections." The Electronic Library 30, no. 2 (2012):
197-219.
Portales, Marco. "A History of Latino Segregation Lawsuits." In The Unfinished Agenda of
Brown v. Board of Education, edited by James Anderson and Dara N. Byrne, 124136. New Jersey: Diverse Issues In Higher Education, 2004.
Project Gutenberg Consortia Center. "Project Gutenberg." http://www.gutenberg.us/
(accessed 2/17, 2014).

143

Olgetree, Charles. "All Too Deliberate." In The Unfinished Agenda of Brown v. Board of
Education, edited by James Anderson and Dara N. Byrne, 45-60. New Jersey:
Diverse Issues In Higher Education, 2004.
Radin, Beryl A. Implementation, Change, and the Federal Bureaucracy: School
Desegregation Policy in HEW, 1964-1968. Columbia University, 1977.
Richardson, Alyssa, and Elizabeth Hadaway. "Civil Rights Lawyering in the 21st Century:
An Interview with Tomiko Brown-Nagin." Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law
Review, 2013. Available from: http://harvardcrcl.org/2013/07/16/civil-rightslawyering-in-the-21st-century-an-interview-with-tomiko-brown-nagin/
Rieger, Oya Y., Angela K. Horne, Ira Revels, Oya Y. Rieger, Angela K. Horne, and Ira
Revels. "Linking Course Web Sites to Library Collections and Services." The
Journal of Academic Librarianship 30, no. 3 (2004): 205-211.
Roady- Lawson, Jennifer. “More than One Struggle: The Evolution of Black School
Reform in Milwaukee.” From Michigan Historical Review 31, No. 2 (2005): 162163.
Ross, Seamus. "Digital Preservation, Archival Science and Methodological Foundations
for Digital Libraries." New Review of Information Networking 17, no. 1 (2012):
43-68.
Saracevic, Tefko. "Digital Library Evaluation: Toward an Evolution of Concepts." Library
Trends 49, no. 2 (2000): 350-69.
Schatz, B., H., B. Schatz, and Hsinchun Chen. "Building Large- Scale Digital Libraries."
Computer 29, no. 5 (1996): 22-26.
Seggern, Marilyn Von, Alex Merrill, and Lihong Zhu. "Sense of Place in Digital
Collections." OCLC Systems & Services: International Digital Library Perspectives
26, no. 4 (2010): 273-282.
Sinn, Donghee. "The use Context of Digital Archival Collections: Mapping with Historical
Research Topics and the Content of Digital Archival Collections." Preservation,
Digital Technology & Culture 42, no. 2 (2013): 73-86.
Sroka, Marek. "Identifying and Interpreting Prewar and Wartime Jewish Photographs in
Polish Digital Collections." Slavic & East European Information Resources 12, no.
2 (2011): 175-187.
Sudatta Chowdhury, Monica Landoni, and Forbes Gibb. "Usability and Impact of Digital
Libraries: A Review." Online Information Review 30, no. 6 (2006): 656-680.

144

Sugrue, Thomas J. Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the
North. Random House, 2008.
Tally, B., & L.B. Goldenberg. "Fostering Historical Thinking with Digitized Primary
Sources." Journal of Research on Technology in Education 38 no. 1 (2005).
Tennant, Roy. "Digital Library Infrastructure." Library Journal 123, no. 11 (1998): 32.
Tennant, Roy. "Personalizing the Digital Library." Library Journal 124, no. 12 (1999): 36.
Tobias, Vicki. Digital Resources in Instruction and Research: Assessing Faculty Discovery,
use and Needs - Final Summary Report, 2009.
———. . Web Survey on the use of Digital Resources in Instruction and Research, 2009.
UCLA Libraries. ""UCLA Library Criteria for Digital Projects."
http://digital2.library.ucla.edu/criteria.html (accessed 2/17, 2014).
Visser, Michelle. "Perspectives on... Special Collections at ARL Libraries and K- 12
Outreach: Current Trends." Journal of Academic Librarianship 32, no. 3 (2006):
313-319.
Wang, Xi, and Fengxian Wu. "An Empirical Study on Performance Evaluation of Digital
Collections Based on the Case of Wenzhou University Library." Energy Procedia
13, (2011): 6398-6404.
Waters, D. "Developing "Digital Libraries: Four Principles for Higher Education."
EDUCAUSE Review SEPT/OCT, (2001): 58-59.
Weber, Jonathan. "Shoestring Digital Library: If Existing Digital Library Software Doesn't
Suit Your Needs, Create Your Own." Library Journal 131, no. 12 (2006): 30-32.
West, Jessamyn. "Saving Digital History: Archivists and Librarians Share Similar
Challenges in Preservation." Library Journal 132, no. 7 (2007): S2.
Zhang, Jane. "Archival Representation in the Digital Age." Journal of Archival
Organization 10, no. 1 (2012): 45-68.
Zibler School of Public Health. ""Epidemiology." UW-Milwaukee.
http://www4.uwm.edu/publichealth/research/research-epidemiology.cfm
(accessed 2/17, 2014).
Zimerman, Martin. "Digital Natives, Searching Behavior and the Library." New Library
World 113, no. 3 (2012): 174-201.

145

Zimmerman, Don, and Dawn Bastian Paschal. "An Exploratory Usability Evaluation of
Colorado State University Libraries' Digital Collections and the Western Waters
Digital Library Web Sites." Journal of Academic Librarianship 35, no. 3 (2009):
227-240.

146

APPENDICES
Appendix A
Student Survey
User Interaction with Digital Collections of Archival Primary Sources: Evaluation of the
March On Milwaukee - Civil Rights History Project
Please describe your experience after using the March On Milwaukee - Civil Rights
History Project and share your suggestions:
1. Please check one:
__Undergraduate

__Graduate

__ Community User

2. The March On Milwaukee site seems easy to use
1
2
3
4
5
agree

disagree

3. Organization and layout of the March On Milwaukee site is
1
2
3
4
5
not effective

very effective

4. Navigation throughout the March On Milwaukee site is
1
2
3
4
5
very difficult
5. Visually the March On Milwaukee site is
1
2
3
unattractive

easy
4

5
very attractive

6. How relevant and accurate are the results returned from your searches? Do your
searches provide the information you expect?
1
2
3
4
5
poor

excellent

7. The most useful materials for my class assignments were (check all that apply):
__ Documents
__ Photographs
__ Oral histories
__ Videos

147

8. I have experienced difficulties using the following materials (check all that apply):
__ Documents
__ Photographs
__ Oral histories
__ Videos
Please describe your difficulties:

9. The most interesting materials in the collection are (check all that apply):
__ Documents
__ Photographs
__ Oral histories
__ Videos
Please give an example of the materials that you found the most interesting:

10. The materials I looked at was easy to interpret and understand as a historical source
1
2
3
4
5
agree

disagree

11. As a result of using this website (check all that apply):
__ I am more knowledgeable about the civil rights movement in Milwaukee
__I am more knowledgeable about the history of Milwaukee
__I found material more quickly and efficiently
__I found/used new primary sources for my research
__I completed my research/project in less time
__I will return to this website soon
__I will tell others about this website
12. Your overall rating of the March On Milwaukee site is:
1
2
3
4
5
negative
13. Additional comments and suggestions

positive

148

Appendix B
Faculty Interview Guide
User Interaction with Digital Collections of Archival Primary Sources: Evaluation of the
March On Milwaukee - Civil Rights History Project
1. What is your assessment of the students’ experience in using the March On
Milwaukee for class assignment?
Do you feel that students could interpret and use the collection effectively with a
minimal amount of intercession by me or librarian, due to the context and
information presented on the site?
2. How you feel about putting archival primary sources online?
In what way can digital collections of primary sources have impact on students’
learning? Can they help instructors in designing courses and compiling teaching
materials?
3. What did you expect to find in this digital collection which you did not?
4. Is there something you need to teach effectively with digital materials that is not yet
included in this digital collection?
5. What was the least useful aspect of the digital collection?
6. What was the most useful aspect of the digital collection?
7. What expectations do you have for online archival collections? Do you expect to find
entire archival collections online or selected items? What is, in your opinion, an ideal
model? What is the minimum acceptable model?
8. How much description of archival collections (telling you what the collection is
about, providing titles of documents, subject terms, dates, etc) do you expect to find
online in addition to copies of original documents?
9. How does the experience of using the online collection compare to viewing the
original materials in the Archives room? Which experience do you prefer and why?
10. What suggestions would you offer for effective integration of digital collections of
primary resources into curriculum?

149

Appendix C
The March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project - Student Worksheet
http://www4.uwm.edu/libraries/digilib/march/index.cfm
1. Open the collection’s Home page and browse by Format to become familiar with the
types of documents available in the online collection. Examine closely two items from
the formats of your choice. Write down the titles and formats of the two items that you
examined:
______________________________________

2. Can you identify the names of two groups and/or individuals that were involved in
civil rights struggles in Milwaukee in the 1960s?
______________________________________

What forms of protest did the groups engage in (e.g. marches, boycotts)? Can you locate
documents or records that would give examples of the strategies of protest that the
groups used?
______________________________________

3. What information can you find about the civil disturbance of July 1967 in Milwaukee?
What was the City of Milwaukee’s reaction to this event?
Please list the documents that were useful to locate this information:
___________________________________

4. Can you identify a document that provides a study of community opinions about the
summer 1967 civil disturbances? Who is the author of this document? How would you
cite it?

150

Appendix D
Focus Group Questions with Findings Notes (notes highlighted)
I. Questions related to the survey and observation:
1. User experience in using the online collection. Start with an open-ended question:
What could you tell about your experience in using the Civil Rights collection?
How does the experience of using the online collection compare to viewing the
original materials in the Archives room? Which experience do you prefer and why?
Possible follow-up questions:
Is it clear to you as a user what is included in this collection?
What was difficult or frustrating about using this collection?
Do you have any suggestions for improvement?
What did you like about this collection?
[Users liked the tag cloud. They said that it was easy to use and they liked that it limited
the search somewhat. Mostly they were impressed by the way it was able to branch
them out to other related fields. Over all they wanted to the tag cloud to do a broad
search across all fields and they wanted results to display at the folder level]
2. Ease of use:
What part of the collection do you find easy to use?
Are there any parts of the collection that you found confusing and why?
[About half of the students were unaware that they could see a typed text version of
the hand written documents. Users liked the idea of having options to
print/download but were unsure of how to do it.]
3. Use of videos vs. documents
Many of you started your exploration of the collection by watching the videos, but
then moved to documents and reported in the survey that you found the documents
to be the most useful. Could you tell us why you found the archival documents the
most useful? What role does the video play?
[Users stated that documents were essential to being able to understand the
context of the videos.]

151

4. Interaction with archival documents in the online collection
How do you think you can search the documents included in the folders? Do you
assume that all documents are searchable? What about handwritten documents,
such as letters? Do you know how to find typed text of those documents that is
easier to read?
[Many complained about the limited open hours of the archive. This made them
value the material on the website. They said it was difficult for them to locate some
items in the archive that they had found on the website. Also, they would like more
information about the scope of the website. This is both historical context as well as
a feel for what is missing in the digital collection. The most appreciated part of the
website was the ability to see and hear video and audio.]
PDF – if you want to get a copy of the documents, how would you go about printing
or downloading the documents included in the folders? Would you be interested in
printing all documents in the folders or just a selection?
5. Help and FAQ
Do you use Help pages when you are online? Do you think that a Help and/or FAQ
page explaining how to use the documents would be useful? Would you use if we
developed it? Would you be interested in watching a video instruction with an
archivist explaining how to use a PDF version?
[Not many people seem to actually use a FAQ but they seem to want one anyway.
Everyone seemed to like the idea of being able to ask a question via email or some
other onsite communication. Video and text tutorials were also popular. They liked
the idea of these educational tools being made readily available so they could train
themselves to use the site.]
II. More general questions about user interaction with archival collections
6. User expectations and information seeking behavior
What expectations do you have for online archival collections? Do you expect to find
entire archival collections online or selected items? What is, in your opinion, an ideal
model? What is the minimum acceptable model?
How much description of archival collections (telling you what the collection is
about, providing titles of documents, subject terms, dates, etc) do you expect to find
online in addition to copies of original documents?

152

Do you find browsing through the folders and documents an acceptable method of
locating documents? How much time are you willing to spend browsing through the
folders to find relevant documents?
7. Final questions and comments
Do you have any questions for us?
General comments
1. They liked the idea of being able to leave feedback.
2. They wanted more contextual material (timelines, maps etc)

153

Appendix E
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee Student Evaluation Study Results Tables
# Answer

Response

%

1 1(negative)

0

0%

2 2

4

6%

3 3

4

6%

4 4

39

56%

5 5 (positive)

23

33%

70

100%

Total

Table 1. Overall rating of the March On Milwaukee site

Table 2. Students’ evaluation of the usefulness of the collection

154

Appendix F
Answers to the Final March on Milwaukee Developer Interview Question:
In your opinion, why is the March on Milwaukee digital collection relevant to you
personally?

Respondent A:
"Personally - It's really tough. I guess, when I do think about it - it makes me see
Milwaukee in a different way. I have a habit of getting into a mindset about this place.
There are vast sloths of this town that are not any good, and uh, it makes me think
about just why that is and it makes me hopeful that someone will make something
happen. It doesn't always have to be that way, and I hope that in some way shape or
form this site will help someone see that way and that their community is malleable and
they don't have to just live where they live because that's the way it is.
I'm interested to see where (March on Milwaukee) goes next. It's been a while since I've
seen this project go somewhere and there are a lot of cool things about this project that
could easily be re-visited and revived depending on what the next steps are. If you look
at the users’ perspective and who actually goes to the site and how they use it, then we
can get it out there and get people to use it. So stuff like that, even just to give people a
reminder that some of these problems still exist.
I do think the digital collections themselves expose the stuff that's in the library to new
people. Students will go to the library, but how many students are going to gather
enough courage up to go figure out how to use the archives? That's where the bulk of
this material sits. You get that material out there and say where it's from and once
people start using it they realize they can go and get more."

Respondent B:
"It was, when I first started in March 2012. Maybe a week or two into the job there was
a gallery night at Arts @Large - who was featuring March on Milwaukee. So I took my
family and went out to see that and there were a group of high school students singing
and all these exhibits built around materials we had were made available. My daughter
was eight at the time and was reading all the descriptions and we read about Vel Phillips
who was there. And my daughter was awestruck. It was moving to see something I'm

155

usually so far removed from. It was great to see firsthand that we made such dramatic
use of these historical materials and stories and my daughter was so impacted by the
exhibit. It makes me want to make sure this collection stays in the front and center of
what we're doing.
It confirmed to me that it was the right decision to make this job."

Respondent C:
I am an immigrant - I emigrated from Poland, and for many years Milwaukee was my
second home. I lived in the south side of Milwaukee. My husband is of Italian descent
and my mother-in-law went to school in Milwaukee. I didn't know that being immigrant
- I didn't know much about civil rights. I was not familiar with the movement in
Milwaukee. So I learned a great deal actually about what was happening in Milwaukee
from this project. I haven't looked at all the documents but I watched all the videos. So
for me personally it was a purposeful project because I learned a lot about the place
where I live. That's the beauty of working on those projects.
When I worked at UWM I worked there for about 10 years, and most of my work was
with the AGSL and their photographic questions. I built about 20 digital collections when
I was there and they ranged in topic. And I have to tell you that March on Milwaukee is
probably my favorite project because of the content because of its social importance
and because it was a great team project - there were so many people involved. I speak
for myself but we had those team meetings, and there was really a sense of excitement
and that what we were doing was important. We put a lot of time on the project and
learned a lot.
Trevor put so much of his own time in that project - it was that sense that we as a
team."

Respondent D:
"First it's interesting to me. It really makes me think - I am from Taiwan, so we know
there are black and white people in the states and they had some problems and still do.
That's the only thing I knew before I came here. But we didn't know how much effort
they paid for it. And I think that's the first firsthand material I have touched about the
movement. So it really changed my thoughts about black and white history. As a
foreigner it totally changed my view about the movement. I know what activists said but

156

it's not my history. But I do see something - for example, when I converted the videos I
had to examine the videos to see if I did it right - so I have to watch them. So that's the
first time I really knew what was happening in those years. Seeing is believing. That
really makes me think it's alive and it's not a movie it's what really happened. It helped
me to understand black history in Milwaukee, but also gave me a picture of the
movement in the whole United States. We had some event after we launched it - a film
about a bus across the nation.
Well I will say we spent a lot of time and effort to build this kind of collection for public
interest. We hope there are more and more people that know there are so many
precious resources here. We will feel happy if there are more people who use it. And if
we can get more feedback, positive and encouragement, there will be more motivation
to have some improvement - it would be very welcome."

Respondent F:
"I think social justice-based education in general has the purpose of showing people that
at one point other people have taken actions to make their lives better. So I think any
time you're able to share information and experiences/media linked to those
experiences it is a positive experience.
I think I can speak for the young students and artists and teachers we've worked with it's inspired them to take action in their community. It absolutely has. The students for
example - they didn't see this as a fight that was won and over. They saw it as a
continuing struggle. It is a continuing struggle. I think being able to understand our past
and our challenges and what we need to overcome - building those linkages is incredibly
important for education but also for community political action.
(March on Milwaukee) gave me perspective. It gave me a great amount of background
knowledge. But it sparked my interest in investigating local history. Through this
education project - the local aspect of it was the key to success because both as an arts
administrator and teachers and students were more invested in it than if it was a
website about national civil rights. Dr. King and Rosa Parks are great but bringing it
home makes it more important and you become more engaged because you see the
failures and successes and challenges that we still have. It becomes more than a text
book. It becomes something that you can see right in front of you.

157

Respondent G:
"I would say, for example, my mom was like 9 at the time during the civil rights
movement. She has the perspective of a scared white young suburbanite. When I talked
to her about the movement she didn't remember Vel Phillips or (Lloyd) Barbee. She
doesn't remember (Father) Groppi in a good way, but she also doesn't remember
anything he said. I think if it's in the schools and widely used they would learn about
their parents and grandparents generation and then parents might also be introduced
to it and people can grasp a different perspective on it than they originally had if they
look back on it. If people are still racist they can look at these sources and the contexts
their presented in and change their perspective.

Respondent H:
"It provides a broader voice to those involved in that era; and provides many varied
community an opportunity to both learn about the past and present race-based
experiences in Milwaukee and the US. Collaborations with Arts@Large and other
student groups are very rewarding as is knowledge of how scholars have become
engaged in topics based on their interactions with the sites."

Respondent I:
"Essentially (March on Milwaukee impacts) the UWM community and the high school
students in Milwaukee who have used it. Generally, going into the site they don't know
anything about the topic. I usually get the response 'why didn't I know about this
before?' I think in particular from the high school students in Milwaukee we've worked
with, learning about this history made them look at their city in a different way and
made them feel a sense of pride and ownership, and think that they had a role to play to
make their city better for the future."

