A CRITICAL IMPASSE:
LITERACY PRACTICE IN AMERICAN PRISONS
AND THE FUTURE OF TRANSFORMATIVE READING

by
Kathrina Sarah Litchfield

A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the Master of Arts degree in Library and Information Science
in the Graduate College of
The University of Iowa

May 2014

Thesis Supervisor: Assistant Professor Joan Bessman Taylor

UMI Number: 1560669

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1560669
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Copyright by
KATHRINA SARAH LITCHFIELD
2014

Graduate College
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, Iowa

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
_______________________

MASTER’S THESIS
______________
This is to certify that the Master’s thesis of
Kathrina Sarah Litchfield
has been approved by the Examining Committee
for the thesis requirement for the Master of Arts
degree in Library and Information Science at the
May 2014 graduation.
Thesis Committee:

_________________________________
Joan Bessman Taylor, Thesis Supervisor

_________________________________
James Elmborg

_________________________________
Rachel Williams

To the men at IMCC Oakdale -the men who come to book group,
and the men who don’t

ii

In reality, every reader, while he is reading, is the
reader of his own self. The writer’s work is merely a kind of optical instrument, which
he offers to the reader to permit him to discern what, without the book, he would
perhaps never have seen in himself. The reader’s recognition in his own self of what
the book says is the proof of its truth.

--Marcel Proust
Time Regained

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION..............................................................................................................1
CHAPTER
1. A CHRONOLOGICAL REVIEW OF READING IN PRISONS..............................17
1.1 The Bible and the Birth of the Penitentiary...........................................17
1.2 The Moral Library.................................................................................25
1.3 The Classification of All Things...........................................................29
1.4 Education and the Prison Library..........................................................33
1.5 The Era of Treatment.............................................................................39
1.6 The Right to Read..................................................................................49
2. WHAT CAN LITERACY DO? THE IMPLICATIONS OF HISTORICAL
LITERARY METHODS ON CURRENT CORRECTIONS PRACTICE................63
2.1 Reform Through Evangelical and Moral Literature................................63
2.2 Educational Programming and the GED................................................66
2.3 Bibliotherapy as a Medical Tool.............................................................69
2.4 Bibliotherapy as Self-Help.....................................................................71
2.5 The Impasse of Rehabilitation vs. Incapacitation...................................73
2.6 Great Books............................................................................................76
2.7 Changing Lives Through Literature.......................................................81
2.8 An Academic Approach..........................................................................85
3.

THE APPLICATION OF LITERACY INTERVENTIONS: NOTES FOR
FURTHER RESEARCH............................................................................................89
3.1 Literacy as Framed by the Practice of Restorative Justice......................89
3.2 Why Read? The Process of Reading vs. the Content of Reading............92
3.3 Conclusion...............................................................................................96

BIBLIOGRAPHY............................................................................................................101

iv

1

INTRODUCTION

The security officer walks a few feet ahead of me, now and then turning to check
that I am still behind him. I’ve made this walk over a dozen times, yet still, a moment of
daydreaming could easily lead to a wrong turn down these labyrinthine corridors. I make
sure I keep to his pace, and soon we enter a classroom packed with almost twenty men,
all wearing identical navy blue t-shirts and jeans. As I approach, an empty chair is rustled
from a corner and placed before me, guys inch their chairs over to make room, and
friendly greetings welcome me from all around the crowded table. Discussion has already
begun; I’ve missed the first ten minutes as I waited in the lobby for an officer to safely
escort me to the room. We have a guest facilitator today, Mr. James 1, a favorite from the
prison staff, who occasionally attends the group whenever we choose a mystery thriller.
Mr. James loves to read almost as much as he loves coaching the guys’ basketball
scrimmages during recreation hours, but he reads strictly mysteries, a couple a week. We
have not met before, but Mr. James very graciously introduces himself and recaps the
discussion as it has progressed so far.
I immediately sense an unusual vibrancy in the room. There are significantly more
participants than usual, and as I scan the room I note both regulars and occasional
members, and a handful of offenders I have never met before. All are engaged in the topic
at hand. We are discussing a work by famed thriller author Michael Connelly (Blood
Work, 1998), and the plot centers around the gathering of evidence obtained from security

1

To protect their identity, I have changed the names of all staff affiliated with the prison.

2

camera. Members are divided on their opinions of the appropriate use of hidden security
cameras -- some feel that cameras provide a valid way to protect one’s property and deter
crime, while some feel that hidden cameras violate privacy. Time flies by as almost every
member takes the opportunity to voice his opinion, and the group, as a whole, finally
agrees to disagree.
This particular day’s discussion continues to interest me, not only because
discussion was so lively and well-attended, but because the topic was clearly one that is
meaningful to these participants. One of the unwritten rules of our “inside” book group is
that, regardless of the turns our discussions take, we never discuss any of the reasons why
anyone is incarcerated. It is impossible to know, as an outside observer, if security camera
tape played a role in any of the participants’ convictions, or just how personally relevant
this discussion is to each participant’s experience. There are a number of possible reasons
to explain the day’s large turnout: our visiting facilitator attracted some new participants,
the crime thriller genre is a particular leisure-reading favorite, or perhaps the crime genre
touches on material of particular interest to an incarcerated population, beyond leisurereading and escapism, allowing the consideration of issues that have real implications to
their own experiences.
I began volunteering as a facilitator for this book group at the same time that I
initiated graduate work in library and information science. I’d been a volunteer for a short
time years before, and welcomed the opportunity once again to participate in monthly
book discussions, this time to gain the new perspective of a librarian-in-training while
observing the library work inside the prison. I was surprised to learn that the book group

3

is actually unaffiliated with the library at all. Run by the Education Supervisor, contracted
from the local community college, Ms. Henning2 is responsible for federally mandated
GED/ABE prep and general literacy courses. She volunteers her time to the group, and
book purchases for the group are made entirely through trust fund-managed donations. In
fact, many changes had occurred within the prison since my last visits in late 2003. Most
relevant to this discussion is that certified librarians are no longer on the Department of
Corrections (DOC) payroll, and no longer make periodic visits to the institution. The
library is now supervised by Recreational Activities Specialists, who share their time
between the library, the gym, and the art room. The library tasks (circulation, cataloging,
book repair) are actually performed by Library Clerks, offenders who have earned status
to obtain one of the most coveted jobs in the institution, earning around 43 cents an hour.
I remember the eagerness I felt in my first return to the book group. Student
colleagues asked me if I felt nervous to be in such close quarters with convicted felons.
Surprising even myself, I answered “no”. Of course there is the anxiety of entering a
social gathering as “the newcomer,” and perhaps additional butterflies from considering
that I am one of only two women in the room, but their criminal histories have little effect
on my nerves. I know that this particular group of men is self-selected. They receive no
tangible rewards for participation, other than the monthly opportunity to engage in a
reading experience and informal discussion with their peers. Such opportunities for
discussions (especially on topics outside their own experience-related rehabilitation) are
scarce in the routines of institutional life. From my very first visit, it has been clear to me

2

Not her true name.

4

that the book group is valued as a pro-social activity that allows for the exchange of
ideas, the exposure to new ideas and alternate perspectives, and the challenge to accept
the opposing views of others. The participants follow unwritten rules in order to maintain
this pro-social environment, and are unwilling to conduct themselves in ways that might
threaten their ability to participate.
Residents of several different dormitory wings of various levels of security (none
of them maximum) sit at a circular table alongside Ms. Henning and I, and we are all
given equal opportunity to participate and lead discussion. Attendees vary each month
from around ten to sixteen members, with a core group that attend each month regardless
of the title chosen. Averaging in age in their early forties, the group is clearly experienced
in the routines of institutional life. Most are well educated, some with Master’s degrees,
and several with Doctorates, and have worked professionally before their incarceration.
Many of them are now employed as offender-tutors, assisting in the HiSET/ABE prep
and literacy courses, and they encourage some of their select students to attend.
Generally, we have a core group of educated participants and a fluctuating group of new
participants, some of whom struggle with even fundamental literacy. All are given the
opportunity to read the same book and contribute their thoughts. It is unusual in any
voluntary book group to host such a range of reading skills, but there is always time to
address both comprehension discrepancies and analytical responses. Selecting titles is a
democratic process, where all participants are invited to nominate titles of interest. The
list is vetted by Ms. Henning, but then offered by ballot, and the top ten titles are
selected. Some choices are surprising, as genres range from science fiction/fantasy,

5

biography, and literary fiction, to narrative non-fiction, teen dystopia, and crime mystery.
We grapple with tough issues like sexual victimization as illustrated in Emma
Donoghue’s Room, slavery and racism in Dolen Perkins-Valdez’s Wench, and the trauma
of war in Tim O’Brien’s The Things They Carried.
Although my voluntary position as a facilitator allows me the freedom to lead
discussion with the group, I have never had the opportunity to speak with members
individually. I am curious to know how each member values the book group experience.
In the case of the Connelly discussion, I want to know why that particular discussion
attracted so many participants, and why that particular discussion seemed to resonate
with each member. As much as I would love to know the answers, I have been unable to
obtain research approval from the warden to investigate these questions. I initially
designed a qualitative study that would allow volunteer participants to engage in short,
private interviews regarding their reading habits, favorite genres, and specifically address
why they either regularly or sporadically attend this volunteer book group. The warden’s
rejection is couched in generalities -- “...we do not have the time or resources to
accommodate” all of our research requests, “...we are favoring requests that best fit with
our research priorities with regard to offender reentry” (Craig, 2013). This is the only
communication I received from the warden, despite several repeated attempts to
communicate. Therefore, I can only speculate that, because the book group is not a
federally mandated, funded, or “evidence-based rehabilitation”, exploring offender
reading habits is not viewed as related in any way to correctional reentry programming.

6

Unwilling to drop it, as my ignored appeals implied I should, I reworked my
thesis and instead conducted a literature review that establishes the origins of reading in
prisons, and the implications of the historical roots of prison reading and education that
influence current corrections practice. Given the priorities stated in the warden’s email, I
first decided to locate academic literature investigating the implications of book groups
and other literacy programming on offender recidivism. I quickly understood that it is
almost impossible to track quantitative evidence linking literacy practice as the sole
contributor to reduced recidivism. A multitude of factors contribute to recidivism, and no
study has been successful in isolating group reading as a measurable benefit to offender
success. However, fundamental literacy skills are a proven contributor, hence the
federally-mandated literacy training for every offender reading at or below a sixth grade
level. Perhaps the most convincing evidence of applied literacy programming that
measurably lowers recidivism can be found in the Changing Lives Through Literature
(CLTL) program (Waxler & Trounstine, 1999). This program was very popular in the
early 1990’s, and adopted throughout Canada and the UK, as well as in half a dozen
American criminal justice systems. Select offenders could enroll in a reading and
discussion course, taught by English professors, in exchange for parole, and in some
districts, for prison sentencing. Participants who successfully completed the six- to eightweek program showed a marked decrease in criminal behavior. The CLTL program in
New Bedford, Massachusetts, reported a 68% decrease in their participants’ criminal
behavior (New Bedford Evaluation, 1996). Regrettably, CLTL is not as vibrant as it once
was. CLTL was concurrent with the largest influx of prisoners in our nation’s history, and

7

criminal justice systems welcomed alternatives to conventional sentencing. And though
our prisons are crowded still, more have been built in the last twenty years, and
conventional sentencing has again taken precedence (Trounstine, 2005).
Other researchers have examined the reading habits of imprisoned populations,
and have provided qualitative data proving the transformational qualities of engaged
reading. Most notably, Megan Sweeney conducted several book groups in three American
prisons serving adult women, documenting her experience in Reading Is My Window
(2010). She interviewed hundreds of female offenders, investigating their reading choices
and the emotional/intellectual benefits of their self-prescribed reading program. She
noted distinct preferences for self-help/religious titles, urban fiction, and victim narratives
among these female readers. Her empirical studies provide an excellent template for
needed research in exploring male offender reading habits, and I return to this work later
in this paper.
As I noted earlier, I began graduate coursework in library science at the same time
that I began volunteering with the prison book group. My professors, encouraging my
burgeoning interest, allowed me to direct many of my assignments toward prison libraryrelated topics. For one assignment, I investigated literacy programs facilitated by public
libraries, schools, and youth outreach programs, aiming to support American “at-risk”
teenagers. My primary claim is that such programs could be modified for adult offenders
in prison education programs, reaching students who have failed or been failed by such
programs in their youth. Having once been “at-risk” themselves, they are now beyond
“risk”, evidence that some students are not reached by the safety nets these outreach

8

programs aspire to be. Yet, just because they are now labeled as “adult” and
“incarcerated” does not mean that transformational programming should be abandoned.
These students are not beyond rehabilitation, as the existence of DOC support for
restorative justice programs makes plain. I will discuss such programs in Chapter 3 of
this paper. In pursuing the scholarship of transformational reading engagement, I
reviewed literature by scholars attesting to strategies for encouraging the “reluctant
reader” (Zaro, 2007; Winters, 2000; Krashen, 1993). Again and again, educators
recommend seducing the reluctant reader, be they “at-risk” or adult, with reading material
that fosters empathy. A reluctant reader will be more invested in a narrative that reflects
one’s own experience, with characters that look and think like them, with settings that
look and feel like their environment. Fundamental literacy, it is understood, will improve
with such empathic reading, and in time, as the reader increases fluency, he will be
prepared to explore narratives slightly more unfamiliar. The reader’s capacity for
empathy with unlike characters will grow.
Does narrative empathy lead to real, life-experience empathy? I consider my
observations made on the day we discussed Connelly’s work. Several new offenders
joined us that day, a few of whom struggled with fundamental literacy skills and found
Connelly’s novel a challenge, but despite that challenge were drawn to the discussion.
Were they experiencing an empathy with the material that urged them to participate,
despite the hard work of reading the material? The end of our discussion left the room
split in opinions concerning security cameras, but there were no fights, no lingering
anger. Each participant heard both sides and expressed their views seemingly without fear

9

of reprisal. Something extraordinary was happening in that room. It centered on the
reading of a crime novel, but something much more substantial was going on. Every
member was engaged in the discussion, using a blend of text and personal experience to
analyze ideas and articulate opinions. It was a situation that classroom teachers strive for,
and here it had happened, spontaneously, in a voluntary book group, with no grades, no
rewards, just the satisfaction of exploring a meaningful idea.
Unfortunately, this experience is only available because of the good will of a staff
member willing to volunteer her time, and the good fortune, for these offenders, to be
placed in an institution willing to make space for it. There is no state or federal mandate
requiring prisons to offer literacy interventions beyond high school completion. The evertightening budget continues to whittle away at staff. Ms. Henning has less than half the
education staff she had when we first met in 2003. More responsibility is left to a smaller
number of employees, and when time is stretched so thin, it is the voluntary work that
gets cut first. Space is also vulnerable to a cost/benefit ratio, and today, serving an abovecapacity population, the library serves as little more than a safe and secure recreational
area, its shelves filled with dog-eared, donated paperbacks. Treatments in behavioral
therapy, restorative justice, anger management and other evidence-based programs need
space, too, and these programs have a calculable benefit to the aims of the institution.
Without a trained librarian to advocate for it, how long before the library space is
reclaimed to accommodate these needs? The life and vibrancy of reading in prisons is
threatened in very real, concrete ways.

10

Reading in prisons is far from a passing fad. It has a history as long as the history
of prisons themselves. Over time, reading has been considered a sustenance as well as a
danger, a cure and a poison, a treatment and a frivolity. Required reading has been used
as a therapy, and denying reading has been used as a therapy. Most of that conflict stems
from a belief that the content of reading has a powerful emotional effect on the choices
we make and the people we are, i.e., if we read good books, we will learn how to be good
people. If we believe that some books encourage us to be good people, than we must also
accept that some books encourage us to be bad. At times in the history of prison reading,
prison administrators have simultaneously praised the act of reading while attempting to
control the content, allowing only the titles believed to make the reader good, or at least
not make them bad. Authorities have and continue to go to great lengths to deny access to
the books that make you bad, putting forth considerable energy to stemming an act that,
in other contexts such as therapy and emotional management, gets short shrift today as an
effective means of rehabilitation. A problem may reside in the ubiquitous notion that
reading is dichotomous: reading either helps you or harms you. But by understanding
how reading employs our empathy and perspective-taking skills, we may begin to see that
reading is far more integrated into our personal experience. It helps us to fill in the blanks
about or own sense of self, and appreciate that others fill in their own blanks in different
ways (Sweeney, 2010; Keen, 2007) . We are affected by the content of what we read, but
we are also practicing cognitive thinking skills -- perspective, construction of other,
effect anticipation -- skills that are difficult, and sometimes dangerous, to practice in real
life (Kidd & Castano, 2013). But in order to practice those skills, a reader must be

11

engaged with the text. My book group participants were clearly engaged with Connelly’s
novel. They were engaged with the ideas surrounding the lawfulness and justice of
hidden security cameras. They were not concerned with whether their opinions made
them better or worse people. But I argue that their enthusiasm to form and articulate their
opinions did make them better people, just a bit. And they will do it again each month, as
long as book group persists.
Investigating the trends of prison reading has led me to the difficult realization
that prison authority and prison rehabilitation are at odds that are not easily reconcilable.
The natural desire to help people in dire situations, to help those facing incarceration with
low education achievements, minimal access to basic needs, and little sense of agency in
civic community, runs up against the more visceral aggression of the general public to
punish and incapacitate lawbreakers. Prison authorities claim to attempt rehabilitation for
the purpose of lowering recidivism, but those attempts cost money and take time, and
have no guarantees, while incapacitation is an immediate short-term solution that requires
little training and minimal compassion. And so we have institutions that attempt
rehabilitation and incapacitation simultaneously, leaving ex-offenders with a confused
sense of agency, with expectations for successful civic membership, but without the full
set of tools to achieve it. It appears that the purpose of incarceration in America is at an
impasse.
Reckoning with this impasse has affected my own ability to remain objective
within the research. Ann Cvetkovich, a scholar on affect theory, reflects on the concept of
impasse, and her words give me hope that we are in the midst of a social circumstance

12

that can be solved with fresh perspective. She states, “As a theoretical concept, impasse
imports its spatial or literal sense into conceptual and social circumstances; it suggests
that things will not move forward due to circumstance - not that they can’t, but that the
world is not designed to make it happen or there has been a failure of
imagination” (Cvetkovich, 2012). She reminds her readers that an impasse is only a
delay, not an end. We live in a world that is not designed to make transformative
experience valuable, to the prison authority or to the hundreds of thousands of
incarcerated Americans. Amidst all the concern for harsher penalties and skyrocketing
long-term sentences, there has been a failure of imagination to envision a more
productive outcome. It is my hope that this paper will assist to reignite our imaginative
power to find a way through this impasse.
To better understand this impasse we are currently confronting, it is necessary to
understand how we got here. In Chapter 1, I provide a chronological review of the
literature concerning reading in American prisons. Although formal literacy interventions
were not introduced until the twentieth century, reading has played an informal role in
detainment facilities since the first jail was built in Pennsylvania. Reading was used as a
form of rehabilitation through affective response to its content, and the key (and
sometimes only) text was the Bible. Over time, religious libraries served our prisons, and
various brave pioneers introduced secular, but always moral, literature, for the purpose of
uplifting the soul. Non-fiction titles were encouraged when trends toward vocational
training for prisoners was popular. Non-fiction titles were most valued by prisoners when
political radicalism was trending across the country as a response to social disparities.

13

The value of reading has crested and ebbed over the centuries, but always with a concern
for affective content. A book that educates a reader on how to farm or weld or fix a car is
welcome, as is a book that models the exceptional character of an Abraham Lincoln or
the ingenuity of a Benjamin Franklin. A book that questions class hegemony or imagines
an altered class structure is dangerous and requires censure. This concern for the effect of
literature comes to a head in the 1970’s, when prison authorities responded by clamping
down on security, limiting access to all material, moral or otherwise. In the decades since,
there has been little time or interest to consider the effect of literature on prisoners, as
authority is concerned with housing and securing the enormous new populations of
offenders.
Chapter 2 considers the ways that literacy interventions of the past, specifically
the twentieth century, have contributed to the current atmosphere of education, treatment,
and rehabilitation within our prisons, as well as the self-prescribed reading that prisoners
practice on their own behalf. Concern for reading practice has moved from prison
administration to prison treatment staff, to dedicated public volunteers, and to scholars of
prison and prison reform. Chapter 3 looks toward the endangered future of literacy
practice in prisons. I first consider the reparative treatment programs that enjoy full
support and endorsement by prison authorities as evidence-based programs to lower
recidivism. In so doing I have discovered that a current advancement of a program called
Restorative Justice encourages many of the same skills and outcomes that a literacy
intervention of perspective-directed reading might achieve. I assert that there is
opportunity for advancing the parallel benefits of transformational reading practice and

14

the empathic encounters encouraged in a restorative justice program. In order to support
the aims of both projects, a strong prison library system is required. I also envision a
reading program that does not rely solely on the affective content of literature, but on the
cognitive work of reading itself, as described through Theory of Mind, an approach that
has not been documented previously in prison literacy interventions. Bringing these
approaches together for the first time enables me to imagine an intervention that treats
both the affective response to varieties of the human experience, as well as exercising the
cognitive skills used in forming self-identity, perspective, and interpersonal sensitivity. I
recommend both of these approaches as opportunities to re-imagine our way out of this
critical impasse.

A NOTE ON KEY TERMS

This paper considers concepts that overlap across the domains of librarianship,
institutional corrections, and literary and cognitive theory. In so doing, key terms have
various meanings, depending on their context. I hesitate when using forms of the word
rehabilitative, as the historical inference in corrections (a term itself that has arguably
evolved into its own antithesis) is that of a naive and futile attempt to eliminate crime
through teaching behavioral change. This is all the more complicated by the prefix “re-”,
which assumes in this context that a convicted criminal is being returned to a state of
fitness for civic functioning. It is as likely that a criminal prior to incarceration has never
been privileged with access to the tools necessary for civic functioning or, conversely,
that corrections rehabilitation does not genuinely aim to return an ex-offender to full civic

15

membership. The long list of civil liberties that are impinged upon even well after a
sentence is served (e.g., curtailed voting rights, denial of access to federal assistance for
food, housing, and education) evidences a lip service paid to the efforts of current
corrections-based rehabilitation efforts. At times I am more comfortable substituting the
word transformative, intentionally implying a transformation from a narrow worldview to
a wider one, or a movement from self-recrimination to agency, from denial to validation.
Transformative Justice is sometimes used interchangeably with Restorative Justice, but
has distinct differences. Restorative Justice is mostly concerned with the aftermath of
crime and its repercussions for the victim, offender, and the community. Transformative
Justice seeks to examine and address the background of the criminal incident and its full
context, with the aim to not only repair the current damage, but prevent future harm. Yet
the word “transformative” remains problematic, with its implications of spiritual or
metaphysical catharsis, which adds a note of melodrama to a process that is often quite
grounded and pragmatic.
Additionally, I pay heed to a discretionary use of the multiple terms ascribed to an
incarcerated person. Correctional institutions refer to their populations often as offenders,
as a reminder of the reason they are serving time. Corrections authorities also make
frequent use of the term inmate as a generic and dehumanizing form of address. I have
heard the men in my book group refer to each other as inmates, but they do not address
each other as Inmate. It is less likely to hear the term convict, but ex-convict, referring to
a person who was convicted and incarcerated but is now released, is common. The
general public appears to favor the term prisoner, and it is indeed the legal term for any

16

person under legal custody. But this term is not favored by incarcerated populations or
those who are sensitive to prison reform efforts, as it gives power to the imprisoning body
and removes the identity of the individual. While I prefer to use the term incarcerated
populations (at least politically, if not phonologically), I have used various terms in
harmony with the context under investigation. I prefer this term because it implies an
inarguable state without inferring blame. I refer here to populations incarcerated in all
detainment facilities, including federal, state, and private institutions, unless otherwise
noted. Likewise, I frequently refer to these populations with masculine pronouns, as
incarcerated men are my focus of study, but I do not intend to preclude the thousands of
American women currently or previously incarcerated.
Finally, I have been volunteering as a co-facilitator for an incarcerated men’s
book group for several years now, and I bookend this thesis with personal narratives of
my experience with this group of readers. My intention had been to remain a passive
observer in the field, but almost immediately I became an overt participant, intellectually
and empathically a member of the group. This is in part due to the men’s proclivity for
my participation and expressions of gratitude for it. Due to my loyalty and fellowship
with this particular group of men, I tend to refer to them as “my” book group. I do not
mean to imply in any way that I am the owner or proprietor of this group, only that my
dedication to our work has grown personal to the extent that this group is “mine” just as
my family is mine. It is their enthusiasm and open hearts that have generated my
continuing interest in this line of inquiry.

17

CHAPTER 1:
A CHRONOLOGICAL REVIEW OF READING IN PRISONS

1.1 The Bible and the Birth of the Penitentiary

The reading of literature has played a role in prison culture since the first
penitentiaries of the 18th century. Previous to the penitentiary, Puritan colonists
established jails as a means to maintain social control as they disassociated from English
codes of criminal justice. As devout Calvinists, Puritans acknowledged an obedience to
God’s spiritual commands and, in creating their local system of justice, mixed and
matched pairings of crime and punishment modified from the English corporal system
but suited to their religious beliefs. Prison historian Adam J. Hirsch notes, “...the criminal
justice system of Puritan Massachusetts by and large duplicated Old World sanctions but
applied them in novel ways, treating property offenses with relative lenience and moral
offenses with relative severity” (Hirsch, 1992). Theft would be sanctioned with fines or
public admonition, but moral offenses such as blasphemy, adultery, or murder were
capital crimes punished with lashings, the stocks, and sometimes the gallows, though this
last was used sparingly, both as respect for God’s compassion and belief in a reformation
of moral character, and also an acknowledgment that the colony population was small
enough already.
In the colonial jail, inmates were primarily pre-trial. Incarceration was not a
sentenced punishment, but rather a holding place for alleged criminals awaiting a

18

sentence of fines, banishment, or corporal and public punishment. Administration of these
jails was arbitrary and often disorganized, locally managed, and often lacking in security
and standard protocols.
The blending of Old World traditional justice practices with Puritanical views
toward virtuous living often created irrational laws. For instance, a medieval practice,
known as the “benefit of clergy”, allowed priests to avoid the harsh penalties of the
secular courts and be tried instead by ecclesiastical court under canon law. Over time,
anyone who could read a Bible verse or recite one from memory could avoid a death
sentence, at least for one’s first offense (Lynch, 2014). This is the first instance of the
value of literacy in the penal context in America.
Through the eighteenth century, as the Industrial Revolution and the rise of early
capitalism began to transform the American landscape, crime became a more prevalent
issue in the minds of Americans. The British legal system, known as “the Bloody Code”
for its harsh severity, continued to influence American criminal justice. From 1688 to
1815, the number of capital crimes rose from around fifty to over two hundred (Lynch,
2014). A simple theft could lead to a death sentence.
The spirit of reform, utilitarianism, and advancement that affected all of American
society prior to and beyond the American Revolution affected the development of
criminal justice, as well. Reformers began to question an indiscriminate system of
punishment, and whether such harsh penalties really did deter crime. For instance, if the
penalty for theft is a death sentence, as well as the penalty for murder, what is to stop a
criminal from killing his burgled witnesses? As Samuel Johnson noted of the English

19

system, “If only murder were punished with death, very few robbers would stain their
hands in blood; but when by the last act of cruelty no new danger is incurred and greater
security may be obtained, upon what principle shall we bid them forbear?” (Johnson,
1751).
Many Americans took the same view, and after the Revolution, state after state
began to reduce the number of death-penalty offenses. Thomas Jefferson, in helping to
revise Virginia’s statutes in 1776, wrote of the legislative debates, “On the subject of the
Criminal law, all were agreed that the punishment of death should be abolished except for
treason and murder; and that, for other felonies, should be substituted hard labor in the
public works” (Jefferson, 1776). Politically, many patriots felt that the death penalty
represented a monarchical ideal, and that reformation was more compatible with the new
republican views of an independent nation.
At the same time, many reformers thought along more theological lines. The
historical Calvinist beliefs of original sin allowed that some people were destined for
wickedness, and that retribution was the appropriate punishment, as innate wickedness
could not be reformed. But after the Revolution, an optimism set in as Calvinist ideas
diluted with other religious perspectives. Reformation would be welcomed by a kind and
merciful God. Quakers were especially active in attending to health and rehabilitation
concerns in both American and British jails and prisons. Dr. Benjamin Rush was a
notable Pennsylvania Quaker and political activist that advocated for isolation and labor
as punishment, and cleanliness and hygiene as institutional standards. Elizabeth Fry,
another prominent Quaker involved in prison reform, extended this advocacy into the

20

next generation, although she argued against the practice of solitary confinement (FCNL,
2014).
A group of prominent citizens in Philadelphia, including Dr. Benjamin Rush and
Benjamin Franklin, created The Philadelphia Society for Alleviating the Miseries of
Public Prisons in 1787. Their aim was to reform criminals into law abiding citizens, and
protect juveniles, women, and offenders of lesser crimes from the deleterious effects of
cohabitating with dangerous hardened criminals. Their first documented attempt at
intervention was in introducing prayer services at the Walnut Street Jail (our nation’s first
jail) in 1787. The jail’s administrators opposed the intervention, yet a year later the
Society submitted its first public recommendation of prison reform to the General
Assembly for Pennsylvania. The document encouraged utilizing solitary confinement to
allow for personal and spiritual reflection, more hard labor for idle hands, a segregation
of criminals based on the severity of their crime, segregation by sex, and the prohibition
of liquor. The following year, all of these recommendations were passed into state law
(Fields, 2005). This society is also recognized as the first organization to provide reading
material, albeit of a religious nature, to the inmates of Walnut Street Jail, thus providing
the first book service to prisons in America in 1790 (Rubin, 1973).
The combined efforts of political and theological reformers led to a reevaluation
of the role of American prisons. The reduction of death-penalty offenses led to a large
population of criminals that required care. Exile, a popular solution of the past, had
worked for a time for British convicts, but Australia had met its saturation point, and
America, as an independent nation, no longer provided an easy dumping ground.

21

Incarceration became its own penalty, rather than a holding place for pre-trial detention.
In 1785 Massachusetts legislature appointed a fortress in Boston Harbor, Castle Rock, to
be a repository for convicted criminals -- and only convicted criminals -- from all over
the state (Hirsch, 1992). This was a major first step in the evolution of modern criminal
justice and the state’s role in appropriating responsibility for its convicted populations.
Meanwhile, the Enlightenment era encouraged the idea that social institutions
built moral character, that the proper environment shaped rational people, and that all
people could be rehabilitated if provided with the appropriate environment. Conversely, it
was the deleterious effects of rapid population growth and social mobility that led to
societal decay. Removing “deviants” from the corruption of their families and
communities allowed the criminal to learn valuable moral lessons they had ignored
previously, without the constant temptation of vice aroused by an encroaching and
depraved society (Rothman, 1971). Thus, two experiments in the rehabilitative model of
the penitentiary -- a “home for the penitent” -- came into being.
The Eastern State Penitentiary opened in 1829 in Philadelphia, promoted by the
aforementioned Society for Alleviating the Miseries of Public Prisons, and purported as
the world’s first penitentiary that advocated complete isolation. Institutional aims were to
provide an environment of complete silence and isolation, encouraging convicts to
contemplate their behavior alone with their Creator, and to recognize their errors. The
penitentiary was architecturally unique, reflecting a panopticon style where convicts
could not view each other, but supervisors had a line of sight to every cell. The building
was the most expensive American construction of its time. Convicts were held alone for

22

23 hours a day, with a private exercise yard adjacent to their cells. No speech was
allowed, and black sacks were placed over their heads whenever convicts were moved
outside of their cells. Each cell had a skylight, the only natural light, referred to as the
“eye of God.” The hallways featured a monastic design, and cell doors were especially
low to encourage a penitent kneeling to pass through (Eastern State Penitentiary, 2014).
This enforced solitude was the attempt of the era to encourage rehabilitation.
Eighteenth-century social theorist Jonas Hanway claimed, “Solitude is the most humane
and effectual means of bringing malefactors...to a right sense of their condition” (Lynch,
2014). Contemporary John Brewster also claimed, “It has been recommended, both by
the practice and precept of holy men, in all ages, sometimes to retire from scenes of
public concourse, for the purpose of communing with our own hearts, and meditating on
heaven” (Lynch, 2014). It was reasoned that isolated men would have neither the
resources nor the desire to rebel or escape, yet this reasoning proved a grave error in
judgement. The Eastern State Penitentiary made heavy use of corporal punishment from
its beginnings, developing an arsenal of hideous torture devices, including the “iron gag,”
the “shower bath,” and the “mad chair,” into which prisoners were tied in contortions that
prevented their bodies from resting (Christianson, 1998). Although isolation was
advertised as Eastern’s method of rehabilitation, torture was the prevailing method of
control.
Around 1823 the state of New York also developed its first penitentiary, Auburn
Prison. It also privileged solitary confinement by night, with congregate hard labor by
day (Hirsch, 1992). Even during congregate labor, inmates were restricted from

23

communicating with each other; a rule of strict silence and constant surveillance
encouraged both inmate separation and congregate therapy. Both the Eastern State
Penitentiary and the Auburn Prison created the prevailing models for all future
incarceration facilities in the United States, though the Auburn model proved more
popular as it became evident that the labor element provided income, and it was more
cost-effective for surveilling and housing large populations.
It is important to note that, by far, the largest demographic of inmates in these
facilities was white men. African-Americans, at this time, were tied culturally to the
slavery system, and the disciplining of slaves was handled privately by their slaveholders
and local communities. Literacy rates of prison inmates were relatively proportional to
the general free population at this time. While neither Eastern or Auburn contained
libraries in their early history, they did allow for the reading and ownership of the Bible.
For those who could not read, prison chaplains, visiting clergy, and male members of
volunteer religious organizations might read the Bible to prisoners through the bars of
their cells. As prison library historians Brenda Vogel and Larry Sullivan note, “During the
early years in the Philadelphia system, the prisoner was permitted only the Bible for his
solitary comfort. Similarly in the opposing Auburn, New York, system, reading was
limited to a Bible and sometimes a prayerbook” (Vogel, 2009).
The inclusion of a Bible in a prisoner’s limited inventory of possessions was not
just a nod to the requirements of a moral life, but an active element of rehabilitation
through solitary confinement. Benjamin Rush, a vocal member of the Society for
Alleviating the Miseries of Public Prisons, and a medical doctor, believed criminality to

24

be a physical defect that would someday be cured through medical means, but in the
meantime could be treated through a prescriptive reading of the Bible. In his Medical
Inquiries and Observations upon the Diseases of the Mind, Rush compared the Bible to
“an apothecary’s shop, in which is contained remedies for every disease of the
body” (Rush, 1818). By reading and meditating on particular verses, a prisoner could be
cured of their criminal impulses. Rush applied the bulk of his biblio-therapeutic ideas
towards the treatment of insanity, pushing for what could be termed today “recreational
therapists” in every asylum and madhouse (Weimerskirch, 1965). In these cases he
argued for a more varied menu of reading, including fiction as well as philosophical and
religious texts. Although criminality, in his view, was also a mental disease, the only cure
strong enough to reform deviant behavior was the strong word of the Bible.
This approach to literacy practice and rehabilitation makes an interesting
reappearance in the philosophy of imprisonment more than a full century later. Librarian
scholar Philip Weimerskirch sub-titled his journal article devoted to Rush and John
Minson Galt, “Pioneers of Bibliotherapy in America,” making the case that Rush helped
establish the concept of prescriptive reading long before the experiment became standard
in the mid-twentieth century. This article was written during the height of bibliotherapy
popularity (1965), especially within the context of clinical therapy treatments for mental
illness. A more recent article published in the Journal of the Medical Library Association
in 2013 cites Wimerskirch’s article and reasserts Dr. Rush’s influence on bibliotherapy as
it is interpreted today as a clinical therapeutic tool. The authors go on to claim that, due to
Rush’s advocacy and the work of his younger contemporary, John Minson Galt, in the

25

early nineteenth century, most hospitals today maintain libraries for patient use (Levin &
Gildea, 2013). Although Rush is regularly credited for his prison reform work, his
bibliotherapeutic advocacy has remained strongly and singularly associated to the domain
of medical library scholarship.

1.2 The Moral Library

Access to reading material expanded quickly over the following decades, and by
the mid-nineteenth century most prisons had libraries of some sort, typically with a heavy
emphasis on religious material. Prison chaplains frequently improvised as librarians.
Documentation of prison library collections of the time appears contradictory, since the
majority of chaplains who bothered to document their collections favored religious
content exclusively. Yet a visitor to the Eastern State Penitentiary in 1850, Frederika
Bremer, noted with admiration, “The library was large and contained in addition to the
religious books, scientific treatises, travel books, and literary works, selected with
discrimination” (Eriksson, 1976). It can be fairly assumed that this particular collection
was unusual in its size and breadth of subject-matter.
Perhaps the first documented library outreach experiment came in 1843 at New
York’s Sing Sing Prison. The prison chaplain, John Luckey, supported the prisoner’s right
to read for the purposes of moral and spiritual improvement. In fact, it was Luckey’s
influence that led New York Governor William H. Seward to remove Elam Lynds as
principal keeper of Sing Sing. Lynds was reputed as a tyrannical warden, relying on

26

flogging and other forms of violence to maintain order, and consistently cutting budgets
for food, clothing, and medicine. Seward petitioned Luckey to make Sing Sing
“consistent with the principles of Christianity,” and Luckey responded by creating a large
library of religious titles “designed to inculcate correct moral principles” (Modern, 2011).
He also applied pressure to the President of the Board of Inspectors, John Edmonds, to
eventually have Lynds removed. This may be the prison library’s first triumph in
championing a philosophy of literacy (although highly evangelical) over corporal
punishment.
However, Luckey was challenged again in 1844 when Edmonds hired Eliza
Farnham as matron of the women’s ward at Sing Sing. This was also the year that the
New York Prison Association was organized to oversee state prison administration, an
organization consisting of reformists dedicated to benevolent treatment and rehabilitation.
Farnham was hired on the recommendation of these reformists, and she was successful in
introducing innovative programs for her female charges, and enlarging the prison library
collection and its aims. As prison scholar Janet Floyd notes,

Certainly, prison libraries and reading in prisons were objects
of debate during this period and, in a scene where there seems to
have been a range of practice, Farnham was certainly at the
forefront in introducing books with no explicit religious content.
She was especially unusual in choosing Dickens; where fiction was
allowed to prisoners during this period, it took the form of ‘moral
tales.’ There was also a diminution of religious instruction - the
mainstay of rehabilitative practice at this time -- under Farnham’s
regime (Floyd, 2006).

27

Although Farnham never published a memoir of her experiences at Sing Sing, her
assistant, Georgiana Bruce Kirby, did. In it, she describes the new culture Farnham
introduced into the prison environment, one of social congregate activity as opposed to
the strictly silent, isolated nature encouraged previous to her tenure. She notes,
The matron ‘on guard’ during the noon hour changed the books
left that had been read for fresh ones. Some read much faster than
others, and as many books as were asked for, in succession, were
allowed, as the great object was to keep the minds of the prisoners
from dwelling on the evil past (Kirby, 1889).
In fact, the penitentiary had been devised as a machine made specifically to
compel its inhabitants to dwell on their “evil past,” and Farnham’s concern for her
wards’ future was a concept well ahead of her time. It is no surprise that relations
between Farnham and her colleague, John Luckey, were under strain. He was responsible
for maintaining the Sing Sing library and, as chaplain, for directing the spiritual
maturation of Farnham’s wards. Vogel artfully states,
The chaplain did not approve of inculcating a ‘love of novel
reading averse to labor.’ And Mrs. Farnham was placing ‘immoral’
works in Luckey’s library. Luckey and his supporters could not
stomach the idea of convicts reading Dickens’s Nicholas Nickleby
and the Christmas Stories, even though the matron has sufficiently
bowdlerized them of ‘immoral’ passages (Vogel, 2009).
It can not be ignored that Farnham’s motivation came mostly from a strident
support of phrenology, and much of her work with prisoners consisted of gathering
phrenological data and reading aloud from such renowned phrenologists as George
Combes. Unfortunately, many of Farnham’s denouncers used her phrenological work as
the easiest target to excoriate her other, perhaps more valuable, contributions. Luckey
was removed from his position in 1846, a highly controversial move on behalf of the

28

Board of Inspectors, but in 1848 Farnham resigned from her position, and her work in
phrenology eventually led to her participation in the popular spiritualist movement. Both
she and John Edmonds, her former primary advocate, became leading public speakers in
spiritualism (Modern, 2011).
And thus ends the first great library outreach experiment of the nineteenth
century, an experiment to treat criminality with the secular moral and emotional lessons
of literature and social engagement, and an effort to maintain control without punishment.
But Farnham’s literacy legacy did influence a major legislative reform in New York state.
The massive new law, covering thirty-seven pages, included forty-three provisions for the
improvement of New York prisons. Two of them, pertinent to our investigation, are the
provision requiring the chaplain to manage the library, and ensure that “no improper
books are introduced into the cells of convicts,” as well as the provision requiring the
appointment of instructors of English education “to those inmates who might benefit
from it” (Correctional Association of New York, 2014).

29

1.3 The Classification of All Things

The next few decades preceding and including the American Civil War shaped, to
a large degree, the public and professional attitudes towards incarceration. The social
sciences began to be treated similarly to the natural sciences (thus the popularity of such
pseudo-sciences as phrenology, physiognomy, and eugenics), requiring systematic
classifications of knowledge. At this same time, “penologists and criminologists claimed
to know the laws that governed criminal behavior,” criminals were classified into severity
of crime and appropriate treatment, and penal authorities were confident that a scientific
method could solve the problems of all criminal behavior (Vogel, 2009). Yet this was
mostly a Yankee optimism, and the effects of the Civil War led the practice of
incarceration down two separate paths.
In the Southern states, the emancipation of slaves provided the greatest influence
on the Southern prison. Slave Codes were rewritten to apply to free blacks, the Black
Codes, for which only black people were criminalized. A black man could be convicted
of vagrancy, absence from work, possession of firearms, or insulting gestures. The
Thirteenth Amendment had abolished slavery “except as a punishment for crime.”
Southern states were quick to create the convict lease system, whereupon black convicts
were sentenced to hard labor in chain gangs and leased to private agencies, essentially
replicating the slave labor economy. Prison activist Angela Davis speaks eloquently of
the parallels between the slavery system and the prison system of the American South in

30

her book, Are Prisons Obsolete? She refers to Mary Ellen Curtin’s study of Alabama
prisoners in the decades just after the Civil War:

...before the four hundred thousand black slaves in that state
were set free, ninety-nine percent of prisoners in Alabama’s
penitentiaries were white. As a consequence of the shifts provoked
by the institution of the Black Codes, within a short period of time,
the overwhelming majority of Alabama’s convicts were black
(Davis, 2003).
More recently, legal scholar Michelle Alexander investigates this phenomenon at
length, and further analyzes how the current incarceration system is directly influenced
by the Black Codes and attempts to recreate a similar system of racial control. As it is no
longer socially acceptable to use race explicitly as a justification for discrimination or
exclusion, it remains perfectly legal to discriminate and exclude convicted criminals. By
targeting black men through the War on Drugs, Alexander argues that the U.S. criminal
justice system maintains a system of racial control despite its public adherence to the
principle of colorblindness. Her excellent survey is titled The New Jim Crow: Mass
Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (2010).
It would be decades before southern prisons could be described as anything other
than prison work farms. Although many prisons closed their farming operations once
agricultural practice became heavily mechanized, some prison farms, such as North
Carolina’s Dan River Prison Work Farm, remain viable and even profitable today,
providing vegetable produce to prison populations throughout the state. But the legacy of
penal rehabilitation, and consequently, any literacy intervention, was left primarily to the
Northern states throughout the Civil War era.

31

The optimism for prison reform in the North was strong, and in 1870 the National
Prison Congress was formed. They defined the principles of reform that would dominate
the prison culture into the next century: rehabilitation over retribution, criminal
classification, probation, and education. And education required the provision of wellstocked libraries. The National Prison Congress recognized the need to avail their
institutions with the resources to support these aims. The New York Prison Association’s
report of the1870 National Prison Congress states, “There is no well ordered plan of
either buying or using books, and for want of it, the wise benevolence of the legislature in
appropriating money has been and will continue to be shorn of its reformatory
power” (Hirsch, 1992).
By 1873 all state prisons in the Northern states had libraries for convict use.
Although it is difficult to gain an exact count since documentation was inconsistent, the
largest collections were found in New York, Pennsylvania, and Illinois, averaging around
fifteen hundred books, with most libraries averaging between three hundred and five
hundred volumes (Vogel, 2009). While a few of these libraries had budgeted
appropriations for book purchases from their institutions, many prison libraries funded
book purchases through visitors’ fees, a system that persisted into the twentieth century
(Sullivan, 1994).
The first official document published specifically for the maintenance of prison
libraries came in 1876, again from the New York Prison Association, and coincidentally
the same year the American Library Association (ALA) was formed. The document is
titled Catalogue and Rules for Prison Libraries. The catalogue includes one thousand

32

books found suitable for prison libraries, and marks the first instance of officially
approved reading material. As the catalogue states, these volumes are:
...well adapted to increase the happiness and welfare of the
prisoners and to benefit them in after life when released from
confinement. The value and influence of every book in this catalogue
have been carefully considered, and the titles have been so arranged
and lettered that any prison, large or small, any jail or prisoner may
make selections from these classified lists according to estimated
excellence or the reader’s preference (NY Prison Assoc., 1876).
The catalogue then describes an elaborate system of book ratings suggesting their order
of excellence and relevance, so that a library restricted to only fifty volumes will contain
the fifty “best” volumes from the catalogue. The document states its two main objectives
thus:
First. To place within reach of all prisoners the best books for
giving useful knowledge of the trades and employments, skill and
habits which will help them to earn a livelihood and do well when
they are released from prison, as well as to add to their happiness
and usefulness while they are detained in prison;...
Secondly. To supply in the volumes of biography, history,
travels, explorations, adventure, natural history, poetry, fiction and
works of the imagination, special science and duty -- such
instruction and influences as are most needed by the prisoners, and
which experience has shown to be best adapted to fill the mind
with noble aspirations, and not only to inspire substantial hopes
and good purposes, but to point out the best ways of realizing
them.
A perusal of the catalogue shows that of the one thousand recommended titles,
three hundred of them are novels. Although the list is highly shepherded and controlled, it
is a major turn, the same work Farnham had attempted fifty years prior, in providing
creative works as an acceptable leisurely pastime and inspirational endeavor. This
development falls in line with the era’s ethos, as this is the time when Dewey develops

33

his library cataloging system, the ALA takes its first steps in professionalizing library
work, the United States Bureau of Education publishes its first report on American public
libraries, Carnegie begins funding thousands of libraries across the nation and, as
information management is born, the educational value of literature is embraced by a
Progressive society. This is also the first evidence of consistent support by a prison
authority in addressing the futures of prisoners upon their release. Prison administrators
acknowledge that prisoners need vocational training in order to become productive
participants in the new Industrial Age.

1.4 Education and the Prison Library

The first few decades of the twentieth century proceeded with tiny steps towards
the standardization of prison libraries. ALA published several reports, and in 1930 the
American Correctional Association published a prison library manual. In 1931, Austin
MacCormick published The Education of Adult Prisoners. MacCormick was the assistant
director of the newly formed Federal Bureau of Prisons, and founded the committee that
later became known as the Correctional Education Association. In his book he states,
“The possible values of directed reading are almost limitless, especially in the field of
adult education. Reading must be moral and ‘directed’” (Vogel, 2009). MacCormick
surveyed almost all of the prisons and reformatories for men and women in the United
States in order to assess their educational and vocational programs. In his Preface he
states, “The educational work in the penal institutions of the country was found to be so

34

limited that the writer soon realized that the major part of his task was not to record what
was being done, but to formulate a workable program, indicating what might be done
with adequate financial support and competent personnel” (MacCormick, 1931). He
identified low priority and inadequate financial support as the key reasons for generally
weak prison education programs. He proposed a philosophy of education where the
inmate was an adult in need of education rather than a criminal in need of reform, a
radical concept at the time. He recommended giving first priority to eradicating illiteracy,
and encouraged a disassociation with the organization and content of the public school
model. He advocated strongly for creating a pro-social prison community through active
socialization opportunities such as self-government of inmate community organizations
and interpersonal and life skills education.
MacCormick’s authoritative voice and influence on prison education cannot be
overstated. Because he was employed and backed by such powerful institutions as the
Federal Bureau of Prisons and his research funded by the Carnegie Corporation, his
desires for education reform were heard and supported in ways that other reform
organizations of the time, such as evangelical groups, Unitarians, or ladies’ clubs, were
not. His long and varied career in powerful positions of penal leadership allowed his
sentiments to be shared, heard, and acted upon in penal departments across the nation. He
served in the US Naval Reserve during WWI as the executive officer of the US Naval
Prison. Thomas Mott Osborne, another renowned prison reformer and former warden of
Sing Sing (1914-1916), was his senior officer. MacCormick would eventually become
commissioner of the New York Department of Corrections, Dean of Criminology at the

35

University of California Berkeley, executive director of the Osborne Association (a prison
reform organization), first editor of the Journal of Correctional Education, and, with the
publishing of his book The Death Penalty in 1964, a major influence in the movement to
abolish the death penalty. After he published The Education of Adult Prisoners, he went
on to focus on Southern prison farms, workhouses, and the convict lease system. So
offended was he by the predominance of physical abuse and exploitation of prisoners in
the Southern penal system, he made recommendations that were soon adopted by the
Texas Prisons, transforming the prison experience -- for a few decades (Austin H.
MacCormick Papers, 2014).
When the American Library Association, in a first partnership with the American
Prison Association, published their first Prison Library Handbook in 1932, just a year
after the publication of The Education of Adult Prisoners, ALA chose not to comment on
the role of the library in the context of prison education, instead recommending readers
go directly to MacCormick’s work: “This subject is fully discussed in Chapter X of A. H.
MacCormick’s The education of adult prisoners, copies of which were sent to the heads
of all prisons and reformatories. This chapter is commended to the attention of librarians
in lieu of a discussion of the subject here.” Although ALA declines to elaborate on the
educative role of prison libraries, instead focusing on fundamental library management
skills for the presumably untrained inmate-clerks that are assumed to be running them,
ALA does assert, “It is difficult to overestimate the potential value of the library as an
agency of education, both indirect and direct.” So difficult, apparently, that they don’t try
to articulate this value. Interestingly, the 1932 Handbook was edited by Edith Kathleen

36

Jones, an active ALA member, and noted as being the first full-time librarian employed in
a hospital, McLean Psychiatric Hospital in Massachusetts, hired in 1904. She had no
experience in working with prison populations, but wrote extensively on medical library
management, and may explain this deferment to MacCormick’s authority (Perryman,
2006).
It was MacCormick’s belief that a prison librarian performs, above the duty of
maintaining the functions of a library, the service of stimulating and guiding the readers’
interest. This is similar to what a public library’s readers’ advisor would do, but in the
interests of moral and intellectual growth and reform. He states, “With prisoners guidance
takes on double significance, for their tastes in most cases start on a relatively low level
and it is the obvious task of the prison as an agency of intellectual as well as moral
improvement to improve their reading tastes if it can be done” (MacCormick, 1931). He
goes on to recommend, as a device for “stimulating” reader interest, the formation of
book groups for discussing selected literature, the organization of a “read-a-book-together
group,” as he calls them. Although he does not elaborate on the potential for read-a-booktogether groups to effect therapeutic benefits, he does allow that communal discussion
can spur interest and intellectual arousal, and that the educational department and the
library should be considered parts of the same general organization.
Trailblazing for its time so early in the twentieth century, MacCormick bravely
asserts that prisoners are, generally, most interested in recreational reading, and the prison
library need not apologize for that. He affirms, “The present discussion of the library as
an educational agency is not intended to belittle its value as a recreational agency...If

37

prisoners read nothing but fiction the library’s place in the prison would be justified. But
its aim has not been achieved until an honest attempt has been made to raise reading
tastes” (MacCormick, 1931). MacCormick was unwilling to advance a notion that fiction
could satisfy any but a recreational value, yet he still acknowledges that recreational
reading is a value in itself, and could lead to more substantial intellectual engagement. No
penal authority, nor the ALA, was willing to make such a statement until MacCormick
said it first.
MacCormick continues to explain the major aims of a prison education system,
and includes a passage that reiterates his claim that education must be individualized; no
national educational system will satisfy the needs of the masses through only a single
approach. He, perhaps unfortunately, uses the following vocabulary: “It (education) must
be based on individual diagnosis and prescription, so far as these are possible with
available personnel. The prisoner should not go through a mass-treatment process, but
should devote the limited time at his disposal to those particular studies which he most
needs and wants and is capable of pursuing most effectively” (MacCormick, 1931).
MacCormick’s comments make good common sense -- every reader learns in their own
way through their own self-motivations. A book that is helpful to one intelligent reader
may be worthless to another equally intelligent reader, regardless of the quality of the
book itself. The danger in MacCormick’s words lies in the use of “diagnosis” and
“prescription.” MacCormick does not belabor medical terminology to describe reader
interest, so it is likely not a literal endorsement of a diagnostic approach to readers’

38

advisory, yet this language will have a very direct influence on the future of prison
reading, a program soon to be coined as “bibliotherapy.”
While the ALA’s Prison Library Handbook, published in the subsequent year,
does not initially invoke this language, it does revisit MacCormick’s suggestions for
encouraging reader interest, including creating reading courses (lists of recommended
titles that elaborate a given interest) and “discussion groups.” ALA acknowledges the
benefits of these groups as “...a strong educational force netting several advantages. They
make for more careful reading; they stimulate reading on new topics; they fix the idea
and information gained by reading and make them a man’s own in a way that they never
are for the casual, tripping kind of reader who seldom ponders on what he has
read” (Jones, 1932). ALA is not quite as generous in allowing for the value of the “casual,
tripping kind of reader” as MacCormick, but the ALA’s discussion of book groups as a
stimulation of closer reading builds on MacCormick’s assertion of the value of the social
aspects of group discussion. ALA also recommends the prison librarian fulfill his
obligation as an educational agency by fostering planned and purposeful reading through
the creation of reading courses. But the ALA warns, “It should not become a fetish,
however, and be pushed to the point where men are induced to try to follow a reading
course when they are not genuinely interested or capable of profiting by it” (Jones, 1932).
Unbeknownst to ALA in 1932, reading courses, prescriptions, and reading-as-therapy did,
indeed, become a fetish for the next generation of prison librarians, as they sought to
assimilate their work with the more general rehabilitative aims of the larger institution.

39

Only because of MacCormick’s prestige and dominance in the fields of prison
administration and reform was he able to convince the American Prison Association to
establish a standing Committee on Institutional Libraries in 1938. The committee worked
with a branch of ALA in creating a standardized, professionally administered library
program, concomitant with a professional stature of the prison librarian, that was
nevertheless ignored by most state prisons for decades. By the time state prisons were
pro-actively developing their library service in the 1970’s, MacCormick’s federal prison
library model had collapsed. Meanwhile, state systems became enamored of the pseudomedical approach to literacy intervention, generally termed bibliotherapy.

1.5 The Era of Treatment

America’s triumph in WWII, its investment in maths and sciences, and an abrupt
professionalization of the social sciences, converged in the American prison environment.
Prisoners were now viewed as victims of a social “disease” that could be cured with the
proper socialization treatments that would conform them to the requirements of a civil
society. Prisoners were caught in a paradox, seen both as enemies of society who had
consciously violated the social contract, and also assumed to desire a place in society, but
simply through lack of opportunity had not succeeded in claiming that place. A lack of
opportunity was blamed as the reason an otherwise sane person would turn to crime, and
by providing that opportunity, a prisoner would choose to conform. Never was it

40

considered that the conformity to established norms was being rejected altogether
(Cummins, 1994).
Providing opportunity was a goal that could be achieved quite efficiently through
directed programming, and the era of treatment began. In order to define the
opportunities needed in each specific case, it was necessary to understand the attitudes
and thought processes of each “patient.” Psychoanalysis became a required step in the
prisoner classification process, and all branches of prison service were invited to
contribute to the attitude analysis and moral rehabilitation of each prisoner. The
penitentiary now became the “correctional facility.” In 1944 San Quentin, a California
prison that took the lead in modeling this new approach, reinstated the California
Indeterminate Sentence Law of 1917, sentencing prisoners for an indefinite time period.
It was left to the prisoners to demonstrate through engaged participation and reformed
behavior that they were ready to leave. “Programs” were established in education,
treatment, therapy, vocational training, and the prison library. Medical doctor C.V.
Morrison addressed the Committee on Institution Libraries in 1940 on the subject of book
prescriptions, saying, “If bibliotherapy is to be effective, it will require the close
cooperation of psychiatrist and trained librarian. Because of the intimate relationship
between mental health and social adaptability every branch of the library can be used to
aid the inmate in his adjustment” (Morrison, 1940). Programs that focused on group
therapy were made available through the psychiatry department, but librarians were
expected to supplement this programming with individual support and therapeutic
attention. Due to large prison populations, individual psychiatric treatment was too costly

41

and unrealistic, but the department could manage group therapy, relying on (medically
untrained) prison librarians to maintain a “continual intellectual atmosphere” that would
encourage behavioral change that the group therapy aimed for (Floch, 1952).
The responsibility of providing bibliotherapy was both an opportunity for trained
librarians (most predominantly to be found in federal prisons) to professionalize their
work in the context of rehabilitation, and an opportunity to exploit the services of
untrained librarians (most predominantly found in state facilities) in work that furthered
the institutions’ aims while not requiring an extensive financial investment in medical
professionals who would otherwise provide these services. The treatment consisted first
of conducting a personal interview with the patient to establish current attitudes,
concerns, and disabilities in conforming to civil society. The librarian would establish a
general reading level, vocational and avocational interests, attitudes towards reading, and
any “unhygienic” mental habits that might surface. The librarian would then create a
reading course of titles that were felt to address the moral and emotional needs of the
patient. Titles tended to be mostly of a non-fiction, self-help variety, at that time termed
“mental hygiene.” Biographies were often employed, as well, as the subjects might be
used as role models through a study of upstanding character. Fiction was used more
sparingly, for those found in need of a “stimulated imagination,” but it was assumed that
most patients “may already be living in a world of fantasy” (Morrison, 1940), and needed
no additional encouragement.
Morrison, a doctor himself, likened the practice of prescribing books very directly
to prescribing medication. Morrison explains that a pill’s essential ingredient is known as

42

the active principle and the solution that makes it “palatable” is the vehicle. In the same
way, the idea described in a book is the active principle, and the cover or the writing style
(or the genre, character, etc.) is the vehicle. Morrison insists that the unbiased rapport that
a patient develops with a book is priceless, considering a therapist may more concisely
and directly share the same lesson as a book, but the patient’s relationship with that
therapist will shade his acceptance of the lesson. Inmates are naturally suspicious of staff
authority, Morrison claims, but a book can speak plainly. Morrison quotes an inmate who
had this relationship with books: “The man who writes a book has no axe to grind. He has
no connection with the government and he can write just what he thinks” (Morrison,
1940).
From the 1940‘s through the 1960‘s, California’s correctional system led the
nation in modeling successful innovations. “California was the model of good
correctional management and inmate programming and its practices influenced American
corrections for over 30 years,” states researcher Joan Petersilia (Petersilia, 2008).
California’s system serves as a model for the implementations and concerns that affected
all state systems in the nation, and has also been extensively documented. For these
reasons it will serve as a model of contemporary correctional history in this paper.
California’s San Quentin, a leader in the grand experiment of the “corrections”
facility, and also known for its unusually extensive library collection, was presided over
by Warden Clinton Duffy from 1940-1952. Duffy was widely praised for his innovations
and reorganization of the prison structure, but it has been suggested that his public
persona was well-groomed; much of his professed dogma has been contradicted in the

43

record and through witness testimony. For instance, he very publicly denounced the death
penalty, but he supervised ninety executions during his twelve-year tenure (Waggoner,
1982). Duffy had taken over San Quentin after a particularly grim period of excessive
violence, inhumane punishments, and obscene abuses against prisoners. The previous
warden had been forced to resign. Duffy fired the offending prison guards and added
psychiatrists, therapists, a librarian, even several surgeons to his payroll. With the help of
his colleague, the new California governor Earl Warren, Duffy advertised his prison as a
model in rehabilitation and gentle kindness. Dr. Norman Fenton, Duffy’s deputy director,
described San Quentin thus: “Human kindness pervades the things that are done in
attempting to help him (the prisoner) in the prison...With understanding help in an
atmosphere of kindness this purpose can best be accomplished” (Mitford, 1973). This
kind of reputation was easy to sell to a public that was indignant over the past incidents
made public at San Quentin. But it may not have been as rosy as Fenton describes. James
Park, a clinical psychologist working in the California prisons at the time, and later an
associate warden at San Quentin, describes the place as “a fairly brutal, old-fashioned
behind the times system. Duffy...got an awful lot of publicity, (but) people were still
being beaten to death under Duffy’s regime. He was not the great fucking savior that his
own press agent built him up to be” (Cummins, 1994).
Using a framework of clinical treatment, San Quentin offered a contradictory
solution to the problem of crime. If criminals were suffering an illness that treatment
could cure, than there was no reason to use corporal punishment to maintain discipline,
nor was it necessary to exact overlong prison sentences. When a prisoner was “cured,”

44

they would be released. The staff that decided when a prisoner had been cured, known at
San Quentin as the Adult Authority and composed almost exclusively of law enforcement
and corrections personnel, evaluated parole annually for any prisoner convicted under the
Indeterminate Sentence Law. The Adult Authority leaned heavily on each prisoner’s
cumulative file to determine parole. These files contained an incredible amount of
personal information, from descriptions of the prisoner’s crime(s), his current attitudes
concerning them, his involvement in rehabilitative and therapeutic programs, misconduct
citations, even his library record -- a record of every withdrawal, librarian interview,
reading course prescribed, and engagement in bibliotherapy or group therapy reading
programs. The parole interview, usually lasting no more than ten minutes, included
inquiries regarding program participation, plans for the future, and his religious beliefs.
This process was very susceptible to abuse and exploitation, and could not be
regarded as successful. Program directors of various branches of the system became so
influential in their contributions to a prisoner’s file that they became something akin to
custody officers, and prisoners learned to work the system to their benefit, enrolling in
every program possible, regardless of their interest or desire for rehabilitation, just to get
that gold star in their file. Though the program directors may have been sincere in their
efforts to rehabilitate, prisoners need not have been sincere in their participation. Due to
the lack of documentation or oversight of the Adult Authority, parole hearings need not
sincerely evaluate each prisoner according to their progress, but could deny parole for
any reason without explanation. As prison scholar Eric Cummins describes it, “...parole

45

hearings had the effect of making daily prison life a game” (Cummins, 1994). But there
was one employee in Duffy’s San Quentin that took the “game” very seriously.
Herman Spector had been working as librarian of the New York Penitentiary
when Duffy recruited him to San Quentin in 1947. Spector turned down the opportunity
to be assistant warden, instead accepting the position of senior librarian, where he would
be given the freedom to test his theories of bibliotherapy. Spector was young, earnest, and
driven to apply his knowledge of criminal justice, psychology, and social work into his
plans for library management. He conducted small-group therapy centered on Great
Books discussions with therapeutic goals in mind. He created reading courses for inmates
and prison staff alike. He kept incredibly detailed files of every prisoner’s reading record,
preferences, and needs. By 1955 he had developed a reputation as the foremost expert on
prison librarianship, perhaps owing in part to Duffy’s public relations success. Prison
libraries and their use of bibliotherapy were frequently becoming the featured topics of
library journals, and Spector’s conviction that the prison library should be at the center of
rehabilitative strategy was getting support and sympathy from the outside public and
library professionals.
However, the prison administration and custody staff were not so easily
convinced. The idea that hardened criminals could be reformed by reading books was
ridiculous to them, especially as the more redeemable criminals were now being sent to
another institution, the California Institution for Men at Chino, and the worst were
staying at Folsom or San Quentin. Nonetheless, the San Quentin administration complied
with Spector’s requests to manage detailed oversight of prisoners’ access to information,

46

censoring all incoming and outgoing mail, as well as newspapers, magazines, and books
from the outside. There was yet no television access for prisoners, but they did have
radio, which was limited to two institutional channels. Prisoners could communicate only
with the ten people on their “approved correspondence list.” Although the prison had an
assistant warden who was meant to be responsible for censorship, except for personal
mail, Spector assumed the role himself. He defines his censorship policy: “Those which
emphasize morbid or antisocial attitudes, behavior, or disrespect for religion or
government or other undesirable materials are not purchased” (Spector, 1957).
In the hopes that he could measure the success of his bibliotherapy endeavors in
reforming prisoners, Spector was particularly fanatical about gathering statistics on what
was being read in his prison, although he never did produce a study to confirm it. He kept
meticulous files on each prisoner, including which administrative unit they resided in,
aiming to track what type of criminal benefited most from what kind of reading material.
In 1956 he reported that prisoners were reading at the average rate of ninety-eight books
per year. In 1957 he reported that almost 90% of San Quentin prisoners were using the
library, while only 18% of the free public were using lending libraries (Cummins, 1994).
In 1960, he noticed that prisoners’ interest in non-fiction showed a marked rise. While in
the late 1940’s non-fiction comprised only 16% of library circulation, by 1960 nonfiction circulation reached 30%. Spector did not speculate on this change in prisoner
reading choices, but it signaled a change to come in the reading practice of prisoners in
the 1960’s and ’70’s.

47

Through his role as censor, Spector recognized another change. He required
oversight of all inmate writing, including manuscripts that prisoners intended to publish.
In 1947, Spector had received 395 manuscripts for his perusal. By 1961, he received
1,989, and that number stayed consistent throughout Spector’s tenure (1967), even
though the prison population stayed around 5000 through these years. Again, Spector
does not speculate on the significance of this rise in prisoner-authored texts (Cummins,
1994).
One particular prisoner-author is worth noting. Malcolm Braly first served time in
San Quentin in 1948. By the time he was forty he had served a combined seventeen years
in prison for burglary, at Nevada State Prison, San Quentin, and Folsom (Franklin, 1989).
It was through Spector’s reign that he first began to write, eventually publishing three
novels behind bars, followed by two more, and an autobiography, prior to his death. His
novel On the Yard, published in 1967, has become a classic of prison literature. In his
autobiography, False Starts, Braly describes his impression of Spector: “...a strange
obsessive man, who was a filing freak...Everything, every scrap of paper that passed
through the library, was copied and filed. When he spoke to you on interview he made
notes of the meeting and these notes were filed” (Braly, 1976).
In his autobiography, Braly explains how he and other prisoners learned to “play
the game” of rehabilitation at San Quentin. “...(W)e quickly learned we were expected to
view this journey through prison as a quest, and the object of our quest was to discover
our problem.” “The one thing we were truly seeking here was not an understanding of our
problem, but the appearance of the search” (Braly, p.157, p. 246). Braly duly played the

48

game with Spector, gaining his friendship and support as an engaged reader/writer, while
hiding the true subject of his writing (prison life and a condemnation of the system, ideas
that would have been censored if Spector were aware of them). Under Spector’s watch
Braly did win clearance to submit his first manuscript, and its publication was celebrated
as a Spector success story. Braly used his advance to purchase a typewriter through the
prison canteen. Thus his career began.
Spector had dedicated so much of his career to gathering data to support his
bibliotherapy ideals, but he never did get around to analyzing them. After he retired, all
the files of reading and writing -- three decades of data -- were unceremoniously
discarded. It appears that the prison administration had been humoring his whims, as his
dedication to encouraging literate endeavors did help maintain a level of security and
calm in the units, but there was little faith in the reformative benefits of bibliotherapy, at
least within the administration. But libraries on the outside were infused with Spector’s
enthusiasm, and Spector’s brand of bibliotherapy was embraced by social workers, public
and school librarians, mental health practitioners, and group therapists serving all
varieties of populations. Bibliotherapy was not the sole brainchild of corrections
institutions, but its performance as a main pillar of educational rehabilitation was key in
bringing the concept to rehabilitation projects for various populations. The trend would
remain popular through the 1980’s, and its influence, although somewhat reframed, is
still strong in psychiatric practice.

49

1.6 The Right to Read

As of the 1950’s or so, the story of prison libraries can be told from three very
startlingly different perspectives. The reason for this is complicated and layered with
influences from the culture of the time, the contradictory aims of various organizations
and movements, and the waxing and waning confidence of the library profession,
especially in appealing to the overarching interests of the state. The state prison
authorities probably tell the least compelling narrative about the advantages of
educational reform, and in fact the coming decades would introduce a steady tide of new
legislation that improved the prisoner’s access to information and crimped the state’s
ability to remand with impunity.
The security officers at San Quentin tended to roll their eyes in response to
Spector’s strange brand of bibliotherapeutic method, but they did support his model of
strict print censorship. As Spector’s encouragement of reading and writing increased, so
did security’s anxieties about this flow of information. One prison educator at the time
recalls that even his beard was searched as he entered the prison, and he was confident
that his classroom was “bugged” (Cummins, 1994). Although San Quentin officials
denied it to the public and the press, throughout the 1950‘s and 60‘s, prisoner mail, both
incoming and outgoing, was censored, especially letters to lawyers and government
officials. A guard admitted in 1961 that “...all those letters are censored, even those to
attorneys, and any complaints about food or conditions or parole reports are
deleted” (Cummins, 1994).

50

If San Quentin’s security didn’t hear Spector’s clarion call for the rehabilitative
power of literature, the prisoners did. As noted earlier, many prisoners viewed
bibliotherapy and its accessory programs as a “game,” but the message of the power of
literacy was not lost on them. The greater emphasis on education in the prison gave many
the opportunity to become functionally literate, to study and, in some cases, pursue higher
degrees, and to write. Spector had noted that in 1960, non-fiction titles amounted to 30%
of his library circulation, double the percentage from when he first began recording the
statistics, in the late 1940’s. Although Spector provided an obstacle course of entry, he
invited prisoners to write censor-approved manuscripts for publication, and the 1960’s
saw an enormous rise in submissions. Braly was not the only prisoner at San Quentin to
achieve publication of his manuscripts behind bars. One particular prisoner-author, Caryl
Chessman, sentenced to San Quentin’s Death Row in 1948, forced a change in how San
Quentin, and consequently, all state facilities in the nation, managed the rights of
prisoners to read and write.
Chessman was penniless at the time of his sentencing, and access to library
materials was difficult, as Spector did not offer more than a weekly book delivery from a
limited menu to the inmates of Death Row. He did not see the benefit of rehabilitating
those about to die. Law books were virtually unavailable. A clerical crisis had taken place
during Chessman’s trial -- the court reporter who had typed Chessman’s trial transcript
had died, and the shorthand transcript, hundreds of pages, was nearly indecipherable.
Chessman could not afford an attorney, so he took it upon himself to educate himself in
law and in writing legal writs, opposing the haphazard transcription that was pieced

51

together by the court. Over time Chessman amassed his own legal library, and was able to
win a stay of execution. He built a reputation as a successful jailhouse lawyer, soon
writing writs for other Death Row inmates. He was working full-time at no pay,
providing legal assistance to his peers and defending his own case, flooding the courts
with writs, thereby greatly annoying the prison administrators. Warden Teets
recommended that maybe he should put his writing to other uses. Chessman then
announced he wished to write his autobiography, and a private cell, typewriter, and desk
were provided for him on Death Row. It was decided that allowing Chessman to write his
autobiography would have “great therapeutic value” (Cummins, 1994). He was allowed
to write from 8am to 10pm every day, and Chessman took full advantage of the time.
In this cell, in 1954, Chessman wrote Cell 2455 Death Row. Spector read it and
disliked it immediately, and would have denied its submission for publication, but a copy
also found its way to Warden Teets and then the California Director of Corrections,
Richard McGee, and they approved it. The manuscript was immediately picked up for
publication and rushed to the presses to be available before Chessman’s execution date.
The book was an immediate success, earning Chessman enormous royalties and building
himself a huge following. He obtained another stay, and dedicated himself to writing,
earning enough money to afford a team of lawyers to defend his life.
Chessman achieved fourteen successful stays of execution, and wrote four
additional books while on Death Row. He had built up fans around the world, and the
press took great notice of Chessman’s legal triumphs. By this time San Quentin regretted
the freedoms they had afforded him, and since then denied any prisoner the right to

52

compose their own works for publication. Nonetheless, Chessman (and many others)
found ways to smuggle their work out, going to great lengths to camouflage their writing
under guard.
Chessman’s fifteenth appeal was denied in February of 1960. With the
announcement of his execution, thousands of people worldwide petitioned for his life. A
vigil of over seven hundred people took place outside the prison doors the night before
his execution. Petitions came in from all strata of society, including celebrities Marlon
Brando, Shirley MacLaine, Brigitte Bardot, and government leaders, including a Mexican
congresswoman, Belgium’s Queen Mother, and finally even Eisenhower’s presidential
administration. Thirteen hundred signatures came in from a petition from UC Berkeley.
To no avail, the execution by gas chamber went forward on February 19, 1960.
Chessman’s publications contributed to the public’s growing awareness for the
plight of the incarcerated. The world was primed for a radical movement, not only for
prisoner rights, but the rights of blacks and other ethnic minorities, women, and those
advocating resistance to the Vietnam War, nuclear weapons, and apartheid. 1960 is the
year Martin Luther King, Jr. was arrested in the lunch counter sit-ins in Greensboro,
North Carolina. PEN International (Poets, Essayists, Novelists), an organization of
literary artists who support freedom of expression, established its Writers in Prison
Committee. The Black Panther movement was just forming, with strong representation in
America’s prisons. Throughout the decade, prisoners would continue to publish, despite
harsher and harsher restrictions from prison authorities. Eldridge Cleaver, Bobby Seale,
George Jackson, and Huey Newton, all published authors who served time at San

53

Quentin, were founding members of the Black Panther party. In 1965, The Autobiography
of Malcolm X was published shortly after his assassination, probably the most popular
and influential American prisoner writing ever published. (Malcolm X credited Norfolk
Prison Colony in Massachusetts for his self-education.) The public was finally paying
attention to what was happening behind the prison gates, and, through reading a constant
stream of prisoner-authored texts, were more informed than ever about prison abuses that
epitomized the racial and civil inequalities of the social system as seen on the street.
As the public built its own resistance movement in civil rights reform, the
American Library Association began to focus its attention on prisoners, as well.
Prisoners’ civil rights litigation began in earnest, and in 1966 Congress established the
Title IVA to the Library Services and Construction Act (LSCA), providing federal
funding for institutional libraries. Although the initial funding did not directly make
revolutionary improvements, it did raise the consciousness of state library agencies, as
they were responsible for the financial distribution, and they began to lobby for prison
library service (Vogel, 2009). Being able to offer federal funding allowed state library
agencies to negotiate with prison authorities, altering the power structure extant since the
first prisons in the nation. Libraries advocated for the need for institutional library
service, and some correctional facilities began to hire trained librarians to manage their
libraries, funded by federal monies. Prison libraries, for the first time, became networked
with public libraries and other resources around the state. Prison library
professionalization began. Unfortunately, the timing was terrible, as the momentum of the
rehabilitation era was just ending.

54

As the political activism of extending rights to prisoners heated up, the institutions
themselves returned, out of panic, to a system of lock-down and retribution. Critics of the
system were claiming that rehabilitation was a failure. The library program, which had
been a centerpiece of rehabilitation, became more and more marginal as classroom
instruction proved easier to facilitate and measure. Researcher Marjorie LeDonne
conducted a nationwide survey of prison libraries in 1972, and found “...few new library
materials were added and staff...was drawn from unqualified personnel; the position of
librarian was seldom filled by direct recruitment, but most often served as a place to
transfer incompetent teachers” (LeDonne, 1972). The institution held dichotomous views
of the purpose of incarceration that would confuse the issue for decades: prison authority
supported simple punitive punishment, while treatment personnel lobbied for the civil
rights of prisoners through education and rehabilitation. Librarians coming into the
profession in the 1960‘s and 70‘s were of a mind to base the prison library on the public
library model, to be user-centered, to provide for intellectual freedom, to protect the right
of access to information. Spector’s era of treatment had advocated that prisoners should
read; the civil rights era demanded that prisoners have the right to read.
Issues of prisoner rights continued to be brought to federal courts, and the system
was forced to defend its policies and procedures. In 1977, the Bounds vs. Smith case
forced state prisons to provide “meaningful access to the courts through people trained in
the law or through law library collections” (Bounds vs. Smith, 1977). Law books that had
been contraband as recently as the 1950‘s were now required. Although this did mean
that prisoners’ access to legal information was legitimized, the rest of the prison library

55

was neglected, both financially and dogmatically. The library beyond legal reference
became a dumping ground of dog-eared, sporadically donated titles, frequently managed
by inmate-clerks, and lacking any collection-management coherence. Few prison libraries
survived this era intact, despite the advocacy of library outreach from the outside. Most
were sustained only because they were still receiving funding from the LSCA. Vogel
observes, “Too often the general prison library program was overshadowed, neglected, or
terminated due to the law library mandate” (Vogel, 2009).
1982 saw the breakdown of partnership between the American Library
Association (ALA) and the American Corrections Association (ACA - formerly known as
the American Prisons Association), a breakdown indicative of the split between the aims
of the library and the aims of the correctional institution. The associations had partnered
since 1932 with the publication of the first Prison Library Handbook. Now, ALA
supported its last 3 legislative action for prison libraries by adopting a “Resolution on
Prisoners’ Right to Read.” The document advocates for serving the needs of a culturally
diverse population, protecting intellectual freedoms, and curtailing censorship in all but
specific instances of threats to security. The resolution is a highly admirable definition of
standards, but is wholly unenforceable as law.
While the ALA was drafting this resolution, the ACA no longer defined itself as
an organization of reform, and began to distance itself from the standards set by the ALA.
Its own standards towards library administration were aimed at protecting prison

3

The resolution was updated in 2010, but the ALA has been conspicuously silent in advocating
for the intellectual freedoms of the incarcerated in any additional substantial legislation since
1982. The updated resolution includes the recommendation that the incarcerated should have
access to the internet.

56

administrators from lawsuits. Prison librarians, caught in the crossfire, abandoned
ambitions of providing treatment and creating behavioral change, just as the corrections
administration had, and instead began solely providing resources to meet the articulated
interests of their users. This shift from prescribed reading to patron-driven selections
permitted them continued support from their library colleagues.
This same time period saw the end of indeterminate sentencing, a consequence of
the doubt that effective rehabilitation prepared prisoners to return to society safely.
Determinate sentencing slowly returned to every state and federal prison, gaining
momentum with the War on Drugs in the 1980’s and the “three-strikes” laws of the
1990’s. The United States now leads the world in incarceration rates, incarcerating 743
individuals per 100,000 population. As of 2009, 2.9% of the American resident
population is under correctional supervision (prison, jail, probation, parole) (BJS, 2014).
Incarceration rates doubled from the 1980’s to the 1990’s, and increased 500% in the
period between 1970 and 1999. Incarceration rates in 2007 were five-and-a-half times
higher than they were during the Great Depression of the 1930’s. Researchers are fond of
speculating the causes and contributors to this explosion of incarceration. It is, however,
beyond the focus of this paper to expand on such beyond acknowledging that the
contemporary correctional institution is in the midst of another epoch as yet to be entirely
defined.
Some liberal-leaning historians claim that we are several decades into what has
been coined the “penal-harm movement,” an era rooted in the retributive model, where
incarceration is meant to be painful and the measure of punishment is long. This

57

philosophy undergirds the “tough on crime” attitudes of the early 1980‘s, implying that
the more arduous the prison experience, the more that rational people will choose not to
commit crime. This same era is referred to by more conservative historians as the
“balanced model,” implying that rehabilitative efforts were mitigated in favor of
additional reliance on retribution, incapacitation, and expansion of prison industries,
providing a “balance” of correctional goals. Unicor, the government-owned corporation
that maintains prison industry in federal prisons, promotes its work as offering valuable
vocational skills training to its federal inmates while providing the government with
needed manufactured products at no cost to the taxpayer. Critics view this program,
which was launched in the early 1930‘s, as a federal attempt to legitimize the contractlease system of the prison farms and chain gangs, employing inmates to do menial,
mostly unskilled factory labor at very low cost. Research historians Rusche and
Kirchheimer propose a “severity hypothesis,” claiming that punishment becomes more
severe when there is a surplus of labor, and more lenient when labor is scarce (Gardner,
1987). This circumstance can be observed in American prisons during WWII, where
prison industries employed around three thousand federal inmates to manufacture many
government products for the war effort. The 1940’s were a relatively peaceful decade in
the history of American incarceration. Today, with a greater surplus than ever of available
labor, thirty-seven states have labor contracts with private corporations, above and
beyond government sponsored Unicor, and the reigning philosophy of incarceration today
centers on punishment.

58

In addition to greater incarcerated populations, the 1980‘s and 90’s also saw
enormous construction of additional correctional facilities. Angela Davis observes the
prison expansion in the state of California: “In all, between 1852 and 1955, nine prisons
were constructed in California...Nine prisons...were opened between 1984 and
1989...And during the 1990’s, twelve new prisons were opened” (Davis, 2003). As of
2014, California has thirty-three state prison facilities. In addition, it places around 9000
prisoners in private facilities out-of-state to tackle overcrowding, and contracts with two
more private prisons located within the state.
The San Francisco Chronicle reported in 2002:

Before the mid-1970’s, most sentences were indeterminate,
meaning that most inmates could get off much earlier than their
original sentence if they completed vocational or academic classes
in addition to good behavior. The state replaced that system with
one lacking an incentive for inmates to take classes or get
counseling to help them prepare for life outside prison. Now,
virtually everyone released from prison spends three years on
parole. Most - about 71 percent - end up back in prison within 18
months - the nation’s highest recidivism rate and nearly double the
average of all other states (quoted in Kowal, 2011).

California’s recidivism rates jumped from 10% in 1977 to 77% in 2009, in line
with the systematic funding cuts on rehabilitation programming in the early 1980’s.
Although the incarceration rate in California has actually declined sightly over the last
ten years, the three-strikes laws, which come with determinate sentencing of very lengthy
duration, account for almost twenty-five percent of the prison population. California
currently imprisons around 160,000 individuals, more than any other state in the country
(BJS, 2014).

59

California’s overcrowding problem has currently come to a head. In 2011, the
Supreme Court judged the extreme overcrowding as a violation of prisoners’
constitutional rights against cruel and inhumane punishment, contributing to disease and
mental health infractions. Governor Jerry Brown was originally given a deadline of April
2014 to reduce prison populations to 137.5% above capacity, down from the current
range of 144% averaged across facilities, while some operate at up to 200% over
designed capacity. However, the state lobbied for additional time, and the deadline has
been extended to February 2016. If the deadline had not been extended, Brown intended
to spend about seventy million dollars to house inmates out-of-state for the next two
years. Due to the extension, Brown now proposes contributing eighty-one million dollars
over the next year to provide rehabilitation programs intended to lower recidivism and
decrease prison populations over time. Those rehabilitation programs are vaguely defined
as including mental health, substance abuse, and reentry. Brown defends his claim,
stating, “The state now has the time and resources necessary to help inmates become
productive members of society and make our communities safer” (Lovett, 2014).
Introducing rehabilitation programming now seems to be too little, too late, and
multiple questions arise in considering Brown’s plans for a solution to overcrowding.
Why weren’t strategies of rehabilitation designed long before overcrowding reached
144%? Michael Bien, lead lawyer representing around 33,000 inmates pressing for
adequate mental health care, replies, “There is no justification for the delay. All of the
things they are talking about doing now, they could have done years ago” (St. John,
2014). Is two years of as-yet ill-defined programming, hastily installed, going to

60

rehabilitate 20% of prisoners enough to return them to society safely? In fact, at the time
of this writing, nearly two months have passed since Brown won his two-year deferral,
but there is yet no media coverage concerning his plans for that additional rehabilitation
programming he has promised. Part of Brown’s compromise with the Supreme Court
includes expanding parole for medically incapacitated prisoners, prisoners aged sixty or
older who have served at least twenty-five years, and prisoners serving second-strike
felonies for non-violent crimes (St. John, 2014). These classifications generally
characterize low-risk, but only when the system is taxed with overcrowding to such a
degree that incarceration is viewed as cruel and unusual punishment are low-risk
offenders granted opportunities for expanded parole. It implies that low-risk offenders are
more dangerous to society when there are fewer incarcerated individuals on the inside. Is
danger relative? How will they define a rehabilitated prisoner? Meanwhile, prisoners will
continue to live in overcrowded conditions for two more years. Critics such as Sherry
Bebitch Jeffe, a senior fellow at Sol Price School of Public Policy at USC, also wonder if
Brown hasn’t extended the deadline in order to postpone returning prisoners to society
before his re-election campaign this year. Jeffe asks, “How is a Republican going to hit
on a politician who wants to keep these guys in jail a little longer?” (Lovett, 2014).
Another critic, journalist Tim Kowal, blames the prisoner guard unions, who are
guaranteed more jobs when there are more prisoners, with contributing to overpopulation
trends to support their self-interest (Kowal, 2011).
Regardless of the best interests of state prisoners, prison governance is fraught
with political maneuvering. Following Governor Jerry Brown’s saga with the Supreme

61

Court clearly illustrates how issues of prisoner rights quickly become politicized.
Thousands of prisoners suffer communicable diseases and debilitating environments
while Brown plans his re-election campaign. As long as the aims of incarceration are
entangled with federal budgeting, elected officials, and the public vote, discovering
solutions to issues such as overcrowding will be a challenge. Political maneuvering
directly buttresses the impasse of incapacitation vs. rehabilitation.
There is a burgeoning movement to abolish the prison system altogether. Such is
the premise of Angela Davis’s Are Prisons Obsolete? She is a co-founder of a grassroots
movement called Critical Resistance, not surprisingly, located in Oakland, California.
Begun in 1997, the organization aims to put a halt to California’s prison-building boom,
to support coalition-building, facilitate education within prisons, and develop resistance
leadership through academic and public communities. They articulate their mission “...
(T)o build an international movement to end the Prison Industrial Complex by
challenging the belief that caging and controlling people makes us safe. We believe that
basic necessities such as food, shelter, and freedom are what really make our
communities secure” (criticalresistance.org). The organization argues that they do not aim
to “fix” a broken system, since the system is doing exactly what it was designed to do -contain, control, and kill those people representing the greatest threat to state power. They
aim to approach prison abolishment through building infrastructure across communities,
addressing issues like homelessness, the prison-to-school pipeline, the acceptance of
queer communities, environmental issues, and government welfare programs.

62

Critical Resistance is just one example of the many organizations that recognize
the need to address weaknesses in the American criminal justice system. Regardless of
political allegiances, spiritual beliefs, or life experiences, it is generally accepted across
the lines of political identification that the system is deeply flawed. California is only the
first of what could just as easily be any state to experience the effects of critical oversentencing and the failures of the system to affect genuine rehabilitation. It is time to
evaluate the record of American incarceration and ask ourselves, what do we expect a
prison to do with criminals? Are we to punish them? To what end? Are we to educate
them? To what end? Are we to simply hide them away from society? To what end? Most
prisoners return to society. Many of those go right back. To what end?

63

CHAPTER 2:
WHAT CAN LITERACY DO?: THE IMPLICATIONS OF HISTORICAL LITERARY
METHODS ON CURRENT CORRECTIONS PRACTICE

2.1 Reform Through Evangelical and Moral Literature

Two hundred and fifty years ago, the reading of a bible verse was enough to save
a prisoner from the gallows. Faith in God (or its appearance) was proof that one’s soul
was salvageable. Religious belief still plays a major role in today’s prisons. Religious
groups comprise the majority of outreach and volunteer programs, and every state prison
is required to make allowances for religious observance. Some prisoners find or develop
their faith behind bars, and some achieve a level of rehabilitation that genuinely turns
them away indefinitely from criminal behavior. Facilitating literacy education for the
purpose of religious study might benefit some, but the choice to practice religious beliefs
must come from the seeker, not the jailer. Religious outreach, by virtue of our
Constitution, cannot be a required component of rehabilitation, but rather a peripheral and
optional service provider in our criminal justice system.
What happens when the freedom to read is limited only to the texts sanctioned by
the prison authorities? We can ask this question broadly today when we consider what
books are “appropriate” for a prison population, by considering the consequences of an
era where the Bible was the only “appropriate” literature on offer. Although the following
particular reader was incarcerated in New Prison, Clerkwell, England, in 1837, his

64

circumstances were similar to Americans incarcerated in institutions such as Eastern State
Penitentiary. He remarks,

I attempted to read in the afternoon a chapter in the Bible to the
rest, but it was so irksome that I was obliged to discontinue it. Not
one in twenty ever takes up the Bible to look at, except to ridicule
it. Yesterday a man took up the Bible, and was picking out and
reading verses, to excite ridicule: there are not three in the ward
who ever take up the Bible to read. Ordinary books, although of a
moral kind, are not allowed, which I think is a pity (Second Report
of the Prison Inspectors, 1837).
The late 1800’s introduced the idea that reading morally-upright literature might
help the reader assimilate to an upright culture through exposure. If only a reader could
examine the motions and emotions of a kind, gentle, industrious, thoughtful, and lawabiding character, the experience would convey a lesson through example. For a few,
perhaps, this method was successful. Yet again, the reader must seek the rehabilitative
lesson. The book cannot reform any more actively than the jailer can by offering a library.
Nor can the jailer assume that the reading of sanctioned, morally-upright literature
will draw appeal for those reasons and those reasons alone. Every reader seeks their own
connections and makes their own inferences, regardless of the guidance or desired
outcomes of authority. Consider this observation, related by Stuart Wood, a British
prisoner and author of Shades of the Prison House, incarcerated during the first decades
of the twentieth century:

At Wormwood Scrubs I lent a work on Henry VII to a jewelthief. When he returned it he remarked that he had enjoyed it very
much and that, if I had another similar book, he would like to read
it. As he did not strike me as being the type of man to take so keen
an interest in history as his praise of the book seemed to imply, I

65

asked him what aspects of Henry VII had aroused his interest. He
replied that it was Henry’s penchant for women that had intrigued
him...this point of view is very general among the inmates of our
jails. They put down for any book which may, by means of its
sexual interest, titillate their morbid tendencies to satyriasis (Wood,
1932).
Prison reading scholar Megan Sweeney makes a similar observance in her work
with female prisoners. In her discussion of female prisoner/reader interest in urban
fiction, she notes that several of the prison librarians she met with were uninterested in
including this genre in their collections. One unidentified prison librarian was quoted as
saying, “I try to say there is more to life than urban books or true crime” (Sweeney,
2010). Clearly, this librarian is concerned with widening the imaginative scope of her
readers. While her intentions are noble, she is not acknowledging the perspective of her
readers, many of whom are inexperienced in finding an identification with characters,
plot, or setting within a text. One prisoner/reader, identified as Wendy, refers to her recent
reading of an urban fiction title, “This book, it gives me goosebumps how real it is!...I
was Amen-ing at all this stuff going on because...there’s a lot of things in this book that I
know” (Sweeney). Her comment is enthusiastic, implying that reading about things “that
I know” is an unusual and thrilling experience for her. The prison librarian may be
discouraged that this reader’s mind is not enlarging to appreciate “great” literature, when
she should be celebrating the fact that this reader is finding meaning and relevance in a
text, perhaps for the first time. This reader is just beginning her journey as a book lover,
and there is no reason to rush ahead of her interest.

66

2.2 Educational Programming and the GED

The 1930’s contributed perhaps the most successful literacy intervention the
criminal justice system has known. The idea that education -- including literacy,
vocational training, literature appreciation, social skills, and higher education -- might
improve the quality of life for prisoners both while inside the prison and upon release,
was both self-evident and revolutionary. The influence of this contribution is still evident
in prisons today, but the benefits have been obscured. While today’s prisoners do
technically have access to higher education, as of 1994, the incarcerated are not eligible
for Pell Grants, government loans that defray the cost of college tuition. Many were able
to access degrees through correspondence courses in the mail, but most colleges and
universities that offer this option have now gone digital, and internet access is required to
download materials. As of 2009, only four state corrections facilities nationwide allow
inmate internet access, and those under very strict supervision with limited access
(“Computer use for/by inmates”, 2009).
Today, when prison authorities refer to “education,” what they are really referring
to is the GED high school equivalency program. In 1982, the Federal Bureau of Prisons
established its first mandatory literacy program for federal prisoners. A sixth grade
literacy standard was established with a mandatory program enrollment period of ninety
days. In 1986 the literacy standard was raised to eighth grade. In 1991, a high school
diploma or GED (General Educational Development) certificate became the standard,
with a one hundred twenty day enrollment period. In addition, a GED was required for

67

inmate employees to gain promotion in prison industry employment. Most state
correctional facilities have complied with this standard, as well. In 2012, GED became a
for-profit corporation, charging fees to test-takers (including state departments of
correction), and discontinuing paper exams. Because the fees, cumulatively, were
extraordinary, and corrections facilities are not equipped to provide the testing online,
many states, including Iowa, moved to another equivalency test provider, HiSET, with
lower fees and administered in paper. Iowa transitioned January 1, 2014.
It is very difficult to measure the impact that high school equivalency test training
has had on lowering recidivism. Several studies, all conducted in the 1980‘s and 1990’s,
provide inconclusive evidence that literacy reduces recidivism. A Federal Bureau of
Prisons analysis in 1994, studying data from 1987, concludes that “the more educational
programs successfully completed for each six months confined, the lower the recidivism
rate” (Harer, 1994). The analysis continues,
While there presently are few formal programs explicitly aimed
at ‘rehabilitating’ the criminal offender, there are various operational
practices and programs that do attempt to ‘normalize’ life in prison, such
as education and social furloughs, and are meant to diminish or overcome
the potentially negative effects of imprisonment (Harer, 1994).
Harer goes on to explain that, through his intense study of the data of 1987, the
strongest support for educational programming comes from its normalizing effects on the
prison population. The concept of the normalizing institution comes from Michel
Foucault, in his book Discipline and Punish, published in 1975. Foucault describes the
modern disciplinary system that, for the purposes of reform, imposes standards of
normality and deviance. Of all social institutions, including hospitals, military services,

68

businesses, and schools, the prison offers the most concentrated power structure by
imposing standards of normal and expected behavior. These institutions induce
conformity through methods of surveillance, examination, and classification. Harer more
optimistically characterizes normalization as the opportunity to counter the effects of
prisonization -- a process by which prisoners become alienated from the rules of the staff,
the institution, and the larger society, and create a subculture with its own rules and
norms. Harer states, “Several criminologists link the inmates’ alienation from institution
rules and staff to poor communication between staff and inmates, long stretches of
nonproductive activity, limited contact with community and family, arbitrary rules, and
capricious rule enforcement” (Harer, 1994). He argues that educational programming
such as literacy training is one way to combat the effects of prisonization, because it
offers an opportunity for staff and inmates to communicate on issues besides the facts of
imprisonment. Also, a shared goal of achieving a literacy and educational standard
creates productive activity, and allow for inmates to acquire law-abiding habits and
norms. But it is this Foucauldian view of the power/knowledge structure of the school for
which critics of the prison industrial complex accuse this normalization process as a form
of exploitation. Adult prisoners who cannot read at an eighth grade standard have been
failed by or rejected the normalization process of the school, and, if the same structure is
in place in the prison, can expect to fail or reject again. Replicating the classroom
structure within the prison may not be an effective solution in and of itself. Again we are
faced with the same phenomenon confronted in previous literacy interventions: if a
prisoner (student) does not wish to conform to the norms of the prison (classroom)

69

culture, and if the cultural benefits of literacy, pro-social engagement, and academic
achievement are not valued, how is rehabilitation to be achieved? The value of literacy
must be demonstrated outside the classroom walls. Pro-social engagement must be
available through social practice that is relevant to the participants. The benefits of
academic achievement must be visible through direct, rewarding experience. How do we
appeal to the overt needs of the student while simultaneously serving the needs of the
disciplinary institution? This is yet another facet of the impasse American incarceration
now faces. Educating prisoners includes the fostering of agency and self-reliance, skills
that conflict with a regimen of incapacitation. Could systematic, personalized diagnoses,
created in a clinic as opposed to a classroom, provide an opportunity to broach
prisonization issues through individual attention, rather than the standardized lecture,
textbook, and examination? Perhaps this was a question Herman Spector considered as he
designed his bibliotherapy programs.

2.3 Bibliotherapy as a Medical Tool

As we have seen, the 1950’s and 1960’s saw the emergence of bibliotherapy as a
tool for teaching literacy, while also supporting the psychiatric goals of providing therapy
and “mental hygiene.” Because of its formulaic and prescriptive nature, bibliotherapy can
more easily be measured and controlled than generalized reading encouragement, and
extends the goals of rehabilitation concretely into the domain of the prison library. It may

70

also be construed as an avenue of access to those who have rejected the standard
classroom model of education.
An article published recently in The Journal of Poetry Therapy attempts to
provide a thorough review of the historical perspective of bibliotherapy in the United
States. From 1900-1958, one study found that 601 articles had been published concerning
bibliotherapy. Another study, examining the years 1970-1975, discovered 131 articles
published. In neither of these studies, nor in McCulliss’ article, is there any mention of
Herman Spector or bibliotherapy as it is used in prisons or other detention facilities. A
study from 1998, studying the years 1993 to 1997, credits the authors of bibliotherapy
articles as belonging to four main groups: psychiatrists (56%), librarians (20%) nurses
(11%), social workers (10%) (McCulliss, 2012). Although there is no further delineation
of the types of librarians counted in the study, McCulliss’ review places bibliotherapy
squarely within the domain of hospitals and their patient libraries. The practice is
described as a cooperation between the medical practitioner and the librarian in providing
guidance to the patient. According to McCulliss, three types of bibliotherapy are
prominent. Clinical bibliotherapy utilizes imaginative literature (fiction, poetry,
biography, etc) to encourage insight and behavioral changes in patients. Developmental
bibliotherapy focuses on didactic self-help texts that support healthy patients in
maintaining emotional and mental well-being. Client-developed bibliotherapy, a more
recent adaptation, provides creative opportunities for readers to imagine alternative
endings, role-play characters, and empathize as imaginative inhabitants of a text
(McCulliss, 2012). While it may seem difficult to imagine how client-developed

71

bibliotherapy is different from any good high school English classroom, it is important to
remember that all three practices are staged in a therapeutic context, for the purposes of
healing, and only incidentally for learning. Bibliotherapy is a tool for healing mood
disorders, primarily by virtue of identifying with uplifting or inspirational content. While
various exercises can be employed to affect that identification, the cure is found in the
content of the reading, and not in the act of reading itself.

2.4 Bibliotherapy as Self-Help

The 1999 publication of Reading to Heal: How to Use Bibliotherapy to Improve
Your Life, by Jacqueline Stanley, is one of many books in the 1980’s and 1990’s
representing a blending of an explosion in self-help literature and a recycling of previous
experiments in literary practice. Stanley encourages her readers to “treat themselves” by
developing a reading plan that focuses on personal issues of concern, from dealing with
physical health issues, to dysfunctional families, to feelings of depression or loneliness -there is no limit to the ailments prescriptive reading can address. Stanley implies that an
identification with a character or narrator’s voice may, among other benefits, “reinforce
feelings of normality;” help a reader assess their values, attitudes, and behavior; create
an awareness of similarities in others; expand focus beyond one’s self; overcome
resistance to change; vicariously experience the lives of others; and connect or reconnect
with the larger community. These are all benefits that sentimentalists and reader-response
theorists have been recognizing for centuries (Hume, 1751; Nussbaum, 1990; Rosenblatt,

72

1995), and many book lovers have surmised on their own. But what is new here is that
these benefits of reading are being characterized as the aims, results, and triumphs of a
science called bibliotherapy. Stanley (and many others) have co-opted the life-work of
Spector and his colleagues’ philosophy, that guided reading can encourage positive
growth, but in its 1990’s interpretation, the reader can prescribe one’s own cure.
Stanley’s short dust-jacket biography explains that she is a lawyer, author of
several books “on legal topics,” but in the context of this work, she is a layperson, a
passionate book-reader, and that is authority enough to describe a cure.
Professionalization is no more necessary in diagnosing the ailment as it is in curing it.
The 1990’s saw a flourishing of self-help titles, both by professionals in their fields, and
by self-proclaimed “experts.” Between 1972 and 2000, the number of self-help titles on
bookstore shelves increased from 1.1 percent to 2.4 percent of all titles published
(McGee, 2005). Several factors conspired to push self-help titles into bestseller status.
Group therapy gained popularity as a treatment method for mood disorders. Discouraged
patients grew skeptical of the medical industry, and turned to alternative therapies or selfprescription instead. Culture impressed upon patients a desire to improve one’s self more
quickly and efficiently than conventional therapy, and encouraged a culturally-embedded
desire that we all should constantly be seeking improvement.
Stanley, like many other self-help authors, did not expect her conception of
bibliotherapy to substitute for necessary medical intervention. She is very careful to point
out instances where bibliotherapy is inappropriate as a sole treatment option: If you are
suffering from a diagnosed illness, if you are suicidal, if you are unable to function from

73

day-to-day, or if you are engaged in life-threatening or destructive habits. In each case
she more or less reiterates the same refrain, “Before supplementing your treatment with
bibliotherapy, you should consult with your doctor” (Stanley, 1999).
Of course Stanley would not wish her recommendations to read a book replace
the sage and practical advice of a medical doctor, but at the same time, it is pretentious to
recommend that a reader consult with one’s doctor before reading a novel. But she must
make such a statement if readers are to accept her thesis that reading books is something
more than a recreational activity. Bibliotherapy, as it is interpreted in the late-twentieth
century self-improvement culture, takes on the gravitas of social science to deliver a
message that, at its source, is much more simplistic: reading might make you feel better.

2.5 The Impasse of Rehabilitation vs. Incapacitation

Although the language might be more romantic, MacCormick, our pioneer of
educational rehabilitation in American prisons, was saying the same thing as
bibliotherapists about the benefits of reading fifty years earlier. In the APA Library
manual for Correctional Institutions, published in 1950, he states, “...the institutional
library is an instrument of wholesome recreation, of direct and indirect education, and of
mental health. Books are for many prisoners the bridge to the free world; over that bridge
they can pass to a better world with a broader horizon than they ever knew before” (APA,
1950). Within MacCormick’s rhetoric is the key to the persuasive power of literacy as
rehabilitation, and his remarks point to the general failures of previous attempts in

74

classroom and bibliotherapy methods: “Books are for many prisoners the bridge...”
History has clearly illustrated that in order to achieve rehabilitation, the prisoner must
desire that rehabilitation for themselves. Attempts at persuading the student to accept the
cultural norms of academic success, the psychiatric benefits of prescribed inspirational
literature, or the evangelical salvation found in religious texts, succeed only for those
willing to be shaped by the authority that confines them. As we observed in the 1960’s
and 1970’s, prisoners embraced literacy when the benefits were direct and outside of the
prison authority (Foucault’s knowledge/power machine). Writing and publishing their
own memoirs encouraged an information flow with the outside world, and while also
undergirding a radical rights movement, encouraged an empowerment of self through the
written word. Prison authorities were not prepared for the backlash of this form of
empowerment, and reacted by increasing security measures and quashing self-expression,
raising again the conundrum of rehabilitative incarceration. Where is the grey area where
mental health, education, and sound cultural norms are achieved without disrupting the
disciplinary authority of the state? How much can a prisoner achieve self-actualization
without threatening the system? Some critics feel this is an unsolvable paradox, and that
abolishing the system and investing in cultural infrastructure is the only way to achieve
true rehabilitation for criminals and prevent future crime. Opposing critics assert that
criminals have lost the right to self-actualization, and that rehabilitation should be defined
as not only an acceptance of cultural norms, but an acceptance to the lower orders of
cultural participation. If indefinite incapacitation cannot be achieved through a life
sentence, then life upon release should be guided by lowered aspirations -- menial work,

75

limited access (for instance, enforcement of cultural limits by placement on the sexual
offender registry), restriction of civic engagement through the revocation of voting rights,
restrictions of eligibility for food stamps or other food aid, restrictions of eligibility for
federal grants for college aid or home mortgages, even surgical castration for male sex
offenders or hysterectomies for female offenders thereby limiting their abilities to plan
their own families.
The current correctional system depends on methods of both rehabilitation and
incapacitation to define success as measured through lower recidivism. If literacy
intervention is to be successful under these terms, it must depend on the rehabilitation
model. We cannot encourage literacy while simultaneously limiting the criminal’s
capacity to aspire. Continuing to attempt one goal (lowered recidivism) through two
opposing means will frustrate any realization of success.
Some critics might argue that the efforts of rehabilitation should not be the means
with which we treat all offenders. The Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that only about
thirteen percent of federal prisoners are serving sentences for violent crime. More than
half (55.7%) are serving for a drug offense. It is a moral analysis beyond the scope of this
paper to determine if violent criminals as a whole are beyond the reach of rehabilitative
efforts, but public opinion seems to be more cohesively in support of rehabilitative efforts
aimed at first-offense, non-violent offenders. Using correctional measurements such as
security classifications can be a handy way of sorting offenders into “treatable” and “nontreatable” classes. But we should be wary of generalized classifications. The best way of
identifying offenders that are most amenable to rehabilitation is through self-selection, as

76

we have noted throughout the history of literacy intervention within prisons. Not every
offender is seeking a transformative, rehabilitative experience. But if prison authorities
could authentically provide that experience to all who sought it, the rate of recidivism
might show a considerable decline. In an ideal setting, self-selected participants could
contribute to the normalizing effects of the rehabilitative program, spurring additional
self-selection. I concede, this notion depends on optimistic ideals, but it might show at
least as much promise as the approaches currently in place.

2.6 Great Books

The experiment of self-selection has been forwarded multiple times, in multiple
incarnations, and with multiple success rates. Perhaps one of the first organized
experiments in a self-selected literacy intervention in the prison environment was
provided by facilitators of the Great Books Foundation. Spurred by the mid-century
ideals of a liberal education made available to all and the values of self-education,
University of Chicago educators Robert Hutchins and Mortimer Adler formed the
foundation in 1947. Classic texts (arguably of a narrow, Western perspective) provided
the centerpiece for group discussion and participants were encouraged to develop critical
thinking skills in analyzing the texts. Facilitators were entrusted to refrain from
contributing their own interpretations, as priority was placed on the dialogue between the
text and the reader. Great Books discussion groups were marketed to the public,
especially the middle class reader who felt isolated from academic culture, yet yearned

77

for opportunities for self-improvement. By 1949, the Foundation estimates that fiftythousand people were enrolled nationwide in Great Books book groups. The program was
so successful, Adler and Hutchins published paperback editions of selected works
through the Foundation, and recommended participants only use the official Great Books
editions.
The Great Books method focuses on a learning technique called Shared Inquiry.
The goal of this method is to encourage self-reliant thinkers, readers, and learners,
engaging the imagination as well as the intellect. Readers engage solely with questions
engendered from the text, rather than relying on likes and dislikes. The Great Books
Foundation website explains:

...participants learn to give full consideration to the ideas of
others, to weigh the merits of opposing arguments, and to modify
their initial opinions as the evidence demands. They gain
experience in communicating complex ideas and in supporting,
testing, and expanding their own thoughts. In this way, Shared
Inquiry promotes thoughtful dialogue and open debate, preparing
its participants to become able, responsible citizens and
enthusiastic, lifelong readers (https://www.greatbooks.org/?
id=1270).
The Foundation did not actively and officially support prison outreach until 1999,
but throughout the height of Great Books popularity, many facilitators brought their
groups into their local prisons and jails. San Quentin hosted a Great Books group for
some time during Spector’s tenure. Today, the general public’s interest in Great Books
has slumped, but related prison outreach work continues. Great Books today has official
groups in seven correctional facilities, all in Mississippi and Tennessee (http://
www.greatbooks.org/programs-for-all-ages/gb/prison-outreach/). Sharmila Patel, the

78

Director of Education for the Tennessee Department of Correction, who has organized
other book groups in her prisons before, describes the Great Books approach: “ In groups
that talk about popular literature, it ends up being more about the pleasure of reading and
feelings. But Great Books have a focus on ideas, so you’re not talking about whether or
not you liked it, but on the thoughts behind it” (Amity360, 2008). Vice President of The
Great Books Foundation, Daniel Born, rhetorically asks, “Why not make them read the
latest crappy memoir or Danielle Steele (sic)? Reading the books that matter will help the
inmates thinks about the issues that matter” (Amity360, 2008).
This presumptuousness that the latest memoir is, by definition, “crappy,” and
disinterested in “issues that matter,” causes quite a bit of friction in today’s reading
community. Opposers of the program argue that its narrow view of “classic” literature
imposes a camouflaged class hegemony, where great ideas come only from a political
elite. Literature discussion becomes a didactic incursion of the powerful upon the
powerless. Attendance in the prison outreach program could be due to a practical interest
in “issues that matter” as defined by Great Books facilitators, but it is just as likely that
participants sign up out of a lack of other alternatives for literary engagement.
An important element to remember while considering the prison outreach work of
The Great Books Foundation is that sponsorship of such programs is entirely supported
through volunteers, participation is voluntary, and they are in no way officially endorsed
or funded by the correctional institutions in which they operate. Programs like Great
Books cannot be lumped with the educational endeavors of correctional strategy, and any
measurements of recidivism or other benefits to the population have not been attributed

79

to voluntary opportunities in any state-sourced empirical studies. Nor has Great Books
itself been successful in measuring its impact on criminal behaviors.
Great Books discussion groups are not nearly as popular as they once were in the
general free public, owing in part to a decline in the veneration of the Western Canon as a
unique vessel of “issues that matter,” and increased access to college-level literary
coursework. Moreover, Great Books is an extension of the New Criticism, a theory of
literature that was popular in the mid-twentieth century. This strategy of literature
analysis stresses the authority of the text. The text is a self-contained aesthetic object, and
it is the reader’s responsibility to objectively use the evidence found in the text to draw
out conclusions, disregarding any affective response, the author’s intention, or any social
or historical contexts. This approach has gone decidedly out of vogue; current readertheory trends embrace the value of the text/reader relationship, acknowledging the value
of the affective, emotional response to literature and its application to the reader’s lived
experience. This reader-response strategy and its impact on current book-selling and
publishing trends in middle brow fiction, not to mention the ethos of popular culture in
general, is carefully examined in Jim Collins’ excellent book Bring On the Books for
Everyone: How Literary Culture Became Popular Culture (2010).
The New Criticism has mainly been left to the academy, and voluntary book
groups that spring up in communities of readers are generally approaching literature from
a self-help or social interchange imperative. Elizabeth Long bolsters this view in her
seminal study of contemporary book group practice, Book Clubs: Women and the Use of
Reading in Everyday Life (2003). Long claims,

80

(Book group) discussion is a lens that reveals the books under
discussion and the inner lives of coparticipants and, through this
process, allows participants to reflect back on their own interior
lives as well. In these conversations, people can use books and
each other’s responses to books to promote insight and empathy in
an integrative process of collective self-reflection. In that sense,
reading group discussions perform creative cultural work, for they
enable participants to articulate or even discover who they are:
their values, their aspirations, and their stance toward the dilemmas
of their worlds. (Long, 2003)
Using books as tools that “promote insight and empathy” in a group setting that
seeks integrated self-reflection is an approach to reading that emerged in popular culture
just as the Civil Rights Movement of the 1970’s incited the citizen’s desire to empathize
with, and recognize themselves as, the victims of social inequalities. Women’s book
groups of the era developed as ways for women to gain insight on and find empowerment
in women’s historical and contemporary social roles. Women readers carried the
momentum of this literary turn, as they were and continue to be the largest consumers of
middle brow literature, an arguably pejorative term that refers to literature that appeals to
popular readers, encourages affective responses, and holds the majority of sales in the
fiction genre. A successful exploration of the uses of reading as affective response,
empathic experience, and therapeutic salve can be found in Timothy Aubry’s Reading as
Therapy: What Contemporary Fiction Does for Middle-Class Americans (2011).

81

2.7 Changing Lives Through Literature

Changing Lives Through Literature (CLTL) is an excellent example of a selfselected prison literacy intervention program that espouses the value of empathic
identification with the text. Furthermore, it has documented statistical improvement in
recidivism, as well as other less conveniently measurable benefits. CLTL once was a
legitimate partner in the criminal justice system, available as an alternative to
incarceration.
In 1991 in the state of Massachusetts, a literature professor, Robert Waxler, a
judge, Robert Kane, and a probation officer, Wayne St. Pierre, together designed a
literacy seminar offered as part of a probation program that provided an alternative to
prison sentencing. The seminar consisted of twelve weekly required meetings, and
included participation by the judge and probation officer. Participants included eight men,
ranging in offense from theft to armed robbery, (sex and drug offenders were not eligible)
with one hundred forty eight convictions between them. Although potential participants
were pre-selected by prison authorities, the option to participate was wholly the choice of
those potential participants. The alternative was serving a prison sentence. As CLTL
explains it,

By discussing books,...the men began to investigate and
explore aspects of themselves, to listen to their peers, to increase
their ability to communicate ideas and feelings to men of authority
who they thought would never listen to them, and to engage in
dialogue in a democratic classroom where all ideas were valid.
Instead of seeing their world from one angle, they began opening

82

up to new perspectives and started realizing that they had choices
in life (http://cltl.umassd.edu/abouthistory.cfm).
The program was successful enough to continue, and was replicated at a
neighboring women’s prison. In 1998, a paper was published analyzing the data of the
first thirty-two men to complete the program, titled “Combining Bibliotherapy and
Positive Role Modeling as an Alternative to Incarceration.” The study found that of the
program participants, 18.75% were reconvicted within three years of their release,
compared to offenders with similar risk/need assessments that did not participate. This
control group’s reconviction rate was 45%.
It is interesting to note the use of the word “bibliotherapy” in the study’s title, a
study authored by third-party investigators. Nowhere on the CLTL website do its authors
refer to their program as bibliotherapy, nor do they describe their program as a therapy at
all. They claim, “CLTL is not therapy, but the process of learning about our lives can be
therapeutic” (http://cltl.umassd.edu/AboutPhilosophy.cfm). There are several ways in
which their program differs from the mainstream conception of bibliotherapy, and the
authors may have wished to distance themselves from those associations. FIrst of all, the
program is not intended to heal, but rather to teach, inspire, affect transformation. The
authors make no medical claims. In addition, while great care is taken in selecting
reading material, participants are not diagnosed with a particular and individual need,
which could be treated with a particular reading. And no participant is required to
participate, although failure to participate, in this instance, does mean a return to a prison
sentence. By including a judge and probation officer in the literature discussion, and
approaching the discussion with a democratic attitude, CLTL discussions encourage the

83

open consideration of all possibilities, rather than a scrutinized reading for the correct
answer that leads to healing. As opposed to the Great Books program, participants are
encouraged to draw parallels between the text and their own experience, to gain an
alternate perspective in problem-solving, and to discuss their affective responses to the
literature. The aim is in achieving a transformative experience that influences an intrinsic
motivation to change behavior. But as in the case of Great Books, participation may just
as easily be influenced by extrinsic motivators such as a shortened probation period, an
evaded prison sentence, or simply that the program provides the only option available for
literary engagement.
Unfortunately, and against all evidence of its proving a successful literacy
intervention, CLTL has lost momentum in the last few years. The program’s website has
not been updated since 2007. It is difficult to find documentation that the program is still
in use in the various pockets where it appeared quite vibrant at the turn of the
millennium. How does one explain this decline? CLTL was formed during a very
desperate period in corrections history. Prison populations were soaring, and corrections
facilities did not have the space to house them. Alternatives to sentencing, even schemes
as outrageous as a literacy intervention, were welcomed until more bodies could be
accommodated. The acceptance by state and local criminal justice systems of the CLTL
program waned to the same degree that new prisons were built. If recent history can be
used as a predictor, it is quite likely that literacy interventions that are directly tied to the
criminal justice system will only be considered when all other options are blocked. As
California’s crisis of prison over-population proves, priority lies in incapacitation by

84

incarceration; lowering recidivism through rehabilitation appears to be a worst-case
solution.
Nonetheless, various outreach programs, none fully endorsed by the current adult
criminal justice system, but tolerated as voluntary supplements, have gained a foothold in
providing literacy intervention. Many of them gain the greatest support through targeting
juvenile “at-risk” populations. Many have also succeeded in building partnerships with
neighboring colleges and universities, inviting professors to teach and facilitate literature
programming through for-credit or non-credit coursework. Much of the outreach is
organized by public librarians. Some programs of note include: Read to Succeed, an
adaptation of the CLTL model for teens (http://www.naco.org/newsroom/countynews/
Current%20Issue/10-18-10/Pages Readingprogramsofferalternativetojail.aspx). Write to
Read is sponsored by the Alameda County Juvenile Justice Center (http://
juviewrite2read.aclibrary.org). An adult ex-offender program is available through
Alameda County public libraries. Free Minds Book Club & Writing Workshop serves
juveniles and juveniles-tried-as-adults in Washington D.C. (http://
www.freemindsbookclub.org/about_us.html). The Hennepin County Library provides a
plethora of services for the incarcerated, recently-released, and juveniles in the
Minneapolis/St. Paul area, comprising a program called Freedom Ticket (http://
www.hclib.org/pub/info/Outreach/freedomticket/). Many state, federal, and private
institutions host informal book groups, writing groups, parent-to-child reading support
and other literacy interventions, but this work is often unpublicized to the greater
community. These programs spring from the outreach efforts of various providers,

85

including institutional education and rehabilitation staff, prison, public, and academic
library staff, professors, educators, and social work professionals. This outreach work is
largely un-salaried, and only infrequently funded by grants.

2.8 An Academic Approach

While corrections authorities appear to be satisfied with incapacitation as a
solution to crime, and the good will of local communities shoulder the responsibility to
provide literacy outreach, academics have begun to take interest in literacy intervention
as a legitimate approach to an issue which with increasing regularity figures into the
flaws of our social infrastructure. Researcher Megan Sweeney notes that she has written
the first analysis of women’s prison reading practice. Sweeney was roused to investigate
the issues when, in 2006, the Supreme Court decision Beard vs. Banks deemed it
constitutional for a Pennsylvania prison to deny secular newspapers and magazines to
forty of its “most incorrigible” prisoners. The decision, which won a 6-2 majority vote,
claims that denying these reading materials serves as an “incentive for inmate growth”
because it encourages prison rule compliance. Once inmates achieve a credible level of
compliance (as defined by prison authorities), they can then be moved to a lower level
security wing, where access is broader. However, only about 25% of the residents of this
high-security wing are ever relocated (Beard vs. Banks, 2006). Concurring Justice
Clarence Thomas supports the ruling because it is “consistent with eighteenth-century
Pennsylvania practices” of isolating the prisoner and denying reading materials (except

86

the Bible) and contact with their families. The most recent publication that Justice
Thomas cited for his historical justification was a book by Gerald Bramley, titled
Outreach: Library Services for the Institutionalised, the Elderly, and the Physically
Handicapped, in which he quotes that prisoners’ library access is “subject to some form
of censorship.” This book was published in 1978, in London. Neither is it current, nor is
it based on American practice.
Sweeney identifies a cause for concern in a contemporary criminal justice system
that denies reading as a form of rehabilitation. Her study identifies the ways in which
some women “habilitate” themselves, meaning that they empower and enable themselves,
regardless of the presence or lack of a supportive literacy structure. While she introduces
reading groups into three different women’s prisons in North Carolina, Ohio, and
Pennsylvania, her primary concern is in investigating the types of reading that female
prisoners turn to on their own, without the guidance or structure of an organized reading
group. Although women prisoners read (and don’t read) as diverse a menu of genres as
the free public does, Sweeney recognized a recurring theme of titles concerning
victimization, inspirational and self-help, and urban street literature. Her book, Reading
Is My Window: Books and the Art of Reading in Women’s Prisons, explores how women
prisoners use reading to “grapple with victimization, crime, and healing” (Sweeney,
2010). They use reading as a means to entertain themselves, experience a sense of escape,
and stay connected to actual or imagined realities outside the prison. They also read to
educate themselves, make meaning from their own experiences, reckon with suppressed
emotions, locate mentors, and to become the “authors of their own lives.”

87

Sweeney’s work is an important step in developing an understanding of how
literacy can play an important role in the “habilitation” of some prisoners. She does not
make the claim that reading practice is a one-stop “cure” for criminal behavior, but it is
through her first-person accounts of witnessing prisoner/readers adopt new perspectives
towards others, towards themselves, and towards the act of reading itself that she
observes how reading practice assists readers, for the time being at least, in navigating
their own lives. She states,

...I do not want to speculate about whether or not those
practices will exert a lasting influence over the lives of women
who may one day leave prison. Indeed, I want to resist any notion
that reading might serve as a permanent cure for, or antidote to,
unethical or unlawful behavior. Such a notion not only seems
deeply flawed; it also seems dangerous, given that bibliotherapy
has served normalizing and coercive ends in penal contexts
(Sweeney, 2010).

Sweeney is wary of prison literacy interventions that, despite their good intentions,
might mirror the debilitating top-down approach that brought the failure of
bibliotherapeutic practice in the past. Her readers volunteered to participate in her reading
groups and interviews, and the texts they read served as tools for discussion, not as
didactic lessons to be learned. As opposed to the goals of bibliotherapy, her participants
were encouraged, not to think what authors told them to think, but to think for
themselves. One of her participants, Olivia, a prisoner/reader in Ohio’s Northeast PreRelease Center, states, “If they really want to rehabilitate and change people’s minds and
thoughts and the way us women think and what our place is in the world, they would
have more book clubs” (Sweeney, 2010).

88

Current corrections authority values the prison library in its ability to offer safe and
secure leisure, but equal value is given to the art room, the gym, and the television room.
Prison librarians in the past have valued the supposed influence of religious texts, the
great books of the Western literary canon, or the bibliotherapeutic benefits of self-help
instruction, in the hopes of guiding the reader down a shepherded path to rehabilitation.
Sweeney posits the idea that prisoner/readers have their own views and individual
entrances to texts that speak to their needs and desires. Choosing literature that affects
their understanding of their own lives builds their own sense of agency and selfactualization, strengths that counter the imprisoning environment, but support their
abilities to succeed in the world upon release.

89

CHAPTER 3:
THE APPLICATION OF LITERACY INTERVENTIONS:
NOTES FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

3.1.Literacy as Framed by the Practice of Restorative Justice

In thinking deeply about the ways literacy can support the success of prisoners as
they are released to society, I am consistently faced with a bothersome conundrum: Our
justice system’s current practice of incapacitation, both inside our prisons and extending
to all facets of civic life upon release, continuously contends with all efforts to
rehabilitate, “habilitate,” and engage the agency of offenders. In order for literacy
intervention to effect a transformation in the reader, the reader must have the space to
aspire. They must be confident that a genuine attempt to gain vocational and jobsearching skills will provide them an opportunity to actually find employment. They must
own the certainty that improved social skills will affect positive changes in their relations
with others. They must be assured that a genuine attempt to empathize with their victim
will profit them in understanding how to make better life choices. If these assurances can
not be made, how can we expect rehabilitation to be successful?
There is a note of hope. The last thirty years have seen a growing trend in a
program known as Restorative Justice (RJ). The program urges a paradigm shift in how
the legal system approaches criminal justice. The European Union actively supports the
restorative justice process, and American state Departments of Correction, while not yet

90

dismantling the current system, are eager to appropriate aspects of the philosophy in their
efforts to lower recidivism. Evidence of particular states’ adoption of RJ principles can be
found on the DOC websites of many states, including Missouri, Louisiana, Vermont,
Minnesota, Ohio, Illinois, and Iowa.
According to Howard Zehr, considered to be the “grandfather” of RJ (Van Ness,
2010), restorative justice can be defined this way: “Crime is a violation of people and
relationships. It creates obligations to make things right. Justice involves the victim, the
offender, and the community in a search for solutions which promote repair,
reconciliation and reassurance” (Zehr, 2004). Zehr urges a change of focus from
retributive justice, based on punishment, to a focus on human relationships, restoring the
humanity of each participant, including an acknowledgement of the wrong done to the
victim and the community as a whole. Common RJ practices that have been adopted even
within a retributive system include victim-offender mediation and conferencing, methods
of restorative encounters that encourage communication between all involved parties.
The benefits of such encounters are manifold. Victims are able to “own” their
voice in a conflict and its resolution; they can advocate for restitution that is practical and
relevant to their needs, they can ask for and obtain the social services they require, and, in
some cases, gain a sense of empathy for the offender and the community in which the
crime takes place. Community representative participants can gain an understanding for
the unique circumstances of an individual case, learn how to protect the community from
future criminal acts, and recognize both the victim and offender as members of that
community. Offenders are encouraged to gain an understanding of the victim’s and

91

community’s perspective of their crime, are given the opportunity to express apology,
design a restitution program that is practical and relevant, and receive assistance in the
reintegration process (Van Ness, 2010).
The RJ practices of victim-offender mediation and conferencing, practices
employed by various tribal cultures long before the establishment of RJ (Van Ness,
2010), depend upon a victim-offender dialogue (though not necessarily in a face-to-face
experience), that is in some way mediated by a community member, government
authority representative, and/or an unbiased mediation professional. The aim of such an
encounter is to allow healing, reconciliation, negotiation, vindication and transformation
for all parties. The extant RJ literature infrequently uses the term “empathy” to describe
the outcomes desired for offenders participating in such an encounter. And yet, it is the
practice of empathy that decides the level of success of an offender’s participation in an
RJ program. Van Ness explains the offender’s participation in an encounter program:

Offenders take responsibility for their actions and agree to
make
amends to the victim. Offenders often have not understood the
effect their actions had on their victims, and this process gives
them greater insight into the harm they caused as well as an
opportunity to repair the damage. Both victim and offender are
confronted with the other as a person rather than a faceless,
antagonistic force, permitting them to gain a greater understanding
of the crime, of the other person’s circumstances, and of what it
will take to make things right (Van Ness, 2010).
Clearly, gaining “greater insight”, a “greater understanding...of the other person’s
circumstances” are acts of perspective-taking, also understood as empathetic responses.
Speaking with one’s victim can easily be imagined as a very threatening and highly

92

emotional experience, and the ability to empathize with a person across the legal divide
of victim/offender takes a particular amount of maturity, sensitivity and empathetic
practice. It is important to consider, before placing participants in this highly-charged
environment, just how prepared an offender is in exercising their empathetic skills. But
how does one gain practice in raising empathetic response? I posit that literacy
interventions -- book groups, writing groups, any reading practice that encourages
empathic identification and pro-social discussion -- pose as effective laboratories for lowstakes practice in perspective-taking, supporting the key responsibilities of the offender in
a restorative justice scenario.
While there is extensive research available on the benefits of restorative justice
for the offender, the victim, and the community, little research has been documented on
the role of literacy in gaining skills conducive to perspective-taking in this context. If the
case can be made that literacy intervention has real value in contributing to restorative
justice success, perhaps literacy intervention programs can relinquish their marginalized
status, and revive the role of the prison library as an active co-participant in facility-wide
efforts to rehabilitate and support prison populations.

3.2 Why Read? The Process of Reading vs. the Content of Reading

The usefulness of literacy intervention in the terms of Restorative Justice relies on
the offenders’ ability to gain empathy for their victim, in hopes of achieving genuine
apology and transformation from criminal proclivity. Sweeney identifies empathy as

93

playing a major role in prisoner/reader appeal in reading choices. Her research suggests
that prisoner/readers may identify empathically with fictional characters and settings, and
thus the appeal of urban fiction. They may identify empathically with the author or
narrator’s voice, as in the appeal of memoirs or narratives of victimization. They may
also experience empathic response when discussing their reading material with fellow
readers, listening and responding to the perspectives of others. An emotional, affective
response to literature can rouse inspiration and behavioral change. This was the benefit
sought in the prescriptive era of bibliotherapy, though self-directed learning and choice
were never then considerable factors. The consciousness-raising era of the Civil Rights
Movement supported the efforts of book group members to find empowerment and
agency, but protecting the right to read tended to overshadow the campaign that the
incarcerated should read, and fighting that battle lost the war for sanctioned literacy
interventions in American prisons. So far, literacy intervention has been characterized by
reading that effects an emotional, transformational, rehabilitative response to content. But
recent research in cognitive science points to the possible benefits of reading as a process
that exercises skills that improve the brain’s ability to problem-solve, to rationalize, and
to think outside one’s own perspective.
There is a rich body of literature concerning empathy as it is approached from
various disciplines, including psychology, literary theory, neuroscience, social work, and
countless more. Definitions of the term vary across disciplines and alternate schools of
thought, but it is generally agreed that empathy includes both an automatic physiological
reaction (known as affective sharing) and the cognitive process of perspective-taking

94

(Barnett & Mann, 2013; Gerdes et al., 2010; Spreng et al., 2009; Jolliffe & Farrington,
2006; Gallese, 2003; Duan & Hill, 1996). Empathy arouses a specific, observable,
measurable brain activity, and recent research suggests that empathy can be learned and
thereby increased. Research in empathy and its relation to reading has historically
centered on the emotional response to text content -- when we read a sad story, we tend to
feel sad, our brains register sadness as if we were actually experiencing the sadness of the
textual character. What has been overlooked in the research until recently is the cognitive
response to empathy -- the brain’s ability to take another’s perspective into account,
regardless of attending affect or emotion, as it applies to the reading of literature. Using
the framework of Theory of Mind (ToM), researchers David Comer Kidd and Emanuele
Castano have explored this concept in their study titled “Reading Literary Fiction
Improves Theory of Mind” (2013). They differentiate between affective ToM -- an ability
to detect and understand others’ emotions -- and cognitive ToM -- the inference and
representation of others’ beliefs and intentions. Their study demonstrated a significant
impact on both reader affective and cognitive ToM when engaged in reading literary
fiction, at least in the short term, and introduces a line of study that suggests ToM may be
influenced by engagement with works of art. The researchers argue that fiction may
explicitly convey social values and make other worldviews less strange, but beyond those
benefits, the act of reading fiction may change not only what people think about others,
but how they do it. Fiction affects ToM processes by forcing readers to engage in mindreading and character construction. Kidd and Castano further explain,

95

Our contention is that literary fiction...uniquely engages the
psychological processes needed to gain access to characters’
subjective experiences. Just as in real life, the worlds of literary
fiction are replete with complicated individuals whose inner lives
are rarely easily discerned but warrant exploration. The worlds of
fiction, though, pose fewer risks than the real world, and they
present opportunities to consider the experiences of others without
facing the potentially threatening consequences of that
engagement. More critically, whereas many of our mundane social
experiences may be scripted by convention and informed by
stereotypes, those presented in literary fiction often disrupt our
expectations. Readers of literary fiction must draw on more
flexible interpretive resources to infer the feelings and thoughts of
characters. That is, they must engage ToM processes (Kidd &
Castano, 2013).
It is interesting to note the echo of the same observations found in the restorative
justice process of offender/victim encounters as it relates to reading. Fiction presents the
opportunity to practice perspective-taking “without facing the potentially threatening
consequences” of a face-to-face encounter. The impact of this research is not yet fully
realized, and, to my knowledge, has not been applied to the therapeutic uses of reading,
especially with incarcerated populations. Further investigation in this area will lay the
groundwork for establishing a strategy for reading that incorporates theory of mind,
empathic response appropriate to the goals of Restorative Justice, and literary reading
practice in a rehabilitative context, a strategy that I will refer to as Perspective-Directed
Reading (PDR). Incorporating Vygostki’s zone of proximal development, a PDR scaffold
of affective and cognitive empathy could lead a reluctant or inexperienced reader through
developmental stages of transformational identity with text that might mirror identity
with real others and a self-actualization in the reader’s real world. To my knowledge, no
prison literacy intervention has ever focused on a cognitive theory of mind approach that

96

encourages the repetitive practice of thought processing that, irrespective of emotional
response, exercises a reader’s ability to take perspective and mind-read the intentions of
an other. The emotional affect of a reading becomes secondary to the cognitive
interpretations the reader must parse to gain comprehension of the literary landscape. It
may be discovered that the ability to mind-read and understand the intentions and beliefs
of fictional characters can be correlated to the ability to mind-read the intentions and
beliefs of people in the real world, including an offender’s family, peers, authority, and,
most importantly, their victims.
This is not to imply that the emotional, affective response to literature is not
valuable, but understanding the less-visible cognitive benefits to reading might have
profound impact on the uses of literacy intervention. What is more, that cognitive benefit
may be measurable, providing evidence to a system that relies heavily on evidence-based
treatment programs to assess needs and risks, and secure funding for national goals in
reducing recidivism.

3.3 Conclusion

There is room for much inquiry in the relations between reading practice, affect,
cognitive neuroscience, and rehabilitative interventions for incarcerated populations. This
thesis points to only a few aspects of intellectual speculation, with the hope that greater
attention will be given to the benefits of literacy practices that support the needs of their
participants as well as the needs of correctional authorities. The hierarchical position of

97

the prison library has shifted continuously over the history of American corrections, and
we have arrived at a moment in time where its position, on the periphery, is threatened by
overcrowding, underfunding, and the legitimate desires of corrections authorities to
implement programming that is measurably effective and affordable. The
recommendations for further inquiry that I have suggested -incorporating literacy
interventions within the established Restorative Justice program, and exploring the
benefits of cognitive reading practice through a Theory of Mind framework - are both
ways of legitimizing the work of the prison library as an integral branch of the
institutional system providing offender treatment. It is not enough to simply claim that
the prison should retain its library because it has always had a library. It is not enough to
say that the prison library should remain because it offers mental escape and relaxation, a
pro-social environment, and a quiet place to think and study. It does all of those things,
but the argument loses its persuasive appeal against the looming constraints of budget
and the general ethos that prisoners do not deserve mental escape or relaxation. Equally
daunting is the repeated mantra concerning rehabilitative interventions that “nothing
works,” stated first by criminologist Martinson in 1974. Embraced by the political
climate of the time, by liberals that desired social and cultural equity by eliminating
indeterminate sentencing that was vulnerable to cultural bias, and by conservatives that
desired harsher punishments and increased incapacitation, rehabilitation was considered
an overall failure (Miller, 1989). While Martinson recanted his findings several years
later, it was too late to change the tide in aggressive criminal justice reforms, and we are
still living under the influence of a system of deterrence, even as qualitative data proves

98

that rehabilitation, administered skillfully and empathically, is effective in reducing
recidivism (Petersilia, 2004; Seiter & Kadela, 2003; Harland, 1996).
What may be the most persuasive argument for rehabilitative interventions comes
from the participants themselves. I hear these arguments anecdotally from colleagues
engaged in similar intervention work, and I hear them in my own experience in
facilitating book group discussion. A colleague engaged in a spectacular and innovative
college program for residents of the Newton (IA) Correctional Facility shared an article
written by a former participant. The program is a partnership between the prison and
Grinnell College, offering both for credit and non-credit courses to the incarcerated. The
participant, now released, is sharing his gratitude for the program, which sustained him
during his difficult reentry process:

I realized that the single most important component of
their (Grinnell educators) indelible mark on me was compassion.
Compassion is redemptive and has a perseverance and intimacy
that stays with me as time passes. Compassion’s force alters the
trajectory of tragic lives towards triumphant ones. This is the
ultimate gift that Grinnell gave me, and it saved my life (Darrah,
2014).
If the cognitive behavioral strategies, the qualitative studies, and the recidivism
statistics are not evidence enough that interventions have positive impacts on the lives of
released prisoners, we can consider alone the testimony that the compassion of a caring
community is inspiration, at least for some, for changing their trajectory towards a
triumphant life. Evidence of compassion is transformative.
Enthusiasm for reading engagement motivated me to join the IMCC book group,
but compassion has kept me there. I have been attending the book group for so long now,

99

and so regularly, that the security officers now allow me to walk alone from the entrance
checkpoint, through the maze of hallways past the religion library, the gymnasium, the art
room, the pharmacy, around the library and to the door of Classroom 3. An inmate has
rushed to fetch the library supervisor to unlock the classroom door, and I chat with some
early arrivals as we wait in the hallway. As we take our seats I call the systems operator
and ask him to page an announcement that book group is about to begin. One inmate has
planned ahead, bringing a bowl of hot, buttered popcorn to share. Today we have nine
participants, fewer than usual, but a solid group, and our discussion is so engaging we
lose track of time. We’ve been talking for an hour and a half, interrupted only once for a
count. Today we have exercised a small freedom -- we’ve agreed to change the order in
which we choose our next book. Instead of going to the next on the list, we chose to vote
on which one we were most eager to read. Agreement came incredibly easily, and that
tiny bit of agency has energized the group to get started on the next title right away.
Dinners have already been served, and trays are going cold back on their units, but
participants linger to finish conversations, get in one last word, wish me well until we
meet again. No security officer has come to fetch me, so I steal a moment to admire the
bulletin board that has just gone up in the classroom hallway. It is dedicated to the book
group, with photocopied book covers of titles we look forward to reading. Interspersed
are a dozen typed quotes from participants, explaining why they value the group. One
book group member waits with me as I copy down all the quotes into my notebook, as I
can’t bring in my camera or my cellphone, and taking a photo, scanning it, and asking the
ed supervisor to email it to me seems all too complicated, so I scribble as quickly as I

100

can. I write down every word, because these are the most persuasive arguments for me.
These quotes state why the prison library must remain, and this is why I come to book
group every month. These are the words of my book group members:
“Book Club is the one place where we can have conversations about things that matter to
me outside of prison.”
“The sharing of my personal thoughts in a group session with my peers that, when taken
seriously, means a lot.”
“Book Club has become a habit. Good community, good discussions, good volunteers
and staff, and usually treats!”
“It’s a great experience to interact with the volunteers from the outside and come together
as a group to talk about a book a number of us have read.”
“The Book Club is fun to be in and I learn a lot about different books. The people are
good to be around.”
“To gain knowledge you currently don’t have or never thought about.”
“My Top 10 Reasons For Being in Book Club
1.Reading is Fundamental!
2. It’s free
3. I can make suggestions for what books I would like to read
4. I vote on the suggestions that have been made
5. We read books that are current
6. It exercises my imagination
7. It allows me to have discussions with like-minded people
8. I read books I may not otherwise read
9. We have Great! volunteers and I like hearing their perspectives
10. IT IS A POSITIVE EXPERIENCE!!”

I slap my notebook shut and we head down the hallway. With one last farewell and a
wave, the last remaining member swings left towards his unit and a cold dinner, and I
swing right, on my way toward the outdoors.

101

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Combining bibliotherapy and positive role modeling as an alternative to incarceration" changing lives through literature Retrieved 9/2/2013, from http://cltl.umassd.edu/
programsresults1a.cfm
“Computer use for/by inmates” (2009, June 22). The Free Library. (2009). Retrieved
3/14/2014
from http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Computer use for/by inmates.-a0208273651
Alexander, M. (2010). The new jim crow: Mass incarceration in the age of
colorblindness. New York: The New Press.
American Prison Association -- Committee on Institutional libraries. (1950). Library
manual for correctional institutions: A handbook of library standards and
procedures for prisons reformatories for men and women and other adult
correctional institutions. New York: APA.
Amity360. (August 21, 2008). Of balls and chains: Great books discussion program
fosters thought in prisons. Retrieved from http://www.greatbooks.org/fileadmin/
pdf/Amity360pv_8-21-08.pdf
Aubry, T. (2011). Reading as Therapy: What Contemporary Fiction Does for Middleclass Americans. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Austin H. MacCormick papers, 1923-1978 | out of the box! Retrieved 2/12/2014, 2014,
from http://nglarchivesandspecialcollections.wordpress.com/2013/11/05/austin-hmaccormick-papers-1923-1978/
Barnett, G. D., & Mann, R. E. (2012; 2013). Cognition, empathy, and sexual offending
Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 14(1), 22 - 33. doi:10.1177/1524838012467857
Barnett, G., & Mann, R. E. (2013). Empathy deficits and sexual offending: A model of
obstacles to empathy Aggression and Violent Behavior, 18(2), 228 - 239. doi:
10.1016/j.avb.2012.11.010
Bill 64 « thomas Jefferson’s monticello Retrieved 3/13/2014, 2014, from http://
www.monticello.org/site/research-and-collections/bill-64
BOP: Recidivism; federal prisoners released in 1987 - oreprrecid87.pdf Retrieved
2/20/2014, 2014, from http://www.bop.gov/resources/research_projects/
published_reports/recidivism/oreprrecid87.pdf

102

Braly, M. (1967). On the yard. Boston: Little, Brown.
Braly, M. (1976). False starts: A memoir of san quentin and other prisons. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Bramley, Gerald. (1978). Outreach: Library Services for the Institutionalised, the Elderly,
and the Physically Handicapped. London:C. Bingley.
Carroll, N. On some affective relations between audiences and the characters in popular
fictions. In A. Coplan & P. Goldie (Eds.), Empathy: Philosophical and
pyschological perspectives (pp. 162) Oxford University Press, USA.
Cates, D. (1998). Ethics, Literature, and the Emotional Dimension of Moral
Understanding: A Review Essay, The Journal of Religious Ethics, 26(2) 409-431.
Christianson, S. (1998). With Liberty for Some: 500 Years of Imprisonment in America.
Boston, MA: Northeastern UP.
Collins, J. (2010). Bring on the Books for Everybody: How Literary Culture Became
Popular Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Connelly, M. (1998). Blood Work. NY: Warner Press.
Coplan, A. & Goldie, P. (2011). Empathy: Philosophical and psychological perspectives.
Oxford University Press, USA.
Correctional association of NY history: Ch. III Retrieved 2/9/2014, 2014, from http://
www.correctionhistory.org/html/chronicl/cany/html/cany03a.html
Craig, W. D. (February 5, 2013). In Litchfield K. (Ed.), Response to request to pursue
research study
“Critical Resistance.” Critical Resistance. N.p., n.d., Retrieved 2/8/2014. <http://
criticalresistance.org/>.
Cruel and unusual: Prisons and prison reform : The colonial williamsburg official history
& citizenship site Retrieved 2/5/2014, 2014, from http://www.history.org/
Foundation/journal/Summer11/prison.cfm
Cummins, E. (1994). The rise and fall of california's radical prison movement . Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Cvetkovich, A. (2012). Depression: A public feeling. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

103

Darrah, J. (2014). Untitled. Liberal Arts in Prison Program, Winter 2014, Grinnell
College. http://www.grinnell.edu/academics/offices/liberal-arts-prison
Davis, A. (2003). Are Prisons Obsolete? New York: Seven Stories Press.
Duan, C. and Hill, C. (1996). The current state of empathy research. Journal of
Counseling Psychology 43(3) 261-274.
Eastern state penitentiary – treasures of pennsylvania Retrieved 2/6/2014, 2014, from
http://www.treasuresofpa.com/2009/11/esp/
Eisenberg, N., & Strayer, J. (1987). Empathy and its development Cambridge [England] ;
Cambridge University Press.
Eriksson, T. (1976). The reformers: An historical survey of pioneer experiments in the
treatment of criminals . New York: Elsevier Scientific Pub. Co.
Factories with fences, the history of federal prison industries - CATMC1101 CATMC1101_C.pdf Retrieved 2/20/2014, 2014, from http://www.unicor.gov/
information/publications/pdfs/corporate/CATMC1101_C.pdf
FCNL. (2014) Quakers Know Prisons from the Inside Out
Retrieved 4/3/2014, from http://fcnl.org/issues/justice/quakers_know_prisons/
Federalprison - inc_federalprisonpop.pdf Retrieved 2/22/2014, 2014, from http://
www.sentencingproject.org/doc/publications/inc_federalprisonpop.pdf
Fields, C. (2005). Philadelphia society for alleviating the miseries of public prisons. In M.
Bosworth (Ed.), Encyclopedia of prisons & correctional facilities (pp. 698).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Floch, M. (1952). Correctional treatment and the library. Wilson Library Bulletin, 26,
454.
Floyd, J. (2006). Dislocations of the self: Eliza farnham at sing sing prison Journal of
American Studies, 40(02), 311. doi:10.1017/S0021875806001393
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York:
Pantheon.
Franklin, H. B. (1989). Prison literature in america: The victim as criminal and artist
(2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Gallese, V. (2003). The roots of empathy: The shared manifold hypothesis and the neural
basis of intersubjectivity Psychopathology, 36(4), 171-180. doi:72786

104

Gardner, G. (1987). The Emergence of the New York State Prison System: A Critique of
the Rusche-Kirchheimer Model Crime & Social Justice 29, 88-109.
Gerdes, K. E., Segal, E. A., & Lietz, C. A. (2010). Conceptualising and measuring
empathy British Journal of Social Work, 40(7), 2326 - 2343. doi:10.1093/bjsw/
bcq048
Harer, M. (1994). Recidivism among Federal Prison Releasees in 1987: A Preliminary
Report. Washington, D.C.: Federal Bureau of Prisons. Office of Research and
Evaluation.
Harland, A. (1996). Choosing Correctional Options That Work: Defining the Demand
and Evaluating the Supply. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hirsch, A. (1992). The Rise of the Penitentiary: Prisons and Punishment in Early
America. New Haven: Yale UP.
Hoffman, M. L. (1987). "Empathy: Justice and moral judgement", hoffman, martin L.;
empathy and its development / edited by nancy eisenberg and janet strayer. In N.
Eisenberg, & J. Strayer (Eds.), (). Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge ; New York :
Cambridge University Press.
Hume, D., 1711-1776. (1957). An inquiry concerning the principles of morals; with a
supplement: A dialogue. edited with an introd. by charles W. hendel. New York:
New York, Liberal Arts Press.
Incorporating restorative and community justice into american sentencing and corrections
- 175723.pdf Retrieved 9/4/2013, 2013, from https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/
175723.pdf
Iowa department of corrections Retrieved 9/1/2013, 2013, from http://
www.doc.state.ia.us/
Iowa department of corrections - victim and restorative justice programs Retrieved
9/2/2013, 2013, from http://www.doc.state.ia.us/VictimRestorativeJustice.asp
Johnson, S. (1751). Rambler 114, saturday, 20 april, 1751. Retrieved from https://
andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Texts/r114.html
Jolliffe, D., and Farrington, D. (2006). The development and validation of the Basic
Empathy Scale Journal of Adolescence 29(4) 589-611.
Jones, E. (1932). The Prison Library Handbook. Chicago: American Library Association.

105

Justice Policy Institute. (May 2000). The punishing decade: Prison and jail estimates at
the millenium. Retrieved February 17, 2014, from http://www.justicepolicy.org/
images/upload/00-05_rep_punishingdecade_ac.pdf
Kallhoff, A. and Nussbaum, M. (2000). ethics and political philosophy: Lecture and
colloquium in munster: Lit Verlag.
Keen, S. (2007). Empathy and the novel. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press.
Kidd, D. C., & Castano, E. (18 October 2013). Reading literary fiction improves theory
of mind. Science, 342(6156), 377.
Kirby, G. Bruce. (1971). Years of Experience; an Autobiographical Narrative. New York:
AMS.
Kowal, T. (2011) The Role of the Prison Guards Union in California’s Troubled Prison
System Ordinary Times Retrieved 2/8/2014 http://ordinary-gentlemen.com/blog/
2011/06/05/the-role-of-the-prison-guards-union-in-californias-troubled-prisonsystem
Krashen, S. (2005). The power of reading: Insights from the research. School Library
Journal, 51(4), S77.
Leder, D. (2004). Imprisoned bodies: The life-world of the incarcerated. Social Justice,
31(1), 51-66.
LeDonne, M. (1972). Library and information problems in correctional institutions. vol.
1. findings and recommendations. University of California at Berkeley: Institute of
Library Research.
Lehmann, V. (2000). The prison library: A vital link to education, rehabilitation, and
recreation. Education Libraries, 24(1), 5-10.
Levin, L. and Gildea, R. (2013). Bibliotherapy: tracing the roots of a moral therapy
movement in the United States from the early nineteenth century to the present.
Journal of the Medical Library Association, 101(2): 89-91.
Long, E. (2003). Book clubs : Women and the uses of reading in everyday life. Chicago :
University of Chicago Press.
Lovett, Ian. (2014). Court Gives California More Time to Ease Prison Crowding. The
New York Times, Feb. 10, 2014.

106

Lynch, J. (2014). Cruel and Unusual: Prisons and Prison Reform: The Colonial
Williamsburg Official History & Citizenship Site, Retrieved 2/4/2014. http://
www.history.org/Foundation/journal/Summer11/prison.cfm
MacCormick, A. (1931). The education of adult prisoners - A survey and a program.
New York: National Society of Penal Information.
Mann, R. E., & Barnett, G. D. (2012). Victim empathy intervention with sexual
offenders: Rehabilitation, punishment, or correctional quackery? Sexual Abuse : A
Journal of Research and Treatment, doi:10.1177/1079063212455669
McCulliss, D. (2012). Bibliotherapy: Historical and research perspectives. Journal of
Poetry Therapy, 25(1) 23-38.
McGee, M. (2005). Self-help, inc.: Makeover culture in american life. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Miller, J. (1989). The Debate of Rehabilitating Criminals: Is It True That Nothing Works?
Washington Post. Retrieved 3 March 2013 from http://www.prisonpolicy.org/scans/
rehab.html
Mitford, J. (1973). Kind and usual punishment: The prison business. New York: Knopf.
Modern, J. L. (2011) Secularism in antebellum america (religion and postmodernism)
University Of Chicago Press.
Morrison, C. V., M.D. (1940). American prison association, proceedings of the seventieth
annual congress, cincinnati, ohio, october 21-25, 1940. Prison Library Book
Prescriptions, Cincinnati, Ohio. 462.
New bedford evaluation - changing lives through literature Retrieved 9/2/2013, 2013,
from http://cltl.umassd.edu/programsresults1c.cfm
New York Prison Association (1876). Catalogue and Rules for Prison Libraries to Aid in
the Selection and Maintenance of Reading Matter in the Prisons and Jails. Albany:
Argus.
Nussbaum, M. C. (1990). Love's knowledge : Essays on philosophy and literature /
martha C. nussbaum. New York: New York : Oxford University Press.
Oñati international series in law and society : Emotions, crime and justice. Retrieved
9/2/2013, 2013, from http://site.ebrary.com/lib/uiowa/docDetail.action?
docID=10502086

107

Perryman, C. (2006). Medicus Deus: a review of factors affecting hospital library
services to patients between 1790-1950. Journal of the Medical Library
Association 94(3): 263-270.
Petersilia, J. (2004). What Works in Prisoner Reentry? Reviewing and Questioning the
Evidence Federal Probation, 68(2) 4-8.
Petersilia, J. (2008). California's correctional paradox of excess and deprivation. In M.
Tonry (Ed.), Crime & justice: A review of research (pp. 207). Chicago: University
of Chicago.
Prison Association of New York. (1871). Catalogue and rules for prison libraries. Annual
Report of the Executive Committee of the Prison Association of New York,
Prisons and Executions—The U.S. model: A historical introduction :: Monthly review
Retrieved 2/17/2014, 2014, from http://monthlyreview.org/2001/07/01/prisons-andexecutions-the-u-s-model
RJ online — Retrieved 9/2/2013, 2013, from http://www.restorativejustice.org/
The role of the prison guards union in California’s troubled prison system | ordinary times
Retrieved 2/17/2014, 2014, from http://ordinary-gentlemen.com/blog/2011/06/05/
the-role-of-the-prison-guards-union-in-californias-troubled-prison-system
Roseman, C. P., Ritchie, M., & Laux, J. M. (2009). A restorative justice approach to
empathy development in sex offenders: An exploratory study. Journal of
Addictions & Offender Counseling, 29(2), 96-109.
Rosenblatt, L. (1995). Literature as Exploration. New York: Modern Language
Association of America.
Rossner, M. (2011). Emotions and interaction ritual: A micro analysis of restorative
justice British Journal of Criminology, 51(1), 95-119. doi:10.1093/bjc/azq075
Rothman, D. (1971). The Discovery of the Asylum; Social Order and Disorder in the New
Republic. Boston: Little, Brown.
Rubin, R. (1973). U.S. Prison Library Services and Their Theoretical Bases. UrbanaChampaign: University of Illinois, Graduate School of Library Science.
Rush, B. (1818). Medical inquiries and observations upon the diseases of the mind.
Philadelphia:
Seiter, R. and Kadela, R. (2003) Prisoner Reentry: What Works, What Does Not, and
What Is Promising Crime & Delinquency, 48(3) 360-388.

108

Second report of the prison inspectors. (1837). London: H.M.S.O.
Spector, H. K. (1957). Library program of the california state department of corrections.
Special Libraries, 48, 7.
Spreng, R.; McKinnon, M.; Mar, R; Levine, B. (2009). The Toronto Empathy
Questionnaire: Scale Development and Initial Validation of a Factor-Analytic
Solution to Multiple Empathy Measures Journal of Personality Assessment 91(1)
62-71.
St. John, P. (Feb. 10, 2014). Gov. Jerry Brown wins two more years to reduce prison
crowding - latimes.com 2014, Retrieved 4/6/2014.
Stanley, J. (1999). Reading to Heal: How to Use Bibliotherapy to Improve Your Life.
Boston, MA: Element Press.
Stam, D. H. (2002). International dictionary of library histories Routledge.
Sullivan, L. (1994). "Prison Libraries." Encyclopedia of Library History. By Wayne A.
Wiegand and Donald G. Davis. New York: Garland Pub. 510-13.
Sweeney, M. (2010). Reading is my window: books and the art of reading in women's
prisons. Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press.
Trounstine, J. (2005). Finding a voice : The practice of changing lives through literature
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Bounds v. smith, 430 u.s. 817 (1977).
Beard vs. banks, 04-1739 (2006).
Van Ness, Daniel W. (2010). In Strong K. H. (Ed.), Restoring justice : An introduction to
restorative justice New Providence, NJ: LexisNexis : Anderson Pub.
Vogel, B. and Sullivan, L. (2009). “Reachin’ Behind Bars: Library Outreach to Prisoners,
1798-2000” The Prison Library Primer: A Program for the Twenty-first Century.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Vygotskiĭ, L. 1896-1934. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, Mass., M. I. T.
Press.
Waggoner, W. (1982). “Clinton T. Duffy, Ex-Warden of San Quentin, is Dead at 84” The
New York Times October 14, 1982.

109

Waxler, R. P., & Trounstine, J. R. (1999). Changing lives through literature. Notre
Dame, Ind. : University of Notre Dame Press.
Weimerskirch, P. J. (1965). Benjamin rush and john minson galt, II: Pioneers of
bibliotherapy in america. Bulletin of the Medical Library Association, 53, 510-515.
Winters, C. A. (2000). Promising practices in adult correctional education. Journal of
Correctional Education, 51(4), 312.
Wood, S. (1932). Shades of the prison house: A personal memoir. London: Williams &
Northgate Ltd.
X, M. and Haley, A. (1966). The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New York: Grove.
Zaro, D. (2007). Teaching strategies for the self-actualized correctional educator: The
inside person vs. the outside person. Journal of Correctional Education, 58(1),
27-41.
Zehr, H. & Toews, B. (2004). Critical issues in restorative justice. Willan, Monsey, N.Y;
Cullompton, Devon, UK: Criminal Justice Press.

