©2014
Edith K. Beckett
All Rights Reserved

EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN CONSTRUCTS OF LIBRARY
VALUE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PUBLIC LIBRARY FUNDING:
A STUDY OF NEW JERSEY PUBLIC LIBRARIES
by
EDITH K. BECKETT
A dissertation submitted to the
Graduate School ‒ New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
In partial fulfillment of the requirements
For the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Graduate Program in Communication, Information and Library Studies
Written under the direction of
Daniel O. O’Connor, Ph.D.
And approved by

____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
New Brunswick, New Jersey
May 2014

UMI Number: 3642502

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3642502
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value
and Local Government Public Library Funding:
A Study of New Jersey Public Libraries
By EDITH K. BECKETT
Dissertation Director:
Daniel O. O’Connor, Ph.D.

As a result of the recent economic downturn many public libraries have had to lay
off staff and make reductions in the programs and services provided to their communities.
At the same time, the demand for access to electronic resources and other services means
that more and more people are making use of their public libraries. Despite a long
history of library evaluation and advocacy, many libraries are chronically underfunded,
and we still do not know what library administrators can do to effectively muster
increased funding for public libraries.
This study investigated three propositions about the relationships between
constructs of public library value and levels of public library municipal funding. The
study investigated these propositions by examining the library value constructs held by
public library directors and by mayors in New Jersey communities that provide tax
support for public libraries. The goal of the study was to identify the important value
constructs for each group, and to discover if there are relationships between specific
value constructs and levels of library funding.
ii

The researcher used surveys to gather data, and usable responses were received
from 88 public library directors and 52 mayors. The surveys asked respondents to use a
Likert scale to rate their level of agreement with a series of statements about library value
and the budget process. The resultant responses were analyzed using correlation analysis
and logistic regression. The respondents also provided answers to four open ended
questions identifying most and least effective types of budget information.
The study findings suggest that while value-funding link is not direct, there is
support for the claim that the public library is still a valued community institution.
Library advocacy efforts and the focus on library evaluation have been effective in
sustaining a shared culture around libraries. However, these activities are not the keys to
the library’s expansion or growth; these activities help libraries survive, but they will not
help them thrive. Securing additional funding does not appear to be about library
goodness, but may instead be about the weight of the library in a particular local
government resource allocation decision matrix.

iii

Dedication
To my mother, Margaret Kearse, my first and best teacher.
You are my hero!
To my sisters, Belinda, Joyce, Rhonda, and Nakia
who always believed and supported,
no matter how outrageous the dream.
To my husband Kenneth, and my daughters, Kearsa and Kalyse,
who walked the journey with me.
and
To Kaellin for making the future matter for us all!

iv

Acknowledgements
My Ph.D. journey has truly been long, with many hills, valleys, twists, and turns.
Along the way I have met and been assisted by a cadre of friends and colleagues. When
we met, you offered a kind word, a piece of advice, or an encouraging smile. Please
know that all were welcomed and received with the deepest gratitude.
Thank you to my dissertation advisor Dr. Dan O’Connor. Without your deep
knowledge of all things library, and your patience in guiding me through the process, this
dissertation would not exist. You gently, but firmly, pushed me past my self-imposed
limits and helped me to find my way through what had been a failing dissertation process.
Thank you also to Dr. Jana Varlejs, Dr. Betty Turock, and Dr. James Hughes for
lending their knowledge and expertise as members of my dissertation committee. I am
especially thankful to Dr. Varlejs and Dr. Turock who have served as informal mentors
and advisors (and when necessary, rescuers) throughout the course of my doctoral
studies. You have all helped me develop what I believe is a solid foundation as a
researcher and scholar.
I want to acknowledge the faculty and staff of the School of Communication and
Information, particularly Joan Chabrak, Dr. Claire McInerny, Dr. Marie Radford, Dr.
Harty Mokros, Dr. Paul Kantor, and Dr. Marija Dalbello for lessons learned through both
instruction and conversation. In addition, I wish to acknowledge the advice and support
of Dr. Annie Norman, for her careful reading and thoughtful comments on several of my
chapter drafts, Dr. Will Hires, who encouraged me to “just sit down and do it”, and Dr.
Jane Gavel, for helping me find “the words for things.”
I would not have made it through the program without the support,
encouragement and friendship of my fellow Ph.D. colleagues. It is impossible to name
v

all who helped, but I am especially grateful to Nicole Cooke, Marianne Martens, Sung
Un Kim, Paulette Kerr, Emily Seitz, Jannica Heinstrom, Jen deRichemond, and Hannah
Kwon. You all gave advice, encouragement and best of all, helped me see the fun hiding
in the midst of the drudgery.
I was fortunate to have the support of my friends and colleagues on the staff of the
New Jersey State Library, and of my “state worker” friends and colleagues from “Third
Thursday.” Thank you all for seeing “Dr. Edith” when I could not. I also extend a
special thank you to Norma Kalibbala, Robert Smith and all of my other friends who
asked about my studies, and then actually listened while I told you. You helped me
believe that what I was working on had “real-world” interest and value.
I wish to acknowledge the financial support provided by a Beverly E. Schoen
Research Fellowship and by a grant from New Jersey’s Laura Bush 21st Century
Librarian program. I extend special thanks to Connie Paul, Susan Briant, Peggy Cadigan,
Betty Turock, and Jana Varlejs, who were integral in securing the IMLS grant and
fostering my participation in the program.
Finally I want to thank my immediate and extended circle of family and friends.
You have shared every step of this journey, and it was your love and support that kept me
looking for ways to move forward. I am deeply grateful for you all.

vi

Table of Contents
Abstract of the Dissertation ………………………………………………….....

ii

Dedication ……………………………...………………………………………… iv
Acknowledgements ………………………………………………………………. v
Table of Contents …………………………...……………………………………. vii
List of Tables …………………………………………………………………...

xi

List of Figures …...……………………………………………………………….. xiii
Chapter One: Background to the Study ……………………………………….

1

Introduction ……………...……………………………………………………….. 1
Advocacy as a Response to Economic Challenges ………………………………. 2
Demonstrating the Value of Public Libraries …………...……………………...

4

Financial Management Practices and Library Value …………...………………... 7
Library Evaluation …………..……………………………………………………

8

Measuring Organizational Effectiveness ……………...………………………….

11

Standards and Ranking Systems ………..………………………………………..

12

The Role of Library Valuation Studies ...………………………………………… 15
Statement of the Problem ……………...…………………………………………. 18
The Purpose of the Study ……………...…………………………………………. 20
Research Propositions and Research Questions …....…………………………..

28

Value of the Study ……………...………………………………………………

29

Definitions of Key Terms ……………...……………………………………….

30

Chapter Two: Literature Review ………………....………………………….

33

Introduction ……………...……………………………………………………….. 33
Library Standards ……………...…………………………………………………. 34
Moving Beyond Standards and Input Measures …...……………………………..

38

Role Setting and Planning ……………..………….……………………………… 44
Library Evaluation Models ……………..………………………………………...

47

Library Valuation Studies ……………...………………………………………… 53
Measuring Direct Economic Benefits ……...…………………………….. 54
Measuring Indirect Economic Benefits of Libraries ……..………………

58

Using Public Library Economic Valuation Studies to Demonstrate Value. 61
vii

State-level Library Valuation Studies ……...…………………………….. 64
Valuation Studies of Regional and Local Public Libraries ……...……….. 68
Measuring Library Goodness …………...………………………………………... 72
Implications for the Current Study ……………...……………………………...

79

Chapter Three: Methodology ………………………………………………...

82

Study Design ……………...……………………………………………………… 82
Study Population ……………...………………………………………………….. 84
Limitations of the Research Design …………………….………………………... 87
Instrumentation and Data Collection …………………………………………...

88

Chapter Four: Descriptive Statistics …………………….…………………….. 94
Survey of Local Government Officials ……………...…………………………… 94
Mayors’ Ratings of Value Statements ……...…………………………..

96

Mayors’ Ratings of Budget Statements ……...…………………………

100

Survey of Public Library Directors ……………...……………………………….. 104
Public Library Directors’ Ratings of Value Statements ………………..

106

Public Library Directors’ Ratings of Budget Statements ………………

110

Communicating Value to Library Colleagues ……...…………………..

114

Communicating Value to Government Officials ………….…………….

116

Supplemental Data …………...…………………………………………………... 119
Equalized Valuation …...…………………………………………………. 119
U.S. Census Data ….…….………………………………………………..

121

Data from NJ Library Statistics …………………………………………

122

Chapter Five: Analysis and Discussion ……………..………….……………… 125
Research Proposition One — The Relationships Between Library Directors’
Descriptions of Library Value and Information Included in Budget Requests ......

126

Research Question 1A: How Library Directors Communicate Library
Value to Local Government Officials ……………………..…………….

126

Research Question 1B: The Information Library Directors Use to
Support Their Budget Requests …………………………………………

127

Discussion of Research Proposition One: The Relationship Between
Descriptions of Library Value and Information Included in Budget
Requests …………………………………………………………….……

129

viii

Research Proposition Two: The Relationships between the Value Constructs of
Library Directors and Levels of Library Funding ………………………..…….

134

Research Question 2A: Public Library Directors’ Ratings of Value
Constructs ……………………………………………………………….

134

Research Question 2B: Value Constructs and Levels of Funding ….…...

136

Frequently Offered and Less-Frequently Offered Library Programs and
Services ………………………………………………………………..

141

Discussion of Research Proposition Two: The Relationships Between
the Value Constructs of Library Directors and Levels of Library
Funding ……………………………………………………………....…

145

Research Proposition Three: The Relationships Between the Value Constructs
of Library Directors and the Value Constructs of Local Government Officials .

146

Research Question 3A: Local Government Officials’ Ratings of Value
Constructs ……………..………………………………………………..

146

Research Question 3B: Comparing the Value Constructs of Public
Library Directors and Local Government Officials …………………….

148

Research Question 3C: Comparing the Value Constructs of Public
Library Directors and Local Government Officials …………………….

154

Discussion of Research Proposition Three: The Relationships Between
the Value Constructs of Library Directors and the Value Constructs of
Local Government Officials …………………………………………….. 157
Greatest and Least Influences on Securing Funding ……………...……………

159

Local Government Officials’ Reports of Factors Having the Greatest
Impact on Their Funding Decisions …………………………….……...

161

Local Government Officials’ Reports of Factors Having the Least
Impact on Their Funding Decisions ………………...…………………

163

Public Library Directors’ Reports of Factors Having the Greatest Impact
on the Success of Their Budget Requests ………………………………

165

Public Library Directors’ Reports of Factors Having the Least Impact
on the Success of Their Budget Requests ……………………..………

168

An Alternative Look at Value Constructs and Funding ………………………..

170

Data Summary ………………………...……………………………………..

175

Chapter Six: Study Implications and Conclusions ……………….…………

179

ix

Study Overview ………………………………………………………………...

179

Revisions to the Conceptual Model Based on the Research Study ………….….. 180
The Role of Culture ………...…………………………………………………..

184

The Role of Resource Allocation Behavior ………...………………………….

187

Study Implications .……………………………………………………………..

189

Limitations of the Study ………………………………………...……...………

193

Future Research ……………………..…...……………………………………..

194

Appendices …………………………………………………………………….

196

Appendix A

Survey Recruitment Letters ……...……………………………..

196

Appendix B

Informed Consent Documents ……...…………………………..

202

Appendix C

Survey of Public Library Directors (SPLD) ……...…………….

208

Appendix D

Survey of Local Government Officials (SLGO) ……...………..

213

Appendix E

Survey Emails ……...…………………………………………..

222

Appendix F

Code Book for Quantitative Analyses ……...…………………..

224

Appendix G Results of the Survey of Respondents’ Websites to Identify
Offered Programs ……………………………………………………….

228

Appendix H Instructions, Codes, and Coding Sheets for Open-Ended Survey
Responses ……………….………...…………………………………………….

232

References ……………………………………………………………………..

259

x

List of Tables
Table 1.1: Comparison of Public School and Public Library Funding Changes
in the Years Preceding and Succeeding State-level Public Library Valuation
Studies …………………………………………………………………………..

17

Table 3.1: Research Propositions, Questions, and Resultant Data …….……….

90

Table 4.1: Survey of Local Government Officials: Number of Municipalities in
Survey Population and Number of Usable Surveys Returned ….………………

95

Table 4.2: Descriptive Statistics of the Mayors’ Ratings of Library Value
Statements ………….…………………………………………………………...

97

Table 4.3: Descriptive Statistics of the Mayors’ Ratings of the Importance of
Library Information to Their Most Recent Budget Decision ………..…………..

101

Table 4.4: Survey of Public Library Directors: Number of Municipalities in
Survey Population and Number of Usable Surveys Returned ……..……………

105

Table 4.5: Descriptive Statistics of the Library Directors’ Ratings of the
Importance of Library Value Statements ………..………………………………

107

Table 4.6: Descriptive Statistics of the Library Directors’ Ratings of the
Importance of Library Information to Their Most Recent Budget Request …….

111

Table 4.7: Descriptive Statistics of the Library Directors’ Ratings of the
Likelihood of Using Certain Types of Information to Communicate Library
Value to Library Colleagues …………………………………………………...

114

Table 4.8: Descriptive Statistics of Library Directors’ Ratings of the Likelihood
of Using Certain Types of Information to Communicate Library Value to
Government Officials …………………………………………………………...

117

Table 4.9: Descriptive Statistics for Four Variables Derived From
Supplemental Data Sources ………………………………..……………………

123

Table 5.1: Concepts Library Directors are Very Likely to Discuss When
Describing Their Library’s Value to Local Government Officials ……………..

127

Table 5.2: Concepts Library Directors Rate as Very Important to Include in
Their Budget Justifications ……………………………………………………...

129

Table 5.3: Significant Correlations Between Library Directors’ Ratings of
Value Communication Concepts and Library Directors’ Ratings of Budget
Information Concepts …………………………………………………..………

130

Table 5.4: Library Directors’ Ratings of Concepts Describing the Ways That
Their Library Adds Value to Their Communities ………………………………

136

Table 5.5: The Observed and Predicted Frequencies for Above Minimal Level
Funding by Logistic Regression of Library Directors’ Ratings of All Value
Statements ……………………………………………………………………...

138

xi

Table 5.6: Logistic Regression Analysis Showing How Well Library Directors’
Ratings of All Value Statements Predict Funding Above 1/3 mil ……………..

138

Table 5.7: The Observed and Predicted Frequencies for Above Minimal Level
Funding by Logistic Regression of Library Directors’ Ratings of Selected
Value Statements ………………………………………………………………... 140
Table 5.8: Logistic Regression Analysis Showing How Well Library Directors’
Ratings of Selected Value Statements Predict Funding Above 1/3 mil ………..

140

Table 5.9: Value Statements Representing Frequently Offered and LessFrequently Offered Programs and Services ……………………………………..

144

Table 5.10: Local Government Officials’ Ratings of the Ways That Their
Library Adds Value to Their Communities …………………………………….

147

Table 5.11: Results of t-test Comparing Means of Local Government Officials’
and Public Library Directors’ Ratings of Library Value Statements ………….

150

Table 5.12: The Observed and Predicted Frequencies for Above Minimal Level
Funding by Logistic Regression of Local Government Officials’ Ratings of All
Value Statements ……………………………………………………………….

155

Table 5.13: Logistic Regression Analysis Showing How Well Local
Government Officials’ Ratings of All Value Statements Predict Funding Above
1/3 mil …………………………………………………………………………..

156

Table 5.14: Factors Most Influential on Local Government Officials’ Most
Recent Library Funding Decision ……………………………………………...

163

Table 5.15: Factors Least Influential on Local Government Officials’ Most
Recent Library Funding Decision ……………………………………………...

165

Table 5.16 – Factors Most Effective in Public Library Directors’ Most Recent
Budget Request ………………………………………………………………...

167

Table 5.17 – Factors Least Effective in Public Library Directors’ Most Recent
Budget Request ………………………………………………………………...

170

xii

List of Figures
Figure 1.1: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of
Library Value and Local Government Public Library Funding – Community
Perspective ………………………………………………………………………

22

Figure 1.2: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of
Library Value and Local Government Public Library Funding – Local
Government Officials’ Perspective ……………………………………………..

23

Figure 1.3: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of
Library Value and Local Government Public Library Funding – Library
Director’s Perspective …………………………………………………………..

24

Figure 1.4: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of
Library Value and Local Government Public Library Funding ………………...

26

Figure 2.1: Dimensions and Expectations of Library Standards …….………….

41

Figure 2.2: Orr’s Framework of the Relationships Among the Variables that
Contribute to Library Goodness ………..………………………………………..

74

Figure 2.3: An Alternative Public Library Management Model ….…………….

79

Figure 4.1: Frequency Distributions of Mayors’ Ratings of Library Value
Statements ……………………………………………………………………...

98

Figure 4.2: Frequency Distributions of Mayors’ Ratings of the Importance of
Information to Budget Decisions ………………………………………………

102

Figure 4.3: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of Library
Value Statements ………………………………………………………………... 108
Figure 4.4: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of the
Importance of Certain Types of Information to Budget Request …….…………

112

Figure 4.5: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of the
Likelihood of Using Certain Types of Information to Communicate Library
Value to Library Colleagues …..………………………………………………...

115

Figure 4.6: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of the
Likelihood of Using Certain Types of Information to Communicate Library
Value to Government Officials …...……………………………………………..

118

Figure 5.1: Comparison of the Means of Public Library Directors’ and Mayors’
Ratings of Value Statements: Group 1 …………………………………………

149

Figure 5.2: Comparison of the Means of Public Library Directors’ and Mayors’
Ratings of Value Statements: Group 2 …………………………………………

149

Figure 5.3: Comparison of the Means of Public Library Directors’ and Mayors’
Ratings of Value Statements: Group 3 .…………………………………………

150

xiii

Figure 5.4: Comparison of the Means of Public Library Directors’ and Mayors’
Ratings of Value Statements: Group 4 …………………………………………

150

Figure 5.5: Comparison of Local Government Officials’ and Library Directors’
Ratings of Value Added by Provision of Access to Books, CDs, and DVDs ….

151

Figure 5.6: Comparison of Local Government Officials’ and Library Directors’
Ratings of Value Added by Provision of Free Internet Access ………………...

152

Figure 5.7: Comparison of Local Government Officials’ and Library Directors’
Ratings of Value Added by Provision of Access to New Technology ………...

152

Figure 5.8: Comparison of Mayors’ and Library Directors’ Ratings of Value
Added by Provision of Services and Support for Local Businesses …………...

153

Figure 5.9: Scatterplot showing the Relationship between the Value Statement
Ratings and the 2011 Millage Rates ……………………………………………

171

Figure 5.10: Scatterplot Showing the Relationship Between Value Statement
Ratings and 2011 Per Capita Library Support …………………………………

172

Figure 5.11: Relationship Between Mayors’ Ratings of Value Statements and
the Millage Rate for Selected Municipalities ……………………………………

174

Figure 5.12: Relationship Between Library Directors’ Ratings of Value
Statements and the Millage Rate for Selected Municipalities …………………... 174
Figure 6.1: Revisions to Conceptual Model Suggested by Study Analysis and
Discussion ……………………………………………………………………...

176

Figure 6.2: Revised Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs
of Library Value and Local Government Public Library Funding ……………..

177

xiv

1
Chapter One – Background to the Study
Introduction
Since 2008, the governments in at least 46 states and the District of Columbia
have had to cut funding in all major areas of state services. These cuts were enacted
“because revenues from income taxes, sales taxes, and other revenue sources used to pay
for these services declined due to the recession” (Johnson, Oliff, & Williams, p. 1).
Another effect of the recession was a significant decrease in the funds available to
support local government services, including public libraries. A 2009 report released by
the American Library Association documents that “69.2 percent of public libraries in
FY2008 and 67.7 percent in FY2009 saw little or no meaningful increases in operating
budgets” (Davis, 2009, p. 14). This has caused many libraries to lay off staff, cut hours,
and make other reductions in the programs and services that they provide to their
communities. However, at the same time that libraries are being cut, more and more
people are making use of their public libraries. The same report states that “25.4 million
people reported using their public library more than 20 times in the last year, up from
20.3 million households in 2006” (Davis, 2009, p. 4). This represents a 25.1 percent
increase in public library use in a three year period. This added demand is closely related
to a desire to access to electronic information and resources using computers and related
technologies; resources which when unavailable at home are often readily available
through the local public library. It appears that during this most recent economic
downtown public libraries were in a situation of high levels of demand and decreasing
economic resources.

2
Although the current economic situation seems dire, it is not new for many public
libraries. Examination of library-related news stories during any economic downturn will
reveal stories of budget cuts, layoffs, and library closings. The National Bureau of
Economic Research (2010) indicates that the U.S. economy was in recession from 19901991. A 1991 article in American Libraries documented funding and service cuts in
public libraries all across the United States, including a proposal in New Jersey to
eliminate dedicated funding for public libraries (Flagg, 1991). Move forward to the
recession of 2002 (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010) and we find an
American Libraries story about researchers who found statistical support for the increase
in public library use during an economic recession (Lynch, 2002). After statistically
controlling for seasonal variations, and the normal growth and decline in circulation
figures, the researchers found that “circulation [was] 8% above trend in March 2001, the
date when the recession officially began… [and] it stayed well above trends, an average
of 9.1% above, for the rest of [that] year” (p. 63). Although the recession that began
2007 ended in 2009 (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011), in FY 2011, public
libraries were still reporting high levels of use and declining levels of funding (Reid,
2012).
Advocacy as a Response to Economic Challenges
While economic recessions and the challenges that they pose for public libraries
are not new, what has changed is the library profession’s willingness and ability to
respond to these challenges. At the national level, the American Library Association’s
Office for Library Advocacy provides training and support on a variety of library issues,
including coordination of opposition or support for library-related legislation, and

3
training to help librarians advocate on behalf of libraries at the state and local levels. The
office also provides support for public relations campaigns like Library Snapshot Day
(American Library Association, n.d.b), which encourages libraries to capture a “snapshot”
of activities within a specified time frame, and the “ilovelibraries.org” website, which is
designed to provide information to the general public about libraries and library-related
issues. American Library Association’s Public Information Office also maintains a
website called Funding News @ your library (American Library Association, n.d.a),
where library supporters can get breaking news about library funding from all around the
United States.
Many state library associations, following the American Library Association’s
model, have included library advocacy and promotion as key components of their
organizational missions (cf. the library associations in New Jersey, Alaska,
Massachusetts, South Carolina, and New Mexico). State level advocacy can take many
forms and supports a range of library activities, including compiling and providing
information about the economic value of the state’s libraries. In Massachusetts, the
library association created a library value calculator (available at
http://www.ilovelibraries.org/getinformed/getinvolved/calculator ) that allows individuals
to calculate the dollar value of their use of public library programs and services. In New
Jersey, the New Jersey Library Association sponsored 2007 research project that
surveyed state residents about the perceived value of public libraries (Potomac
Incorporated, 2007). The researchers found that a majority of the respondents saw
positive economic impacts from their local public libraries, and considered the funding of
public libraries to be a good use of public money. Many state library associations also

4
provide updates on state and local budget issues and provide tools that allow librarians
and library users to easily contact state and local government officials about pending
legislation and budgetary issues.
Demonstrating the Value of Public Libraries
An extension of the advocacy efforts of the library profession is the desire by
librarians to demonstrate the value that they add to their communities. Early attempts to
demonstrate the value of public libraries were embodied in library standards. According
to Martin (1972) each version of the national standards reflected the then current ideas
about public library service and organization, with each revision designed to improve the
base-level quality of library services. The American Library Association (ALA)
standards for public libraries were first issued in 1933, with major revisions in 1943,
1956, and 1966. In the 1970s as ALA began to focus on planning and evaluating library
services, individual states began to develop their own standards, many of which began as
adoptions and/or expansions of the ALA standards. In 1974 Blasingame and Lynch
added to the emphasis on output data by suggesting that criteria for library measurement
should:
1. focus on future planning rather than measuring past performance;
2. assist in the management of a specific library instead of focusing on
comparisons between libraries;
3. use outputs showing what users actually get from the library to inform
staffing and acquisitions. (p. 19)
The library profession embraced these recommendations and began to move away from a
national set of prescriptive standards to library planning and evaluation frameworks that

5
reflected the growing recognition that library services are best designed and evaluated in
response to the needs of the local community.
By 2011, forty-seven U.S. states had state standards for public libraries (Public
Library Statistics Cooperative, 2011). “The advent of federal Library Services and
Construction Act monies intermingled with state aid monies [provided the states] with a
financial carrot with which to cajole the use or application of state standards” (Rohlf,
1982, p. 72). This financial carrot is not as significant as one might expect because “state
funding is generally not a primary revenue source for public library budgets” (Kelley,
2012, p. 37). Federal and state funding account for about ten percent of total public
library funding; the remaining eighty percent comes from local tax revenues (DeRosa &
Johnson, 2008). In many states, the standards specify the minimum levels of service that
libraries must provide in order to receive state aid. However, this minimum service level
is not necessarily an indicator of high quality library service, and the state standards alone
do little to promote the improvement of library service beyond the minimum levels.
White (2007) suggests that libraries need to begin to account for the intangible
elements that are also a significant part of the value created by libraries. The discussion
of intangibles can be traced back to Orr’s 1973 discussion of the measurement of library
goodness. The discussion was picked up again in 1982 by Buckland, in 1990 by Rodger,
and in 2011 by Kim and Yu. These authors agree that there is no consensus on what
constitutes library goodness, but they all agree that libraries produce many intangible
benefits that must be accounted for in any discussion of library goodness. Priestly (2008)
connects the measurement of intangibles to the library budget by suggesting that local
governments conceptualize and fund libraries as the communities’ research and

6
development (R&D) expense. According to Priestly, “the R&D model posits that public
libraries will enrich, entertain, and educate the residents to become better persons, to
obtain better paying jobs, and to be able to pay local taxes and be productive citizens” (p.
125). While the R&D model moves the focus to long-term library outcomes, funding
decisions are often based on shorter term priorities. According to DeRosa and Johnson
(2008) while elected officials may have a positive view of the benefits of the public
library, and strongly believe that it improves the local quality of life, they rank the public
library low (just above park service and public health) on the list of public services that
they would support with a tax increase.
Many public libraries also attempt to demonstrate their value by showing that they
are effective stewards of the funds that they receive from their communities. This is
especially useful if libraries want to advocate for continued or increased funding. One of
the ways that library managers can demonstrate the quality of their fiscal management is
by providing information about benefits that come to the community as a result of tax
dollars given to libraries. Most often, the focus of these calculations are the operational
measures or tangible benefits generated by libraries, e.g. programs produced, books
circulated, or reference questions answered. These library output measures are often
assigned a dollar value so that they can be discussed within the context of the library’s
budget allocation. While this calculation can be used to inform various stakeholder
groups about the economic value generated by their support for public libraries, it is
unclear if this information leads to improved or continued library funding.

7
Financial Management Practices and Library Value
The established system of library management follows an industrial age model
that focuses on inputs (money, staff, and other resources) and outputs (circulation and
other use counts). This is useful information, but collecting this information is not
sufficient to help libraries demonstrate the value that they add to their communities. This
desire to demonstrate value coupled with growing demands from the public and local
government officials for libraries to account for their funding needs are moving public
libraries away from measuring inputs and outputs to the measurement of processes and
outcomes (Blasingame & Lynch, 1974; Rudd, 2000; Elliott, Holt, Hayden, & EdmondsHolt, 2007).
The interest in verifying impact and achieving results does not stem merely from
an attempt to better understand the effect of library programs and services on
users. Nationwide, program performance and results-based planning, budgeting,
and public reporting are becoming the norm. (Rudd, 2003, p. 19)
Constituency groups want to know why the library provides specific services and how
their specific group benefits from the services provided; implementation of sound
financial management practices are essential in the provision of this information.
In a discussion of financial management for libraries, Roberts (2003) identifies
three key financial management activities: deployment, which is the task of planning and
budgeting; sourcing, which is identifying funding sources to pay for the planned and
budgeted activities; and utilization, which is putting the planned and budgeted activities
into action. According to Roberts, deployment, sourcing, and utilization are supported by
the need for rich information about organizational activities, an awareness of how this

8
information relates to staff and users’ behavior, and sound processes for transforming this
knowledge into decisions and actions. In many public libraries, usage statistics provide
some of the information needed for decision and action by allowing library staff to track
when and how library programs and services are being used. These statistics can also be
used in library evaluation efforts which attempt to quantify the library’s programs and
services. Insight into users’ behavior is provided by understanding how people use the
library’s programs and services, what human and material resources are needed to
provide services, and how the library can best respond to changes in both demand and
supply of services. Implicit in Robert’s analysis is the belief that the data feeding the
managerial requirements is collected using empirically sound methods, and is collected
purposefully and with enough frequency to support responsive planning and decision
making.
Library Evaluation
Library users, funders (local, state, and federal), and many community members
want to know how they and their communities benefit from the tax support given to
libraries. In order to provide this information, libraries routinely conduct myriad
evaluations and report the results of these evaluations to a diverse audience. Evaluations
are conducted to assess everything from individual library staff performance via annual
performance reviews, to assessments of state library agency performance via Library
Services and Technology Act (LSTA) reviews conducted every five years by the federal
government’s Institute for Museum and Library Services (IMLS). The tendency for
constituency groups, especially funders, to require reports about performance information
has been called the accountability movement (Carman, 2010). Libraries have a long

9
history of collecting data about the interactions between the library and its users. The
propensity to collect data has intensified with the use of electronic systems, many of
which automatically collect usage data. Often, the data is collected and warehoused, with
only cursory attempts at in-depth analysis (Brooks-Kieffer, 2010). The pressures of the
accountability movement are pushing libraries to use their collected data. However, in
order to use the collected data to evaluate library operations and/or persuade constituency
groups, the gathered data must be analyzed for answers to specific queries, the actions
supported by the data must be planned and enacted, and then the data that results from
those actions must be analyzed and evaluated. This is a cyclical process where each
cycle generates new data and supports modified activities. “Each time an action is
evaluated the organization has learned more about the action itself and the organization’s
own process of evaluation” (Brooks-Kieffer, 2010, p.12). Collecting and analyzing data
within this framework leads organizations to engage in what Brooks-Kieffer describes as
“analysis-driven decision-making” (p. 12). Library evaluation can be a part of an
analysis-driven decision-making process only if it is conducted on a recurring basis, i.e.
cyclically, and the results of the evaluations are used to both evaluate past performance,
and to support actions to meet current and developing library needs. However, there is
no known link between a library management’s use of analysis-driven decision making,
and an increase in funding from local government sources.
It is increasingly clear that for libraries to demonstrate their value, they must
move beyond counting inputs and outputs to a systematic measurement of library
benefits. Zweizig (1990) suggests that the selection of appropriate measures and the
incorporation of those measures into a comprehensive evaluation process will make the

10
output measures more useful to libraries. He suggests the following eight criteria that can
be used to select appropriate measures:
1. Ease – Measurements should be easy to obtain because the more difficult
a measurement is to obtain, the more difficult it will be to ensure accurate
and consistent collection.
2. Meaningfulness – The data provided by the measure should have meaning
for at least one library constituency group because if no one cares about
the measure, then gathering the data will be a waste of time.
3. Intrusiveness – Collection of the data should be minimally intrusive for
both library users and library staff, since people tend to resist data
collection efforts that appear overly burdensome.
4. Comparability – Measures and data collection procedures should be
comparable to those used by similar programs and/or organizations.
5. Validity – Measures and data collection should tell library staff and what
they really want to know about libraries.
6. Reliability – Data should be recorded with very high levels of accuracy
and consistency. "It is not meaningful to say a measure is not valid or not
reliable. The question is, 'How valid is it? How reliable is it?'”
7. Controllability – Accurately interpret the results of the measures by
recognizing the level of control that the library does and does not have on
the outcomes that provide data for the measures.

11
8. Goal Relatedness – The library should choose to measure activities and
programs that relate to significant program or organizational goals. (p. 25)
While many library evaluation plans may not use all eight of the suggested criteria, the
design and execution of effective assessment plans will incorporate meaningfulness,
validity, reliability, controllability, and goal-relatedness.
Measuring Organizational Effectiveness
One of the goals of the accountability movement is to improve the operations of
the organizations that are evaluated (Van House, 1990; Laughlin & Wilson, 2008;
Hernon & Schwartz, 2011; Brown, 2011; Smith, 2011). Despite interest by researchers
and policymakers, there is no generally accepted set of criteria for assessing
organizational effectiveness (Cunningham, 1977; Matthews, 2004, 2011). Cunningham
(1977) identified several strategies that could be used to assess organizational
effectiveness. Rational goal and system resource approaches are best suited to evaluate
the performance of the organizational structure. Managerial process and organizational
development approaches are best when evaluating the performance of an organization’s
human resources structure. Bargaining, functional, and structural functional approaches
work best when evaluating the impact of organizational functions and /or activities. The
emphasis on structural viability, e.g. acquiring resources, using inputs to efficiently
achieve potential, and satisfying clients, places library evaluation studies firmly within
Cunningham’s description of the structural functional approach to assessment of
organizational effectiveness. The various assessment strategies are effective in different
situations, and their use depends upon the organizational situation to be evaluated.

12
Matthews (2011) reviews several models of assessing organizational effectiveness
in order to examine the role of “performance measures as surrogates for effectiveness” (p.
83). His analysis suggests that assessment frameworks can help libraries understand the
often complex relationships between inputs and performance.
None of the frameworks determines what outcome measures should be used. …
[The important] outcomes can be best accomplished if the library understands
how it adds value for each type of use of the library and its services. (p. 107)
The plethora of frameworks and approaches to library evaluation serve to underscore the
idea that the best approach is a balance between the resources of the organization and the
goals of the assessment.
Standards and Ranking Systems
At its best, library evaluation can help constituency groups make reasoned
decisions about resource deployment and service provision. If the evaluation criteria and
results are accepted by major stakeholder groups, then decisions based on the evaluation
are more likely to be seen as well-supported, even if those decisions are unpopular. If the
evaluation criteria and results are unsound, then any decisions based on the evaluation
may be difficult to support. “The [American Library] Association has long recognized
that standards … based on informed professional opinion rather than empirical
research… [have] limited credibility” (Bloss, 1976). Implicit in the concept of evaluation
is the need for comparison, i.e. a thing can be deemed “good” or “bad” only in
comparison to something else. Library evaluation often involves one of three kinds of
comparison. Libraries can compare their current performance to external standards; they
can compare their current performance to their past performance; or they can compare

13
their current performance to the current performance of a peer library or group of peer
libraries. Two recent efforts at developing a meaningful system of comparison are
Hennen’s American Public Library Ratings and the Library Journal Index of Public
Library Service.
Hennen (1999a, 1999b) advocates for the establishment of a system that allows
public libraries to compare their performance to that of other public libraries. His system,
referred to as Hennen’s American Public Library Ratings, or the HAPLR index, uses 15
factors to compare national input and output data from approximately 9000 public
libraries. The HAPLR index creates library peer groups based on the size of the
population served, and creates an index value based on the rankings of the selected
factors. The most common criticisms of the HAPLR index concern the construction of
the index. Lance and Cox (2000) use a correlation matrix to demonstrate that only four
of the fifteen measures used in the HAPLR index are “sufficiently closely related to each
other to be combined in an index” (p. 83). Lance and Cox also question the empirical
validity of the weights assigned to the index factors. Hennen (1999a) reports that the
assignment of weights was based on an informal poll of members of the PubLib listserv.
This is an example what Bloss (1976) described as measures based on informed
professional opinion rather than empirical research, so it is not surprising that their use
was questioned.
In response to the perceived shortcomings of the HAPLR index, Lyons and
Lance, with support from Library Journal and Baker & Taylor’s Bibliostat, developed
the Library Journal Index of Public Library Service, popularly known as America’s Star
Libraries (Lance & Lyons, 2008). The LJ index uses the same data sources as the

14
HAPLR index, but libraries are compared in peer groups based on reported levels of
operating expenditures. The LJ index seeks to correct perceived statistical errors in the
HAPLR index by including only variables validated by correlation and factor analysis.
This analysis results in four variables which are standardized using Z-scores (cf.
O’Connor, 1982), and then combined to derive an index value. The authors give each of
the variables equal weight, because they believe there is no empirical support for
differential weights. While there is statistical support for the methods used to select the
LJ index values, critics are concerned that the expenditure-based peer groups do not give
sufficient weight to differences, especially socioeconomic and demographic differences,
between communities (Burkett, 2009; Clapp, 2009). The use of expenditure-based peer
groups for comparison also appears to challenge Wheeler’s (1970) admonition that “the
logical statistical basis for library calculations and standards is the population of the
political unit which provides the basic tax funds to run the library; the population is what
the library should be serving” (p. 457).
Both the HAPLR index and the LJ index create a de facto three tiered system of
performance standards with the idea that most libraries would meet the very basic
standards in the first tier, fewer libraries would meet the more stringent standards in the
second tier, and even fewer would meet the most stringent standards in the third tier.
Each tier of standards includes those in the levels below and, in theory, libraries in each
tier can look at the peer libraries ranked above them for guidance on improving various
aspects of their performance. In both indexes, the libraries meeting the most stringent
standards are at the highest level of their respective peer groups, the majority of public
libraries fall in the middle ranges, and a few libraries fall below the minimum level. The

15
LJ index even makes a statistical correction so that no library receives a negative index
score. The indexes identify “good”, “better”, and “best” levels of service, but we still do
not know if receiving high rankings on either scale helps public library administrators
secure continued or additional funding.
The Role of Library Valuation Studies
A library valuation study is a method of library evaluation that emphasizes the
dollar value provided by library services. This value is most often expressed as a
benefit/cost ratio. Library valuation studies have been conducted at the state, regional
and local level. The state-level studies calculate the economic value generated by all
public library activity within a state, but is there any evidence that state-level benefit/cost
studies improve funding for the public libraries within the state? Six states: Florida,
South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Indiana, and Wisconsin, have conducted
statewide public library economic valuation studies, and only Vermont and Florida have
conducted multiple studies. In all of the studies the primary focus is on communicating
the value provided by public libraries; there is no evidence of an attempt to use the
findings to inform or support individual public library development or evaluation. What
impact have state-level valuation studies had on the funding and development of the
public libraries in the states in which they were conducted? Thus far, there have been no
published studies of any benefits that were linked to the publication of a state-level
library valuation study, but one of the possible impacts of library valuation studies is to
maintain or increase library funding.
There are many factors that contribute to levels of library funding, but we can
look for evidence of changes in funding levels in the years immediately following the

16
publication of a state-level public library valuation study. While data is not available for
all of the states in which state-level studies were conducted, we can examine results in
Florida, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. Using public library income data, taken from
several editions of the American Library Directory (2006, 2007, 2008, 2009), and
calculating the percentage increase or decrease for the years immediately preceding and
following a library valuation study revealed increases in public library income in the
years immediately following the valuation study. As an example, the Florida valuation
study was published in 2004. Public library income increased 7.58 percent from FY 2003
to FY 2004. The increase from FY 2004 to FY 2005 was 8.16 percent, and the postvaluation study increase (FY 2005 to FY 2006) was 13.18 percent.
To provide context, the changes in library funding can be compared to changes in
public school funding for the same periods. This is a valid comparison because both
public school and public library funding is provided by a mix of local, state, and federal
funds, so significant changes in the funding environment, e.g. cuts due to an economic
recession, could affect the funding streams of both entities. The school funding data,
taken from the National Center for Education Statistics reports on the revenue and
expenditures for public schools, allows us to see changes in public school funding during
the period surrounding the library valuation study.
In Florida, public school funding increased 30.72 percent from FY 2003 to FY
2006, which was 8.3 percentage points above the increase in library funding for the same
period. In Pennsylvania, the public school funding increase for FY 2003 to FY 2006 was
20.73 percent, which was 8.41 percentage points above the increase in library funding. In
South Carolina, the public library funding increase for FY 2003 to FY 2006 was 37.82,

17
20.84 percentage points above the increase in public school funding for that period.
Table 1.1 lists the values and percentage increases for public school and public library
funding for Pennsylvania, Florida, and South Carolina. While it is not possible to
conclude from this data that the changes in library funding were caused by the valuation
studies, the direction and magnitude of the increases in library funding lend some support
to the argument for a positive relationship between the publication of a library valuation
study and increases library funding, which in turn lends support to the claim that statelevel library valuation studies may increase state-level support. However, we do not
know if increases in state aid to libraries translate into commensurate increases in support
at the local level.
Table 1.1: Comparison of Public School and Public Library Funding Changes in the Years Preceding
and Succeeding State-level Public Library Valuation Studies
FLORIDA (Valuation study conducted in 2004)
FY

School ($)

% Change

Library ($)

% Change

2003
2004
2005
2006

18,984,106,000
21,042,495,000
22,633,476,000
24,816,807,000

10.84
7.56
9.65

476,548,877
476,548,877
515,446,820
583,396,628

7.58
8.16
13.80

% Change

Library ($)

% Change

6.48
7.38
5.80

294,311,140
293,809,062
306,686,828
330,560,677

-0.17
4.38
7.78

PENNSYLVANIA (Valuation study conducted in 2005)
FY

School ($)

2003
2004
2005
2006

18,751,160,000
19,966,276,000
21,439,695,000
22,638,987,000

SOUTH CAROLINA (Valuation study conducted in 2005)
FY
2003
2004
2005
2006
Notes:
1.
2.

School ($)
5,732,697,000
5,978,577,000
6,267,520,000
6,706,259,000

% Change
4.29
4.83
7.00

Library ($)
84,605,459
88,940,916
97,468,207
116,602,877

% Change
5.12
9.59
19.63

Library funding data taken from American Library Directory, [2006, 2007, 2008, 2009;]
School funding data taken from NCES reports of Revenues and Expenditures [Cohen & Johnson, 2004; NCES
Common Core, 2004; Hill & Johnson, 2005; Zhou, Honegger, & Gaviola, 2007; Zhou, 2008.

18
Statement of the Problem
Public library administrators use a variety of methods to demonstrate the tangible
and intangible value the library adds to its community. These contributions are often
demonstrated at the local level with quantitative and qualitative data about the library’s
programs and services. While individual libraries can also compile quantitative
cost/benefit data, many libraries do not have the funding or expertise to conduct regular
cost/benefit analyses. Local public library activities are also insufficient to capture any
regional economic impacts generated by public library activities; calculation of these
larger, often indirect effects is best accomplished by analysis of an aggregated group of
libraries, e.g. at the multi-city, county, or state level (Elliott, Holt, Hayden, & Edmonds
Holt, 2007). In many states, public library input and output data is routinely compiled by
a state library agency. This data is used for many purposes, including providing evidence
of the quality of public library services within the state, and providing insight into areas
that need development and improvement. The Public Library Association’s Public
Library Data Service also compiles extensive public library usage data. This data is used
to report on past library activities, e.g. how many books were circulated last year, but it is
not often used as a part of a program of analysis-driven decision making focused on
library evaluation and development.
Public library administrators are under increasing pressure to demonstrate the
value that libraries add to their communities. Indicators of this pressure are the
continuing effort to develop ranking systems that allow libraries to compare themselves
to peers on a national level, and the development of state and local standards designed to
reflect community standards of library quality. The pressure is most evident in public

19
library budget constraints. In New Jersey, for example, state funding for library
programs in the FY 2011 state budget was reduced by 42 percent from the amount in the
FY 2010 budget; and the FY 2012 budget maintained the FY 2011 funding levels (New
Jersey Library Association, 2011). Recently passed legislation puts additional fiscal
pressure on New Jersey’s public libraries. P.L. 2010, c. 83 (A2911 / S2070) requires
transfer of municipal free library surplus amounts above 20 percent to municipality for its
general purposes, which may include property tax relief, in effect, creating the possibility
of the library as a supplemental source of municipal funds. P.L. 2011, c.38
(S2068/A2679/A3240) provides dedicated line item on property tax bill to fund
municipal free public libraries and joint free public libraries, which makes the tax support
given to public libraries much more visible to individual tax property tax payers.
Public library administrators are looking for ways to consistently and clearly
demonstrate the value that libraries provide to their communities. Their actions suggest
the belief that establishing empirically sound measures of public libraries’ value will
provide all constituency groups with data to support informed decision-making about
library funding. The actions of library administrators incorporate the often unspoken
assumptions that there is a relationship between well-run organizations and well-funded
organizations, and that clear value demonstrations will lead to increased or at the very
least continued funding.
There are many ways to evaluate the performance of libraries, but we still do not
know the impact of using any of the evaluation programs. How does knowing the
library’s cost/benefit ratio, or its HAPLR or LJ index score help library administrators
improve their services or successfully advocate for continued or expanded financial

20
support? Many public libraries must meet minimum standards to receive state and
federal library aid, but does merely meeting the minimum standards lead to better library
services or increased funding? If not, what else should the libraries consider? DeRosa
and Johnson (2008) assert that “voter’s perceptions of the role the library plays in their
lives and in their communities are more important determinants of their willingness to
increase funding than their age, gender, race, political affiliation, life stage or income
level” (p. 4-1). This suggests that there is some relationship between levels of funding
and community perceptions of value, but how do library administrators know what the
community values about the library? Arns and Daniel (2007) assert that the library’s
value in the community can be defined by how well it interprets and responds to
community needs; how well it functions as a community asset; how well it serves as a
community meeting place and safety zone; and how trusted it is as an ethical institution
within the community. Do library administrators conceptualize library value in
accordance with Arns and Daniel’s propositions, or do they focus primarily on
demonstrating how well they meet standards, or documenting how efficiently the library
uses its allocated funds? Despite a long history of library evaluation, we know little
about how library administrators work with their local governments to muster support for
increased funding for public libraries.
The Purpose of the Study
This study examines the relationships between constructs of library value and
public library funding. For the purposes of this study constructs of library value are the
mental representations that describe ideas about the benefits that can be associated with
the library. These benefits can be individual or societal and the ideas about the benefits

21
are assumed to vary with the experiences and perspective of the perceiver. The
conceptual model for this study considers the relationship between local government
funding and constructs of public library value from the perspectives of three key
stakeholder groups: the community, local government officials, and public library
directors.
Library users are often mobilized by librarians to contact federal, state, and local
government officials to protest library funding cuts or to mobilize their neighbors to
support local budget initiatives. However, we must keep in mind that library users are
generally a subset of a larger community, and it is input from this larger community that
helps government officials set their budget priorities. When the larger portion of the
community does not place a high value on library programs and services the library may
lose value in the minds of government officials, especially when compared to services
like schools or roads. When the library is not highly valued by the community, cuts to
the library budget cause much less community consternation than cuts to schools or cuts
to road repair. One factor that may influence the community’s ideas about the library are
their beliefs about the library’s purpose in the community and how well the library’s
services correspond with those beliefs.
The library’s level of correspondence is most evident in the programs and services
that are offered to the community. The people in the community must believe that the
library has desirable programs and services, even if they do not make use of these
services. This desirability is not a measure of the objective quality of the library services;
many communities have well-loved libraries that provide services of questionable
quality. The library is valuable to a community if a significant portion of the community

22
feels that what the library offers is important to the community, and the community must
also believe that the library should be maintained just in case they need it.
Communication of these library value constructs to local government officials
may play a role in shaping the official’s constructs of library value. Figure 1.1 shows the
relationship from the perspective of members of the community served by the library.
The dotted line between utilization of library programs and local government officials’
library value constructs indicates the uncertain relationship between the officials’ value
constructs and data about utilization of library programs.
Figure 1.1.: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and Local
Government Public Library Funding – Community Perspective

Figure 1.2 shows the factors that may influence local government officials’
constructs of library value and the library’s budget allocation. Local government
officials may have their personal constructs of the value of the library in the community.
They may also be influenced by community feedback about the library and from

23
information provided by library administrators. When considering the library’s budget
requests, the local government officials’ constructs of the library’s value to the
community may also be influenced by competing budget priorities, e.g. the need to fund
all municipal services, including libraries, and the perceived relative importance of each
of the services to the needs of the community. These value constructs may be further
shaped by the availability of funds and the overall municipal economic environment. The
interaction of all of these factors affects whether a legislator values the library as an
essential community service to be funded at the requested levels, as a community
recreational service that can be cut when budgets are tight, or as a community service
whose value falls somewhere between these two poles.
Figure 1.2.: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and Local
Government Public Library Funding – Local Government Officials’ Perspective

Figure 1.3 shows some of the factors that influence library administrators’

24
constructs of library value. The library’s budget allocation directly impacts the ability of
library staff to deliver programs and services. This generalized ability will be referred to
as library capability. Library capability and library administrators’ professional and
personal ideas about library service are used to provide the programs and services
believed to be beneficial to their communities. Some members of the community become
active library users and provide data that library administrators can use to evaluate their
service choices. The capability, the programs and services, the utilization data, and
information from various evaluation methods all contribute to the library administrators’
constructs of the library’s value to the community. These constructs of value influence
both what information library administrators share with local government officials and
with the community-at-large. It may also influence the amount of money the library
requests from local government to support its operations.
Figure 1.3.: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and Local
Government Public Library Funding – Library Director’s Perspective

25
Figure 1.4 shows the full model, integrating legislator, community and library
perspectives. According to this model, constructs of library value play a key role in the
public library’s budget allocation. In the model, one of the key value constructs is that of
local government officials, a second is that of library administrators. The activity of both
groups has a direct impact on the kinds of library services and programs that will be
offered in a community. The library administrators attempt to add value by their program
and service decisions, and local government officials decide how much of the available
pool of municipal funds will go to the library to support those decisions. The model also
suggests that government officials’ library value constructs may be influenced by both
the community and by the library administrators, however little research has explored the
extent to which library administrators and local government officials share value
constructs. It is also not clear if shared value constructs have any significant relationship
to levels of municipal library funding.
Figure 1.4 also shows two of the major limitations of this study. A very obvious
limitation is that the study does not directly address the influence of the socioeconomic
and educational levels of the community on library funding. Research by O’Connor and
Fortenbaugh (1999) suggests that communities with high family income levels or with
high educational levels are more likely to have well-funded and well used public
libraries. This relationship continues to be validated, as for example in recent studies by
McLaren & Zappala (2002); Zhang, Wang, & Kolodinsky (2010); and Sin, (2012).
While there may be a significant relationship between library use and individual factors
like income and educational level, these alone do not account for all of the factors that
may influence public library funding. It is possible that other factors, including

26
stakeholders’ constructs of value may also play a role in determining the level of
financial support a community provides for its public library.
Figure 1.4.: Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and Local
Government Public Library Funding
E
D
U
C
A
T
I
O
N
A
L

P
O
L
I
T
I
C
S

L
E
V
E
L

SOCIOECONOMIC LEVEL

Another limitation of the study is that it does not consider how the political
climate of a community may influence library funding decisions. Public funding
decisions also have a political aspect, and well-funded libraries often have politically
savvy directors. However, studying the relationships between politics and library
funding is beyond the scope of this study. Political factors, and community
socioeconomic and educational levels are significant influences on almost all community
life, but they alone do not account for all of the variability that we see in levels of public
library funding. While many librarians work to improve the educational, and even the

27
socioeconomic conditions in their communities, there is often little an individual library
can do in the short-term to significantly change these important aspects of a community.
This study focuses on aspects that are believed to be directly within the control of
the librarians and local government officials, i.e. how they perceive library value, and
what affects these value perceptions have on their library budget and funding actions.
The current study examines areas of public library funding where it is believed that
individual ideas and actions can make a difference in funding levels. Understanding
more about the relationships depicted in this model may help LIS researchers and
professionals understand an interesting component of the very complex public library
funding picture.
This study examines library directors’ constructs of library value and the extent to
which these constructs mirror the library value constructs of local government officials
responsible for the library’s budget allocation. The study attempts to discover if
increased library funding can be associated with the ways in which public library
directors communicate information about their libraries’ value to local government
officials during the budget justification process. This is accomplished by testing for
associative relationships between public library directors’ conceptualizations of library
value and the types of information that they use to support their budget requests. The
study also describes the library value constructs most often used when library directors
work to secure funding.
An underlying assumption of this research is that if public library directors are
successful in their efforts to communicate library value, then local government officials,
who are key to the library funding process, will share some of the library directors’

28
library value constructs. In other words, in cases where the library received additional or
continued funding, both library directors and local government officials should have
similar ideas about the value of the public library in the community. This study also
examines local government officials’ constructs of library value, looking for relationships
between these constructs, the value constructs of public library directors, and support for
public library budgets.
Research Propositions and Research Questions
This study explored three research propositions. Data collection to evaluate each
proposition was guided by associated research questions.
P1

There is a significant relationship between the library administrators’ descriptions

of library value to local government officials and the information that they provide to
support their budget requests.
RQ1A How do library directors describe the value of their libraries to local
government officials?
RQ1B What kinds of information do library directors use as evidence to support
their budget requests?
P2

Library administrators’ assessments of library value that primarily focus on

frequently offered library services, such as lending books or children’s programming, are
more likely to be associated with higher levels of funding than assessments of library
value that focus on less-frequently offered library programs and services, e.g. services for
local businesses or providing access to e-government.
RQ2A Is there an observable focus of public library directors’ assessments of
library value?

29
RQ2B Is there a relationship between the focus of public library directors’ value
assessments and library funding above the required minimum level?
P3

Local government administrators who are responsible for library funding will

have library value constructs that are consistent with library value constructs of library
administrators, and the level of agreement will be associated with higher levels of library
funding, i.e. the value constructs that are rated highly by both groups will also be
associated with funding above the minimum level.
RQ3A How do local government officials who are responsible for library funding
conceptualize library value?
RQ3B Is there a relationship between the library value constructs of local
government officials and those of public library directors?
RQ3C Can similarities in the value constructs of local government officials and
public library directors be associated with higher levels of public library funding?
Value of the Study
Research conducted during this study supports the development of a model of the
variety of ways library administrators and local government officials think about public
library value. This study also provides information about what each group values, and
which of these values are shared. Ultimately, the results of this study can provide insight
for policy makers, researchers and library administrators about the relationships between
continued or increased library funding and the ways that library value is conceptualized.

30
Definitions of Key Terms
Terms used in this study are defined as follows:
Accountability movement refers to the tendency for constituency groups, especially
funders, to require reports about performance information from publicly
supported entities.
Conceptualizations of library value are the ways that people think of and describe what
they believe the library contributes to the community, also referred to as library
value constructs.
Consumer surplus represents the difference between the market price of a good and the
amount a consumer is actually willing to pay for the good.
Contingent valuation is a survey methodology developed to assign value to non-market
goods.
Culture is a system of defining meaning that is expressed through social rules or
agreements that something – an object, a behavior, and idea – represents
something else.
Direct benefits refer to changes in status or indicators received without intervening
factors or influences.
Economic impact studies estimate the change in regional economic indicators, such as
income and employment, resulting from the introduction or loss of an activity.
Indirect benefits refer to changes in status or indicators received as a result of
intervening factors or influences.
Library capability refers to the generalized ability of library staff to deliver programs
and services to their communities.

31
Library evaluation refers to the use of a variety of measures to determine the condition,
significance or worth of a library.
Library statistics are numerical facts and data that measure library activity within a
specified time period.
Library standards are indicators of levels of quality or excellence that are accepted as
professional norms and serve as indicators by which actual library programs and
services are judged.
Library value, operationalized as the library’s value in the community and defined as
how well the library interprets and responds to community demands for programs
and services; how well the library functions as a community asset by providing
access to materials; how well the library serves as a community meeting place and
safety zone; and how trusted the library is within the community as a source of
high quality information and knowledgeable staff.
Library valuation study is a method of library evaluation that emphasizes the dollar
value provided by library services. This value is most often expressed as a
benefit/cost ratio.
Local government official is a mayor or other municipal government official with the
authority to make decisions about municipal public library funding.
Municipal public library is a nonprofit library supported primarily by local tax funds to
provide services and resources to the residents of a specific city or town.
Resource allocation behavior (RAB) is the observable actions taken to enact the results
of resource allocation decisions which are the choices that people make about
how to allocate a fixed level of resources among a variety of alternative uses.

32
Role setting for libraries is a process by which a library assesses the needs of its
community and then uses a formal process to decide which community needs it
can meet and then aligns its programs and activities in service of the selected
role(s).
In the next chapter the professional and research literature of library and
information science is examined to explore the development of library valuation concepts
and practices. This discussion of key themes informs this study by describing the current
state of knowledge about library valuation and evaluation, and also by indicating areas
still open for additional study. This provides both an historical and a research context for
this study.

33
Chapter Two – Literature Review
Introduction
This study is an attempt to understand how library administrators and local
government officials think about the value that the public library adds to their
communities. An underlying assumption of this study is that the library is a public good
and that its value can be perceived and described by individuals. Perceptions of library
quality and value are a reflection of individual preferences. While these preferences
cannot be validated or invalidated by external observations, it may be possible to measure
the extent to which certain perceptions of quality and value, e.g. ideas about library
goodness, are shared among a group of individuals.
Historically, LIS researchers and practitioners have been the source of the
dominant ideas about library quality and value. Knightly (1979) in a study of
measurement criteria used in library annual reports identified four classes of evaluative
criteria most often used by libraries. Librarians attempt to measure inputs, such as library
resources; processes, such as library capability; outputs, such as utilization of services,
and/or impacts, which are the benefits that accrue from library activities. One of the aims
of these criteria is to measure the often elusive value or goodness of the library. This
review examines the use and development of these criteria in LIS professional and
research literature. The focus of the review is on the evaluation of the library as an
entity, rather than on the evaluation of specific programs and services. This study is
about public libraries, so the reviewed literature discusses evaluation as it relates to
public libraries.

34
In 1876, the United States Bureau of Education issued a report on the condition
and management of the libraries of the country. The report provided a detailed look at all
types of libraries, including school and asylum libraries. This report represents both a
“state-of-the-field” report, documenting successes and problems found in all types of
libraries, and an attempt to standardize the collection of library statistics for use in
improving library management. The authors of the report found that irregular funding
patterns and mismanagement of resources, both books and the funds allocated for their
purchase, limited the effectiveness of many public libraries. This report also includes
suggestions to improve the success, organization, and management of public libraries (cf.
chapters by Perkins, p. 419 and Poole, p. 476). The publication of this report, along with
the founding of the American Library Association, and the start of the publication
American Library Journal mark 1876 as the beginning of the modern period of
professional librarianship (Garrison, 1979; Williams, 1988). One of the hallmarks of the
modern library profession has been the desire to establish quality standards for library
services.
Library Standards
The Encarta World English Dictionary defines a standard as “a level of quality or
excellence that is accepted as the norm or by which actual attainments are judged”
(“Standard,” 1999, p. 1824). Significant attention in the library profession has been
devoted to the development and dissemination of standards for public libraries, with
standards promulgated at both national and state levels. Martin (1972) in a discussion of
the history of public library standards traces the formal quest for public library standards
back to the American Library Association’s publication of Standards for Public Libraries

35
(1933) in the November issue of the Bulletin of the American Library Association. The
1933 standards proposed minimum levels for essential services, and proposed the
adoption of library funding at the $1.00 per capita level, but it was essentially “a brief
statement that public libraries ought to have adequate resources and funds” (Martin,
1972, p. 165). The next version of the standards, Post-War Standards for Public
Libraries (American Library Association, Committee on Post-War Planning, 1943), was
significantly longer, and combined qualitative and quantitative measures to promote the
vision of the public library as a center for adult continuing education.
Martin continues his review with a discussion of Public Library Service: A Guide
to Evaluation, with Minimum Standards (American Library Association, Coordinating
Committee on Revision of Public Library Standards, 1956). In this edition of the
standards, there was less of a focus on quantitative measures, and the beginnings of an
emphasis on service development. The structure of the document, which first presents
principles of service followed by standards, heralds the profession’s change in focus from
measurement to planning. The 1956 document also attempts to address issues relating to
varying library sizes and circumstances. Previous standards statements used a sliding
scale to measure operations, i.e. smaller populations needed more resources per capita in
order to meet the minimum standards. The 1956 standards introduced a financial
supplement, which was revised at regular intervals to accommodate changes in prices and
costs. This supplement proposed per capita spending levels to help libraries provide the
“minimum” levels of service, with the idea that additional funding would be required to
provide services at the “reasonably good” and “superior” levels. Martin’s review ends
with a discussion of Minimum Standards for Public Library Systems, 1966 (Public

36
Library Association, 1967) which were “based on a decided shift from individual
libraries to regional systems, despite its incorporation of considerable text from the 1956
booklet” (Wheeler, 1970, p. 455). The standards discussed by Martin focused primarily
on the measurement of library inputs and outputs. This focus implied that “library
goodness” would be determined by optimal levels of resources (inputs) used to provide
optimal levels of service (outputs). The optimal levels are generally decided by the size
and the specific needs of the population served by the library. Librarians were expected
to use these standards as the base for developing programs and services to meet the needs
of their communities, thereby ensuring that all citizens would have access to a
professionally determined base-level of library services.
The publication of the 1966 standards marked the beginning a period of intense
discussion and activity about both the form and the role of standards in librarianship.
Martin criticizes the 1966 standards as a “missed opportunity” for the library profession.
He writes:
What the public library needed a decade later [in 1966] was a statement pointing
the way into the future, for a country increasingly more preoccupied with selffulfillment and the quality of life than with economic well-being. The 1966
document is not such a model. While a library in the 1950s might have come
reasonably close to meeting the needs of its constituents by providing the
elements and achieving the levels prescribed at that time, this cannot be said of
the public library today working from the present standards. In substance we are
living with public library standards formulated almost two decades ago. (p. 169)

37
Wheeler (1970) supports the 1966 shift toward consolidation of library services,
arguing that it is economically inefficient to provide library services to small population
service areas. However, he feels that the focus in the 1966 standards on the development
of regional library systems overlooked the need for standards for individual libraries,
branches of systems, reference services, and professional staffing. According to
Wheeler, libraries needed quantitative data to help them justify their budgets to their
funding bodies and to help them measure their progress. This need does not change
because the individual library has become a part of a system (p. 455). Additional support
for the claim that the 1966 standards were not proving useful as drivers of library funding
is provided by Hirsch’s (1972) commentary on the need for library standards. He called
for “clearly defined, carefully reasoned, unequivocal standards for our libraries” (p. 162),
warning that “anybody who has ever negotiated with administrators, trustees, and state
budget directors knows that they are not impressed by vague ‘guidelines’” (p. 161).
ALA responded to the criticism of the 1966 standards with the formation of three
task forces to develop working papers that could be used by the Public Library
Association’s (PLA) standards committee as they developed the next revision of the
standards (Bloss, 1976). In a paper prepared for the PLA standards committee,
Blasingame and Lynch (1974) state that “what public librarians need … are not rules for
sameness but tools which will help them analyze a situation, set objectives, make
decisions and evaluate achievements” (p.19). As a result of their analysis, Blasingame
and Lynch called for the establishment of guidelines that would help the public library
community plan, deliver and evaluate library services. The work of the PLA task forces

38
strengthened the library profession’s shift from the measurement of library capacity to
discussions of community needs and library services.
Moving Beyond Standards and Input Measures
By the 1970s there was growing recognition that library services were often
developed based on the judgment of librarians and community opinion leaders, with little
or no research to establish the need for information services, and no real effort to solicit
input from the general public (Bloss, 1976). Bloss (1976) cites Blassingame and Lynch
to support his argument for a different approach to library standards. Bloss points out
that libraries have to compete for funds with other public agencies and must begin to
make service decisions that best utilize their limited resources. He suggests that
understanding community needs will allow library administrators to prioritize the range
of possible library services and focus their efforts on the services desired by their
particular communities. The LIS literature of the 1970’s was marked by discussions
about the future roles of measurement and standards in public libraries.
Questions about the role of standards were not limited to the U.S. library
community. Withers (1974) conducted an examination of standards for national,
academic, public and school libraries in twenty countries from around the world. The
goal of the research, sponsored by UNESCO and the International Federation of Library
Associations (IFLA), was to document how standards are used in various countries. The
sponsors of the research:
recognized that a country’s documentation and library services, indispensable for
all forms of economic, social and cultural development, should be considered as

39
one coordinated information system and accordingly included in any national
development plans. (p. 5)
From this perspective, standards are primarily a tool used to plan and evaluate library
services, and the principles of good librarianship are believed to be universal, with
standards in one country influencing the development (or revision) of standards in other
countries. Most of the public library standards reviewed began with a definition of the
role of the library in the community, followed by a discussion of the appropriate
administrative structure for the optimal delivery of library services. In many countries,
there was an emphasis on the need for cooperation among libraries to enable them to
deliver higher quality services, and many of the countries favored library services
provided through a large central library or services coordinated by a national library
agency.
In order to be useful, standards must continually be revised to reflect changes in
both librarianship and in the needs of the users. However, Withers acknowledged that the
best that the international survey can do is to create a qualitative framework that shows
the aspects of library service common to most countries. He also notes that “the
framework does not include quantitative standards since these must vary according to
local circumstances and must be worked out in individual countries or on a regional
basis” (p. 9). So yet again the literature supports the view that library standards can be
very useful in the development and evaluation of library services, but standards are most
useful when they accommodate the circumstances of the local library and the needs of the
local community.

40
By the 1980s ALA and PLA were no longer promoting national standards for
libraries, but this shift in focus did not mean the end of public library standards. In the
United States the standards became more reflective of local circumstances as most state
library agencies developed their own state-level standards. Information from the Public
Library Statistics Cooperative’s wiki indicates that every U.S. state, except Arizona, New
Hampshire, and Wyoming, has public library standards, and 31 of the 47 states link the
receipt of state library aid to these standards (Public Library Statistics Cooperative,
2011). McClure (1980-81) believes that state library agencies should lead public
libraries away from the use of standards because in the past, standards were not
especially useful to public libraries. He claims that standards are often confused with
measurement, goals or planning, and are often presented to libraries without any guidance
on how the standards are to be attained or maintained. He also questions the implied
assumption that providing more resources to meet the standards resulted in better services
for communities.
McClure points out the complexity inherent in standards and suggests that each
standard has ten dimensions and expectations, each of which may receive a different
interpretation from a different audience. This complexity is illustrated by the following
statement: “Standards are developed by A intended for J based upon B for E libraries that
hope to H . Although the primary purpose of standards is for I , the intent is to G libraries
to have C levels of D measures whose criteria stress F” (p. 52). McClure then provides a
table that lists each of the dimensions, provides between three and five options for each
and invites readers to complete the statement using various combinations of the options.
McClure’s table is reproduced as Figure 2.1. This exercise serves to underscore his point

41
that “standards can be interpreted as all things to all people without careful delineation of
expectations” (p. 52).
Figure 2.1 Dimensions and Expectations of Library Standards
A. Origin of Standards
Profession at large
State library agency
Public library
Local community

B. Basis
Expert opinion
State, federal regulations
Local information needs
Empirical data

C. Level of Standard
Minimum
Adequate
Average
Range of levels
Maximum

D. Type of Measure
Qualitative
Quantitative
Opinion

E. For Library Type
System
Branch
Urban non-system
Rural non-system

F. Criteria of the Standard
Provision of services
Storage of documents
Provision of information
Basic resources, staff,
collections, facilities, etc.

G. Intent
Encourage
Compel
Self assess
Ignore
Control

I. Primary Purpose
Planning
Measuring
Comparing
Distribute money

J. Target Audience
Librarians
Governance bodies and
boards
Community individuals

H. Anticipated Result
Increase resources
(inputs)
Increase services
(outputs)
Maintain status quo
Cooperation /sharing
/network
Establish goals

Source: McClure, C.R. (1980-81). From public library standards to statewide levels of adequacy. Library Research, 2, p. 51.
Copyright Elsevier, (1980). Used with permission.

McClure suggests that rather than focusing on the development of standards, a
more useful role for state library agencies, in conjunction with local public libraries and
the local community, is the establishment of statewide levels of adequacy for the
availability of resources and the provision of services. These individualized levels would
serve as benchmarks against which both the state library agency and the local public
library would assess the library’s performance. Much like the ideas later expanded as
role setting, the library uses input from its community to decide on adequate levels of
resources and service, and the state library agency then holds the local library responsible
for meeting its self-determined level of adequacy. The state library agency would
compile averages based on reports from all of a state’s public libraries, and create a
database that will allow libraries to compare their performance to that of peer libraries.

42
Individual libraries and communities would then be able to decide if, when, and how they
could improve their levels of library resources and services.
Despite McClure’s arguments for levels of adequacy, many state library agencies
began to link state aid to library performance measures. Curran and Clark (1989) discuss
the implications of this practice and list twenty statements that they believe could guide
the discussions about performance measures as criteria for state library aid. The twenty
statements highlight the complexity of using measures, many of which are beyond the
control of the library, to judge the library’s performance. There are also pitfalls in the
selection of measures and in the selection of points of comparison and assessment. They
conclude by stating that while there is nothing inherently wrong with tying state aid to
performance measures all parties to the process must remain aware of the limitations and
pitfalls of the practice.
Owen (1992) reviewed the state of state standards for public libraries and found a
variety of implementations. Her review found forty-six states with “standards” but not all
of them were defined as standards. She found that states had “one of three things:
standards, guidelines, or state-aid requirements” (p. 213). Owen believes that the varying
names also imply varying levels of authority. At the top of her hierarchy are state-aid
requirements which imply legislative authority. Next are standards, formulated by an
authoritative entity and should “lead at the very least to some type of formalized public
glory (i.e. certification) or at least to some type of formalized public funding (i.e. state
aid)” (p. 213). Lowest in the hierarchy are guidelines, which are often developed by
professional associations.

43
Citing McClure’s (1980) argument about the complexity of standards, Owen
(1992) states that “in fact, it is impossible to discuss the merits of any state’s public
library standards without having a basic understanding of how the state’s context has
shaped choices about these dimensions” (p. 214). Despite the variety, Owen was able to
identify some common elements among state standards. Almost all of the state standards
support the role of local planning and evaluation in the improvement of library services.
Most library standards focus on core library activities, e.g. administration, personnel,
collection, and services, and at least half declare themselves to be minimum standards.
At least twenty percent of states link the standards to state aid. Owen concludes by
reminding us that standards are political tools as well as professional statements. “We
adopt them because we expect something out of them in the political and funding arena
as well as in the professional arena” (p. 220).
This argument is supported by Moorman (1997) who examined state library
standards from 23 states to determine if there was consensus on four quantitative library
measures. The measures considered were hours of service, a volume count of library
materials, library staffing levels, and library operating budgeting. Moorman found that
there was no consensus among states for any of these measures. However, Moorman felt
that the measures were useful because they reflected the actual political realities and
resource situations in their respective states. Moorman suggested that
in spite of the national emphasis on planning, role setting, and the use of output
measures to measure individual library effectiveness, practicing librarians still
need quantitative, numerically expressed, resource-based measurements of library
effectiveness to use when building the case for increased funding in budget

44
discussions with governing bodies [and that statistics gathered to meet state
standards help fulfill this need]. (p. 37)
Role Setting and Planning
The national and international discussions of library standards and output
measurements made it clear that the profession wanted to move toward an evaluation
framework that focused on services to meet community needs. There was also concern
that standards, as previously utilized, served as both minimum standards and as indicators
of excellence. As the research into library performance developed, it also became clear
that there was no empirical base for the standards, and that the use of standards did not
accommodate the unique situations of each library (Griffiths, 2003). In 1980 the
publication of A Planning Process for Public Libraries (Palmour, Bellassai, & De Wath,
1980) codified the profession’s change of focus to planning public library services. The
planning process did not require a library to compare itself to a standard based on
physical facilities, collections, or staffing (Rohlf, 1982). Instead, library administrators
were encouraged to use the following five questions to guide their service planning
efforts:
1. Does our library service, as it has developed at this time represent the best
possible pattern for the future?
2. Does it meet the most pressing needs of our community, and reflect
changes occurring in the area?
3. Does it consider other sources of information available to our people?
4. Do the library’s priorities for service and for those to be served match the
characteristics of the community population and their library needs?

45
5. Given the constraints on time and money that we face, are we providing
the most effective library services possible? (Palmour, et al., 1980, p.1-2)
The prescribed planning process takes the measurement and evaluation processes
developed in previous standards and guidelines, and supplements them with the
development of objectives that reflect the role of a specific library in a specific
community at a specific point in time.
The planning process received additional refinement with the 1987 publication of
Planning and Role Setting for Public Libraries (McClure, Owen, Zweizig, Lynch, & Van
House, 1987). This document was created as one part of a three part program designed to
“assist public libraries in the areas of planning, measurement, and evaluation” (McClure,
et al., 1987, p. xi). The other parts of the program were a new edition of Output
Measures for Public Libraries (Van House, Lynch, McClure, Zweizig, & Rodger, 1987),
and “the design and specifications for a public library data service” (McClure, Owen,
Zweizig, Lynch & Van House, 1987, p. xi). Planning and Role Setting for Public
Libraries was created as a response to feedback about the 1982 planning process
document. The step-by-step planning process was retained but it was supplemented by
the concept of role setting. Public libraries offer many services to their communities and
the concept of roles provides a way to describe what the library wants to accomplish,
what groups they want to serve and what resources are needed to support their efforts.
Role setting enables the library to decide what it can do in the community, and
then work to ensure that library operations are designed to support the selected roles.
Role setting however cannot occur in a professional vacuum. The authors believe that
“excellence in library service … lies in the ‘fit’ between the library’s roles and the needs

46
and expectations of the community it serves” (McClure, et al., 1987, p. 27). The authors
also caution against trying to fill too many roles suggesting that libraries focus their
efforts and resources on a limited number of roles. Eight standard library roles are
presented to help library administrators begin their own analysis of possible roles to be
fulfilled in their own communities:


Community Activities Center: The library is a central focus point for
community activities, meetings, and services.



Community Information Center: The library is a clearinghouse for current
information on community organizations, issues, and services.



Formal Education Support Center: The library assists students of all ages
in meeting educational objectives established during their formal courses
of study.



Independent Learning Center: The library supports individuals of all ages
pursuing a sustained program of learning independent of any educational
provider.



Popular Materials Library: The library features current, high-demand,
high-interest materials in a variety of formats for persons of all ages.



Preschoolers’ Door to Learning: The library encourages young children
to develop an interest in reading and learning through services for
children, and for parents and children together.



Reference Library: The library actively provides timely, accurate, and
useful information for community residents.

47


Research Center: The library assists scholars and researchers to conduct
in-depth studies, investigate specific areas of knowledge, and create new
knowledge. (McClure, et al., 1987, p. 28)

Research conducted by D’Elia (1993) augmented this list to include:


Business Information Center



Comfortable quiet place for residents to read, think, write, or work

Planning and role setting were envisioned as tools to help library managers ensure
that they could understand and communicate to library staff and to the community
information about the activities at which the library intended to excel. The roles and the
related planning process were flexible and were designed to be modified to reflect the
unique circumstances of a library and its community. D’Elia (1993) validated the
importance of these roles by surveying a stratified national sample that included a general
population sample of 1001 adults, an additional 322 African-American respondents, 358
Hispanic-American respondents, and 300 community leaders for a total of 1981
respondents. The researcher found that:
the results of these surveys indicate that the public library’s roles to support the
educational aspirations of the community – for preschoolers, students, and adult
independent learners – were evaluated most highly by both the general public and
the community opinion leaders. (p. vi)
Library Evaluation Models
The LIS literature contains many examples of library evaluation models (cf.
Baker & Lancaster, 1991; Matthews, 2007). In addition to the various models, Powell’s
(2006) overview of library evaluation research identifies twenty distinct reasons for

48
conducting library evaluation and fourteen different methods commonly used in library
evaluation studies. This section of the literature review will describe a few representative
examples.
In 1971 the Bureau of Library and Information Science Research at Rutgers
University, headed by Ernest DeProspo, conducted a study that developed new criteria to
measure the effectiveness of public libraries. This study and its results moved evaluation
from the standards and their sole use of input data measurement, that is, data gathered
primarily on the resources put into the library, for example, budget size, staff size,
including the number of professional staff, volumes owned and volumes added annually.
For the DeProspo study the evaluation variables were termed output data, which
measured how inputs are translated into service, for example, circulation of materials
both those removed from the library and those used in the library; the availability of
materials to the public; the usage of facilities, furnishings and equipment; the number and
type of reference questions asked; the number of library programs and the attendance; the
number and type of community outreach programs offered and finally user satisfaction
with the services supplied.
Early into the 1970’s the study undertaken by the Bureau of Library and
Information Science Research at Rutgers University, introduced earlier, sought to
develop criteria that would measure the effectiveness of public libraries in new ways. The
planned study consisted of five phases, the first three of which were funded by the U.S.
Department of Education. Phase I reviewed the existing literature on library service
effectiveness, which analyzed the applicability of existing library statistics as indicators
of library effectiveness. Phase II developed descriptive criteria and data collection

49
methodology to measure public library effectiveness. This phase also included a pilot
study to test the methods and establish baseline performance ranges for the descriptive
criterion. Phase III consisted of a test of the criterion and methodology on a national
sample of public libraries and the development of a “profile” for each of the libraries in
the sample. In Phase IV of the study, the researchers planned to gather in-depth
qualitative data about the use of the descriptive criteria. Since this phase did not receive
outside funding it was not completed. Phase V was not funded either, but the Bureau did
complete a detailed analysis of the entire project, which was considered important
enough to the profession to be published as “Performance Measures for Public Libraries”
by the Public Library Association, a division of the American Library association. (De
Prospo, Altman, & Beasley, 1973). The data collection for the output data was not based
on complex statistical methods but used a simpler arithmetic methodology. It gathered
significant professional attention and was adopted for use in a number of American
public libraries.
One of the goals of the project was the identification of macro-level indicators of
the quality of library service that could be quantified using readily available library data.
The researchers met this goal by limiting the measurement criteria to three traditional
areas of library service: provision of materials; use of facilities; and availability of staff.
The researchers also wanted to develop criteria that were easily understood and methods
that could be used by working librarians, thereby increasing the chances that the data
would be collected and used in library decision-making processes. Although the entire
study was not completed, this work helped move the profession away from its early focus

50
on standards toward the use of measuring specific outputs to evaluate and plan library
services.
Contemporary with the research of De Prospo, Altman, & Beasley was a
statistical model developed by Hamburg, Clelland, Bommer, Ramist, & Whitfield (1974).
These researchers were also looking to develop a single method to measure the
performance of public libraries, but their focus was on the development of a
comprehensive statistical system to support library planning and decision-making. The
authors felt that this system was essential because
in the intensifying competition for financial support, libraries as well as other
social institutions are being increasingly called upon to provide relevant
information for the evaluation of their effectiveness, the extent of their use, and
the costs of providing their services. (Hamburg, et al., 1974, p. 1)
The quality of a library service was measured in how well the library maximized the
“exposure of individuals to documents of recorded human experience” (Hamberg, et al.,
1974, p. 4). While comprehensive, the system developed by Hamburg, et al. was very
complex to implement. The statistical sophistication required to gather the data and run
the analyses meant that few public libraries were able to make use of it (Van House &
Childers, 1993).
The research of Hamburg, et al. and De Prospo, et al. reflect the growing
influence of computers and data analysis techniques in library evaluation. In this sense,
they were building of the work of Morse (1968) who used probabilistic models to
measure library effectiveness. O’Connor’s (1982) work on calculating z-scores, which

51
were based on statistical calculations designed to enable an “equitable comparison of all
libraries for evaluation and comparison purposes” (p. 51) is also a part of this tradition.
Although it is incomplete, De Prospo, et al.’s emphasis on less complex statistical
methods seemed designed to promote a wider adoption of their system. LIS researchers
recognized the possible utility of sophisticated data gathering and analyses, but working
librarians were often unwilling or unable to effectively use a system that imposed the
increased workload required to understand and utilize these systems. It may well be that
the discomfort with conducting statistical analysis is, in part, responsible for the
prevalence of the national rating systems created by Hennen (1999b) and Lance and Lyon
(2008). These systems use statistical analysis to rank libraries and provide a mechanism
that allows libraries not included in the analysis to easily identify and compare
themselves to “peer” libraries.
One of the best known library evaluation models was developed by Orr (1973).
This model considers input, process, output, and outcomes measures to measure the
effectiveness of library operations. The input measures are the resources available to the
library, the process measures are what the library actually does with the resources, also
referred to as its capability. The output measures show the effectiveness of the input and
process measures, and the outcomes measures show the impact of the inputs, processes,
and outputs, on the individual, community or organization. The Orr model provides a
simplified way of thinking about the relationships between various aspects of library
service and several later evaluation models (cf. Cronin, 1982 and Kim and Yu, 2011) use
similar concepts and relationships.

52
Zweizig, Johnson, Robbins, and Besant (1996) developed a model for evaluating
library performance which places emphasis on planning the evaluation and then sharing
the results of that evaluation. Their framework, called TELL IT!, is a six-step process
that has librarians talk about the library’s vision for itself, explore the alternative ways to
achieve the vision, learn from their experiences by evaluating them, let people know what
they have accomplished, integrate the results of the evaluation into ongoing service
efforts, and think about how it all worked and how the library can continue to improve
(Zweizig, et al., 1996). The first letters of each step in the framework form the acronym
TELL IT. The requirement to tell “people” about the library’s accomplishments suggests
the growing recognition of the importance of stakeholders in an evaluation process. The
model is also significant for the emphasis on integration of evaluation into the library’s
planning process.
Reed (2001) and Rubin (2006) developed evaluation frameworks that build on
aspects of the Zweizig, Johnson, Robbins, and Besant framework. Reed (2001) focused
specifically on communicating the outcomes of the evaluation efforts to gain political
power. Information gathered during the evaluation process is used to help the community
understand the value and importance of the library. Rubin (2006) focused on measuring
outcomes in many aspects of library service with very specific instructions for integration
of the results in the library’s planning process.
King, Boyce, Montgomery & Tenopir (2003) developed a model showing
conceptual relationships between various economic metrics used to measure library
performance. In the model there are five possible perspectives from which the quality of
library services can be measured: library, user, parent organization, community served

53
and society. The perspective determines the specific and derived methods that will be
used for the evaluation. Inputs and outputs tell the evaluation story from the library’s
perspective, while usage measurements consider evaluation from the perspective of the
users. Outcomes measurements and environmental assessments most often consider
evaluation from the perspectives of the parent organization, e.g. the municipal
government that supports the public library, the community served by the library, or
society in general. In addition to basic metrics like circulation counts, the model also
uses derived metrics, such as cost-effectiveness, cost-benefit, and impact which span
group perspectives.
This model is also supported in work by Dugan, Hernon, and Nitecki (2009) who
recognize the complexity inherent in the selection of metrics for evaluation. These
researchers suggest that librarians need to understand that meaningful evaluation efforts
must expand beyond the library and its users to include the varying groups of people who
are interested in, and/or can influence the library’s survival. Their discussions also
suggest that well-designed measurements can cover multiple perspectives and they also
suggest the use of a combination of methods. The number and variety of evaluation
models makes it clear that there is no single “best” method of library evaluation, and that
the purpose of the evaluation, and the intended audience of the evaluation report are
significant factors affecting its effectiveness.
Library Valuation Studies
Extensive research in public library evaluation has been in the form of library
valuation studies. In 2007, the Americans for Libraries Council published an extensive
review of library valuation studies, Worth Their Weight: An Assessment of the Evolving

54
Field of Library Valuation (Imholz & Arns, 2007), which described seventeen library
valuation studies, and made recommendations to improve research in the field of library
valuation. The researchers acknowledged the limited ability of economic assessments to
capture the complexity of libraries’ contributions to their communities. However, they
also acknowledge that library leaders are looking for ways to link library activities to the
social and economic development of their communities, and “public and private funding
communities are demanding more quantifiable results for their investment” (Imholz &
Arns, 2007, p. 12). These conditions suggest to the researchers that methodologically
sound library valuation research can be beneficial to both communities and to the
profession. The studies reviewed in the report “tend to rely on two types of
methodologies: those that produce estimates of direct benefits and those that produce
estimates of indirect benefits” (Imholz & Arns, 2007, p. 15). The reviewed research used
a variety of approaches but all of the studies shared the goal of assigning a dollar value to
the services that the public libraries provide to their communities.
Measuring direct economic benefits.
Cost/benefit analysis (CBA), also referred to in library valuation studies as returnon-investment (ROI), is the method most often used in research studies that attempt to
provide estimates of the direct benefits that accrue from the use of public library services.
CBA is primarily used to support public policy decisions about non-market goods for
which there is no clear market value (Kim, 2011). In the library literature CBA and ROI
are used often interchangeably, even though technically, they measure slightly different
things.

55
Often, the results of a benefit-cost analysis is framed as a ‘return-on-investment,’
and for capital projects that yield financial benefits over a long period of time, the
use of the term return-on investment is not spurious. However, for programs with
annual operating expenditures, and institutions that do not have a well-defined
stream of financial returns many years into the future, it is not strictly accurate to
use the term return-on-investment. (Indiana Business Research Center, 2007,
p.87)
CBA attempts to demonstrate the feasibility of a plan or project by quantifying its costs
and benefits, while ROI is a measure of profitability. Kim (2011) provides the following
example to illustrate the difference: “if a cost (investment) is $1 million and a benefit
(return) is $1.2 million, CBA is 1.2, but ROI is 0.2” (p. 113). Thus while public library
valuation studies use the term ROI, a more accurate description of their activities is
cost/benefit analysis.
Aabø (2009) conducted a meta-analysis of library valuation studies that reported a
cost/benefit ratio or ROI result. This study is of interest because 32 of the 38 studies in
the analysis were of public libraries. She found that “cost/benefit analysis [was] the most
used means of characterizing the dollar benefits that accrue to communities when they
provide tax support for public libraries” (p. 316). To conduct a cost/benefit analysis, a
researcher assigns “a cost or purchase price to a library service or collection item and
[compares] this amount to the value of that service or item to library patrons and their
communities” (Imholz & Arns, 2007, p. 15). The resulting ratio is usually expressed as
the amount of benefit that accrues for every dollar of support received by the library.

56
Costs must be assigned in CBA of libraries because most public library services are nonmarket goods, that is, there is no commercial market where users can purchase library
services.
In a few of the library valuation studies (Barron, Williams, Bajjaly, Arns, &
Wilson, 2005; Kamer, 2005; Griffiths, King, & Aerni, 2006; Indiana Business Research
Center, 2007; State of Vermont, Department of Libraries, 2007) researchers used a
variation of the consumer surplus approach. Consumer surplus represents the difference
between the market price of a good and the amount a consumer is actually willing to pay
for the good. In the library studies, researchers seem to assume that if library services
were unavailable, consumers would have to pay the market price, because most often the
services were valued at the average market prices. Kamer, 2005, reports “each of the
services has been assigned a market value: that is, the dollar amount that users of the
particular service would have paid had the resources of the public libraries been
unavailable” (p. 3). Market values were derived from a variety of sources, for example,
in the Suffolk County, NY study (Kamer, 2005) library collections were assigned market
prices based on information from the Bowker Library Almanac, Library Journal, School
Library Journal, and NetLibrary (Kamer, 2005, p. 4). “The main drawback of the
consumer surplus method (arguments about the proxy for market value notwithstanding)
is what it may leave out of the total valuation equation,” specifically maintenance costs
and values relating to non-use. (Indiana Business Research Center, 2007, p. 14).
The method most often used to assign costs in library valuation studies is known
as the contingent valuation method (CVM). “Contingent valuation is a survey
methodology developed to assign value to non-market goods” (Imholz & Arns, 2007, p.

57
16). CVM is a revealed preference method in which people are surveyed to determine
their willingness to pay (WTP) for specific services and/or their willingness to accept
(WTA) reduced levels of service. In general, people are expected to be willing to pay
more for services that they value, and are unwilling to accept lower levels of services that
they value. The aggregated responses to the survey “reveal” the value that the service has
to the community.
Although it is widely used, the contingent valuation method can be controversial.
Chung (2008) reports on a number of studies that found the values predicted by
contingent valuation exceeded those revealed in experimental and real-life markets. She
suggests that there are several potential biases inherent in the design of contingent
valuation surveys: yea-saying, which is the tendency to give a positive or inflated
response to questions there by expressing motivation rather than actual preferences;
protest answers, which is a refusal to answer questions because of opposition to the
payment vehicle, e.g. increased taxes, rather than opposition to the service or program
under consideration; and information bias, which occurs when invalid answers are given
because respondents do not have enough information to develop a true preference for the
service or program being considered. Aabø and Audunson (2002) also question the
validity of CVM through a discussion of the theory of rational choice which is believed
to describe the way people assign value to goods and services, e.g. people have rational
reasons for their economic decisions and that these choices are related to their individual
conceptions of the value of an activity or object. From the perspective of rational choice,
"actions are explained by opportunities and desires or preferences – by what people want
to do and what they can do" (p. 7). This perspective may not fully account for value

58
assigned for altruistic reasons, i.e. people value libraries in general as a positive cultural
good, even though they themselves do not use libraries, and have no immediate plans to
do so. Aabø and Audunson (2002) claim that the failure to consider altruistic motivations
may be especially problematic in contingent valuation surveys, where there may be an
implied assumption that value is related to use and “values for non-market goods are
inferred from individuals’ stated responses to hypothetical [use] situations” (p. 13).
Researchers assigning value to library services based solely on information from
members of the community (both users and nonusers) need to be mindful that value is not
analogous to use, and that respondents may not be able to accurately assign a value to
services that they do not use. Hilder (2008) conducted a study to test the feasibility of
CVM to provide dollar valuations of library services and concludes there are many
library services to which CVM can be applied, but the “surveys require very careful
question construction and thorough piloting; they also require large, broad-based samples
and some relatively sophisticated statistical analysis” (p. 456).
Measuring indirect economic benefits of libraries.
In addition to measures of direct benefits, many CBA studies also include
measures of indirect benefits or economic impact. “An economic impact study estimates
the change in regional economic indicators, such as income and employment, resulting
from the introduction or loss of an activity” (Elliott, Holt, Hayden, & Edmonds Holt,
2007, p. 13). Most often, these benefits are calculated using some form of regional inputoutput (I-O) multiplier. The multipliers are statistically derived from input-output models
which detail the sales of goods and services between major sectors of an economy at a
specific point in time. According to Wiedmann (2010) the tables are most often

59
compiled by national governments and are governed by a United Nations standard. A
“crucial advantage of input-output based analysis is that it is possible to provide a
quantitative consumption perspective of virtually any economic activity” (Wiedmann,
2010, p. 6). In traditional I-O models the transactions, measured in the local currency,
are divided into two categories: basic and non-basic. Transactions between local
households, industries, and institutions are considered non-basic transactions, while
imports to and exports from the economy being modeled are considered basic
transactions (Deller, Hoyt, Hueth, & Sundaram-Stukel, 2009).
The multipliers attempt to calculate the total economic impact of a project by
using a statistically derived multiplier to derive the secondary and tertiary effects of an
initial expenditure. The three most widely used models in the U.S. are the USDA/Forest
Service’s IMPLAN model, Regional Economic Models, Inc’s REMI model, and the U.S.
Department of Commerce/Bureau of Economic Analysis’ RIMS II model (Rickman &
Schwer, 1995). In a study comparing these three models Rickman and Schwer found that
once you control for differences in how the models were constructed “the three models
were statistically indistinguishable from each other” (p. 372).
RIMS II is based on an I-O table which shows inputs purchased and outputs sold
for a variety of industries. The data for RIMS II is derived from the U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis’ (BEA) national I-O tables and their regional economic accounts.
The RIMS II I-O tables provide input and output data for approximately 490 industries,
and the regional data allows adjustments to the national data to show regional trading and
industrial structures. “For any region comprised of one or more counties, RIMS II can

60
provide two series of tables of I-O multipliers: Series 1 is for 490 detailed industries and
series 2 is for 38 industry aggregations” (Lynch, 2000, p. 4).
The IMPLAN model generates two types of multipliers, Type I and Type III. The
essential difference between the two multipliers is that the measurement of consumption
in the Type III multiplier is nonlinear. This means that the consumption measurement is
responsive to both changes in income and to changes in population and employment.
IMPLAN builds its data from top to bottom, with national data serving as control totals
for state data, which in turn serves as control totals for county data. “The primary
sources of employment and earnings data are County Business Patterns data [from the
Census Bureau] and BEA data” (Lynch, 2000, p.7).
REMI is both an input-output model and an econometric model that attempts to
predict the behavior of industries based on their economic activity. It is best described as
a model that links an input-output model to an econometric model, because when “the
econometric responses are suppressed, the model collapses to an input-output model”
(Lynch, 2000, p. 8). Data for the REMI model is derived from BEA’s employment,
wage, and personal income data, County Business Patterns data, and the U.S. Bureau of
Labor’s Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. The basic structure of the model
consists of five parts: output; labor and capital demands; population and labor supply;
wages, prices, and profits; and market shares. The input-output component is provided
by the output portion of the model, while the other parts of the model contribute data for
the econometric measures (Lynch, 2000). All of the statewide valuations studies in this
review, and several of the regional and local studies used I-O multipliers to calculate
indirect benefits of library expenditures.

61
Using public library economic valuation studies to demonstrate value.
Recent years have seen the release of a variety of public library economic
valuation studies. Aabø’s (2009) meta-analysis identified 38 studies that report
cost/benefit ratios or some kind of economic benefit provided by libraries. It is notable
that many of these studies appear to have been initiated by the libraries and are grounded
in the assumption that the libraries provide benefits, so it is not surprising that all of the
studies found that libraries add value to their communities. It is also very likely that few
libraries would support publication of studies which found that they provided no benefits.
Although library valuation studies are a form of evaluation, the findings from the public
library valuation studies are different from the findings often reported in many other
kinds of program evaluation studies.
In general, program evaluation focuses on the outcomes of the program in
question, and is often designed to secure continued or additional funding or to improve
program operations (Morley & Lampkin, 2004). Saul (2011) suggests that outcomes
have degrees of impact and that funders respond most positively to three "high-value"
outcomes: change in status or condition; return on investment; systemic change. Projects
that can demonstrate one or more of these outcomes will be viewed positively by funders
and other constituency groups. One of the goals of library valuation studies may be to
secure additional funding, and they report cost/benefit ratios to demonstrate how the
library uses allocated funds, however the focus is not on outcomes of specific library
programs but on the overall economic and social impact that the library has on the local
community.

62
Kim (2011) identifies two frameworks often used in library valuation studies: the
marketing framework and the evaluation framework.
The marketing framework sees valuation activity as a communication process
between a library and its constituency groups that affects the future of the library,
whereas the evaluation framework treats valuation activity as an evaluation
process with results used for a specific purpose, prediction. (p. 112)
The frameworks are not mutually exclusive, and both the marketing and evaluation
frameworks can be used in the same study. The SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, & Threats) analysis included in the Wisconsin valuation study was
designed to guide future economic development and is an example of the marketing
framework. Another example is the projection in the Florida study of the economic
consequences of the redistribution of public library funding to alternative government
spending activities. All of the reviewed studies used the marketing framework, often
with the goal of estimating “the direct and rigorously measured benefit of spending
taxpayer dollars on libraries” and to evaluate the contribution of libraries to the
development of the state’s economy (Indiana Business Research Center, 2007). In almost
every case, the researchers wanted to make a convincing argument to funders (the state
legislature and local government officials), and the community about the economic
importance of libraries.
Many of the studies (British Library, Florida, South Carolina, Indiana, Suffolk
County, and Philadelphia) used empirically gathered data, often library output and use
counts, contextualized by feedback from library staff, library users, and other members of
the community. This practice is in line with McClure’s 1990 model in which factors

63
related to the library, the user, and the external environment interact with one another and
all exert influence on the user's interaction with library services/products. This
interaction influences the library's output measures which, in turn, influence the library,
the user, and the external environment. In many cases, the external environment is
measured as indirect economic benefits that are generated by the public libraries. User
benefits are measured by contingent valuation surveys, library usage statistics, and
interviews and surveys of various stakeholder groups. An examination of these studies
provides examples of data analysis techniques, as well as providing examples of various
ways that researchers have tried to establish the economic value public libraries adds to
communities.
In her meta-analysis, Aabø (2009) identified five national library valuation
studies. Two were conducted in the UK, and one each in Australia, New Zealand, and
Norway. While the size and complexity of public library systems in the United States
makes a national library validation study unfeasible, many of the U.S. studies cite the
public library study conducted by the British Library in 2000 (Morris, Hawkins, &
Sumsion, 2000). This study “was based on contingent valuation and assessed the value
enjoyed directly and indirectly by UK citizens” (Missingham, 2005, p. 6). Two thousand
people were surveyed as they returned books to three medium-sized libraries and one
small inner-city library. The researchers received 557 valid surveys to use in their
analysis. The surveys attempted to ascertain the adults’ willingness to pay for library
services, their willingness to accept compensation in lieu of library services, their
estimates of the time and money invested to access library services; their estimates of the
costs that they would incur if forced to use alternative services, and the responsiveness of

64
their demand for library services in response to changes in the price of these services.
This study is described as a national study, however, the convenience sample of 557
respondents from four small to medium sized libraries represents a very small portion of
the universe of actual UK library users, and an even smaller portion of the universe of
UK citizens. It is possible that a random sample of U.K. citizens or even a larger and
more diverse sample of library users would reveal different valuations. It is also possible
that the valuations of non-users could also change the total valuation estimate assigned to
public library services.
State-level library valuation studies.
State-level studies have been conducted in Florida, South Carolina, Pennsylvania,
Indiana, Vermont and Wisconsin. The reviewed studies were conducted between 2002
and 2008, and all attempt to assess both direct and indirect economic benefits that public
libraries provide to the citizens of the state. They differ in the variety of methods used to
collect data, and in the choice of methods to calculate indirect economic benefits. Elliott,
Holt, Hayden, and Edmonds Holt (2007) suggest that calculation of indirect benefits is
most useful when library activities have the potential for regional impact. They suggest
that economic impact analysis is not as relevant at the local level, because the economic
impact of most individual public library activities is local. Some of the state-level studies
(State of Vermont, Department of Libraries, 2007; Barron, Williams, Bajjaly, Arns, &
Wilson, 2005; Griffiths, King, Tomer, Lynch, Harrington, 2004; Griffiths, King, & Aerni,
2006) appear to recognize this caveat, and only apply the regional multipliers to a
percentage of the total library expenditures.

65
In 2004, the State Library and Archives of Florida commissioned researchers to
conduct a comprehensive study of the return-on-investment to taxpayers from Florida
public libraries. The researchers used telephone and in-person surveys to gather data from
both individuals and organizations about the value of Florida’s public libraries. They
also used the REMI (Regional Economic Modeling, Inc.) input-output regional
multiplier, and data gathered from the annual reports submitted to the State Library and
Archives by the public libraries. This study also considered the implications of not
funding public libraries. The researchers used the REMI model to project forward from
2004 to 2035 the economic consequences of redistributing public library funding to
alternative government spending activities. “The REMI model indicated that if funding
for public libraries was reallocated across Florida’s government sectors, the state
economy would result in a net decline of 5.6 billion in wages and 68,700 in jobs”
(Griffiths, King, Tomer, Lynch, & Harrington, 2004, p. ii).
Researchers in South Carolina conducted a two-phase evaluation of the state’s
public libraries in 2005. The first phase gathered data directly from users, who were
asked to provide their perceived value of a range of library services. The users were a
self-selected sample of library users who agreed to complete a survey in March 2004.
The second phase of the study used data from South Carolina’s annual public library
statistics to calculate the direct and indirect economic impact of South Carolina’s public
libraries. The direct economic impact was calculated using the following six measures:
Measure 1: Total impact of all public libraries on the state’s economy
Measure 2: Total non-tax funds received by all South Carolina libraries
Measure 3: Value of loans of books, videos, and other materials to library users

66
Measure 4: Value of reference questions answered
Measure 5: Value of in-library use of materials
Measure 6: Economic value of the use of facilities and equipment in all public
libraries in South Carolina. (Barron, Williams, Bajjaly, Arns, Wilson, 2005, p. 5760)
These measures provided direction on how to quantify the use of commonly provided
library services. The indirect economic impact was calculated using the number
measuring the total impact of all public libraries on the state’s economy (the figure from
measure 1) multiplied by .637. The researchers developed this multiplier as a
conservative estimate of the effect of extended (quaternary and beyond) levels of
economic impact. This multiplier was developed in a 2002 study of the economic impact
of the cultural industry in South Carolina. That study used the IMPLAN multiplier to
calculate indirect economic impacts of arts and cultural activities on the economy of
South Carolina (Division of Research, Moore School of Business, 2002, p. 9).
In 2006, two of the researchers from the Florida study led a research team that
conducted a statewide study to ascertain the economic benefit of Pennsylvania’s public
libraries, and to also determine what citizens believe public libraries contribute to their
overall well-being (Griffiths, J.-M., King, D. W., & Aerni, S. E., 2006). The
Pennsylvania team used surveys, the REMI regional multiplier, and Pennsylvania public
library annual statistics as data sources for the studies, and all of their estimations were
confined to a single year. The researchers used the contingent valuation method to help
determine the costs to use alternative sources for the services provided by the public
library. In addition to reporting a cost/benefit ratio, the researchers also make the claim

67
that if there were no public libraries in the state the local economy and library used would
lose an estimated $1,377 million.
The 2006-2007 Vermont public library valuation study appears to have been
conducted by the staff of the Vermont State Library. This study used the methodology
from phase two of the South Carolina study to report on direct and indirect economic
impact. The Vermont study used five of the measures developed by the South Carolina
researchers to calculate the direct economic impact of public libraries on the state’s
economy. The value of in-library use was excluded because that data was not available
in Vermont public library statistics. This suggests that economic valuations which rely
on public library statistics will have to adjust the analysis to fit the available data. The
Vermont study also used the 0.637 multiplier developed by the South Carolina
researchers to calculate indirect impact. This choice raises some questions, because there
is no indication that the regional economies of Vermont and South Carolina are similar
enough that the same multiplier would be appropriate to both.
The Indiana library valuation survey measured the economic value of both public
and academic libraries in the state. The results were reported separately and only the
public library data were examined for this review. In this study, direct economic value
for specific library services was calculated by determining a “market” value for each of
the services provided by the libraries. The economic value of each type of library service
was then calculated based on what it would have cost users to purchase the same level of
service from commercial providers. The study also reports indirect economic effects and
“induced economic effects”, which “represent the spending on goods and services by
households of both the library staff and of the additional employees of companies that

68
provide goods and services to the library that result from the library’s business with those
firms” (Indiana Business Research Center, 2007, p. 12). The study describes the
importance of both calculations in determining the contributions of libraries to the state’s
economy, but the method used to calculate the indirect and induced economic effects
values was not reported. The study measured economic benefits, and also included
stakeholder surveys and case studies of selected libraries to help assess the impact
libraries can have on economic development. In addition to a cost/benefit ratio, the
Indiana study reports a “total market value of library services” of $629,911,638 (Indiana
Business Research Center, 2007, p. 25).
The Wisconsin public library valuation study also used a “market value approach
to determine the economic value of public library services” (Ward & Hart, 2008, p.8).
The market value data was used to calculate the direct economic value of library services.
The indirect economic value was calculated using a statewide economic multiplier
supplied by Minnesota IMPLAN Group (MIG), an econometric modeling firm located in
Stillwater, MN. (Ward & Hart, 2008, p.65). The researchers found that public libraries
contributed $753,699,545 to the Wisconsin economy in 2006. This study also included a
SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, & Threats) analysis which gathered data
intended to guide future economic development, and a survey of users to ascertain usage
patterns and attitudes toward public libraries.
Valuation studies of regional and local public libraries.
In addition to the statewide valuation studies, there have been more than a dozen
valuation studies of individual library systems (Aabø 2009). In an attempt to capture the
range of these studies three were included in this review. The St. Louis Public Library

69
study represents one of the earliest library valuation efforts. The valuation study of the
public libraries of Suffolk County, New York represents library valuation at mid-decade,
and the valuation study of the Free Public Library of Philadelphia represents a very recent
effort.
The St. Louis Public Library valuation study was conducted in 1999. The
researchers describe their study as a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) study, because they felt
that CBA more accurately represented the ways that libraries deliver services and the
ways that benefits flow from these services. Consumer surplus, contingent valuation, and
cost of time were used to construct a range of values for the evaluated library services.
The researchers’ “rationale was simple: It did not cost much more to undertake multiple
measures rather than one, and, if all the methods were used, much more could be learned
about how to construct a nationally transportable CBA methodology for public libraries”
(Holt, Elliott, & Moore, 1999). The end result of the analysis suggested that the St. Louis
Public Library provided $4.00 in benefits to users for every $1.00 of annual tax support.
The researchers caution that use of this figure must include the caveat that the benefits
were not only the result of current tax support, but also reflected past investments in the
library and its collections. The St. Louis study was the starting point for an additional
fourteen CBA studies in public libraries and the subsequent development of a model for
conducting CBA studies in small to medium-sized public libraries (Elliott, Holt, Hayden,
& Edmonds Holt, 2007).
In 2005, an economic valuation study was conducted for the public libraries of
Suffolk County, New York. In this study, the researcher selected frequently used library
services, assigned a market value to those services, and then used the number of annual

70
transactions to calculate an economic value for the services. These calculations resulted
in the direct value assigned to the library system. The indirect economic value was
calculated using the RIMS II multipliers for state and local government enterprises, which
provided values for economic output, earnings, and employment. Significant library
construction expenditures also supported the use of the RIMS II construction industry
multipliers, which yielded values for economic output, earnings, and employment that
could be attributed to library construction. The results of the analysis found that $3.93 in
services were created for every $1.00 of tax support given to the public libraries. In
addition, the operating and capital expenditures by the Suffolk County public libraries
resulted indirectly in a “net output increase of more than $117 million. Long Island
earnings increased by more than $50 million and more than 1,200 additional jobs were
created throughout the Long Island economy” (Kamer, 2005, p. 11).
The 2010 economic valuation study of the Free Public Library of Philadelphia
(Diamond, Gillen, Litman, & Thornburgh, 2010) used a framework suggested by the
Urban Libraries Council’s 2007 report Making Cities Stronger: Public Library
Contributions to Local Economic Development (Manjarrez, Cigna, & Bajaj, 2007). This
framework suggested to the researchers that libraries can be agents of economic
development, and that their impact may be visible in four areas: literacy, workforce
development, business development, and value to homes and neighborhoods (Diamond,
Gillen, Litman, & Thornburgh, 2010, p. 5-6). The value created in the areas of literacy,
workforce development, and business development were calculated using market
valuations for key services in each area, and multiplying that market value by usage
statistics. Regression analysis was used to calculate the impact of libraries on the

71
surrounding neighborhoods. Data was also gathered through public forums and through
interviews and surveys of librarians and library users. The researchers found that the
economic value of the library’s literacy related services was $21.8 million in FY2010.
For the same period, the economic value of the library’s workforce development services
was $6 million and the value of the business development services was $3.8 million.
When considering the libraries contributions to the economic value of homes and
neighborhoods, the researchers found that:
homes within ¼ mile of a Library are worth, on average, $9,630 more than homes
more than ¼ mile from a library, … [and] the additional home values generated
by proximity to a Library produce an additional $18.5 million in property taxes
to the City and School District each year [emphasis in the original]. (Diamond,
Gillen, Litman, & Thornburgh, 2010, p. 6)
The review of this literature suggests several implications for future library
valuation research. The first is that economic valuation of library services is useful
because it provides information to stakeholder groups which could result in continued or
improved library funding. Another implication is that while economic valuation alone is
unable to capture the complexity of a public library’s relationship to its community,
economic valuation studies are useful because they provide public library leadership with
information that allows them to assess the benefits generated by specific library activities,
and provides a way to discuss those benefits with key community constituency groups. A
third implication is that library valuation studies are limited by the use of previously
collected library statistics. It is assumed that the statistics capture data on the most
significant library activities, but it is possible, as in the case of Vermont, that the

72
collected statistics do not provide information to support the full range of relevant
measures. A fourth implication is that while contingent valuation is a useful way to
measure the perceived value of libraries, the cost and complexity of these studies
suggests that most libraries will be unlikely to conduct them on a regular basis. Finally,
the use of regional multipliers can provide adequate measures of the indirect benefits
generated by libraries, but only if the valuation is conducted at the state or regional level.
Measuring Library Goodness
Implicit in much of the research on public library evaluation is the idea that the
services provided by the library are “good.” Historically, there have been two dominant
ideas about measuring the benefits of public library service (Orr, 1973). Some believe
that the quality of library services is a subjective matter with each person rating the
quality of the service based on its ability to meet their particular need. A contrasting
opinion is that while views of the quality of library service may be subjective, these
subjective perceptions should be validated whenever possible by the use of objective
measures. Orr (1973) used the concept of library goodness to describe this combination
of objective and subjective measures. For Orr, there are two basic questions to be
answered about any library service; the question “How good is the service?” will provide
information about the quality of the service, and the question “How much good does it
do?” will provide information about the value of the service. Any answers to these
questions must keep in mind that
the ultimate criterion for assessing the quality of a service is its capability for
meeting the user needs it is intended to serve and that the value of a service must

73
ultimately be judged in terms of beneficial effects accruing from its use as viewed
by those who sustain the costs. (Orr, 1973, p. 318)
Orr outlines four basic propositions that form the foundation for his discussion of library
quality and value:


Service capability tends to increase as available resources increase;



Utilization of services tends to increase as capability increases;



Beneficial effects of a service tend to increase as utilization increases;



Resources devoted to a service tend to increase as beneficial effects increase.

All four propositions have two caveats:
1. The propositions are based on an assumption of all things being equal, which
means they may not prove true in real-world situations;
2. The proposed increases are not necessarily proportional, meaning that, as an
example, increases in resources will lead to increases in capability, but increasing
resources by ten percent does not always lead to a ten percent increase in
capability. (p. 318)
The propositions also identify the four variables – capability, utilization,
beneficial effects, and resources – that are the center of Orr’s model of library goodness.
The relationships among the variables are depicted in Orr’s framework which is
reproduced in Figure 2.2. In this model resources, and to a lesser extent utilization, lend
themselves to direct measurement, i.e. we can count resource inputs and usage outputs,
e.g. number of new books purchased or circulations per capita. Capability, which is a
measure of what the library should be able to do, and the beneficial effects that accrue
from library services are less easy to measure directly. As a result measurements of

74
resources and their utilization have been used as a surrogate for quality, while levels of
utilization often serve as a surrogate for value. In Orr’s model library quality can be
equated with capability and value can be equated with beneficial effects. This means that
we measure levels of available resources and/or the extent to which these resources are
used and make quality assessments based on this data. We measure how often services
are used and conclude that use implies beneficial effects and can thus serve as a surrogate
for value. In the model, the dotted lines connecting quality and value to the other
variables in the model indicate the indirect nature of these measurements.

Orr’s framework is a simplified model of the relationships between the variables
that contribute to the quality of library. Despite its limitations this model is useful in the

75
discussion of the relationships between library funding and library value. Buckland
(1982) uses Orr’s model to support a discussion of ways to make the concept of library
goodness less ambiguous. He notes that “single measures of library goodness can be
concocted but their credibility is undermined by the number of arbitrary assumptions that
have to be made to piece the parts together” (p. 63). For Buckland, a key source of
ambiguity results because “goodness” can measure the quality of a service or it can
measure the value provided by that service. Buckland suggests that the profession can
resolve the ambiguity by recognizing that both questions need to be addressed. There
will be people for whom the library goodness question is “how good is the public
library?” This group could include library users, library administrators, and perhaps the
library profession. The “how good…” question addresses the quality aspects of library
services. However, for funders and also the larger community the library goodness
question is “What good does the library do?” i.e. what is its value in our lives or
community. It is imperative that when library administrators are asked how good their
library is, they know which question is being asked so that they can respond
appropriately.
Rodger (1990) appears to ask the “How good is it?” question about library
goodness and suggests the use of performance measurement to answer the question.
Rodger conflates outcomes and outputs and suggests that the focus on measuring outputs
or outcomes resulted from the recognition that people do not care how many books,
DVDs, or databases are available in a library if they cannot locate the item that will meet
their information need (p. 17). Measuring outputs and outcomes is based on “the
assumption that it is good to have the materials that people want to use” (p. 17). Rodger

76
suggests that some output measures can serve as indicators of library effectiveness, and
recommends that public library performance measurement focus on these indicators. Her
list of the most important indicators of library effectiveness are based on the research
conducted by Van House and Childers, the final version of which was published in 1993.
Van House and Childers surveyed a purposive sample of 2,689 people
representing seven library constituency groups. The response rate from the survey was
89.8 percent with responses distributed across the stratifying variable of population
served and geographic region. The indicators of quality most preferred by all of the
groups surveyed by Van House and Childers include:
1. Convenience of hours
2. Range of materials
3. Staff helpfulness
4. Services suited to the community
5. Materials quality. (Van House & Childers, 1993, p. 52)
Indicator one focuses on access to library services; indicators two and four relate to the
quantity of materials and services; indicators three, and five relate to the quality of library
services and materials. Multiple foci suggest that while there are a variety of ways for
constituency groups to value libraries, the traditional emphasis on access to services,
quality of materials and services, and quantity of available materials are also validated.
Rodger believes that measuring and building performance around these indicators will
allow libraries to demonstrate their effectiveness (goodness) to their constituency groups.
However, Rodgers cautions that performance measurement alone will not guarantee
funding. Echoing Buckland she notes

77
politically made funding decisions are often made based on either the value of the
service as perceived directly by funders or as demonstrated by users of the
service. We often miss the funding boat because as administrators we talk about
program needs while funders respond to public demand [emphasis added]. (p. 18)
Allen (2003) tested the hypothesis that public library funding is affected by public
opinion about the quality of library services and public demand for those services. The
researcher surveyed a random sample of 1,025 adults in the United States. His
investigation found that demand for library services had the largest association with
revenue for the current year (r2=.01999) and even this association was modest. The
association becomes even more tenuous as we move to subsequent years (r2=.0137).
Allen concludes that “there was no association of funding level changes with demand for
library services” (p. 421). He also found that public opinion about library services, even
when respondents expressed support for additional taxes to support libraries, had no
influences on public funding.
These finding contradict an implicit assumption underlying many library
evaluation efforts of a positive relationship between public beliefs about the quality of
library services and levels of library funding. While public opinion about the value of the
library are important to both library administrators and local government officials, they
appear to have only minimal direct impact on library funding. Librarians have a
professional obligation to provide high quality services that are valued by their
communities, but this alone does not ensure adequate levels of funding. Allen’s research
suggests providing information about the quality of library services may have little effect
on library funding levels.

78
Kim and Yu (2011) use Orr’s model to develop a framework for library
evaluation and management. The goal of their study was to develop and test “an
alternative framework with income as a goal for sustainability” (p. 359). Kim and Yu
focused on the recursive nature of Orr’s model and use library statistics collected by the
Institute for Museum and Library Services (IMLS) to measure changes in resource levels
over successive cycles. Their model is depicted in Figure 2.3. In the model, the four
variables from Orr’s 1976 model – capability, utilization, beneficial effects, and resources
– are used, but the emphasis is now on the recursive nature of the relationship between
the variables. The model also suggests that (all things being equal) the size of each of the
variables increases with each successive period.
Kim and Yu tested their model using data from IMLS’s Public Library Statistics
collected for the years 2002-2007. The initial data screening resulted in a pool of 8,999
libraries; a random sample of 1,055 libraries was selected from this pool. The researchers
used change in revenue as the dependent variable (DV) and selected eleven independent
variables (IV) whose changes could be expected to produce measurable effects on
resources in the next funding cycle. The non-normal nature of the data required
additional screening and transformations resulting in a final sample of 840 cases. Kim
and Yu then used correlation analysis to explore the relationships between the dependent
variable and the independent variables. They found, at a 99 percent confidence level, that
14 percent of the variability in total revenue could be explained by the linear combination
of past resources and activities represented by the independent variables. The authors
acknowledge that the effect size is small, but suggest that perhaps the data collected
under the Public Library Statistics program may not include the measures needed to

79
predict revenue. Despite the limitations, the authors consider the test of their model a
success, indicating that future researchers should work to determine which internal
activities and operational resources are effective predictors of changes in revenue.

Implications for the Current Study
This review of the literature helped identify some of the key themes in LIS
evaluation literature. LIS researchers and practitioners have spent a great deal of time
and effort working to develop practices to help libraries evaluate library services. This
was accomplished by the use of written standards from 1933-1965, and by guidelines that
placed the evaluation within the context of library planning from the 1970s to the present.
Although ALA no longer issues library standards, they are still important to public
libraries because many states have created their own standards and use them as local
indicators of library quality. This suggests that the library profession has an historical
interest in measuring library quality and value by using standards and that working to

80
meet state level standards may be an important factor in local public library value
constructs.
The wide variety of methods used to evaluate libraries suggests that librarians are
interested in empirically sound evaluation metrics. However, this same literature also
indicates that rank and file librarians tend not to use systems requiring complex statistical
calculations. The literature also indicates there is no consensus on the “best” method to
evaluate libraries, thus, there is no most used database or system that could serve as a
source of data for this study. This supports gathering data about local conceptualizations
of value as an efficient and effective way to begin to understand what value constructs
are meaningful to local public libraries.
The literature indicates that effective evaluation methods must be a part of an
overall planning and management effort. Considerations of multiple stakeholder
perspectives as well as an awareness of opportunities for advocacy are also becoming
important parts of library evaluation activities. The link between library management
and evaluation supports the selection of library directors as study participants. Local
government officials are among the biggest stakeholders in discussions of library funding
and are also often the targets of library advocacy efforts, so they are also logical
participants for this study. Library-level economic valuation methods are useful to both
librarians and various stakeholder groups, but the methods work best at the state and
regional levels where both direct and indirect economic benefits can be assessed. The
focus of this study is on local budget support so the use of library valuation methods is
not supported. Allen’s findings about the limited role of public opinion in securing

81
library funding supports the focus of this project on the library value constructs of library
administrators and local government officials.
Orr’s model of library evaluation suggests key variables that can support an
inquiry into library value. Subsequent research developed the idea that “library
goodness” can be viewed from multiple perspectives, suggesting that different groups
could use similar language to describe dissimilar concepts. Finally, Kim and Yu build on
Orr’s research to suggest possibility of measuring the link between library activities and
funding levels. The next chapter discusses the methods that were used to collect the data
for this study.

82
Chapter Three – Methodology
Study Design
Data for this study was collected using surveys designed by the investigator. In
addition, data files from the 2011 edition of the New Jersey Library Statistics and the
United States Census Bureau’s American FactFinder website were used to provide
additional information about the respondent libraries. The research questions sought to
understand the library value constructs of two groups of people: public library directors
and local government officials. Surveys were selected as the primary data collection
method because they allow the collection of information from samples of groups and the
extrapolation of their responses to the entire population (Rossi, Wright, & Anderson,
1983; Robson, 1993; Krathwohl, 1998). Although the research questions could have also
been answered using interviews, the available time and financial resources made using
surveys the better choice. The surveys were cross-sectional, with a single data collection
period for each group of respondents (Creswell, 2003). The surveys were created using
the SelectSurvey application available through the Rutgers University School of
Communication and Information and administered by email. If an email address was not
available, a print version of the survey was sent to those participants by mail.
This study attempted to gather information about constructs of public library
value. Perceptions of library quality and value are a reflection of individual preferences.
While these preferences cannot be validated or invalidated by external observations, it
may be possible to measure the extent to which certain perceptions of quality and value
are shared among a group of individuals. The philosophical concept that applies is
contributory value, i.e. the value added by the library to the community of which it is a

83
part (Saracevic & Kantor, 1997). Viewed from this perspective, perceptions of library
value can be measured by the benefits people believe the library provides to the
community. The literature review suggested several concepts that can serve as surrogates
for library value (McClure, Owen, Zweizig, Lynch & Van House, 1987; D’Elia, 1993).
These concepts were further validated by an examination of the offerings at professional
library conferences in 2010 and 2011. The concepts reflect the programs and services
most often offered by public libraries, and include services for children and adults,
provision of e-books and other materials, and providing support for local businesses.
Participants in this study were asked to rate statements derived from these concepts to
indicate which of the concepts indicate value added to their community by the local
public library.
This study also sought to understand the relationships between information
provided during a library’s budget justification process and library funding. Participants
were asked to rate the importance of various kinds of information that could be used to
support a library’s budget request and the rated responses were then analyzed to see if
any of the highly rated responses could predict whether a library received a higher level
of financial support. The literature on library valuation studies (Barron, Williams,
Bajjaly, Arns, & Wilson, 2005; Kamer, 2005; Griffiths, King, & Aerni, 2006; Imholz &
Arns, 2007; and Aabø, 2009) suggests several concepts that were important in these
studies. The concepts include the library’s efficient use of funds, the library’s
partnerships with community organizations, and the effects of library programs and
services on the community. Participants in this study were asked to rate the importance
of a series of statements based upon these concepts.

84
Finally, this study examined the relationships between constructs of library value
and levels of municipal library funding. In New Jersey a minimum level of library
funding is mandated by state law, but municipalities can fund libraries above this
minimum level. This study will identify whether the participants’ libraries are funded
above the minimum level, and if there are any relationships between the higher levels of
funding and the value constructs revealed by the rated statements.
Study Population
This study was designed to identify and describe the relationships between library
administrators’ and local government officials’ constructs of library value and levels of
local government funding. The primary participants in this study were library
administrators from every municipal public library in the state of New Jersey. Municipal
libraries were selected because research suggests that approximately eighty percent of
their funding is provided by local government (DeRosa & Johnson, 2008). The
municipal libraries were identified by first consulting a list of all New Jersey libraries that
was available on the website publiclibraries.com. This alphabetical listing also included
the mailing addresses and telephone numbers of the libraries. This information was
imported into a table in a Microsoft Access database. Each entry was then verified using
the 2012 edition of the Official Directory of New Jersey Library and Media Centers. The
original list was also edited to add the name and public email address of the library
director and to remove all listings for county library branches. In addition to municipal
public libraries, New Jersey also has fourteen county libraries. Both the branches and the
main county libraries were excluded from this study because their funding and service
models, which include local and county government decision makers, are much more

85
complex and are presumed to be more difficult to study and analyze. Some of the entries
in the directory did not list email addresses for the library directors. These email
addresses were gathered from the 2011 New Jersey Public Library Statistics dataset
available on the New Jersey State Library’s website. The result of these actions was a
population of 252 public libraries with complete contact information. Requests for
participation were sent to all of these libraries.
One of the goals of this study was to compare the library value constructs of
library administrators to those of local government officials. Thus the secondary group
of participants for this study was local government officials from the identified
municipalities that support public libraries. New Jersey has eleven distinct forms of
municipal government (New Jersey State Commission on County and Municipal
Government, 1992) which suggests that a variety of people would participate in
municipal financial decisions. All of the forms of government include a mayor, although
the role of the mayor may vary among municipalities, so the initial requests for
participation was sent to the mayors of the identified municipalities. An initial list of
New Jersey mayors was downloaded from the 2012 Mayors Directory search page on the
website of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs and imported into a table in
a Microsoft Access database. This initial list was edited to remove all of the
municipalities that did not provide direct funding for a municipal library. There were 255
municipalities on the final list; this is three more than on the list of public libraries
because three of the libraries are joint libraries, each of which is supported by two towns.
The study population included all 255 mayors on the list. The resulting list did not
include email addresses for the mayors, so the website of each municipality in the list was

86
searched for a public email address for the mayor. There was no publicly available email
address for eighty-five of the mayors in the list. These eighty-five mayors received a
print version of the online survey.
The initial contact with the study participants who were given the online survey
was a letter sent via U.S. mail to briefly describe the project and solicit their participation
(see Appendix A for copies of the recruitment letters). The letters also provided
participants with the investigators’ contact information, and gave the participants an
opportunity to correct the email address that were used to deliver the survey. This was
followed by an email to the participants’ official business email address with a link to a
survey. In the cases where there was no publicly available email address, the potential
participants were sent a recruitment letter along with a print copy of the survey and a
postage-paid return envelope. Participant contact information was requested only if the
participants wanted to receive a summary of the survey results or if they were willing to
answer additional questions on this topic.
The eighty-five respondents who were asked to complete the print survey
received a single mailing with the recruitment letter, the survey, and an addressed and
stamped envelope which allowed them to return the completed survey to the investigator.
The rationale for this decision was that if the recruitment letter was persuasive, then
respondents would be likely to complete the survey immediately. The investigator could
also find no benefits for sending the recruitment letter and the survey at different times.
Sending a single mailing to these respondents also helped contain the costs associated
with this project.

87
Limitations of the Research Design
The primary limitation of this research design stems from the reliability of selfreported data. The participants will provide their subjective opinions about the value of
the public library in the community. The research design tries to encourage accurate
answers by minimizing risks of participation for all respondents. Perceptions of risk are
minimized by ensuring confidentiality to individual respondents. No names or other
identifiers were collected during the survey, and participants were assured that no
individual responses to the surveys would be reported in subsequent research.
Perceptions of risk were also minimized by limiting requested information to general
inquiries about library value. These conditions were included in the informed consent
documents that accompanied each survey (see Appendix B for copies of the informed
consent letters). It is hoped that the low level of risk encouraged open and accurate
responses. The surveys have also been designed to minimize the cognitive effort required
by the respondents. The anticipated time to complete each survey was between fifteen
and twenty minutes, and whenever possible clear and simple language was used to make
the survey items easy to understand. However, the researcher is aware that the accuracy
of the responses cannot be verified in an objective manner and the possible unreliability
of the responses must be considered when analyzing the data.
Additional unreliability may result from the survey items themselves. The
language used to construct the items was scrutinized to ensure that each statement
referred to a single concept. In addition, the statements in the online version of the
survey were presented to the respondents in random order so that any bias caused by the
order in which the items were presented was minimized. It may also be possible that the

88
items did not adequately measure library value. The items were developed based on the
researcher’s practical knowledge of librarianship and an understanding of the relevant
concepts in the literature. Each survey was also evaluated by representatives from each
respondent group, and the researcher is confident that the surveys measured the concepts
under investigation. A low survey response rate would also be another limitation of this
study methodology. The usefulness of survey data in understanding the phenomena
under investigation may be constrained if too few people complete the survey. The
researcher tried to increase the response rates by having multiple points of contact with
respondents, e.g. recruitment letters and emails, explaining the purpose and value of the
survey. The researcher also worked to make the surveys easy to access and easy to
complete.
Instrumentation and Data Collection
This study used two data gathering instruments; a survey of public library
directors (SLPD) and a survey of local government officials (SLGO). The surveys
collected basic demographic information, i.e. county and municipality, and information
about the level of municipal funding provided to the library. All participants were asked
to rate their agreement with fifteen statements about the ways that a library can add value
to the community. All participants were also asked to rate the importance of nine types
of information that can be used to support library budget requests. Finally, all
participants were asked to provide short answers describing the most and least effective
factor in their most recent library budget request. The survey of local government
officials could be completed in approximately fifteen minutes. The survey of public
library directors, which was slightly longer, included two additional items which asked

89
the librarians to rate the likelihood of using specific types of information when
communicating about their library’s value to other librarians and to local government
officials. The survey of public library directors could be completed in twenty minutes.
See Appendix C for a copy of the survey of public library directors and Appendix D for
the survey of local government officials.
Most of the questions used a 7-point Likert scale with anchor terms. A seven
point scale was selected because research suggests that it provides more accurate
measurement in electronic and other unsupervised questionnaires (Finstad, 2010). The
specific anchor terms were listed at the beginning and end of the choices for each of the
statements, with only numbers provided to represent the levels of agreement. In an effort
to further minimize the cognitive load of the survey, respondents were not asked to keep
a stem statement in mind when responding to the statements, instead the full text of the
statement was given with each item.
The surveys were created using the SelectSurvey application available through the
Rutgers University School of Communication and Information. Respondents received an
email with a link to the first page of the survey which was the informed consent
document. See Appendix E for copies of the text of the survey emails. In order to
continue with the survey, respondents needed to select the item which indicated that they
understood the informed consent document and wished to continue with the survey.
Selecting any other option took respondents to the last page of the survey which thanked
them for participating and closed the survey. The survey software also presented the
items within each question in a random order for each respondent. This helped minimize
any bias that could result from the order in which the items are presented to the

90
respondents. Table 3.1 shows the research propositions, the research questions, the
survey questions from the survey of public library directors (SPLD) or the survey of local
government officials (SLGO) that were relevant for each research questions, and the
types of resultant data.
Table 3.1: Research Propositions, Questions, and Resultant Data
Research
Proposition

Research Question

Relevant Survey
Question(s)

Resultant Data

P1: There is a
significant
relationship
between the
library
administrators’
descriptions of
library value to
local
government
officials and the
information
that they
provide to
support their
budget
requests.

RQ1A: How do library
administrators describe
the value of their library
to local government
officials?

SPLD question 10: When
describing to local
government officials the
value that my library adds
to the community…

Six items rated using a 7point Likert scale with
responses ranging from
1-Not Likely to 7-Very
Likely

RQ1B: What kinds of
information do library
administrators use as
evidence to support their
budget requests?

SPLD question 11: When
preparing your most recent
budget request which of the
following … did you feel it
was important to include in
support of the budget
request…

Nine items rated using a
7-point Likert scale with
responses ranging from
1-Not Important to 7Very Important

P2: Library
administrators’
assessments of
library value
that primarily
focus on
frequently
offered library
services, such
as lending
books or
children’s
programming,
are more likely
to be associated
with higher
levels of
funding than
assessments of

RQ2A: Is there an
observable focus of
library administrators’
assessments of library
value?

SPLD Questions 6-8: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways
that the library can add
value to a community…

15 items rated using a 7point Likert scale with
responses ranging from
1-Strongly Disagree to 7Strongly Agree

RQ2B: Is there a
relationship between the
focus of library
administrators’ value
assessments and their
reports of funding above
the required minimum
level?

SPLD Question 5: Did your
municipality support the
library in excess of 1/3 mil…

One item with Yes, No,
and Don’t Know as
possible responses

SPLD Questions 6-8: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways
that the library can add
value to a community…

15 items rated using a 7point Likert scale with
responses ranging from
1-Strongly Disagree to 7Strongly Agree

91

Table 3.1: Research Propositions, Questions, and Resultant Data
Research
Proposition

Research Question

Relevant Survey
Question(s)

Resultant Data

RQ3A: How do local
government
administrators who are
responsible for library
funding conceptualize
library value?

SLGO Questions 7-9: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways the
library can add value to the
community…

Seventeen items rated
using a 7-point Likert
scale with responses
ranging from 1-Strongly
Disagree to 7-Strongly
Agree

RQ3B: Is there a
significant relationship
between the library
value constructs of local
government
administrators and those
of library administrators?

SPLD Questions 6-8: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways
that the library can add
value to a community…

Seventeen items rated
using a 7-point Likert
scale with responses
ranging from 1-Strongly
Disagree to 7-Strongly
Agree

SLGO Questions 7-9: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways the
library can add value to the
community…

Seventeen items rated
using a 7-point Likert
scale with responses
ranging from 1-Strongly
Disagree to 7-Strongly
Agree

SPLD Question 5: Did your
municipality support the
library in excess of 1/3 mil…

One item with Yes, No,
and Don’t Know as
possible responses

SPLD Questions 6-8: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways
that the library can add
value to a community…

Seventeen items rated
using a 7-point Likert
scale with responses
ranging from 1-Strongly
Disagree to 7-Strongly
Agree

library value
that focus on
less-frequently
offered library
programs and
services, e.g.
services for
local businesses
or providing
access to egovernment.

P3: Local
government
administrators
who are
responsible for
library funding
will have library
value
constructs that
are consistent
with library
value
constructs of
library
administrators,
and the level of
agreement will
be associated
with higher
levels of library
funding, i.e. the
value
constructs that
are rated highly
by both groups
will also be
associated with
funding above
the minimum
level.

RQ3C: Is there a
significant relationship
between the level of
congruence in the library
value constructs of local
government officials and
those of public library
administrators and
higher levels of public
library funding?

92

Table 3.1: Research Propositions, Questions, and Resultant Data
Research
Proposition

Research Question

Relevant Survey
Question(s)

Resultant Data

SLGO Question 6: Did your
municipality support the
library in excess of 1/3 mil…

One item with Yes, No,
and Don’t Know as
possible responses

SLGO Questions 7-9: Here
are a group of statements
about some of the ways the
library can add value to the
community…

Seventeen items rated
using a 7-point Likert
scale with responses
ranging from 1-Strongly
Disagree to 7-Strongly
Agree

Each of the surveys was reviewed by the investigator to ensure that the surveys
gathered the data necessary to answer the research questions. The public library
director’s survey was also reviewed by former public library directors who were not
members of the survey population. Additional review of the local government officials’
survey was provided by people who have worked as members of municipal government.
These reviews helped the investigator refine the items so that they contained a minimum
of library jargon and used language that was familiar to the target audiences. The
additional reviews also confirmed the usability of the survey interface and the
investigator’s completion time estimates for each of the surveys.
The first survey administered was the survey of public library directors. The
recruitment letters were mailed to the each of the selected public library directors. Two
weeks after the recruitment letters were mailed, the survey emails were sent to the library
directors. The survey was open for responses for four weeks. Recruitment letters for the
survey of local government officials were sent to the selected mayors approximately two
months after the survey emails were sent to the public library directors. Two weeks later

93
the local government officials’ survey emails and the mailings with the print surveys
were sent. The local government officials’ survey was open for responses for four weeks
after the email link was sent.
The completed survey data was transferred into Microsoft Excel and IBM SPSS
for data analysis. The analysis of the collected data, presented in chapter five, will focus
on using the data to provide responses to the research questions and address the research
propositions. The present study was the first use of these survey instruments so an
examination of the resultant data may be useful. To facilitate this examination the survey
findings, in the form of detailed descriptive statistics for the collected data, are presented
in chapter four.

94
Chapter Four ‒ Descriptive Statistics
The purpose of this study was to examine the relationships between constructs of
library value and public library funding. This was accomplished by examining ideas
about library value and then testing to see if there were any relationships between specific
ideas about library value and library funding above the legally required minimum level of
1/3 mil. Data for this study was collected from mayors and public library directors in
New Jersey municipalities that provide local tax support for municipal public libraries.
This is an exploratory study and the instruments used to collect the data were developed
specifically for this study. An examination of the descriptive statistics provides insights
into the strengths and weaknesses of data collected to support the exploration of this topic
using these previously untested instruments. This chapter presents the descriptive
statistics for the collected data. Discussion of the research questions and additional data
analysis is presented in chapter five.
Survey of Local Government Officials
The survey of local government officials (mayors) was administered in both an
online and a paper format. The study population was 255 mayors, and the original plan
was to administer the survey via email, however email addresses were available for only
170 mayors. These 170 mayors were sent recruitment letters informing them about the
survey and asking the mayors to take the survey when they received an email with the
link. 170 emails were sent and four were returned as undeliverable leaving a total online
survey population of 166 mayors. The online survey was completed by 27 mayors.
Eighty-five of the mayors did not have a publicly available email address and were sent a
print version of the survey. The print survey was completed by 25 mayors. Copies of the

95
recruitment letters, survey emails, and survey instruments are available in the
Appendices. A total of 52 usable print and online surveys were returned for a response
rate of 20.7 percent. Table 4.1 shows the number of municipalities in the survey
population by county along with the number of usable surveys returned to the researcher.
Table 4.1: Survey of Local Government Officials:
Number of Municipalities in Survey Population and
Number of Usable Surveys Returned
Municipalities
Usable
County
in Survey
Responses
Population
Returned
Atlantic
4
0
Bergen
61
13
Burlington
3
1
Camden
13
4
Cape May
2
0
Cumberland
3
1
Essex
20
5
Gloucester
8
4
Hudson
10
3
Hunterdon
3
0
Mercer
5
0
Middlesex
24
5
Monmouth
14
0
Morris
31
8
Ocean
1
0
Passaic
15
4
Salem
5
0
Somerset
6
1
Sussex
1
0
Union
20
2
Warren
6
0
No demographic
1
1
data
2
Totals
255
52
Notes: 1 This row represents the respondent who submitted a usable
survey but opted not to respond to the survey items requesting
demographic data.
2

This figure represents the total population that met the study
criteria. The response rate calculation uses 251 which is the number
of surveys that were successfully delivered to potential respondents.

The survey had four sections and took participants approximately 15 minutes to
complete. The first section of the survey consisted of six questions, which provided the
informed consent document and gathered demographic data from the respondents. The

96
county and municipality data was used to ensure that there were no duplicate responses.
The second section asked respondents to rate the importance of 15 statements about
library value. The third section asked respondents to rate the importance of nine types of
information to their most recent library budget decision. The final section consisted of
two open-ended questions that asked respondents to tell what had the greatest and least
influence on their most recent library budget decision. Codes were created for each of
the items on the survey to facilitate the analysis of the data. The code book for the study
is available in Appendix F.
Mayors’ ratings of value statements.
The mayors were asked to use a 7-point scale to rate their level of agreement with
statements describing ways that their public library adds value to their community. The
scale used two anchor terms: the number one represented “Strongly Disagree” and the
number seven represented “Strongly Agree.” The rest of the scale was represented by the
numbers two through six with higher numbers indicating stronger levels of agreement.
Cronbach’s alpha was computed to assess whether the 15 variables that were used to
measure library value formed a reliable scale. The alpha for the 15 items was 0.906,
which indicates that the items have a good level of internal consistency and reliability.
Table 4.2 presents the descriptive statistics for the mayors’ ratings of the value
statements.
The mayors indicate that providing access to traditional library materials and
provision of free Internet access are the most important ways that the library adds value
to the community. This is closely followed by programming for children and teens, and
the provision of librarians who are knowledgeable about available community resources.

97
The mayors believe that the library adds the least value to the community by helping
people access e-government services and by providing help to local businesses.
Table 4.2: Descriptive Statistics of the Mayors’ Ratings of Library Value Statements

Variable

2

% Strongly % Disagree that
Agree that this this adds value
1
adds value(7)
(1-3)

N

Mean

SD

BKCDDVD

52

6.37

0.929

61.5

0.0

FREEINT

50

6.36

1.064

64.0

4.0

DATABSE

50

5.90

1.313

46.0

6.0

NEWTECH

51

5.86

1.637

54.9

9.8

EBOOKS

52

5.75

1.454

44.2

5.8

ADLTPRO

52

5.81

1.560

44.2

9.6

KIDPRO

52

6.25

1.219

57.7

3.8

CINFOR

52

5.46

1.421

30.8

7.7

JBSRCH

51

5.75

1.339

41.2

7.8

EGOV

52

4.60

2.089

28.8

42.3

LRNTECH

52

5.63

1.621

44.2

9.6

MEETSPA

52

5.31

1.995

38.5

19.2

BUSHLP

50

4.80

1.690

24.0

22.0

RESLIBR

52

6.10

1.332

53.8

5.8

EDLLIBR

52

5.94

1.434

46.2

7.7

1

Notes: The “Disagree” value includes all responses entered as 1, 2, or 3. This range was
selected because it included the lowest level responses across all variables.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable
names.

Figure 4.1 presents the histograms of variables derived from the mayors’
responses to the value statements (shown as sub-figures 4.1.1 to 4.1.15). These diagrams
show the symmetry of the responses for each variable. What is clear from the figures is
that the distributions for the responses are asymmetric and the responses of most items
are negatively skewed. The exceptions are Figure 4.1.8 which has an almost symmetrical
distribution; and Figures 4.1.10 and 4.1.13 which while still negatively skewed, are more
symmetrical than most of the other variables in this group.

98
Figure 4.1: Frequency Distributions of Mayors’ Ratings of Library Value Statements
4.1.1: Library adds value by providing access to Books,
CDs, and DVDs

4.1.2: Library adds value by providing free access to
high speed Internet

4.1.3: Library adds value by providing access to
databases

4.1.4: Library adds value by providing access to new
technologies such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, or tablet computers

4.1.5: Library adds value by providing access to e-books

4.1.6: Library adds value by providing programs and
activities for adults

99
4.1.7: Library adds value by providing programs and
activities for teens and young children

4.1.8: Library adds value by keeping people informed
about community activities

4.1.9: Library adds value by helping people with jobsearch related activities

4.1.10: Library adds value by helping people access egovernment services (requesting permits, license
renewals, etc.)

4.1.11: Library adds value by helping people learn to
use technological devices, such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, and tablet computers

4.1.12: Library adds value to the community by
providing community meeting spaces

100

4.1.13: Library adds value by providing services and
support for local businesses

4.1.14: Library adds value by providing librarians who
know the resources available in the community

4.1.15: Library adds value by providing librarians who
can help people find the information they want and
need for everyday living and in extraordinary situations
that arise in their lives

Mayors’ ratings of budget statements.
The mayors were also asked to use a 7-point scale to rate the importance of
specific types of information to their most recent library budget decisions. The scale
used two anchor terms: the number one represented “Not Important” and the number
seven represented “Very Important.” The rest of the scale was represented by the
numbers two through six with higher numbers indicating stronger levels of agreement.
Cronbach’s alpha was computed to assess whether the nine variables that were used to

101
measure the construct of important budget information formed a reliable scale. The alpha
for the nine items was 0.884, indicating that the items have an acceptable level of internal
consistency and are a reliable measurement of the construct of information of importance
to your library budget decision.
Table 4.3 presents the descriptive statistics for the mayors’ ratings of the budget
information statements. The mayors felt that what the library was able to accomplish
with existing budgets and staff, how many people used various library programs, and
how well the library managed its money were the most important factors in their recent
library budget decisions. The mayors were least influenced by media coverage of library
events.
Table 4.3: Descriptive Statistics of the Mayors’ Ratings of the Importance of Library Information to
their Most Recent Budget Decision
N

Mean

SD

% Very important
for budget (7)

% Not important for
budget
1
(1-3)

PROGUSE

48

5.92

1.108

33.3

4.2

IMPACT

48

5.27

1.455

16.7

14.6

UTEST

48

4.73

1.634

14.6

22.9

BUDSTAF

49

5.96

1.172

44.9

4.1

MONEY

48

5.92

1.471

54.2

6.3

GOVPART

48

4.56

1.844

16.7

27.1

COMPART

48

4.63

1.632

12.5

20.8

MEDIA

48

4.25

1.919

16.7

35.4

STANDS

48

4.52

1.856

16.7

27.1

Variable

2

1

Notes: The “Disagree” value includes all responses entered as 1, 2, or 3. This range was selected because it
included the lowest level responses across all variables.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable names.

Figure 4.2 presents the histograms showing the frequency distributions of the
mayors’ responses to the importance of certain types of information to their most recent
budget decisions (shown as sub-figures 4.2.1 to 4.2.9). The distributions of the responses
that make up these variables are more symmetrical than those shown in Figure 4.1;

102
however the distributions shown in figures 4.2.1-4.2.4 show a high level of negative
skewness which indicates a higher level of agreement on the importance of these
variables.
Figure 4.2: Frequency Distributions of Mayors’ Ratings of the Importance of Information to Budget
Decisions
4.2.1: How many people use various library programs

4.2.2: What the library as able to achieve given
existing budget and staff levels

4.2.3: How well the library manages its money

4.2.4: The impact of library programs and services
on specific segments of the community

103
4.2.5: The library’s partnerships with other government
agencies

4.2.6: User testimonials about various library
programs

4.2.7: Reports of media coverage of library activities and
events

4.2.8: NJ public library standards for staffing levels
and hours of service

4.2.9: The library’s partnerships with community
organizations

104
In addition to the survey questions, respondents were asked to complete two open-ended
questions asking them to describe what had the greatest influence and what had the least
influence on their most recent library budget decision. There were 45 usable responses to
these questions.
Survey of Public Library Directors
The survey of public library directors (library directors) was administered online.
The population for the survey was the directors of the 252 municipal public libraries in
New Jersey. Each library director was sent an initial recruitment letter via the U.S. Postal
service. The letter described the survey and asked the library directors to take the survey
when they received the email with the link. One library directory responded to the
recruitment letter by refusing to participate in the survey. Emails were sent to the
remaining 251 library directors in the sample. Nine of the emails were returned as
undeliverable, reducing the actual population for this survey to 242 possible respondents.
A total of 88 usable surveys were returned for a response rate of 36.4 percent. Copies of
the recruitment letters, survey emails, and survey instruments are available in the
Appendices. The survey had six sections and took participants approximately 20 minutes
to complete. Table 4.4 shows the number of libraries in the survey population by county
along with the number of usable surveys returned to the researcher.
The first six questions of the survey provided the informed consent document and
gathered demographic data from the respondents. The county and municipality data was
used to ensure that there were no duplicate responses. The second section asked
respondents to rate the importance of 15 statements about library value. The third section
asked respondents to rate the importance of nine types of information to their most recent

105
library budget request. The fourth and fifth sections asked respondents about the
likelihood of using certain kinds of information when communicating about their
library’s value to library colleagues and to governmental officials.
Table 4.4: Survey of Public Library Directors: Number of
Libraries in Survey Population and Number of Usable
Surveys Returned
Libraries in
Usable
County
Survey
Responses
Population
Returned
Atlantic
4
1
Bergen
61
15
Burlington
3
2
Camden
13
5
Cape May
2
1
Cumberland
3
2
Essex
20
5
Gloucester
8
3
Hudson
10
5
Hunterdon
3
1
Mercer
5
1
Middlesex
24
11
Monmouth
13
4
Morris
31
12
Ocean
1
0
Passaic
15
6
Salem
4
0
Somerset
6
4
Sussex
1
1
Union
20
6
Warren
5
1
No demographic
2
1
data
2
Totals
252
88
Notes: 1 This row represents the respondent who submitted a usable
survey but opted not to respond to the survey items requesting
demographic data.
2

This figure represents the total population that met the study criteria.
The response rate calculation uses 242 which is the number of surveys
that were successfully delivered to potential respondents.

The final section consisted of two open-ended questions that asked respondents to tell
what had the greatest and least influence on the success of their most recent budget
request. Codes were created for each of the items on the survey to facilitate the analysis
of the data. The code book for the study is available in Appendix F.

106
Public library directors’ ratings of value statements.
The library directors were asked to use a 7-point scale to rate their level of
agreement with statements describing ways that their public library adds value to their
community. The scale used two anchor terms: the number one represented “Strongly
Disagree” and the number seven represented “Strongly Agree.” The rest of the scale was
represented by the numbers two through six with higher numbers indicating stronger
levels of agreement. These were the same items used in the survey of local government
officials so the internal reliability and consistency of the scale is the same as reported for
that survey (α = 0.906).
Table 4.5 presents the descriptive statistics for the library directors’ ratings of the
value statements. The library directors indicate that the provision of free Internet access
and providing access to traditional library materials are the most important ways that the
library adds value to the community. This is closely followed by programming for
children and teens, the provision of librarians who are knowledgeable about available
community resources, access to databases, provision of librarians to help with everyday
life information needs, programming for adults, and providing access to e-books. The
library directors believe that the library adds the least value to the community by
providing help to local businesses.
Figure 4.3 presents the histograms of variables derived from the library directors’
responses to the value statements (shown as sub-figures 4.3.1 to 4.3.15). These diagrams
show the symmetry of the responses for each variable. What is clear from the figures is
that the distributions for the responses are asymmetric and the responses of most items

107
are negatively skewed. The exception is sub-figure 4.3.13 which has an almost
symmetrical distribution.
Table 4.5: Descriptive Statistics of the Library Directors’ Ratings of the Importance of Library
Value Statements

N

Mean

SD

% Strongly Agree
that this adds
value(7)

% Disagree that this
adds value
1
(1-3)

BKCDDVD

89

6.80

0.771

88.0

1.1

FREEINT

89

6.84

0.705

91.0

1.1

DATABSE

89

6.17

1.342

60.7

5.6

NEWTECH

88

5.17

2.102

39.8

20.5

EBOOKS

88

6.07

1.468

60.2

5.7

ADLTPRO

88

6.08

1.599

62.5

8.0

KIDPRO

89

6.54

1.012

74.2

2.2

CINFOR

89

5.82

1.328

40.4

5.6

JBSRCH

89

5.90

1.500

51.7

10.1

EGOV

89

5.04

2.061

38.2

24.7

LRNTECH

88

5.60

1.772

43.2

12.5

MEETSPA

89

5.79

1.806

57.3

13.5

BUSHLP

89

4.98

1.732

23.6

20.2

RESLIBR

89

6.22

1.250

59.6

4.5

EDLLIBR

89

6.13

1.546

64.0

6.7

Variable

1

2

Notes: The “Disagree” value includes all responses entered as 1, 2, or 3. This range was selected because it
included the lowest level responses across all variables.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable names.

108
Figure 4.3: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of Library Value Statements
4.3.1: Library adds value by providing access to Books,
CDs, and DVDs

4.3.2: Library adds value by providing free access to
high speed Internet

4.3.3: Library adds value by providing access to
databases

4.3.4: Library adds value by providing access to new
technologies such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, or tablet computers

4.3.5: Library adds value by providing access to e-books

4.3.6: Library adds value by providing programs and
activities for adults

109
4.3.7: Library adds value by providing programs and
activities for teens and young children

4.3.8: Library adds value by keeping people informed
about community activities

4.3.9: Library adds value by helping people with jobsearch related activities

4.3.10: Library adds value by helping people access egovernment services (requesting permits, license
renewals, etc.)

4.3.11: Library adds value by helping people learn to
use technological devices, such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, and tablet computers

4.3.12: Library adds value to the community by
providing community meeting spaces

110
4.3.13: Library adds value by providing services and
support for local businesses

4.3.14: Library adds value by providing librarians who
know the resources available in the community

4.3.15: Library adds value by providing librarians who
can help people find the information they want and
need for everyday living and in extraordinary situations
that arise in their lives

Public library directors’ ratings of budget statements.
The library directors were asked to use a 7-point scale to rate the importance of
specific types of information to their most recent library budget requests. The scale used
two anchor terms: the number one represented “Not Important” and the number seven
represented “Very Important.” The rest of the scale was represented by the numbers two
through six with higher numbers indicating greater importance. These were the same

111
items used in the survey of local government officials so the internal reliability and
consistency of the scale is the same as in that survey (α = 0.884).
Table 4.6 presents the descriptive statistics for the library directors’ ratings of the
budget information statements. The library directors’ responses suggest how many
people used various library programs, what the library was able to accomplish with
existing budgets and staff, and how well the library managed its money were the most
important kinds of information to include in their most recent budget requests. Their
responses indicate that information about the library’s compliance with state standards
was the least important information that could be included in their budget requests.
Table 4.6: Descriptive Statistics of the Library Directors’ Ratings of the Importance of Library
Information to Their Most Recent Budget Request
Variable

2

PROGUSE
IMPACT
UTEST
BUDSTAF
MONEY
GOVPART
COMPART
MEDIA
STANDS

N

Mean

SD

% Very important
for budget (7)

% Not important for
1
budget (1-3)

88
88
88
88
88
87
88
88
88

6.15
5.27
4.94
5.91
5.76
4.71
5.02
4.40
4.25

1.419
1.837
2.053
1.630
1.729
1.855
1.851
1.879
2.024

58.0
34.1
36.4
53.4
50.0
21.8
28.4
13.6
14.8

6.8
15.8
22.7
10.2
11.4
19.5
18.2
28.4
33.0

1

Notes: The “Disagree” value includes all responses entered as 1, 2, or 3. This range was selected because it
included the lowest level responses across all variables.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable names.

Figure 4.4 presents the histograms showing the frequency distributions of the
library directors’ ratings of the importance of certain types of information to their most
recent budget decisions (shown as sub-figures 4.4.1 to 4.4.9). The distributions of the
responses that make up these variables are more symmetrical than those shown in Figure
4.3; however the distributions shown in sub-figures 4.4.1-4.4.3 show a high level of

112
negative skewness which indicates a higher level of agreement on the importance of these
variables.
Figure 4.4: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of the Importance of Certain Types of
Information to Budget Request
4.4.1: How many people use various library programs

4.4.2: What the library as able to achieve given
existing budget and staff levels

4.4.3: How well the library manages its money

4.4.4: The impact of library programs and services on
specific segments of the community

113
4.4.5: The library’s partnerships with government
agencies

4.4.6: User testimonials about various library
programs

4.4.7: Reports of media coverage of library activities
and events

4.4.8: NJ public library standards for staffing levels and
hours of service

4.4.9: The library’s partnerships with community
organizations

114
Communicating library value to library colleagues.
The library directors were asked to use a 7-point scale to rate their likelihood of
using certain kinds of information when communicating about their library’s value to
other library colleagues. The scale used two anchor terms: the number one represented
“Not Likely” and the number seven represented “Very Likely.” The rest of the scale was
represented by the numbers two through six with higher numbers indicating increased
likelihood of using a particular type of information. Cronbach’s alpha was computed to
assess whether the six variables that were used to measure communication of value to
colleagues formed a reliable scale. The alpha for the six items was 0.769, which
indicates that the items have a reasonable level of internal consistency and reliability.
Table 4.7: Descriptive Statistics of the Library Directors’ Ratings of the Likelihood of Using Certain
Types of Information to Communicate Library Value to Library Colleagues
N

Mean

SD

% Very likely to
Communicate (7)

% Not likely to
1
Communicate (1-3)

LPROGUSE

88

5.82

1.459

43.2

8.0

LBUDSTAF

89

5.75

1.384

38.2

9.0

LMONEY

89

5.45

1.581

33.7

12.4

LIMPACT

88

5.64

1.620

44.3

11.4

LCOMPART

89

5.43

1.658

33.7

15.7

LGOVPART

89

5.15

1.825

31.5

19.1

Variable

2

1

Notes: The “Disagree” value includes all responses entered as 1, 2, or 3. This range was selected because it
included the lowest level responses across all variables.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable names.

Table 4.7 presents the descriptive statistics for the library directors’ ratings of
their likelihood of using certain types of information to communicate library value to
library colleagues. The close dispersion of the means, with only .67 between the highest
and lowest values, suggests that library directors are very likely to discuss all of the
constructs represented by these variables when they are communicating about their

115
library’s value to library colleagues. Figure 4.5 presents the histograms showing the
frequency distributions of the library directors’ ratings of their likelihood of using certain
types of information to communicate their library’s value to library colleagues (shown as
sub-figures 4.5.1 to 4.5.6). The distributions of the responses that make up these
variables are less skewed than some of the previous distributions from this dataset, but
visually there are still a higher number of very likely responses to all of the variables in
this group.
Figure 4.5: Frequency Distributions of Library Directors’ Ratings of the Likelihood of Using Certain
Types of Information to Communicate Library Value to Library Colleagues
4.5.1: How many people use various library programs

4.5.2: What the library was able to achieve given
existing budget and staff levels

4.5.3: How well the library manages its money

4.5.4: The impact of library programs and services on
specific segments of the community

116
4.5.5: My library's partnerships with community
organizations

4.5.6: My library's partnerships with other local
government agencies

Communicating library value to government officials.
The library directors were asked to use a 7-point scale to rate their likelihood of
using certain kinds of information when communicating about their library’s value to
governmental officials. The scale used two anchor terms: the number one represented
“Not Likely” and the number seven represented “Very Likely.” The rest of the scale was
represented by the numbers two through six with higher numbers indicating increased
likelihood of using a particular type of information. Cronbach’s alpha was computed to
assess whether the six variables that were used to measure communication of value to
government officials formed a reliable scale. The alpha for the six items was 0.743,
which indicates that the items have an acceptable level of internal consistency and
reliability.
Table 4.8 presents the descriptive statistics for the library directors’ ratings of
their likelihood of using certain types of information to communicate library value to
governmental officials. There is a close dispersion of the means in this group, with only
0.819 between the highest and lowest values. This suggests that although there may be

117
more variability when communicating about the library’s value to government officials,
library directors are still very likely to discuss all of the concepts represented by these
variables when they are communicating about their library’s value to library colleagues.
Table 4.8: Descriptive Statistics of Library Directors’ Ratings of the Likelihood of Using Certain
Types of Information to Communicate Library Value to Government Officials
N

Mean

SD

% Very likely to
Communicate (7)

% Not likely to
1
Communicate (1-3)

GPROGUSE

88

6.60

0.838

75.0

1.1

GBUDSTAF

89

6.48

0.893

67.4

1.1

GMONEY

89

6.51

0.978

73.0

2.2

GIMPACT

89

6.28

1.118

60.7

3.4

GCOMPART

89

6.00

1.314

50.6

4.5

GGOVPART

89

5.78

1.670

49.4

11.2

Variable

2

1

Notes: The “Disagree” value includes all responses entered as 1, 2, or 3. This range was selected because it
included the lowest level responses across all variables.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable names.

Figure 4.6 presents the histograms showing the frequency distributions of the
library directors’ ratings of their likelihood of using certain types of information to
communicate their library’s value to government officials (shown as sub-figures 4.6.1 to
4.6.6). The distributions of the responses that make up these variables exhibit the same
tendency toward negative skewness that was also evident in some of the previous
distributions from this dataset. Visually there are high numbers of very likely responses
to all of the variables in this group suggesting that library directors are very likely to use
the concepts represented by these variables when communicating about their library’s
value to government officials.

118
Figure 4.6: Frequency Distributions of Public Library Directors’ Ratings of the Likelihood of Using
Certain Types of Information to Communicate Library Value to Government Officials
4.6.1: How many people use various library programs

4.6.2: What the library was able to achieve given
existing budget and staff levels

4.6.3: How well the library manages its money

4.6.4: The impact of library programs and services on
specific segments of the community

4.6.5: My library's partnerships with community
organizations

4.6.6: My library's partnerships with other local
government agencies

119
In addition to the survey questions, respondents were asked to complete two open-ended
questions asking them to describe what had the greatest impact and what had the least
impact on the success of their most recent library budget request. There were 84 usable
responses to these questions. These responses are discussed in chapter five.
Supplemental Data
This study also makes use of demographic and other data about the respondents
taken from supplemental sources. The municipality of each respondent was matched
with an appropriate four-digit code from 2012 NJ-1040 County/Municipality Codes (New
Jersey Division of Taxation, 2012). This created standardized identifiers for all of the
respondents, and allowed the responses to be easily sorted by county and by municipality.
Equalized valuation.
This study used the 2010 equalized valuations for the municipalities represented
by the respondents (New Jersey Division of Taxation, 2011). In New Jersey
“equalization ensures that all properties within a district and all districts within their
counties and the State bear the same relationship to market value” (New Jersey Division
of Taxation, 2013, p. 519). The New Jersey Division of Taxation examines the
relationship of current market real estate values to assessed property values and each year
publishes a Table of Equalized Valuations. The legislatively mandated uses of the
equalized valuation calculation are the distribution of state school aid and the
apportionment of county taxes. In addition to these mandated uses, the equalized value
of municipal property is also used to calculate the amount of financial support a town is
required to provide to the municipal library.

120
The use of municipal property value as a basis for public library support in New
Jersey can be traced back to 1884. In this year the Reverend William Prall, in
conjunction with other leading citizens of the day, proposed a bill enabling the municipal
support of free public libraries. According to McDonough (1997) the one of the intended
effects of the law was to remove library funding and management from the political
process (p. 9). The public library was linked to municipal government and the local
school system, but operated as an independent entity. The library would be governed by
a seven-member library board of trustees; five of the members to be appointed by the
mayor, with the mayor and superintendent of schools serving ex-officio in the remaining
two positions.
The 1884 bill also established the fiscal basis for municipal library support;
“libraries were to be supported by municipal funds by a minimum one-third of a mil
property tax on every dollar of assessed valuation” (McDonough, 1997, p. 9). This
provision of the bill was designed to ensure that public libraries would receive at least a
minimum level of tax support. In theory, if municipalities assessed property at its true
value, each library would receive funding that reflected the economic base of its
community. Unfortunately, communities often assessed at different levels, e.g. “one
community [would]…set its rate of assessed valuation at 49 percent of true value while
another [would]…decide to assess at 75 percent of true value” (McDonough, 1997, p.20).
These decisions resulted in some libraries receiving only marginal levels of municipal
support. The funding formula was modified in 1985 to provide public libraries with
support based on the equalized or true taxable value of municipal property, which would

121
mitigate the differences in funding caused by these local variations in the ratio of
assessed to true property value.
Since 1985, all New Jersey municipalities that have public libraries are required
to provide them with a level of tax support based on the millage (mil) of the municipal
equalized valuation. One mil is equal to $0.001 of every $1000.00 of equalized property
value. New Jersey municipal libraries must receive a minimum of 1/3 of a mil, or
$0.000333333 for every $1000.00 of equalized value. The equalized valuation data used
in this study was taken from the 2010 Table of Equalized Valuations (New Jersey
Division of Taxation, 2011). This data along with the names of the municipalities and
the county/municipality codes was entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet.
U.S. Census data.
Population, household income, and educational attainment data were taken from
data files published by the U. S. Census Bureau (2013a, 2013b). The name of the
municipality for each respondent was searched on the American FactFinder website
(U.S. Census Bureau, n.d.). The current population, the median family income, the
number of households, and the educational attainment of the population aged 25 and
older was added to the Excel spreadsheet containing the equalized valuation data.
Although only the population data was used in the subsequent analyses, the household
income and educational attainment data provided a more complete picture of the
respondents, and it may also be of use in studies that extend the findings of the current
studies.

122
Data from NJ library statistics.
Statistical data is collected each year from New Jersey public libraries by the New
Jersey State Library. Data is collected on a range of library metrics, including library
expenditures and municipal tax support and the data file is available from the State
Library’s website (New Jersey State Library, 2012). Information about municipal tax
support for most of the respondents was available in the data file; however responses
were also received from a few municipalities that were not represented in the State
Library statistics data file. The 2011 municipal budgets for these municipalities were
located and the library tax support data was obtained. The municipal tax support data
was also entered into the Excel spreadsheet containing the equalized valuation data.
Once the library tax support data information was entered, the millage rate for each
library was calculated by dividing the amount of municipal tax support provided to the
library in 2011 by the 2010 municipal equalized valuation. The level of per capita library
support was also calculated by dividing the amount of municipal library support by the
municipal population.
Data from these supplemental sources provided an additional 15 variables.
Removal of duplicate municipalities caused by receiving responses from both the mayor
and the library reduced the data set to 118 cases. Table 4.9 provides the descriptive
statistics for the four of the variables created by using the supplemental data sources
described in this section. These are the variables that were used in the analyses described
in chapter five.
The descriptive statistics presented in Table 4.9 suggest that the respondents
represent both very small and very large communities, with a median population of

123
around 14 thousand people. The median equalized valuation of the communities
represented by the respondents is 2.2 billion dollars, suggesting that more than half of the
communities have property values above this level. The tax support provided to libraries
also covers a wide range with 7.4 million dollars separating the highest and lowest
values. The median millage rates show that at least half of the libraries are funded above
the 1/3 mil minimum value of .0333333. These statistics suggest that although the
respondents do not comprise a large enough sample be statistically representative of the
entire population of New Jersey public libraries and municipalities, the respondent
communities are diverse enough to support additional analysis.
Table 4.9: Descriptive Statistics for Four Variables Derived from Supplemental Data Sources
2
1
1
1
1
1
Variable
Mean
SD
Minimum
Median
Maximum
POPSRVD
25148
31063.846
919
13954
247597
EQVAL
3452624025
3440445975
146084561
2241015001
22184882220
TAXSUP
1247768.46
1236638.653
49838
835268
75000000
MILLAGE
.0003635887
.00008854322 .000067931
.0003335245
.000719694
1

Notes: N = 118.
2
See the Code Book for Quantitative Analysis (Appendix F) for descriptions of the variable names.

This chapter described both the data collected by the survey instruments and the
data gathered from supplemental sources. The data collection methods resulted in usable
survey responses from 88 library directors and 52 mayors. These respondents represent
118 municipalities, which is 46 percent of the municipalities in the study population. The
reliability coefficients for the various groups of data suggest that the survey instruments
can be reasonably expected to measure the intended concepts. The survey response rates
are low, so the data may not be representative of the population studied however the
researcher believes there is sufficient data to support a discussion of the research
questions. In chapter five, the data described in this chapter is used to address the study
research questions and the research propositions. The discussion of the research

124
questions and propositions is followed by chapter six in which the implications of the
study are considered along with a discussion of any conclusions that can be drawn from
this study.

125
Chapter Five — Analysis and Discussion
The purpose of this study was to examine the relationships between constructs of
library value and public library funding. This was accomplished by orienting the
research around the following propositions:
1. There is a significant relationship between the library administrators’ descriptions
of library value to local government officials and the information that they
provide to support their budget requests.
2. Library administrators’ assessments of library value that primarily focus on
frequently offered library services, such as lending books or children’s
programming, are more likely to be associated with increased funding than
assessments of library value that focus on less-frequently offered library programs
and services, e.g. services for local businesses or providing access to egovernment.
3. Local government administrators who are responsible for library funding will
have library value constructs that are consistent with library value constructs of
library administrators, and the level of agreement will be associated with
increased levels of library funding, i.e. the value constructs that are rated highly
by both groups will also be associated with funding above the minimum level.
Each of the propositions had associated research questions which guided the data
collection. The research questions were:
RQ1A -- How do library directors describe the value of their libraries to local
government officials?
RQ1B -- What kinds of information do library directors use as evidence to
support their budget requests?

126
RQ2A Is there an observable focus of public library directors’ assessments of
library value?
RQ2B -- Is there a relationship between the focus of public library directors’
value assessments and library funding above the required minimum level?
RQ3A -- How do local government officials who are responsible for library
funding conceptualize library value?
RQ3B -- Is there a relationship between the library value constructs of local
government officials and those of public library directors?
RQ3C -- Can similarities in the value constructs of local government officials and
public library directors be associated with higher levels of public library funding?
This chapter uses the data described in chapter four to address the research questions and
to discuss each of the related research propositions. The discussion of the research
propositions will be followed by a discussion of the respondents’ reports of the greatest
and least impacts on recent funding requests or decisions.
Research Proposition One — The Relationships Between Library Directors’
Descriptions of Library Value and Information Included in Budget Requests
Research question 1A — how library directors communicate library value to
local government officials.
There were two research questions to address the relationships between public
library directors’ value constructs and the types of information that they use to
communicate budget information to local government officials. Research question 1A
asked how library directors describe the value of their library to local government
officials. This was measured by asking the library directors to rate the likelihood of using
specific types of information when describing their library’s value to local government
officials. The assumption underlying the question is that library directors are very likely

127
to discuss what they believe has value to local government officials. Seventy-five
percent of the respondents were very likely to talk to local government officials about
how many people use library programs and services. Seventy-three percent were also
very likely to talk about how well the library manages its finances, and 67.4 percent were
very likely to discuss what the library was able to accomplish with existing budgets and
staff. Only 60.7 percent were very likely to discuss the impact of library programs on
specific segments of the community, e.g., the impact of teen programming efforts. The
library directors were also less likely to discuss library partnerships, with 50.6 percent
very likely to discuss partnerships with community organizations and 49.4 percent very
likely to discuss partnerships with other local government agencies. Table 5.1 shows the
value concepts library directors are very likely to discuss with local government officials.
Table 5.1: Concepts Library Directors are Very Likely to Discuss When
Describing Their Library’s Value to Local Government Officials
Concept
% Very Likely to
Discuss Concept
Program Use
75.0
Money Management
73.0
Accomplishments With Current Budget & Staff
67.4
Impact of Library Programs on Community
60.7
Community Partnerships
50.6
Local Government Partnerships
49.4

Research question 1B ‒ the information library directors use to support their
budget requests.
Research question 1B asked what kinds of information do library directors use to
support their budget requests. This was measured by asking library directors to rate the
importance of including certain types of information in their most recent budget request.
The most important information to provide in support of budget requests, as indicated by
58 percent of the respondents, was information about how many people used library

128
programs and services. The next most important information to include in budget
justifications, as indicated by 53 percent of respondents, was information on what the
library was able to achieve with the existing budgets and staff. Fifty percent of the
respondents indicated that it was also very important to include information about how
well the library manages its money. Information about library impacts on users, user
testimonials, library-local government partnerships, and library-community partnerships
were less important to the budget requests, with 22 to 37 percent of respondents rating
these items as very important. The least important information to include in budget
justifications was information about meeting state standards for service (14.8 percent)
and reports of media coverage of library events (13.6 percent). Table 5.2 shows the
concepts that library directors indicated are very important to include in their budget
justifications.
The highest rated concepts, i.e. program use, library accomplishments, and money
management, suggest that library directors’ communications about their budget focus
primarily on outputs and library management. User-focused concepts, i.e. user
testimonials and user impacts, ranked low, and partnerships ranked even lower. The
ratings of the concepts used to communicate library value to local government officials
are very similar to the ratings of the budget justification concepts. A possible explanation
for the similarity is that most of the library directors’ communication with local
government officials may be about the library budget. If library directors believe that
local government officials’ primary interest in the library is its budget, then
communicating about the library in the context of its budget seems a reasonable choice.

129
Table 5.2: Concepts Library Directors Rate as Very Important to Include in
Their Budget Justifications
% Rating Concept as
Concept
Very Important
Program Use
58.0
Accomplishments With Current Budget & Staff
53.0
Money Management
50.0
User Testimonials About Library
36.4
Impact of Library Programs on Community
34.1
Community Partnerships
28.4
Local Government Partnerships
21.8
Meeting State Standards
14.8
Media Coverage of Library Events
13.6

Discussion of research proposition one – the relationship between
communication of library value and information included in budget requests.
Research proposition one claims there is a significant relationship between the
information library directors use to communicate their libraries’ value to local
government officials and the information that they provide to support their budget
requests. This claim was tested using a correlation analysis of the library directors’
ratings of the information they use to communicate their library’s value to local
government officials (see Table 5.1) and the library directors’ ratings of the information
they believed it would be important to include in their budget requests (see table 5.2).
There were 15 variables of interest, and taken in pairs, there were 105 possible
correlation coefficients; 48 of these, or 46 percent, were statistically significant at the
0.01 level. Table 5.3 presents the significant correlations from this analysis. The
analysis indicates that all of the budget information concepts were significantly correlated
with at least one of the library value communication concepts.
The correlated concepts can be grouped into three categories. The first category
consists of the correlations between related pairs of concepts. There are four value

130
communication variables that were significantly correlated with a similar budget
information variable.
Table 5.3: Significant Correlations Between Library Directors’ Ratings of Value Communication
Concepts and Library Directors’ Ratings of Budget Information Concepts
Budget Information Concepts

MEDIA

STANDS

GCOMPART
GGOVPART

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
2
r
N
Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
2
r
N

COMPART

GIMPACT

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
2
r
N

GOVPART

GMONEY

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
2
r
N
Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
2
r
N

MONEY

GBUDSTAF

Concepts Used to Communicate Library Value to Local Government Officials

N

BUDSTAFF

2

UTEST

r

IMPACT

PROGUSE

GPROGUSE

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)

.284

.105

.093

.133

.146

.145

.090

.073

.007

.325

.389

.213

.172

.175

.401

.494

.081

.011

.009

.018

.021

.021

.008

.005

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

.408
.000
.166
89

.335
.001
.112
89

.090
.401
.008
89

.209
.050
.044
89

89
.013
.903
.000
89

.082
.445
.007
89

.251
.018
.063
89

.065
.543
.004
89

.101
.384
.010

.021
.848
.000

.254
.016
.064

.399
.000
.159

.040
.712
.002

.082
.445
.007

.038
.723
.001

.056
.604
.003

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

.301
.004
.091

.472
.000
.223

.279
.008
.078

.204
.055
.042

.408
.000
.166

.275
.009
.075

.345
.001
.119

.271
.010
.073

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

.206
.053
.042
89

.154
.150
.024
89

.168
.115
.028
89

.269
.011
.072
89

.489
.000
.239
89

.641
.000
.412
89

.189
.077
.036
89

.172
.107
.030
89

.103
.336
.011

.168
.115
.028

.190
.075
.036

.109
.309
.012

.171
.108
.029

.488
.000
.238

.198
.063
.039

.122
.254
.015

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

89

Notes: Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed)
See Appendix F for a full description of the variable names,

The related variables are:

131


What the library was able to accomplish with current budgets and staff
(GBUDSTAF and BUDSTAF) r (89) = 0.408, p = .01.



How well the library manages its money (GMONEY and MONEY) r (89) =
0.399, p = .01.



The impact of library programs and services in the community (GIMPACT and
IMPACT) r (89) = 0.472, p = .01.

The library’s involvement in community partnerships (GCOMPART and COMPART) r
(89) = 0.641, p = .01.
These correlations suggest that public library directors who are likely to discuss the
concepts represented by these variables when communicating with local government
officials about the value of the library are also likely to include information about the
same concepts in their budget requests. While some of these correlation coefficients are
modest, the effect sizes are all greater than 15 percent. These four relationships are
indicated in Table 5.3 with gray shading.
The second category consists of variables that are less directly related, but still
have correlation coefficients above .300 and effect sizes above nine percent. Three of the
five correlations in this category are with the variable representing the likelihood of
communicating library value to local government officials by discussing the impact of
library programs and services in the community (GIMPACT). This concept is
significantly correlated with the variables representing the following budget information
concepts:


Local Government Partnerships (GOVPART) r (89) = 0.408, p = .01.



Media Coverage of Library Events (MEDIA) r (89) = 0.345, p = .01.

132


Program Use (PROGUSE) r (89) = 0.301, p = .01.

This suggests that library directors who are likely to discuss the impact of library
programs when communicating about library value to local government officials are also
likely to include information about local government partnerships, media coverage of
library events and library program use in their budget requests.
The variable representing the likelihood of communicating library value to local
government officials by discussing the library’s partnerships with other local government
agencies (GGOVPART) was strongly correlated with the variable representing the budget
information concept:


Community Partnerships (COMPART) r (89) = 0.641, p = .01.

This correlation suggests that library directors who are likely to discuss the library’s local
government partnerships with their municipal officials are also likely to include
information about community partnerships in their budget requests.
The variable representing the likelihood of communicating library value to local
government officials by discussing what the library was able to accomplish using existing
staff and budgets (GBUDSTAF) was strongly correlated with the variable representing
the budget information concept:


Money Management (MONEY) r (89) = 0.335, p = .01.

This correlation suggests that those library directors likely to discuss what the library was
able to accomplish with existing budgets and staff are also likely to include information
about how the library manages its money in the budget request. The correlations from
this second category are indicated in bold type in Table 5.3.

133
The final and largest category contains the remainder of the statistically
significant correlations from this analysis. While these correlations include all of the
available variables, the correlation coefficients are all less than .300. These relationships
may be statistically significant, but the small effect sizes, which range from less than one
percent to a high of nine percent, suggest that over ninety percent of the relationship
between these variable is due to other, as yet unidentified, factors.
There is a significant relationship between the way that library directors describe
the value of their library to local government officials and the information that library
directors believe it is important to include in their budget justifications. The relationship
is strongest between related concepts, but there are also moderate relationships between
talking about the impact of the library to government officials and three of the budget
information concepts. Most surprising is the strength of the correlations around local
government and community partnerships. These concepts had the lowest percentages of
“Very Likely” ratings as a topic used to discuss library value with local government
officials with about fifty percent of respondents indicating that they would be very likely
to discuss these concepts. An even smaller percentage of respondents indicated that they
would be very likely to include information about these partnerships in their budget
justifications. However, the correlation analysis suggests that those who choose to
discuss these partnerships are also very likely to include information about them in their
budget justifications.
The clustering of the statistically significant correlations around related concepts
and around the library impact variable suggest some support for the claim made by
research proposition one of a relationship between information used to support library

134
budget justifications and the way that library directors are likely to communicate library
value to local government officials. Since the majority of the statistically significant
correlation coefficients for the variables in this analysis are smaller than .300 with
correspondingly small effect sizes, it should also be noted that the relationship does not
appear to be an especially strong one. The moderate correlation coefficients and small
effect sizes also suggest the possibility of still unidentified factors that influence both
how library directors communicate value to local government officials and what
information they choose to include in their budget justifications.
Research Proposition Two — The Relationships between the Value Constructs of
Library Directors and Levels of Library Funding
Research question 2A — public library directors’ ratings of value constructs.
Research question 2A examined the focus of the library directors’ value
statements, i.e. what could be learned by examining the value constructs that were rated
“Very Important” by the library directors. Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet
was rated by 91 percent of the library directors as a very important way that the library
adds value to the community. The next highest rated response was Making Books, CDs
and DVDs Available to the Community (88 percent). This was followed by Providing
Programs and Activities for Teens and Young Children (74.2 percent). Providing
Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs was rated as very
important by 64 percent of the library directors. Providing Programs and Activities for
Adults was rated as very important by 62.5 percent of the respondents, and slightly fewer
rated Providing Access to Databases (60.7 percent) and Providing Access to E-books
(60.2 percent) as very important.

135
Table 5.4 shows the percentage of “Very Important” ratings by the public library
directors for each of the value statements. The table indicates that the library directors’
primary focus was on adding value through traditional library services such as lending
books and DVDs, the provision of free internet access, and providing programs for teens
and children. These are services that are geared toward library users and usually do not
require exceptional support from the community beyond utilization. These are also the
services people expect from the library (Zickuhr, Rainie, & Purcell, 2013), and these
appear to be the services the library expects to provide. Providing these services is
generally a role that the library can fill with little or no outreach to the community
beyond library users. These services and programs may also be easier to justify as
appropriate uses of library staff and resources. Less traditional services such as providing
support to small businesses and helping people access e-government services were rated
as very important by fewer than forty percent of the respondents.

136
Table 5.4: Library Directors’ Ratings of Concepts Describing the Ways That Their Library Adds Value
to Their Communities
% Rating
Concept
Concept as
Very Important
2
Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the Community
91.0
2

Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet

88.0

Providing Programs and Activities for Teens and Young Children

74.2

Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs

64.0

Providing Programs and Activities for Adults

62.5

Providing Access to Databases

60.7

Providing Access to E-books

60.2

Providing Librarians Who Are Knowledgeable About Community Resources

59.6

Providing Community Meeting Spaces

57.3

Helping People With Job Search-related Activities

51.7

Helping People Learn to Use Technological Devices (such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, and tablet computers)

43.2

Keeping People Informed About Community Activities

40.4

Providing Access to New Technology (such as e-book readers, music/audiobook
players, or tablet computers)

39.8

Helping People With E-government Services (requesting permits, license renewals,
etc.)

38.2

Providing Services and Support for Local Businesses

23.6

2
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
1

2
1

2

2

Notes: 1 N = 88. 2 N = 89.

Research question 2B — value constructs and levels of funding.
Research question 2B tried to ascertain if any of the value constructs could be
associated with higher levels of library funding, and how the constructs associated with
higher funding were reflected in the focus of value statements identified in research
question 2A. The ratings of the value statements provided categorical data for 15
independent variables. Levels of library funding were measured by creating a
dichotomous variable called ABV3RDMIL. This variable was created by taking the 2010
library municipal support data from the New Jersey Library Statistics file (New Jersey
State Library, 2012) and using the data from the 2010 Table of Equalized Valuations

137
(New Jersey Division of Taxation, 2011) to calculate the millage rate represented by the
level of support given to the library (library millage). The library millage data was then
coded as “Yes” if it was greater than 0.000333333 or 1/3 mil, and “No” if the millage
value for the municipal library support was less than or equal to 1/3 mil. This variable
(ABV3RDMIL) was used as the dependent variable in the analysis. Logistic regression
was selected for the analysis because it is the recommended test when examining
multiple categorical independent variables and a dichotomous dependent variable (Leech,
Barrett, & Morgan, 2011).
Logistic regression was conducted to assess whether any of the library directors’
ratings of the value constructs significantly predicted whether or not a library was funded
above the minimum level of 1/3 mil. A test of the full model with the 15 value
statements as predictors against a constant-only model was statistically reliable, χ2 (15, N
= 81) = 25.88, p < .05. This indicates that the predictors, as a set, reliably distinguish
between libraries that were funded above 1/3 mil and those that were not. The model was
able to successfully predict 54.5 percent of the libraries that were not funded above 1/3
mil and 79.2 percent of the libraries that were funded above 1/3 mil with the overall
prediction success of the model at 69.1 percent. The model is only slightly better than
random chance at predicting libraries that were not funded above the minimum level,
suggesting that the ratings of the value statements may be most useful at predicting which
libraries received above minimal level funding. Table 5.5 presents the observed and
predicted frequencies for above minimal levels of funding by logistic regression of the
library directors’ ratings of the 15 value statements.

138
Table 5.5: The Observed and Predicted Frequencies for Above Minimal Level Funding by Logistic
Regression of Library Directors’ Ratings of All Value Statements
Observed
Predicted
% Correct
No
Yes
No
18
15
54.5
Yes
10
38
79.2
Overall % Correct
69.1
Note: N=81, χ2 = 25.89, df = 15, p = .039.

Table 5.6 presents the regression coefficients, Wald statistics, significance levels
(p < .05), the odds ratios, and the 95 percent confidence intervals for the fifteen variables
and the constant used in the model.
Table 5.6: Logistic Regression Analysis Showing How Well Library Directors’ Ratings of All Value
Statements Predict Funding Above 1/3 mil
95% Confidence
Odds
Interval
Variable
β
Wald
p
ratio
[Lower
Upper]
Provide Books, CDs, and DVDs
.776
1.699 .192
2.173
[.676
6.977]
Provide Free Internet
-1.321
2.228 .136
.267
[.047
1.512]
Provide Access to Databases
.352
.817 .366
1.422
[.663
3.049]
Provide Access to New Technologies
.025
.020 .886
1.025
[.728
1.444]
Provide Access to E-books
-.796
4.712 .030*
.451
[.220
.926]
Provide Programs for Adults
.166
.266 .606
1.180
[.629
2.214]
Provide Programs for Children and Teens
1.525
5.592 .018*
4.594 [1.298 16.256]
Provide Access to Community
-.460
1.929 .165
.632
[.330
1.208]
Information
Provide Job Search Assistance
.236
.523 .470
1.266
[.668
2.402]
Provide Help With E-Government
.504
5.896 .015*
1.655 [1.102
2.485]
Services
Help People Learn to Use Technology
-.296
1.035 .309
.744
[.421
1.315]
Provide Public Meeting Spaces
-.043
.045 .831
.958
[.643
1.426]
Provide Services to Local Businesses
-.457
2.408 .121
.633
[.355
1.128]
Librarians Who Are Knowledgeable About
.236
.341 .560
1.266
[.573
2.800]
Community Resources
Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-.743
4.223 .040*
.476
[.234
.966]
life Information Needs
Constant
1.793
.398 .528
6.007
Note: *p<.05

Although the overall model created by the logistic regression analysis was a statistically
significant predictor of above minimum level funding, individually, only four of the
variables in the model were statistically significant predictors at the .05 level. The ratings

139
of the variables representing Provide Access to E-books, Providing Programs and
Activities for Teens and Young Children, Helping People With E-government Services,
and Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs, were all
individually statistically significant predictors of above minimum level funding. This
indicates that 11 of the 15 variables in the logistic regression model were not individually
statistically significant predictors of funding above the minimum level.
Would a logistic regression model with only the individually statistically
significant variables result in a more parsimonious model? In an attempt to address this
question, a second round of logistic regression analysis was conducted using only the
four statistically significant variables from the first model. A test of the revised model
with the four statistically significant value statements as predictors against a constantonly model was statistically reliable, χ2 (4, N = 83) = 16.63, p < .05. This indicates that
these four predictors reliably distinguish between libraries that were funded above 1/3 mil
and those that were not. The revised model was able to successfully predict 52.9 percent
of the libraries that were not funded above 1/3 mil and 85.7 percent of the libraries that
were funded above 1/3 mil with the overall prediction success of the model at 72.3
percent. Like the first model, this model too was better at predicting that a library
received funding above 1/3 mil than it was in predicting that a library did not receive
such funding. Table 5.7 presents the observed and predicted frequencies derived from
the second round of logistic regression. Table 5.8 presents the regression coefficients,
Wald statistics, significance levels (p < .05), the odds ratios, and the 95 percent
confidence intervals for the four variables and the constant used in the revised model.

140
Table 5.7: The Observed and Predicted Frequencies for Above Minimal Level Funding by Logistic
Regression of Library Directors’ Ratings of Selected Value Statements
Observed
Predicted
% Correct
No
Yes
No
18
16
52.9
Yes
7
42
85.7
Overall % Correct
72.3
Note: N=83, χ2 = 16.63, df = 4, p = .002.

Table 5.8: Logistic Regression Analysis Showing How Well Library Directors’ Ratings of Selected Value
Statements Predict Funding Above 1/3 mil
95 % Confidence
Odds
Interval
Variable
β
Wald
p
ratio
[Lower
Upper]
Provide Access to E-books
-.598
5.570 .018*
.550
[.335
.904]
Provide Programs for Children and
.685
3.597 .058
1.985
[.977
4.030]
Teens
Provide Help With E-Government
.361
6.026 .014*
1.434
[1.075
1.913]
Services
Everyday Life Information Librarian
-.491
4.002 .045*
.612
[.378
.990]
Constant
.731
.202 .653
2.077
Note: *=p<.05

The purpose of this analysis was to provide information to support an examination
of the relationships between the focus of the library directors’ ratings of the value
statements and funding above 1/3 mil. The data analysis in this section provides support
for the claim that of the 15 value statement variables in this study, the four variables in
Table 5.8 are the most significant predictors of a library receiving funding above 1/3 mil,
with the ratings on these variables able to predict 72.3 percent of the time whether or not
a library was funded above the 1/3 mil level. High ratings on Providing Programs and
Activities for Teens and Young Children and Helping People With E-government Services
have odds ratios greater than one, so they appear to increase the odds of funding above
1/3 mil, while high ratings on Providing Access to E-books and Providing Librarians
Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs have odds ratios, that are less than
one, so they appear to decrease the odds of funding above 1/3 mil.

141
According to data from Table 5.4, 74 percent of the library directors in this study
rated Providing Programs and Activities for Teens and Young Children as very
important, but only 38.2 percent of these respondents rated Helping People With Egovernment Services as very important. Sixty-four percent of the respondents rated
Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs as very
important, and 60.2 percent of the respondents rated Providing Access to E-books as very
important. The highest rated value constructs were Making Books, CDs and DVDs
Available to the Community, rated as very important by 91 percent of respondents, and
Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet, rated as very important by 88 percent of
respondents. Neither of these was individually a significant predictor of funding above
1/3 mil, and high ratings on Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet actually
appears to decrease the odds of funding above 1/3 mil. The answer to the research
question suggested by the preceding analyses is that while the ratings of the value
statements have some effectiveness as predictors of funding above 1/3 mil, the
relationship between the value statements rated as very important by a majority of the
library directors and library funding above 1/3 mil is relatively weak.
Frequently offered and less-frequently offered library programs and
services.
The research questions discussed in the previous sections explored the
relationships between library directors’ value constructs and levels of library funding.
The proposition for these research questions examines whether there is a relationship
between the types of programs and services offered by the library and the level of
funding that the library receives from the municipality. The assumption of the
proposition is that there are some library services and programs that most people expect,

142
and that libraries will be valued in part because they provide the expected programs and
services. What is unknown is whether providing the expected programs and services can
be associated with higher levels of funding.
To facilitate exploration of this proposition, the library programs and services
represented by the value statements in the survey were assessed to determine which of
them were most often offered by the respondent libraries. To determine whether a value
construct represented a frequently offered program or service, the websites of the
responding libraries were examined to ascertain the presence of a particular program or
service. The programs offered by 50 percent or more of the respondent libraries were
categorized as frequently offered library programs and services; those offered by fewer
than 50 percent of the respondents were categorized as less-frequently offered library
programs and services. A caveat for this discussion is the recognition that the presence of
a program or service on a library’s website does not provide any indication of the quality
of the program, nor does it indicate how the program or service is valued by the
community. It should also be recognized that the frequently offered/less-frequently
offered categorization is cursory and serves primarily to facilitate this discussion of the
programs and services offered by the survey respondents.
The presence of a library catalog served as a proxy for lending materials, while
links to information about types of programs served as indicators that these were standard
services for an individual library. The availability of reference services served as a proxy
for librarians who help with everyday life information needs. Links to other community
organizations or a community calendar served as a proxy for keeping people informed
about community activities. Links to federal, state, or municipal government websites

143
and services served as a proxy for providing help and access to e-government services.
Library online policy pages and newsletters were also examined to ascertain the
availability of specific programs and services. Most of the programs represented by the
value statements were provided by at least one of the respondent libraries. The lone
exception was Providing Librarians Who Are Knowledgeable About Community
Resources. There was no information indicating that any of the respondents had library
staff specifically tasked with providing users with information about the local
community. It may be possible that providing community information is subsumed under
providing everyday life or reference information.
The examination of the websites of the survey respondents suggests that the most
frequently offered services include providing access to books, CDs and DVDs, services
and programming for children, teens, and adults, and providing assistance to job seekers.
In New Jersey, state and regional cooperative agreements have also made the ability to
provide free high speed Internet, databases, and e-books available to most public libraries
at little or no cost, and most library websites confirm that these are also frequently
offered services. A table listing the details of the survey of the respondents’ websites is
available as Appendix G.
The constructs that were not represented on at least fifty percent of the websites
are categorized as less-frequently offered library programs and services. These services
were offered by some libraries, but they were less often featured on the websites. Value
constructs representing less-frequently offered library programs and services include the
availability of public meeting rooms, the provision of community information, and
offering help to learn to use new technological devices. Some of the value constructs in

144
this group also received lower percentages of very important ratings. It is unclear
whether these constructs are less important because they are not widely offered, or if they
are still new kinds of programming with low community demand and therefore possibly
lower value. Table 5.9 lists the value statements representing frequently offered and lessfrequently offered programs and services. The number in parentheses after each
statement represents the percentage of websites where the program or service was
offered.
Table 5.9: Value Statements Representing Frequently Offered and Less-Frequently Offered Programs
and Services
Frequently Offered Library Programs & Services
Less-Frequently Offered Library Programs &
Services
Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the
Providing Community Meeting Spaces (49.6%)
Community (95.7%)
Providing Librarians Who Can Help People Find
the Information They Want and Need for
Providing Access to Databases (95.7%)
Everyday Living and in Extraordinary Situations
That Arise in Their Lives (43.5%)
Providing Programs and Activities for Teens and
Young Children (93.9%)

Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet
(92.9%)

Providing Access to E-Books (88.7%)
Providing Programs and Activities for Adults
(84.3%)
Helping People With Job Search-related Activities
(60.0%)

Keeping People Informed About Community
Activities (34.8%)
Helping People Learn to Use Technological
Devices (such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, and tablet computers)
(28.7%)
Providing Services and Support for Local
Businesses (9.6%)
Helping People Access E-government Services
(requesting permits, license renewals, etc.) (7.8%)
Providing Access to New Technology (such as ebook readers, music/audiobook players, or tablet
computers) (7.8%)
Providing Librarians Who Know the Resources
Available in the Library and in the Community
(0%)

Note: The number in parentheses after each statement represents the percentage of websites where the program or service was
offered.

145
Discussion of research proposition two — the relationships between the value
constructs of library directors and levels of library funding.
The second proposition explored by this research was that public library directors’
constructs of library value that primarily focus on frequently offered programs and
services are more likely to be associated with increased funding than constructs of library
value that focus on the provision of less-frequently offered programs and services. The
data from this study suggests mixed support for this proposition. In the first logistic
regression model containing all of the variables representing the ratings of the value
statements, Helping People With E-government Services was a significant predictor of
funding above the minimum level (odds ratio = 1.655, p = .015), however this construct
was rated as very important by only 32.8 percent of library directors.
Seven of the value constructs were rated as very important by more than 60
percent of the library directors. The two most highly rated constructs, Making Books,
CDs and DVDs Available to the Community, (odds ratio = 2.173, p = .192) and Providing
Free Access to High Speed Internet (odds ratio = .267, p = .136) were not statistically
significant predictors of funding above the minimum level. However, an important
statistically significant predictor of higher levels of funding was Providing Programs and
Activities for Teens and Young Children (odds ratio = 4.594, p = .018), which was rated
as very important by 74.2 percent of the library directors.
While the value statements that reflect frequently offered library programs were
rated as very important by a majority of the library directors, almost none of these
constructs was a strong predictor of funding above 1/3 mil. The high percentages of very
important ratings suggest that the value statements may adequately capture the library
directors’ ideas about how their libraries add value to the community. This is supported

146
by the evidence that the constructs receiving the highest ratings are also represented in
the frequently offered programs. However, it appears that the constructs most likely to
predict higher levels of funding were rated as very important on average, by only 59.1
percent of the library directors in this study. This suggests that there is only a moderate
relationship between The value constructs the library directors rated as very important
and the odds of the library receiving funding above 1/3 mil.
Research Proposition Three — The Relationships Between the Value Constructs of
Library Directors and the Value Constructs of Local Government Officials
Research question 3A — local government officials’ ratings of value
constructs.
Research question 3A asked how local government officials who are responsible
for library funding conceptualize library value. This question examined the focus of the
local government officials’ survey ratings of 15 value statements, i.e. what could be
learned by examining the value constructs that were rated very important by the local
government officials who responded to the survey. Three frequently offered library
activities received the highest percentages of very important ratings. Sixty-four percent
of the local government officials ranked Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet as
a very important way that the library adds value to the community. The next highest
rated response was Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the Community (61.5
percent), followed by Providing Programs and Activities for Teens and Young Children
(57.7 percent). The local government officials’ next highest rated construct was
Providing Access to New Technology (54.9 percent), followed by Providing Librarians
Who Are Knowledgeable About Community Resources (53.8 percent). Providing Access
to Databases (46.0 percent) and Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life
Information Needs (46.2 percent) were respectively rated the sixth and seventh most

147
important constructs. Providing Programs and Activities for Adults, Helping People
Learn to Use Technological Devices, and Providing Access to E-books were all tied for
eighth place with 44.2 percent of the local government officials rating each of these
constructs as very important. Table 5.10 shows the percentage of very important ratings
for each of the value statements by the local government officials.
Table 5.10: Local Government Officials’ Ratings of the Ways That Their Library Adds Value to Their
Communities
Concept

% Rating
Concept as
Very Important
1

Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet

64.0

Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the Community

61.5

Providing Programs and Activities for Teens and Young Children

57.7

Providing Access to New Technology (such as e-book readers, music/audiobook
players, or tablet computers)

54.9

Providing Librarians Who Know the Resources Available in the Library and in the
Community

53.8

Providing Librarians Who Can Help People Find the Information They Want and
Need for Everyday Living and in Extraordinary Situations That Arise in Their Lives

46.2

Providing Access to Databases

46.0

Providing Access to E-books

44.2

Providing Programs and Activities for Adults

44.2

Helping People Learn to Use Technological Devices (such as e-book readers,
music/audiobook players, and tablet computers)

44.2

Helping People With Job Search-related Activities

41.2

Providing Community Meeting Spaces

38.5

Keeping People Informed About Community Activities

30.8

Helping People With E-government Services (requesting permits, license renewals,
etc.)

28.8

Providing Services and Support for Local Businesses

24.0

3
3
2

3

3

1
3
3
2

2
2
3
3

1

Notes: 1 N = 50. 2 N = 51. 3 N = 52.

Table 5.10 indicates that the local government officials’ primary focus was on
value added through frequently offered library services such as lending books and DVDs,
the provision of free internet access, and providing programs for teens and children. The

148
local government officials’ highest rated constructs also include value constructs that
represent two less-frequently offered library services, i.e. Providing Access to New
Technology, and Providing Librarians Who Are Knowledgeable About Community
Resources. The high ratings given to these constructs differs from the ratings given by
the library directors, who rated Providing Access to New Technology as the eleventh most
important construct, and rated Providing Librarians Who Are Knowledgeable About
Community Resources as the eighth most important construct.
Research question 3B — comparing the value constructs of public library
directors and local government officials.
Research question 3B asked if there was a relationship between the library value
constructs of local government officials and those of public library directors. Both
groups were asked to rate the same value constructs, and there were some similarities in
the focus of the ratings. Both groups rated Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to
the Community, Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet, and Providing Programs
and Activities for Teens and Young Children as the most important ways that the library
adds value to the community.
An independent samples t-test was used to compare the means of the library
directors’ ratings of the 15 value statements to the local government officials’ ratings of
those same value statements. The t-test was selected primarily because the comparison
involved only two groups, i.e. public library directors and local government officials.
The researcher also found that the ordinal values produced by the Likert ratings could not
be used in non-parametric tests to compare the means of the two groups.
Four of the fifteen variables did not violate the assumption of equal variances
between the groups. The t-tests for three of these four variables indicate that there are

149
statistically significant differences between the means of the responses of the two groups.
This claim is supported by figure 5.1 which shows stacked bar charts that allow a visual
comparison of the means for the variables with statistically significant differences.
The t-tests for twelve of the variables indicated no statistically significant
differences between the means of the responses of both groups. The assumption of equal
variances between the two groups was violated for 11 of these variables, indicating that
the p values for these variables may actually be higher than indicated by the t-test.
Although the variable representing the ratings of the concept Providing Access to
Databases (DATABSE) did not violate the assumption of equal variances, there was no
statistically significant difference between the means of the ratings of this variable
between the two groups. Figures 5.2 through 5.4 show stacked bar charts comparing the
means of the 12 variables with no statistically significant differences between the means.

Figure 5.1: Comparison of the Means of Public
Library Directors’ and Mayors’ Ratings of Value
Statements: Group 1

Figure 5.2: Comparison of the Means of Public
Library Directors’ and Mayors’ Ratings of Value
Statements: Group 2

Comparison of Means: Group 1

Comparison of Means: Group 2

BKCDDVD

DATABSE
ADLTPROG

FREEINT

NEWTECH

5.17

5.86

6.84

6.36

6.80

6.37

Library Directors

Mayors

EBOOKS
KIDPROG

6.54

6.25

6.08

5.81

6.07

5.75

6.17

5.90

Library Directors

Mayors

150

Figure 5.3: Comparison of the Means of Public
Library Directors’ and Mayors’ Ratings of Value
Statements: Group 3

Figure 5.4: Comparison of the Means of Public
Library Directors’ and Mayors’ Ratings of Value
Statements: Group 4

Comparison of Means: Group 3
MEETSPA

BUSHLP

6.13

RESLIBR

Comparison of Means: Group 4

EDLLIBR

COMINFO

JBSRCH

EGOV

5.60

5.94

LRNTECH

5.63

5.04

4.60

5.90

5.75

5.31

5.82

5.46

Mayors

Library Directors

Mayors

6.22

6.10

4.98

4.80

5.79
Library Directors

Table 5.11 presents the statistically significant results from the t-test of the means
of the ratings of local government officials and library directors of the value statements.
Table 5.11: Statistically Significant Results of t-test Comparing Means of Local Government Officials’
and Public Library Directors’ Ratings of Library Value Statements
Variable (CODE)

t (df)

p
(2tailed)
(p<.05)

Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the
Community (BKCDDVD)

-2.974 (139)

.003*

Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet (FREEINT)

-3.208 (137)

.002*

2.022 (137)

.045*

Providing Access to New Technology (NEWTECH)
1

Analysis
1 2
Group
(N)
LGO (52)
PLD (89)
LGO (50)
PLD (89)
LGO (51)
PLD (88)

M (SD)
6.37 (.929)
6.80 (.771)
6.36 (1.064)
6.84 (.705)
5.86 (1.637)
5.17 (2.102)

2

Notes: LGO = Local Government Officials. PLD = Public Library Directors.

The value statements representing Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the
Community, Providing Free Access to High Speed Internet, and Providing Access to New
Technology had statistically significant differences in the means of the responses. It

151
should be noted that the differences in the means in not necessarily indicative of
significant differences in the value assigned to the constructs represented by these
statements. An examination of bar charts comparing the responses of both groups (see
Figures 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7) show the marked similarities in the distribution of responses by
both groups for these value statements. All of the figures show the rightward skewness in
the data that was noted in chapter four, which suggests that a large number of respondents
in both groups rated these constructs as very important. There is a wider dispersion in the
local government officials’ ratings, but there is a high level of agreement among both
groups that Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the Community and Providing
Free Access to High Speed Internet represent the most important ways that the public
library adds value to the community.
Figure 5.5: Comparison of Local Government Officials’ and Library Directors’ Ratings of Value
Added by Provision of Access to Books, CDs, and DVDs

Notes: 1 Local Government Officials [Mayors] (N = 52; M = 6.37; SD = .929). 2 Library Directors (N =89; M = 6.80; SD = .771)

152

Figure 5.6: Comparison of Local Government Officials’ and Library Directors’ Ratings of Value
Added by Provision of Free Internet Access

Notes: 1 Local Government Officials [Mayors] (N = 50; M = 6.36; SD = 1.064). 2 Library Directors (N =89; M = 6.84; SD = .705)

Figure 5.7: Comparison of Local Government Officials’ and Library Directors’ Ratings of Value
Added by Provision of Access to New Technology

Notes: 1 Local Government Officials [Mayors] (N = 51; M = 5.86; SD = 1.637). 2 Library Directors (N =88; M = 5.17; SD = 2.102)

Figure 5.7 shows a high level of variability in the responses about the value added by
Providing Access to New Technology, but again the pattern of responses is similar; both
groups have mixed responses on the importance of this value construct. These figures

153
suggest that while there may be disagreement on the relative importance of a specific
value construct, in general, there is little difference between the way that library directors
and local government officials conceptualize the value added to the community by the
library.
Additional support for this claim is provided by an examination of the value
construct that was rated lowest by each group. Both library directors and mayors rated
the construct representing Providing Services and Support for Local Businesses as least
important. Only 24 percent of the mayors rated this construct as very important (M =
4.98, SD = 1.732) and 23.6 percent of the library directors rated it as very important (M =
4.80, SD = 1.690). Figure 5.8 shows the ratings of this statement by both groups. The
figure shows that there is a great deal of variability in the ratings of this value statement,
however the difference between the means for each group is only 0.178, which lends
additional support to the claim of very little difference between the value constructs held
by the mayors and library directors in this sample.
Figure 5.8: Comparison of Mayors’ and Library Directors’ Ratings of Value Added by Provision of
Services and Support for Local Businesses

Notes: 1 Local Government Officials [Mayors] (N = 50; M = 4.80; SD = 1.69). 2 Library Directors (N =89; M = 4.98; SD = 1.73)

154
Research question 3C — comparing the value constructs of public library
directors and local government officials.
Research question 3C asked if similarities in the value constructs of local
government officials and public library directors could be linked to higher levels of
public library funding. The discussion of research question 3B lends support to the claim
that there are no significant differences between the ratings of value constructs by mayors
and library directors. The discussion of research question 2B asserts that for library
directors, when all 15 value statements are considered together they predict 69.1 percent
of the time whether or not a library was funded above the minimum level. The
discussion of research question 2B also suggested that the library directors’ ratings of
only four of the value statements: Providing Access to E-books, Providing Programs and
Activities for Teens and Young Children, Helping People With E-government Services,
and Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs could be
used to correctly predict 72.3 percent of the time whether or not a library was funded
above 1/3 mil. This section discusses a similar analysis that focused on the local
government officials’ ratings of the library value statements.
The dichotomous variable ABV3RDMIL was also used in this analysis. As in the
previous analysis, this variable was created by taking the 2010 library municipal support
data from the New Jersey Library Statistics file (New Jersey State Library, 2012) and
using the data from the 2010 Table of Equalized Valuations (New Jersey Division of
Taxation, 2011) to calculate the millage rate represented by the level of support given to
the library (library millage). The library millage data was then coded as “Yes” if it was
greater than 0.000333333 or 1/3 mil, and “No” if the millage value for the municipal
library support was less than or equal to 1/3 mil. In this instance, the logistic regression

155
analysis was conducted to assess whether the local government officials’ ratings of the
value statements significantly predicted whether or not a library was funded above the
minimum level of 1/3 mil.
A test of the full model with the 15 value statements as predictors against a
constant-only model was statistically reliable, χ2 (15, N = 47) = 27.44, p < .05. This
indicates that the predictors, as a set, reliably distinguish between libraries that were
funded above 1/3 mil and those that were not. The model was able to successfully
predict 80 percent of the libraries that were not funded above 1/3 mil, and 86.4 percent of
the libraries that were funded above 1/3 mil with the overall prediction success of the
model at 83 percent. Table 5.12 presents the observed and predicted frequencies for
above minimal levels of funding by logistic regression of the library directors’ ratings of
the 15 value statements.
Table 5.12: The Observed and Predicted Frequencies for Above Minimal Level Funding by Logistic
Regression of Local Government Officials’ Ratings of All Value Statements
Observed
Predicted
% Correct
No
Yes
No
20
5
80.0
Yes
3
19
86.4
Overall % Correct
83.0
Note: N=47 (5 cases with missing values were excluded), χ2 = 27.44, df = 15, p = .025.

Table 5.13 presents the regression coefficients, Wald statistics, significance levels
(p < .05), the odds ratios, and the 95 percent confidence intervals for the fifteen variables
and the constant used in the model. Although the overall model created by the logistic
regression analysis was a statistically significant predictor of above minimum level
funding, individually, only one of the variables in the model was a statistically significant
predictor at the .05 level.

156
Table 5.13: Logistic Regression Analysis Showing How Well Local Government Officials’ Ratings of All
Value Statements Predict Funding Above 1/3 mil
95% Confidence
Odds
Interval
Variable
β
Wald
p
ratio
[Lower
Upper]
Provide Books, CDs, and DVDs
2.189
2.454 .117
8.928
[.577 138.112]
Provide Free Internet
-2.096
1.922 .166
.123
[.006
2.380]
Provide Access to Databases
-1.511
2.512 .113
.221
[.034
1.430]
Provide Access to New Technologies
1.938
2.699 .100
6.947
[.688
70.164]
Provide Access to E-books
-1.616
2.613 .106
.199
[.028
1.410]
Provide Programs for Adults
.516
.331 .565
1.675
[.289
9.692]
Provide Programs for Children and
.877
.682 .409
2.403
[.300
19.269]
Teens
Provide Access to Community
-.875
.819 .365
.417
[.063
2.771]
Information
Provide Job Search Assistance
2.009
4.145 .042*
7.459 [1.078
51.617]
Provide Help With E-Government
-.362
.896 .344
.697
[.329
1.473]
Services
Help People Learn to Use Technology
-2.343
2.976 .085
.096
[.007
1.376]
Provide Public Meeting Spaces
.023
.005 .942
1.023
[.548
1.911]
Provide Services to Local Businesses
.071
.014 .904
1.074
[.335
3.445]
Community Resources Librarian
1.242
3.109 .078
3.463
[.871
13.774]
Everyday Life Information Librarian
2.211
2.580 .108
9.122
[.614 135.427]
Constant
-15.488
4.986 .026
.000
Note: *p<.05

The ratings of the variable representing Helping People With Job Search-related
Activities was an individually statistically significant predictor of above minimum level
funding. A subsequent logistic regression model using only Helping People With Job
Search-related Activities as the independent variable was not a statistically reliable
predictor of whether or not a library was funded above 1/3 mil. The lack of statistically
significant predictors may be due to the small sample size (N = 47).
Nine of the constructs in the logistic regression model based on the local
government officials’ ratings of the 15 value constructs have odds ratios that are greater
than one. This suggests that the ratings on these nine constructs increase the odds of a
library being funded above 1/3 mil. However, the constructs with odds ratios greater than
one were not consistently rated as very important by a majority of the local government
officials. The construct representing Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every

157
day-life Information Needs (odds ratio = 9.12) was rated as very important by 46.2
percent of the local government officials however, that percentage places it sixth in the
ranked list of value constructs. Making Books, CDs and DVDs Available to the
Community (odds ratio = 8.93) and Providing Access to New Technology (odds ratio =
6.95) were rated as very important by more than 50 percent of the local government
officials, but only 41.2 percent rated Helping People With Job Search-related Activities
(odds ratio = 7.46) as very important. Only two of the top five constructs based on the
mayors’ ratings of the value statements (see Table 5.10) also increased the odds of a
library being funded above the 1/3 mil level.
Discussion of research proposition three — the relationships between the
value constructs of library directors and the value constructs of local government
officials.
Research proposition three states that local government officials who are
responsible for library funding will have library value constructs that are consistent with
library value constructs of library administrators, and the level of agreement between the
groups will be associated with higher levels of library funding. The first part of the
proposition that local government officials who are responsible for library funding will
have library value constructs that are consistent with the library value constructs of public
library directors is supported by the data. While the library directors and the local
government officials differed in the ranked order of their ratings of the value constructs,
the small differences between the means for the constructs (Table 5.11, and Figures 5.1
through 5.4) indicates a high level of agreement about how the library adds value to the
community. The similarities in the overall responses can be illustrated by examining the
grand means of the value construct ratings for each group. The grand mean for the local

158
government officials’ responses to the value statements is 5.42 and the grand mean for
the library directors’ responses to the value statements is 5.41. The absence of significant
between group differences in the means of the responses to the value statements and the
corresponding similarities in the grand mean lends support to the claim that the mayors
and library directors in the study have consistent library value constructs.
The second part of the proposition suggests that the level of agreement will be
associated with higher levels of library funding. This part of the proposition is not
supported by the data. While the regression analysis supports the claim that as a whole
the responses to the value statements are significant predictors of funding above the 1/3
mil level, there are noticeable differences between the findings for the two groups of
respondents. One difference is that the regression model of the local government
officials’ responses (see Table 5.12) has stronger predictive power at eighty three percent
than either of the regression models of the library directors’ responses which have
predictive powers of 69.1 percent (see Table 5.5) or 72.3 percent (see Table 5.7).
A second difference involves the predictive power of the responses to individual
variables. The logistical regression of the library directors’ ratings of the 15 value
statements indicates that the value constructs that represent Helping People With Egovernment Services (p = .010), Providing Programs and Activities for Teens and Young
Children (p = .018), Providing Access to E-books (p = .030) and Providing Librarians
Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs (p = .040) may individually be
significant predictors funding above the minimum level. The logistical regression of the
local government officials’ ratings of the fifteen value constructs indicates that only the

159
value construct that represents Helping People With Job Search-related Activities (p =
042) may individually be a significant predictor of funding above the minimum level.
Although there are similarities in the responses from each group, this analysis
suggests that the constructs that may predict funding above the minimum level differ
between the groups. Three of the four significant predictors for the library directors and
the single significant predictor for the local government officials all reflect frequently
offered library programs and services (see Table 5.9). The exception is the predictor that
represents Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs.
The absence of this concept may be due to the limitations of the method used to classify
the services. In the classification method, the availability of reference services served as
a proxy for Providing Librarians Who Can Help With Every day-life Information Needs.
The absence on a library’s website of a specific mention of reference services or the
ability to ask a librarian meant that that library was not given credit for offering this
service. It is possible, and very probable, that most of the public libraries in New Jersey
offer at least basic library reference services. So although there is a great deal of
similarity in the value constructs of both the local government officials and the public
library directors in this study, the similarities are not significant predictors of funding
above 1/3 mil. This suggests only partial support for the claims of research proposition
three.
Greatest and Least Influences on Securing Funding
The surveys used to gather data for this study each included two open-ended
questions that asked what the respondents believed had the greatest and least influence on

160
the most recent library funding decision. The resultant responses were organized into
four variables:


local government officials’ reports of the greatest influence on their recent
funding decision;



local government officials’ reports of the least influence on their recent funding
decision;



public library directors’ reports of the greatest influence on the success of their
most recent budget request



public library directors’ reports of the least influence on the success of their most
recent budget request.
Emergent coding (Neuendorf, 2002, p. 194) was used to develop a series of

categories to organize the responses for each variable. A single set of categories was
found to be applicable to all of the variables, although not all of the categories were
represented within each variable. The reliability of the codes was verified by having the
researcher and one additional person independently code each group of statements. The
questions and the codes were discussed with two coders who were then given the code
book and one of the groups of statements. One person coded the library directors’
responses and the other coded the responses of the local government officials; the
researcher coded statements from both groups. Correlation analysis was used to calculate
a reliability coefficient for each group of statements and the resulting analysis indicated a
high level of inter-coder reliability (Neuendorf, 2002, p.143). The Pearson correlation
coefficient measuring the inter-coder reliability for each variable is presented in the

161
following sections when each of the individual variables is discussed. The code book and
the coding sheets are available as Appendix H.
Local government officials reports of factors having the greatest impact on
their funding decisions.
Forty-five of the 52 local government officials responded to the open-ended
question that asked them to describe what had the greatest impact on their funding
decisions. The two coders identified seven categories in these responses (N = 45, r =
0.926, p < .01). The largest response category, with 26.7 percent of the responses, was
statements that talked about library users, programs, and services. Several of the
respondents spoke of the quality of the services provided. Representative responses
include “The service they provide to residents” (Respondent 42) and “Service to the
community” (Respondent 36). Other respondents spoke of the importance of community
use: “Positive feedback from the Public” (Respondent 18) and “The number of people
who use the library for computer time” (Respondent 29). Some of the respondents
indicated an awareness of the costs of providing service as the greatest influence, e.g.
“union contract, staffing, hours of operation” (Respondent 11) or “Long range planning
for building maint. and e-tech. programs for the community” (Respondent 13).
The next largest response category spoke of no actions being taken due to the
statutory requirement to fund the library at 1/3 mil. A few of the responses were very
simple, e.g. “We are mandated to budget the library” (Respondent 4), but others
expressed the idea that although the library provides great service, this does not affect
funding: “Our Library and staff do a great job providing these services to the community
but that has had no impact on funding decisions. The Library has received the funding
guaranteed by law and our decision has been based solely on that” (Respondent 6). It

162
also appears that some library boards may also choose not to submit budget requests
because they know that the 1/3 mil is all that they can expect from the municipality: “Our
library board has not requested any funding. Since we fund the library based on the
statutory 1/3 of a mil there is no decision or discussion about funding. Since we do not
fund above the statutory limit [this] question… is not applicable” (Respondent 23).
There is also an indication that some libraries are funded at the minimum level, but would
receive more funding if they were willing to improve services: “We are funding as
required by statute. Additional funding would be provided however current activity is
outdated, refuses to work with local government or accept community input. Changes in
mission would be greatly appreciated. Program changes are long overdue” (Respondent
40).
Twenty percent of the responses mentioned how well the library managed its
funds, e.g. “We believe the library spends their funds wisely; the library is efficient; the
number of patrons has significantly increased over the past five years” (Respondent 35).
There was also recognition of the library doing its part to help the municipality through
rough economic times: “Ability to work within a specific budget and make cuts with
keeping an eye on services” (Respondent 1). Communication between library
management and local government officials was mentioned in 15.6 percent of the
responses. The best example is from Respondent 34: “It wasn't one particular action -local government and the library have always worked well together. We also recognize
how important the library is to our community. We also appreciate them moving with the
times we are living in -- e.g. they started a Career Center to help those out of work or in
need of updating their skills, resume, etc.” Some of the respondents (6.7 percent)

163
mentioned extraordinary circumstances, e.g. capital improvements, which influenced the
library’s budget allocation. Other respondents (4.4 percent) mentioned the general fiscal
condition of the municipality as the greatest factor influencing their recent library budget
decision. 4.4 percent of the respondents indicated that they could not answer this
question.
Table 5.14: Factors Most Influential on Local Government Officials’ Most Recent Library
Funding Decision
Response Category
% of
Respondents
Reports about users, programs, or services
26.7
No funding actions taken/ library only funded at 1/3 mil
22.2
Reports of how well the library manages its funds
20.0
Direct requests for funding from the library/Relationship with library
15.6
Extraordinary circumstances (e.g. building construction or capital
6.7
improvements)
Not sure how to answer this question/No Response Entered
4.4
Effect on the general fiscal condition of the municipality
4.4
Note: N = 45

Local government officials’ reports of factors having the least impact on
their funding decisions.
Forty-five of the 52 local government officials responded to the open-ended
question that asked them to describe what had the least impact on their funding decisions.
The two coders identified eight categories in these responses (N = 45, r = 0.868, p < .01).
The largest response category, with 31.1 percent of the responses, was statements that
talked about the mandatory 1/3 mil funding requirement. Most of these responses simply
indicated that there was no action taken, or the respondents referenced a previous
response in which the 1/3 mil requirement was given as the having the most influence on
their library funding decisions. When there was an answer, it was usually short and
direct, e.g. “There wasn't any as we are mandated to budget” (Respondent 4). The second
and third largest categories each had twenty percent of the responses. The second

164
category represented those who indicated that they could not identify a least influential
factor or entered no response for this question.
The third category contained the respondents who indicated that reports that
focused on users, programs or services were least influential in their most recent budget
decisions. Several of the responses focused on staffing issues, for example: “As a trustee
I don't worry about the overall standards for staffing, just what we need to provide an
acceptable level of service” (Respondent 19). Respondent 40’s response includes
funding for staffing within the context of general dissatisfaction with the library services
provided to the community: “Any request requiring additional funding for perpetuating
antiquated notions of what a local free public library should provide residents. Requests
for pay increases & staffing increases. Our library has great unrealized potential.”
Approximately nine percent of the respondents were not influenced by direct
requests for funding and a similar number of respondents found information about how
the library manages its money to be least influential in their funding decisions. An
additional 4.4 percent of respondents were not influenced by reports of media coverage of
library events, and information about the negative consequences that would result from
funding decisions were the least influential for another 4.4 percent of respondents.
Finally, 2.2 percent of the respondents reported that they were least influenced by
anything that would have negative impacts on the general fiscal condition of the
municipality, e.g. “Again, the important factor was the amount needed in our budget to
not raise taxes” (Respondent 24). Table 5.15 shows the items least likely to influence the
local government officials’ library funding decisions and the percentage of respondents
for each category.

165
Table 5.15: Factors Least Influential on Local Government Officials’ Most Recent Library
Funding Decision
Response Category
% of
Respondents
No funding actions taken/ library only funded at 1/3 mil
31.1
Not sure how to answer this question/No Response Entered
20.0
Reports about users, programs, or services
20.0
Direct requests for funding from the library
8.9
Reports of how well the library manages its funds
8.9
Media coverage about the library
4.4
Negative consequences of failure to fund/Threats
4.4
General fiscal condition of the municipality
2.2
Note: N = 45.

Public library directors’ reports of factors having the greatest impact on the
success of their budget requests.
Eighty-four of the 88 public library directors responded to the open-ended
question that asked them to describe what had the greatest impact on the success of their
most recent budget request. The two coders identified eight categories in these responses
(N = 84, r = 0.939, p < .01). The largest response category represented the 45.2 percent
of respondents who took no specific budget action because they felt that no matter what
they said or did, the library would only get funded at the 1/3 mil level. Respondent 71
reports “We get the minimum funding no matter what cogent arguments I might present,
so I don't waste their time nor mine,” this view was shared by most of the respondents in
this category, including Respondent 47 who reports “This library gets the state-required
funding. No specific action seems to have any great impact in regard to funding - positive
or negative.”
The second largest category, with 21.4 percent of the responses, represented the
respondents who reported that sharing information about users, programs, and services
had the most influence in the success of their most recent budget request. Respondent 65
reports “What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff level as well
as how much more the library could achieve with additional funding. Expressing what the

166
library achieved with statistics and public testimonials is paramount to success.”
Similarly, Respondent 61 reports “Testimony from local citizens about how important the
library is to their lives. In our budget preparation, stressing shared services, use of the NJ
Library Network, and how hard we work on using every dollar to its maximum so they
can justify library funding.”
The third largest category represents the 15.5 percent of respondents who report
that communication or a relationship with local government officials had the greatest
influence on the success of their most recent budget request. Respondent 56 credits the
“Positive relationship I developed with the government officials over the years,” a
statement echoed by Respondent 66 who reports “having sustained positive relationships
with elected officials as well as other prominent members of the community.”
Respondent 69 did not speak of an ongoing relationship, but instead credits “Meeting
with the Mayor, City Council members, and the Business Administrator to give data as to
what and how important it is for the [library] to be funded. Also, give data as to how
many library users we have, etc.”
There were 4.8 percent of respondents who reported sharing the negative
consequences that would result from lack of funds to be their most effective strategy, e.g.
“I feel that talking about cuts to specific programs and services, as well as talking about
potential personnel cuts and decreased hours had the greatest impact in our budget
discussions. While it did not increase our town appropriation funding, our municipal
officials did negotiate with our library regarding fees that the library pays the
municipality for custodial staff, maintenance, landscaping, etc.” (Respondent 60).
Sometimes, the sharing of negative consequences extends beyond reports to municipal

167
officials, such as the case shared by Respondent 77: “After 2 months of meetings and
shared information with no resolution, we went to the community, spoke in the town
council meeting and called in the media to make residents aware of the drastic cuts being
required. At that point, the council was persuaded to compromise on the budget.”
Evidence of good fiscal management was reported as the most influential budget
strategy by 4.8 percent of respondents. For example, Respondent 14 reports “How well
we manage our money and our partnerships with community organizations and local
government agencies,” and Respondent 75 reports “library moving forward in regards to
technology. a technology plan/budget that list our needs.” New construction or other
capital improvements were most influential for 3.6 percent of the respondents, and 2.6
percent of the respondents felt successful for receiving funding despite the fact that the
municipality was experiencing hard economic conditions. Only 2.4 percent of the
respondents were unsure how to respond to the question. Table 5.16 show the categories
of responses reported as being most effective in a recent budget request and the
percentage of respondents in each category.
Table 5.16 – Factors Most Effective in Public Library Directors’ Most Recent Budget
Request
Response Category
% of
Respondents
No funding actions taken/ library only funded at 1/3 mil
45.2
Reports about users, programs, or services
21.4
Relationship with local government officials
15.5
Negative consequences/Threats
4.8
Reports of how well the library manages its funds
4.8
Extraordinary circumstances (e.g. building construction or capital
3.6
improvements)
General fiscal condition of the municipality
2.4
Not sure how to answer this question/No Response Entered
2.4
Note: N = 84

168
Public library directors’ reports of factors having the least impact on the
success of their budget requests.
Eighty-four of the 88 public library directors responded to the open-ended
question that asked them to describe what had the least impact on the success of their
most recent budget request. The two coders identified ten categories in these responses
(N = 84, r = 0.987, p < .01). The largest response category, with 33.3 percent of the
respondents, represented people who either indicated that they did not know how to
respond to this question, or those who responded to the question about what had the most
impact, but did not enter a response to the question about what had the least impact. This
suggests that respondents may be aware of what has worked, but are less aware of
strategies that have been unsuccessful. The second largest category, with 21.4 percent of
the responses, were categorized as no action was least effective because the library only
receives the mandated 1/3 mil allocation. The general idea from the responses in this
category are conveyed by Respondent 68 who reports “The borough routinely funds the
library at 1/3 mil, up or down depending on the equalized assessed evaluation. When
values decline as they have for the past three years they can rely on that to hold the line.”
There were 15.5 percent of respondents who provided responses which suggest
that their attempts to communicate with local government officials have been least
effective. Respondent 41 reports “We have not been successful at getting full funding.
We sent a very strong letter requesting funding for a youth services librarian (we have
never had one on staff) which fell on deaf ears.” Respondent 1 found “Trying to meet
with the mayor & council on an individual basis” to have the least impact, a sentiment
shared by Respondent 39 who reports little success with “Outright requests for more
funding,” and by Respondent 76 who reports “I did not feel that my request was heard.”

169
The next largest category, with 8.3 percent of the respondents, consisted of
reports that information about users, programs, and services was the least effective in
securing library funding. This idea is represented by Respondent 77 who reports, “Sadly,
the [local government officials] were not impressed by program statistics, lists of
partnerships or any evidence of the library's value to the community,” and by Respondent
77 who reports “discussing value of services to community” to be the least effective
strategy. There were 7.1 percent of respondents who reported the general fiscal condition
of the municipality as the underlying cause of unsuccessful budget requests. Respondent
12 reports, “The assumption that you are making is that there is a request made. The
current economic crisis has in fact made the 1/3 minimum, the maximum.” Respondent
19 reports “[The municipality] is struggling with funding issues in many areas. And
although the municipality is supportive of the library it is at this time not the top
priority.”
Citing state standards for library service or comparisons to other libraries or
municipalities was found to be least effective in making successful budget requests by 4.8
percent of the respondents. Communication of the negative consequences that would
result from failure to fund the library was reported as a least effective strategy by 3.6
percent of respondents. While some of the respondents found information about how
well the library manages its funds to be among the most effective strategies when making
a budget request, for 2.4 percent of the respondents it was the least effective strategy.
This same percentage also found that reporting information about the library’s
community partnerships to be one of the least effective strategies. Finally, reports of
media coverage of library activities were the least effective strategy for 1.2 percent of

170
respondents. Table 5.17 shows the items least likely to influence the success of the
library budget request and the percentage of respondents for each category.
Table 5.17 – Factors Least Effective in Public Library Directors’ Most Recent Budget Request
Response Category
% of
Respondents
Not sure how to answer this question/No Response Entered
33.3
No funding actions taken/ library only funded at 1/3 mil
21.4
Direct requests to local government officials for funding
15.5
Reports about users, programs, or services
8.3
General fiscal condition of the municipality
7.1
Comparisons to state standards or other libraries
4.8
Negative consequences of failure to fund/Threats
3.6
Reports of how well the library manages its funds
2.4
Reports about partnerships with other community organizations
2.4
Media coverage about the library
1.2
Note: N = 84.

An Alternative Look at Value Constructs and Funding
The purpose of this exploratory study was to investigate how local government
officials and public library directors conceptualize library value and how those
conceptions relate to municipal public library funding. Although logistic analysis was an
appropriate method to analyze the survey data, would additional analysis tell us more
about the relationships of interest? To explore this question, an index value was created
by summing the 15 value statement ratings for each respondent. The lowest possible
index value was 15, i.e. the respondent gave all of the value statements a rating of one;
the highest possible index value was 105, i.e. the respondent gave all of the value
statements a rating of seven. This index variable provided a scale variable that could be
used to generate scatterplots that would allow a visual inspection of the data. The second
variable selected for the scatterplots was the millage rate for each library. This variable
was calculated by dividing the amount of municipal tax support provided to each library
in 2011 by the 2010 municipal equalized valuation of the supporting municipality.
Figure 5.9 shows the scatterplot for these two variables.

171
Figure 5.9: Scatterplot showing the Relationship between the Value Statement Ratings and the 2011
Millage Rates

Index Score of Value Statement Ratings1

Relationship Between Value Statement Ratings
and Millage Rate
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.000000 0.000100 0.000200 0.000300 0.000400 0.000500 0.000600 0.000700 0.000800
2011 Millage Rate2
Notes: 1N = 135
2
0.000333 is the minimum funding level for New Jersey public libraries.

The scatterplot clearly shows the non-linear nature of the relationship between
these two variables. For example, index scores above 80 are given both to libraries that
received very low levels of funding and those that received funding significantly above
the 1/3 mil level. In addition, the library receiving the lowest value rating did not get the
lowest level of funding, and the library receiving the highest value rating did not also
receive the highest level of funding. It is also clear that a significant number of the
responses cluster around the 1/3 mil rate. This confirms the importance of the 1/3 mil
requirement suggested by the open-ended responses, and suggests that the 1/3 mil
requirement may be a confounding variable in the relationship between library value and
funding.

172
Given the preceding analysis, would an examination of funding from a different
perspective moderate the effect of the 1/3 mil funding requirement and reveal new
information about the relationship between the value statements and funding? To explore
this question, the index values created in the first part of this discussion were again used
to generate a scatterplot. The second variable was changed to the level of per capita
support provided to each of the libraries represented in the dataset. Per capita support
was calculated by dividing the amount of municipal tax support provided to each library
in 2011 by the 2011 population of the supporting municipality. Figure 5.10 shows the
scatterplot of these two variables.
Figure 5.10: Scatterplot Showing the Relationship Between Value Statement Ratings and 2011 Per
Capita Library Support

Index Score of Value Statement Ratings

Relationship Between Value Statement Ratings and
2011 Per Capita Library Support
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.00

20.00

40.00

60.00

80.00

100.00

120.00

2011 Per Capita Library Support

Note: N = 134. One case was considered an outlier and was removed from the analysis. In this instance the property values and
population meant that the 1/3 mil support resulted in per capita support of $363.

The relationship depicted in this scatterplot is more linear than the relationship
between the index scores and the millage rate. However, the amount of per capita library

173
support also does not appear to be strongly affected by the ratings of the value statements.
Most of the index scores fall between 60 and 105, reflecting the overwhelmingly positive
view of libraries held by the respondents. The levels of per capita support cover a much
broader range starting at low of less than fifteen dollars and ending at a high of over one
hundred dollars. The two libraries receiving the highest levels of funding, i.e. more than
one hundred dollars per capita, have lower index scores than two libraries that received
less than twenty-five dollars per capita. The median level of 2011 library per capita
support for the respondents was $47.53. Ten libraries received the highest index score of
105, but only three of the ten received per capita support above the median level. Six
libraries received index scores of less than 60, and five of the six also had per capita
funding rates that were below the median level. The library receiving the lowest index
score of 15 received funding below the median level of per capita support, but only by
less than five dollars. The value index/per capita support scatterplot supports the claim of
a relationship between library value and funding, but it is also clear that the relationship
is very likely an indirect one that is moderated by other factors including the requirement
to fund public libraries at 1/3 mil.
There were 15 instances where responses were received from both the mayor and
the public library director. The scatterplots in Figures 5.11 and 5.12 show the two sets of
responses. These scatterplots are visually similar and lend support to the claim of little
difference between the value statement ratings of the mayors and the library directors
made by the previous data analysis and also point to the moderating effects of the 1/3 mil
funding requirement.

174
Figure 5.11: Relationship Between Mayors’ Ratings of Value Statements and the Millage Rate for
Selected Municipalities

Index Score of Value Statement Ratings

Relationship Between Mayors' Ratings of Value Statements
and Millage Rate: Selected Municipalities2
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.000000

0.000100

0.000200

0.000300

0.000400

0.000500

0.000600

2011 Millage Rate
Note: 1N = 15;
2
Selected municipalities are those for which valid responses were received from both the Mayor and the Public Library Director.

Figure 5.12: Relationship Between Library Directors’ Ratings of Value Statements and the Millage Rate
for Selected Municipalities

Index Score of Value Statement Ratings

Relationship Between Library Directors' Ratings of Value
Statements and Millage Rate: Selected Municipalities2
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.000000

0.000100

0.000200

0.000300

0.000400

0.000500

0.000600

2011 Millage Rate
Note: 1N = 15;
2
Selected municipalities are those for which valid responses were received from both the Mayor and the Public Library Director.

175
Data Summary
The findings from this study suggest partial support for the guiding research
propositions. Research proposition one is moderately supported by the data analysis.
The clustering of the statistically significant correlations around related concepts and
around the library impact variable suggest some support for the claim made by research
proposition one of a relationship between information used to support library budget
justifications and the way that library directors are likely to communicate library value to
local government officials. However, since the majority of the statistically significant
correlation coefficients for the variables in this analysis were smaller than .300 with
correspondingly small effect sizes, it should also be noted that the relationship does not
appear to be an especially strong one. The moderate correlation coefficients and small
effect sizes also suggested the possibility of still unidentified factors that influence both
how library directors communicate value to local government officials and what
information they choose to include in their budget justifications.
Research proposition two is partially supported by the data analysis. The public
library directors’ highest rated value concepts were also represented in the list of
frequently offered library programs and services, lending support to the idea that libraries
offer programs that library directors believe are valuable. However, the highest rated
value constructs were not significant predictors of above minimum level funding, and the
significant predictors of higher levels of funding were rated as very important by an
average of only 59 percent of the respondents. Finally, research proposition three was
also only partially supported by the data analysis. There is support for the claim that
public library directors and local government officials have high levels of agreement

176
about how the public library adds value to the community. Despite the high level of
agreement about library value, there are marked differences in the ability of their ratings
of the value statements to predict higher levels of funding.
The open-ended questions sought to determine what has been most and least
effective in the library budget process from the perspectives of public library directors
and local government officials. The data provided by the open-ended responses mirrors
the data provided by the ratings of the value statements and the ratings of the budget
information. Although there are differences between the percentages of respondents in
each category, there is a great deal of similarity in the responses of the local government
officials and the public library directors. This lends support to the claim that although
they may differ on the relative value of a specific concept, the public library directors and
local government officials in this study have high levels of agreement about what
information is important in the budget decision process.
When considering the most effective strategies, the same categories are
represented in the responses of both groups. The only exception is that some public
library directors reported that making local government officials aware of the negative
consequences of not funding the library had been an effective strategy; none of the local
government officials reported negative consequences of failing to fund the library as
having a positive influence on their budget decisions. Another significant difference is
that a larger percentage of the local government officials (20 percent) reported that
information about how well the library manages its funds to be the most significant factor
in their library funding decisions, but this appeared to be true for only 4.4 percent of the
public library directors. Both groups agreed that the state requirement to fund public

177
libraries at 1/3 mil was a significant factor in the library funding decision process, and the
scatterplots suggest that the 1/3 mil requirement may be a significant confounding
variable in the relationship between library value and funding. Both groups also agreed
that communication between the library and local government officials, and reports about
users, programs, and services were also important to the library funding decision process.
For both groups, the most effective budget strategies included:


perceived limits imposed by the law requiring funding at 1/3 mil



information on how well the library manages its money



reporting information about users, programs, and services



communication/relationships between the library and local government officials.

These four categories contained the responses of 84.5 percent of the local government
officials and 86.9 percent of the public library directors. So while they may differ on the
relative importance of a specific concept, the local government officials and public
library directors represented in this study share many of the same ideas about what has
been most effective in their library funding decisions.
When considering the strategies and factors that were least effective in the library
funding decision process, again there is a great deal of similarity between the response
categories of the two groups. The eight response categories for the local government
officials are also represented in the responses of the public library directors. As in the
categories describing the most effective budget concepts, the library directors have more
categories of responses than the local government officials, i.e. only library directors
reported partnerships and comparisons to standards or other libraries as least effective
strategies.

178
In both groups, many of the respondents were unable to describe a least effective
budget strategy, but when they were able to provide a response, the least effective
strategies included:


perceived limits imposed by the law requiring funding at 1/3 mil



reporting information about users, programs, and services



communication/relationships between the library and local government officials

These three categories contained the responses of 80 percent of the local government
officials and 78.5 percent of the public library directors. It is interesting to note that there
is a great deal of similarity between the most effective and least effective strategies. This
suggests that the least/most effective dichotomy may not accurately capture the
complexity of the issues surrounding municipal library budget strategies. An in depth
study of the communication and other organizational and cultural structures that surround
the municipal library budgets could provide additional insight into what makes these
concepts function as both most and least effective budget strategies.
The data analysis concluded with scatterplots examining the relationships of the
value statements with both the 2011 millage rate and the 2011 level of per capita library
funding. These charts support the claim of a weak relationship between library value and
funding, and examination of these scatterplots suggests that the 1/3 mil funding
requirement exerts a moderating effect on the library value/library funding relationship.
The next chapter presents a revision of the conceptual model, the conclusions
drawn from the research, a discussion of the implications of the results, and
recommendations for further research.

179
Chapter Six – Conclusions
Study Overview
The purpose of this research study was to explore the relationships between
conceptions of library value and public library funding. The research sought to determine
if there were significant relationships between the library value constructs of public
library directors and those of local government officials who were responsible for library
funding. In addition, the study attempted to see if the participants’ ratings of library
value constructs could be associated with higher levels of library funding.
Chapter one of this study provided the background for this exploration of library
value, and included the problem statement, a conceptual model of the relationships under
consideration, three research propositions, and seven research questions. Chapter two
provided a review of the library and information science literature on library evaluation
and valuation, including a discussion on the effectiveness of statewide library valuation
studies in securing additional public library funding. Chapter three presented the
research design, and included a discussion of the selection of New Jersey public library
directors and mayors as research subjects, and the use of survey instruments specifically
designed for this study. This study was the first use of these survey instruments, so the
descriptive statistics of the collected data were presented in chapter four. Analysis and
discussion of the seven research questions and the three research propositions was
presented in chapter five. That chapter also presented a discussion of the results of
participants’ reports of significant factors that influenced their recent budget processes,
and additional examinations of the library value/library funding relationship. This final
chapter presents a revision of the conceptual model, some conclusions drawn from the

180
research, a discussion of some implications of the results, and recommendations for
further research.
Revisions to the Conceptual Model Based on the Research Study
The original conceptual model that supported this study, initially presented in
chapter one, is reproduced below. It shows suggested relationships integrating legislator,
community and library perspectives on library funding. The model suggests that
constructs of library value play a key role in the public library’s budget allocation. The
model also suggests that the library value constructs of local government officials and
public library directors, indicated by the circled area, are important areas of focus when
attempting to understand the relationships between library value and public library
funding. The model suggests that the activities of both groups have a direct impact on
the kinds of library services and programs that will be offered in a community. The
library administrators attempt to add value by their program and service decisions, and
local government officials decide how much of the available pool of municipal funds will
go to the library to support those decisions.
One of the outcomes of this study is that a little more can be said about the area
inside the circle, i.e. the relationships between the library value constructs of public
library directors and those of local government officials responsible for providing
financial support for municipal public libraries. Initially, the model suggested that library
directors’ library value constructs influence their budget requests and that local
government officials’ library value constructs influence their budget allocation decisions,
but the original conceptual model says very little about the relationships between the
library value constructs of the two groups.

181

Figure 1.4. Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and Local
Government Public Library Funding
E
D
U
C
A
T
I
O
N
A
L

P
O
L
I
T
I
C
S

L
E
V
E
L

SOCIOECONOMIC LEVEL

Analysis of the data from this study suggests that the area within the circle can be
expanded with some additional details. The data suggests support for the claim that the
library directors and the local government officials share library value constructs. In
addition, the data suggests that the ratings of the value constructs are significant
predictors of above minimum level funding, but with the exception of programming for
teens and children, the constructs that were the strongest predictors of higher levels of
funding, were not the most highly rated by either group. Correlation analysis supports
the claim that there are significant relationships between the information public library
directors’ are likely to use to communicate library value to local government officials and
the information that they use to support their budget requests, but the correlation

182
coefficients suggest that the relationships are moderate. Finally, the data suggests four
shared concepts that may be contributors to positive library funding outcomes. Figure
6.1 shows the revisions to aspects of the conceptual model based on the analysis of the
data from this study.
Figure 6.1: Revisions to Conceptual Model Suggested by Study Analysis and Discussion

Figure 6.1 shows that the public library directors and the local government
officials share library value constructs, and they also agree about four of the factors that
could result in a budget outcome that is favorable to the library. Although the shared
value constructs and the shared list of factors that may influence a favorable library
budget outcome suggest similarities in the library value constructs of the public library
directors and local government officials in this study, as the diagram shows, there was no
direct relationship between these shared factors and the library value constructs. Figure

183
6.2 shows the full conceptual model with the revisions suggested by the analysis of the
data from this study.
Figure 6.2: Revised Model for Exploring the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and
Local Government Public Library Funding

In Figure 6.2 the area inside of the circle has been adjusted to reflect the claim
made by this study that local government officials and public library directors share
library value constructs. The library’s budget request and allocation have been separated
from the library value constructs reflecting the claim of no strong direct link between
library value constructs and levels of funding. The library’s budget request and
allocation are instead linked by the four factors identified in this research as having the
greatest impact on library budget outcomes (see figure 6.1 for the detailed list of the
factors). The role of library evaluation has been made more central based on the review
of the literature which suggests that data from library evaluations can be used to both

184
improve library programs and services, and provide data to inform and support a budget
justification or request. The role of the community’s conceptions of library value has
been modified to reflect that both library directors and local government officials
indicated that they valued community feedback about the library, and both groups
referenced community feedback/impact when describing most and least effective budget
strategies. The community also provides feedback by their use (or lack of use) of library
services, and an arrow linking the community’s conceptions of library value to the
utilization of library programs and services has been added to reflect this relationship.
The arrows from the local government officials’ library value constructs to the local
budget environment and competing budget priorities represent the claim that library value
constructs work with both of these factors to shape the library’s budget allocation. In the
original model, the library value constructs of public library directors were directly linked
to their budget requests. The library budget requests were directly linked to the local
government officials’ library value constructs, which was directly linked to the library’s
budget allocation. As a result of this research, the model has been revised to show that
while library directors and local government officials may share library value constructs,
these constructs only partially account for the public library’s budget allocation.
The Role of Culture
One way to interpret the data from this study is as evidence of a shared culture
around public libraries in the community. Culture can be defined as shared systems of
meaning that are communicated between members of a community or group (Geertz,
1973; D’Andrade, 1984; LeVine, 1984). Using this definition, the evidence of shared
value constructs and the shared ideas about what leads to successful library budget

185
outcomes lend support to the claim that the public library directors and local government
officials in this study share a culture around the role of the public library in the
community. However, this shared culture does not seem to be directly connected to
higher levels of library funding.
According to D’Andrade (1984), culture is a system of defining meaning that is
expressed through social rules or agreements that something – an object, a behavior, and
idea – represents something else; it helps people make sense of their world. These social
rules can function as regulative rules, sometimes referred to as norms, and/or as
constitutive rules, which serve to create, regulate, and define existing behavior.
Regulative rules provide clues as to what we believe should be done, while constitutive
rules provide guidance on how it should be done. Constitutive ideas and rules create
reality, while regulative ideas and rules constrain and order action.
The 1/3 mil law in New Jersey is a regulative rule in public library culture. The
New Jersey Legislature as a body passed the law saying in essence, we agree that if a
municipal library is formed, it should be financially supported at a particular level.
Individual communities agree with this regulative rule, and in general provide the
required level of support. The various ways that individual communities comply with
this regulative funding rule are evidence of constitutive rules in action. In some
communities, the 1/3 mil funding level is treated as the absolute ceiling for library
funding, and so there is no prescribed budget action required by the library. The local
government officials and the library administration agree that the library will be funded at
1/3 mil; no additional action or discussion is usually required. In other communities, the
1/3 mil amount is merely a starting point for library funding. The library administration

186
and local government officials actively negotiate funding and these libraries often get
funding in excess of 1/3 mil. The acceptable actions and outcomes are often governed by
the culture of a particular municipality.
These regulative and constitutive rules are not absolute, and can be changed if
there is sufficient support in the rule-making bodies. Regulative rules can be changed,
for example, when municipalities dissolve the municipal public library, or the Legislature
modifies the library funding laws. Both municipal library dissolution and public library
funding law modifications have happened in New Jersey. Constitutive rules can be
modified by changes in municipal or library administration, or by changes in economic
conditions, e.g. increasing or decreasing tax bases.
While culture provides meaning systems that help people direct and understand
their behavior, a shared culture does not automatically determine material flow. Material
flow is not a meaning system, but instead refers to the “movement of goods, services,
messages, people, genes, diseases, and other potentially countable entities in space and
time” (D’Andrade, 1984, p. 110).
Constitutive rules create a variety of types of people, occasions, and objects,
which are linked to norms concerning the rights of certain types of people over
certain kinds of objects on certain occasions. These norms are major
determinants of a person’s actions and reactions, directly affecting the flow of
things on which social life depends. (D’Andrade, 1984, p. 111)
There are multiple causal relationships between conditions of material flow and
meaning systems. In the context of this study, the norm created by the 1/3 mil law
governs material flow of funds to libraries, but at the municipal level, the material flow of

187
funds may be governed by other norms in which funding the library is viewed as one part
of the local government officials’ resource allocation decision matrix. Although
additional research is needed to explicate the relationships between the shared culture of
the municipal library and the various regulative and constitutive rules that determine
library funding, this study provides an empirical base to begin such research.
The Role of Resource Allocation Behavior
Langholtz, Marty, Ball, & Nolan (2003) describe resource allocation behavior as
“the outward, observable behavior in which people act upon their resource-allocation
decisions” (p. 2). Any judgment that people make about how they will allocate
resources, e.g. how much funding to give to the public library each year, is generally
classed as resource allocation behavior. The two basic categories of resource allocation
problems are maximization problems where decision makers attempt to achieve the
maximum level of a goal without consuming more than a fixed amount of resources, and
minimization problems where decision makers are attempting to achieve a fixed goal
while consuming a minimum amount of resources. Resource allocation decisions are
often made over time with the results of previous decisions providing feedback for
current decisions; “these are multi-cycle problems, where each allocation represents one
cycle among a series” (Langholtz, Marty, Ball, & Nolan, 2003. p. 5). Multi-cycle
problems are affected by whether the decision-maker has the option of either carrying
forward unused resources, or borrowing resources against the next time frame.
The view of library funding as a multi-cycle problem is supported by the recent
regulative change to New Jersey library law requiring the give-back of excess funds (P.L.
2010, C.83, 2010) which changes the ability of the library to carry forward excess fund

188
by making any library resources in excess of twenty percent above 1/3 mil available for
use by the municipality. Viewing library funding from the perspective of a multi-cycle
problem is also supported by Orr’s (1973) model of library goodness (see Figure 2.2) and
Kim and Yu’s (2011) framework for library evaluation and management (see Figure 2.3).
Many allocation decisions about public goods are made within the context of
government institutions. These decisions are made with both recognition of the current
situation and awareness of how the current decisions will provide costs and benefits over
future periods. “Given any set of political decision rules, there may be fiscal rules or
institutions which restrict the range within which collective results may emerge,”
(Buchanan, 1969, p. 158) and it is also very likely that political decision rules and fiscal
or institutional rules may substitute for one another. The two primary public decision
variables are the tax rate and the expenditure mix. The most efficient decisions should
balance costs and benefits, but institutional rigidities, e.g. tax codes, or mandated
expenditures, often prevent costs and benefits to be decided purely on the basis of
efficiency.
In the case of public libraries, the 1/3 mil law is a rule that affects the expenditure
mix available to local government officials. The library is funded each year, and giving
the library more than 1/3 mil one year does not mean that decision-makers have the
freedom to give the library less in subsequent years. The inability to fund the library at
less than 1/3 mil may also inhibit funding at over 1/3 mil. When considered from the
perspective of local government officials’ resource allocation behavior, it becomes
apparent that there are many factors, outside of a shared culture around libraries, that may
influence the decision to fund the library at levels above 1/3 mil. Local government

189
officials value the public library, but they also value all of the other contributors to the
community. Funding the library at only 1/3 mil may be more about maximizing available
resources than about the perceived value of the library.
Study Implications
This study showed that there were marked similarities between the value
constructs of the public library directors and local government officials in this study.
Both groups rated traditional services, such as the provision of books, CDs, and DVD and
the provision of free Internet access as very important ways that the public library adds
value to their communities. There was even a high level of agreement on the value
constructs rated least important by the two groups. Neither group felt that providing help
with e-government services, or providing services and support to small businesses were
important ways that their library was adding value to the community. These similarities
suggest that the library directors and local government officials in this study share a
culture around libraries. However, that shared culture does not necessarily translate into
higher levels of financial support for the public library. Analysis of the responses to the
value statements lends support to the claim that, with the exception of programming for
children and teens, none of the value constructs rated as very important by the
respondents is a significant predictor of funding above the minimum level. This lends
support to Allen’s (2003) research which suggested providing information about the
quality of library services may have little effect on library funding levels.
While it was surprising to find the degree of similarity between the public library
directors’ value constructs and those of the government officials, in retrospect the data
clearly demonstrate that the public library directors operate from the supposition that

190
local government officials’ primary interest in the library exists around the budget. If
that is a valid supposition then communicating about the library in the context of the
budget seems reasonable. But the data also lead to an alternate view of how the shared
culture arose without an understanding of the library’s budget needs over time.
Data taken from public library directors tell us that they report regularly what
library is able to accomplish with the existing money and staff the budget allots. This
encourages a shared culture that arises from repeated budget presentation of the status
quo. A more meaningful endeavor would center on the development of a shared culture
in which fiscal increases were perceived as needed by government officials based upon
the services required by the community in this digital age. This would demand further
dialog and even ongoing education that makes visible the library budget needs built on
communication throughout the year about the library of the 21st century. Ideally, this
communication could be presented over the time intervening between budget hearings,
and could, for example, take the form of the presentation of quarterly reports that provide
a short, easy to read and carefully documented précis of what is happening in library
service nationally at a point in time and what the community library needs to remain
viable in the face of the ongoing technological revolution it faces. What the directors
must develop is a new shared culture that focuses on how the library can meet changing
community needs, which would begin to replace the culture that emphasizes what was
done with previous budget allocations. This requires a vision that presents compelling
and irresistible scenarios of the budget needs of the community library of the future and
how it will use that budget to fulfill its mandate in service of the public interest.

191
The findings that relate to the library budget suggest that library directors’ are
very likely to provide information about library use and money management in both their
budget requests and their conversations with local government officials about the library.
The local government officials’ survey responses confirm that information about money
management and users, programs, and services were among the most influential factors
on their library budget decisions. This supports the idea that sound money management
practices and library metrics are important to local government officials. However, there
was no support for the claim that reporting this information made it more likely that a
library would receive funding above the minimal level required by state statute.
It is very likely that the quality of library programs and level of community
support for the library are significant contributors to a shared library culture, but that the
library budget is more a reflection of the general fiscal condition of a municipality, and
the specific resource allocation behavior of local government officials. The competition
among community services is illustrated definitively in the creation of budget priorities,
e.g. the need to fund all municipal services, including libraries, and the perceived relative
importance of each of the services to the needs of the competing. This leads to allocation
behavior that defines libraries as a lower need in the life of the community.
Major questions for libraries are how to raise the library’s level to a higher order
and how might the library position itself as an essential community service? Campaigns
championing the library as a place that changes lives have become a staple part of
attempts to move the library to a higher order community service. Over the years, time
and time again through stories, testimonials and narratives the theme has been repeated
by the famous and the average person that libraries influence, change, and even save

192
lives. It remains for future investigators to design a study that brings data to bear on that
statement. Carefully crafted it could provide data that elevates the movement of library
budget need to the higher order of most essential community services.
It is important that libraries operate in a fiscally responsible manner, and it is
important that the community, including local government officials, believe that library
programs and services are meeting the needs of the community. It is equally important
that library administrators recognize that library funding is not just about demonstrating
that the library does these things really well. Municipal library funding is a part of a
resource allocation decision matrix. Local government officials may easily envisage
what effects increasing or decreasing the funds allocated to police or sanitation will have
on a community; it may be more difficult to do the same for library services, e.g., if we
cut the police budget, there are fewer officers to patrol the streets; if we cut the library
budget, they will not be able to buy as many new books, or they may have to cut some
hours, but they will still be open and have all of the books they own, and we may be able
to restore the funds next year. Unless library administrators work to command a more
substantial position in the resource allocation decision matrix, libraries may always be
relegated to minimal levels of funding or continue to experience deep cuts during periods
of municipal economic hardship.
This study was an attempt to explore the hidden assumptions about the
relationships between conceptions of library value and public funding. While the study
suggests the value-funding link is not direct, it does support the claim that the public
library is still a valued community institution. Library advocacy efforts and the focus on
library evaluation have been effective in sustaining a shared culture around libraries.

193
Continuing these activities and creating responsive services could help the public library
remain an important community institution. However, these activities are not the keys to
the library’s expansion or growth; these activities help libraries survive, but they will not
help them thrive. Securing additional funding does not appear to be about library
goodness, but instead about the weight of the library in a given-resource allocation
decision matrix. This perspective may help us understand how, in tough economic times,
even stellar, award-winning, public libraries are not exempt from budget cuts. Perhaps
the relevant question is not how does the library demonstrate its value, but instead, how
does the library position itself as an essential and evolving community service?
Additional research on municipal library funding can increase both research and
professional understanding of funding dynamics, and may allow the future development
of knowledge and practices that will help librarians answer this crucial question.
Limitations of the Study
Caution should be exercised when attempting to extend the conclusions of this
study beyond the research participants. The low response rates, i.e. 20.7 percent for the
local government officials and 37.3 percent for the public library directors, did not
capture responses from a large enough portion of the target populations to allow
generalizations. While the researcher believes that the findings and conclusions are valid
for the survey respondents, she is less sure that they are valid for all public libraries in
New Jersey, and it is not recommended that the conclusions be extended to public
libraries outside of the state. A second limitation results from the use of a survey as the
primary method to gather the data. While surveys allow the collection of large amounts
of data, this survey was not able to capture the complexity of the factors that affect

194
municipal library funding. It is possible that respondents had ideas about library value
and library funding that were not expressed because there was no provision in the survey
for in-depth comments and the survey findings were not supplemented with follow-up
interviews. If the survey instruments developed for this study are used in the future, it is
suggested that they be modified to allow study participants the option of providing freetext comments in addition to their coded responses.
Future Research
It is suggested that exploratory case studies of municipal library funding in New
Jersey, as well as in other states, be conducted. These studies would help to contextualize
this research, particularly the political and communicative aspects of the relationships
between local government officials and public library directors. Future research on the
topics discussed in this study could also explore:


the resource allocation behavior of local government officials from an historical
perspective, i.e. what was funded, what was not funded, what were the expected
outcomes of the decisions, and what were the actual outcomes;



the 1/3 mil funding requirement from the perspective of former local government
officials, especially in depth research on factors that influenced their decisions to
fund the library above and below the 1/3 mil level;



the relationships between the shared culture of the municipal library and the
regulative and constitutive rules that determine library funding;



whether the predictive power of the value statements changes if socio-economic
factors are added to the statistical models;



longitudinal research to explore the cyclical facets of municipal library funding;

195


what kinds of library/local government official communication/relationships help
libraries get more than the minimum levels of funding, i.e., what would help
move the shared culture from a focus on past accomplishments to a focus on
continued development;



historically how the library funding decision process was modified by increasing
and/or decreasing municipal revenues, i.e. do libraries get cut primarily because
there are fewer available funds.

196
APPENDIX A: Survey Recruitment Letters

[Date of letter]

«LibDirectorFirstName» «LibDirectorLastName»
«LibDirectorTitle»
«LibName»
«LibAddress»
«Municipality», NJ «LibZip»
Dear «LibDirectorSalutation» «LibDirectorLastName»,
My name is Edith Beckett and I am a doctoral student at the Rutgers University School of
Communication and Information. I am researching the relationship between the ways that public
library directors think about the value their libraries add to their communities and their success in
securing municipal funding for their libraries. In many communities, the library is a wellestablished community institution that often struggles for financial support. I am interested in
identifying patterns in the way that library directors think about the value their libraries add to the
community and how they communicate that value to their funding officials. My goal is to
determine whether some value statements are more effective than others when trying to convince
the local government to provide financial support for the library.
Without your participation in this study, it will not be successful. Please agree to complete a
short online survey, which should take no more than 20 minutes. You will not be asked to
provide any confidential information about your library or its finances. Participation in the
research project is completely voluntary, and your decision whether or not to participate will
remain confidential.
The goal of this study is to help the library profession learn more about what we can do to ensure
that our public libraries get the financial support necessary to continue to provide high quality
services to the people of our communities.
On [date of survey email] I will send an email to you at «LibDirectorEmail». If this email does
not reach you, please contact me at ekbecket@eden.rutgers.edu so that I can update my records

197
with accurate information. My email will describe the survey and provide you with a link that
you can use to complete it.
If you have any questions or concerns, you may contact me at my email address, shown above, or
at 609-310-1187. You may also contact Professor Dan O. O’Connor, Department of Library and
Information Science, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 4 Huntington St, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071; 732-932-7500, ext. 8219; Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu.
I look forward to working with you to gather information that will have meaning for the
continued vitality of your public library and all of the public libraries across the nation.
I await your response with great anticipation.

Sincerely,

Edith K. Beckett

198

[Date of letter]
The Honorable «MAYORFULLNAME»
Mayor of «MUNI_NAME»
«ADDRESS_1»
«ADDRESS_2»
«CITY», NJ «ZIP»
Dear Mayor «MAYORLASTNAME»,
My name is Edith Beckett and I am a doctoral student at the Rutgers University School of
Communication and Information. I am researching the similarities and differences between the
ways that local government officials and public library directors think about the value that the
library adds to the community. I am interested in finding out what kinds of value statements have
the most meaning for you, as a local government official, when you are considering how much
financial support to provide for the public library.
Without your participation in this study, it will not be successful. Please agree to complete a
short online survey, which should take no more than 15 minutes. You will not be asked to
provide any confidential information about your library or your municipality. Participation in the
research project is completely voluntary, and your decision whether or not to participate will
remain confidential.
Your participation in this study will help librarians learn more about what local government
officials value about public libraries. I believe this knowledge will help the library profession
understand what we can do to ensure that librarians are able to work effectively with their local
governments. This in turn could result in better services for the citizens of our communities.
On or about [date of survey email] I will send an email to you at «EMAIL». If you do not
receive an email by [two days after date of survey email], please contact me at
ekbecket@eden.rutgers.edu so that I can update my records. My email will describe the survey
and provide you with a link that you can use to complete the survey. If you prefer to have
someone else on your staff respond to my survey, please email their name and email address to
me, and I will send the survey link directly to your designee.
If you have any questions or concerns, you may contact me at my email address, shown above, or
at 609-310-1187. You may also contact Professor Dan O’Connor, Department of Library and
Information Science, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 4 Huntington St, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071; 732-932-7500, ext. 8219; Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu.

199

Sincerely,

Edith K. Beckett

200

[Date of letter]
The Honorable «MAYORFULLNAME»
Mayor of «MUNI_NAME»
«ADDRESS_1»
«ADDRESS_2»
«CITY», NJ «ZIP»
Dear Mayor «MAYORLASTNAME»,
My name is Edith Beckett and I am a doctoral student at the Rutgers University School of
Communication and Information. I am researching the similarities and differences
between the ways that local government officials and public library directors think about
the value that the library adds to the community. I am interested in finding out what
kinds of value statements have the most meaning for you, as a local government official,
when you are considering how much financial support to provide for the public library.
As a local government official, you want to provide the best available services to the
residents of your community. Fiscal realities mean that you often have to make very hard
choices between many services that affect the quality of life for your residents.
Librarians recognize this reality, and we want to know the kinds of library services that
you believe add the most value to the community.
Please agree to complete the enclosed survey, which should take no more than 15
minutes. Input from you and other local government officials is essential to the success
of this study. All individual research results will be kept confidential. Results will only
be reported in group form and upon request you will be provided with a group summary
of the results at the end of the study. You will not be asked to provide any confidential
information about your library or your municipality. Participation in the research project
is completely voluntary, and your decision whether or not to participate will remain
confidential.
Your participation in this study will help librarians learn about some of the things that
local government officials value about the public library. I believe this knowledge will
help the library profession learn more about what we can do to ensure that librarians are
able to work effectively with their local governments. This in turn could result in better
services for the citizens of our communities.

201
Please use the enclosed envelope to return the completed survey to me by [date survey
closes]. If you prefer to have someone else on your staff respond to my survey, please
pass the survey materials along to them.
If you have any questions or concerns, you may contact me at my email address,
ekbecket@eden.rutgers.edu, or at 609-310-1187. You may also contact Professor Dan
O’Connor, Department of Library and Information Science, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, 4 Huntington St, New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071; 732-9327500, ext. 8219; Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu.
Thank you in advance for your time and participation.

Sincerely,

Edith K. Beckett

202
APPENDIX B: Informed Consent Documents

Consent Form (Public Library Directors: Online Survey)
Please read the terms on this page, SELECT YOUR RESPONSE, and CLICK THE
"NEXT" BUTTON.
Study title: An Exploration of the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value
and Local Government Public Library Funding
Researchers: Edith K. Beckett and Daniel O. O’Connor, School of Communication and
Information, Rutgers the State University of New Jersey
You have been selected to participate in a research study about public library value.
Approximately 288 directors from New Jersey municipal public libraries have been
selected to participate in this study and each person’s participation will last
approximately 20 minutes.
If you agree to participate in this study you will take this survey online.
The survey questions ask for some basic demographic information. You will then be
asked to rank a series of statements about library value and provide short answers to
some additional questions.
The knowledge gained from this study may contribute to understanding the relationships
between conceptions of library value and municipal financial support. Your responses to
this survey will be used in conjunction with data from published library statistics and
municipal public records to help the researchers understand municipal library support in
your community.
This research is confidential which means that the research records will include some
information about you, such as the name of your library and your position with that
library. The research team will keep this information confidential by limiting individual's
access to the research data and keeping it in a secure location. The research team and the
Institutional Review Board at Rutgers University are the only parties that will be allowed
to see the data, except as may be required by law. If a report of this study is published, or
the results are presented at a professional conference, only group results will be stated.
At your request you will be provided with a group summary of the results when they
become available.
There are no predictable physical ill effects associated with participating in this study,
and you are completely free to refuse to answer any of the survey questions.
Participation in this study is voluntary and you are free to end your participation at any
time after the survey has started.
You will not receive any financial compensation for agreeing to participate in this study
and there are no penalties for refusing to participate.

203
If you have any questions or concerns about your participation in this project you may
contact :
Daniel O. O’Connor, Associate Professor,
School of Communication and Information,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
4 Huntington Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
Tel: 732-932-7500, ext. 8219
Email: Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu
If you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, you may contact the
Institutional Review Board Administrator at Rutgers University at
Rutgers University Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs
3 Rutgers Plaza
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-8559
Tel: 848 932 4058
Email: humansubjects@orsp.rutgers.edu
This informed consent form was approved by the Rutgers University Institutional Review
Board for the Protection of Human Subjects on August 22, 2012; approval of this form
expires on August 21, 2013.
I understand these terms and AGREE to participate in this study.
I DO NOT WISH to participate in this study

204

Consent Form (Local Government Officials: Online Survey)
Please read the terms on this page, select your response, and click the "NEXT" button.
Study title: An Exploration of the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value
and Local Government Public Library Funding
Researchers: Edith K. Beckett and Daniel O. O’Connor, School of Communication and
Information, Rutgers the State University of New Jersey
You have been selected to participate in a research study about public library value.
Approximately 260 government officials from New Jersey municipalities that provide
support for public libraries have been selected to participate in this study and each
person’s participation will last approximately 15 minutes.
If you agree to participate in this study you will take this survey online.
The survey questions ask for some basic demographic information. You will then be
asked to rank a series of statements about library value and provide short answers to
some additional questions.
The knowledge gained from this study may contribute to understanding the relationships
between conceptions of library value and municipal financial support. Your responses to
this survey will be used in conjunction with data from published library statistics and
municipal public records to help the researchers understand municipal library support in
your community.
This research is confidential which means that the research records will include some
information about you, such as the name of your municipality and your position with that
municipality. The research team will keep this information confidential by limiting
individual's access to the research data and keeping it in a secure location. The research
team and the Institutional Review Board at Rutgers University are the only parties that
will be allowed to see the data, except as may be required by law. If a report of this study
is published, or the results are presented at a professional conference, only group results
will be stated.
At your request you will be provided with a group summary of the results when they
become available.
There are no predictable physical ill effects associated with participating in this study,
and you are completely free to refuse to answer any of the survey questions.
Participation in this study is voluntary and you are free to end your participation at any
time after the survey has started.
You will not receive any financial compensation for agreeing to participate in this study
and there are no penalties for refusing to participate.
If you have any questions or concerns about your participation in this project you may
contact :
Daniel O. O’Connor, Associate Professor,
School of Communication and Information,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

205
4 Huntington Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
Tel: 732-932-7500, ext. 8219
Email: Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu
If you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, you may contact the
Institutional Review Board Administrator at Rutgers University at
Rutgers University Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs
3 Rutgers Plaza
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-8559
Tel: 848 932 4058
Email: humansubjects@orsp.rutgers.edu
This informed consent form was approved by the Rutgers University Institutional Review
Board for the Protection of Human Subjects on August 22, 2012; approval of this form
expires on August 21, 2013.
I understand these terms and AGREE to participate in this study.
I DO NOT WISH to participate in this study

206

Consent Form (Local Government Officials: Print Survey)
Study title: An Exploration of the Relationships Between Constructs of Library Value and
Local Government Public Library Funding
Researchers: Edith K. Beckett and Daniel O. O’Connor, School of Communication and
Information, Rutgers the State University of New Jersey
You have been selected to participate in a research study about public library value.
Approximately 260 government officials from New Jersey municipalities that provide
support for public libraries have been selected to participate in this study and each
person’s participation will last approximately 15 minutes.
If you agree to participate in this study you will complete the attached survey.
The survey questions ask for some basic demographic information. You will then be
asked to rank a series of statements about library value and provide short answers to
some additional questions.
The knowledge gained from this study may contribute to understanding the
relationships between conceptions of library value and municipal financial support.
Your responses to this survey will be used in conjunction with data from published
library statistics and municipal public records to help the researchers understand
municipal library support in your community.
This research is confidential which means that the research records will include some
information about you, such as the name of your municipality and your position with
that municipality. The research team will keep this information confidential by limiting
access to the research data and keeping it in a secure location. The research team and
the Institutional Review Board at Rutgers University are the only parties that will be
allowed to see the data, except as may be required by law. If a report of this study is
published, or the results are presented at a professional conference, only group results
will be stated.
At your request you will be provided with a group summary of the results when they
become available.
There are no predictable physical ill effects associated with participating in this study,
and you are completely free to refuse to answer any of the survey questions.
Participation in this study is voluntary and you are free to end your participation at any
time after the survey has started.
You will not receive any financial compensation for agreeing to participate in this study
and there are no penalties for refusing to participate.

207
If you have any questions or concerns about your participation in this project you may
contact :
Daniel O. O’Connor, Associate Professor,
School of Communication and Information,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
4 Huntington Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
Tel: 732-932-7500 , ext. 8219
Email: Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu
If you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, you may contact the
Institutional Review Board Administrator at Rutgers University at
Rutgers University Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects
Office of Research and Sponsored Programs
3 Rutgers Plaza
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-8559
Tel: 848 932 4058
Email: humansubjects@orsp.rutgers.edu*
This informed consent form was approved by the Rutgers University Institutional Review
Board for the Protection of Human Subjects on August 22, 2012; approval of this form
expires on August 23, 2013.
I understand these terms and agree to participate in this study.
Initials: __________
Date: ____________
I do not wish to participate in this study.
Initials: ___________
If you do not wish to participate in the study, please use the enclosed envelope to
return this form to me

208
APPENDIX C: Survey of Public Library Directors (SPLD)
[The informed consent document is listed in the online survey as question 1]
2.
Please select your COUNTY
[Respondents get a drop down box with a list of the counties]
3.
What is the name of your MUNICIPALITY?
[Respondents get a blank field]
4.

How many years have you been a library director?
0-4 years
5-9 years
10 or more years
Other, please specify_____________________________
5.
Thinking about the year that includes September 2012, did your municipality
support your library in excess of the amount required by state law (1/3 mil)?
Yes
No
Don't Know
The 3 questions on this page explore the many ways that public libraries can add value to
their community.
6.
Here are a group of statements about some of the ways that the library can add
value to a community. Please examine these statements and indicate your level of
agreement with each statement as it applies to your library.
1
Strongly
Disagree

2

3

4

5

6

7
Strongly
Agree

My library adds value to the community by helping people access e-government services
(requesting permits, license renewals, etc.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by helping people with job search-related
activities
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by making books, CDs and DVDs available to
the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

209
My library adds value to the community by providing librarians who can help people find
the information they want and need for everyday living and in extraordinary situations
that arise in their lives
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing access to new technologies such as
e-book readers, music/audiobook players, or tablet computers
My library adds value to the community by keeping people informed about community
activities
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7.
Here are a second group of statements about some of the ways that the library can
add value to a community. Please examine these statements and indicate your level of
agreement with each statement as it applies to your library.
1
Strongly
Disagree

2

3

4

5

6

7
Strongly
Agree

My library adds value to the community by serving as a community center/sociable
meeting space for seniors and others in the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing a quiet or study space for students
and other community members
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing community meeting spaces
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing programs and activities for adults
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing programs and activities for teens
and young children
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing free access to high speed Internet
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8.
Here are a final group of statements about some of the ways that the library can
add value to a community. Please examine these statements and indicate your level of
agreement with each statement as it applies to your library.
1
Strongly

2

3

4

5

6

7
Strongly

210
Disagree

Agree

My library adds value to the community by providing access to e-books
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

My library adds value to the community by helping people learn to use technological
devices, such as e-book readers, music/audiobook players, and tablet computers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing librarians who know the resources
available in the library and in the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library adds value to the community by providing access to databases
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

During the course of a year there may be many opportunities to describe the value that
your library adds to the community. The next two questions examine how you describe
your library's value to two groups: other librarians and local government officials.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
9.
When describing to LIBRARY COLLEAGUES the value that my library adds to
my community I am likely to talk about:
1
Not
Likely

2

3

4

How many people use various library programs
1
2
3
4

5

6

7
Very
Likely

5

6

7

What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff levels
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

How well the library manages its money
1
2
3
4

7

5

6

The impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
My library’s partnerships with community organizations
1
2
3
4
5

6

7

My library’s partnerships with other local government agencies
1
2
3
4
5

6

7

211
10.
When describing to LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS the value that my
library adds to my community I am likely to talk about:
1
Not
Likely

2

3

4

5

6

7
Very
Likely

How well the library manages its money
1
2
3
4

5

6

7

How many people use various library programs
1
2
3
4

5

6

7

The impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff levels
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

My library’s partnerships with other local government agencies
My library’s partnerships with community organizations
1
2
3
4
5

6

7

The final questions in the survey examine the information that you use when preparing
your budget requests.
11.
When preparing your most recent budget request which of the following kinds of
information did you feel it was important to include in support of the budget request:
1
Not
Important

2

3

4

5

6

7
Very
Important

6

7

Information documenting how well the library manages its money
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

New Jersey public library standards for staffing levels and hours of service
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

How many people use various library programs
1
2
3
4

7

Reports of media coverage of library activities and events
1
2
3
4
5

5

6

212
Reports about the impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the
community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Information about the library’s partnerships with other local government agencies
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff levels
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

Information about the library’s partnerships with community organizations
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

User testimonials about various library programs
12.
When making your most recent budget request to local government officials, what
action had the GREATEST impact in getting you the requested funding?

13.
When making your most recent budget request to local government officials, what
action had the LEAST impact in getting you the requested funding?

14.

Are you willing to answer additional questions on this topic?
Yes

No
15.
Do you wish to receive a summary of the results of the survey at the end of the
study?
Yes
No
16.
Please enter your name and email address if you are willing to answer additional
questions OR if you wish to receive a summary of the survey results when they are
available.

213
APPENDIX D: Survey of Local Government Officials (SLGO)
Online Version of the Survey of Local Government Officials (SLGO)
[The informed consent document is listed in the online survey as question 1]
2.
Please select your COUNTY
[Respondents get a drop down box with a list of the counties]
3.
What is the name of your MUNICIPALITY?
[Respondents get a blank field]
4.

Please select the form of government used by your municipality.
Borough
City
Commission
Council-Manager (Council Manager Act of 1923)
Council-Manager (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
Mayor-Council (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
Mayor-Council-Administrator (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
Small Municipality (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
Special Charters
Town
Village

5.

What is your position/title?

6.
Thinking about the year that includes September 2012, did your municipality fund
the public library in excess of the amount required by state law (1/3 mil)?
Yes
No
Don't Know
The 3 questions on this page explore the many ways that public libraries can add value to
their community.
7.
Here are a group of statements about some of the ways that the library can add
value to a community. Please examine these statements and indicate your level of
agreement with each statement as it applies to the public library in your community.
The library adds value to the community by keeping people informed about community
activities
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree

214

The library adds value to the community by helping people with job search-related
activities
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by providing access to new technologies such as
e-book readers, music/audiobook players, or tablet computers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by making books, CDs and DVDs available to
the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8.
Here are a second group of statements about some of the ways that the library can
add value to a community. Please examine these statements and indicate your level of
agreement with each statement as it applies to the public library in your community.
The library adds value to the community by helping people access e-government services
(requesting permits, license renewals, etc.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing programs and activities for teens
and young children
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by providing free access to high speed Internet
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by providing programs and activities for adults
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by providing community meeting spaces
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
9.
Here are a final group of statements about some of the ways that the library can
add value to a community. Please examine these statements and indicate your level of
agreement with each statement as it applies to the public library in your community.
The library adds value to the community by providing services and support for local
businesses
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree

215
The library adds value to the community by providing librarians who can help people
find the information they want and need for everyday living and in extraordinary
situations that arise in their lives
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by providing librarians who know the resources
available in the library and in the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by helping people learn to use technological
devices, such as e-book readers, music/audiobook players, and tablet computers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The library adds value to the community by providing access to e-books
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

The library adds value to the community by providing access to databases
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

10.
Thinking back to the most recent public library budget request please indicate the
importance of the following types of information in your final funding decision.
Information documenting how well the library manages its money
1
2
3
4
5
6
Not
Important
Reports of media coverage of library activities and events
1
2
3
4
5

6

7
Very
Important
7

Reports about the impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the
community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
User testimonials about various library programs
1
2
3
4

5

6

7

What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff levels
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

Information about the library’s partnerships with community organizations
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

New Jersey public library standards for staffing levels and hours of service

216
1

2

3

4

How many people use various library programs
1
2
3
4

5

6

7

5

6

7

Information about the library’s partnerships with other local government agencies
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
11.
Thinking about the library's most recent budget request, what action by the library
had the GREATEST influence on your funding decision?

12.
Thinking about the library's most recent budget request, what action by the library
had the LEAST influence on your funding decision?

13.
Yes
No

Are you willing to answer additional questions on this topic?

14.

Do you wish to receive a summary of the survey results when they are available?
Yes

No
15.
Please enter your name and email address if you are willing to answer additional
questions OR if you wish to receive a summary of the survey results at the end of the
study.

217
Print version of the Survey of Local Government Officials (SLGO)

1.
In what COUNTY is your municipality located?
__________________________________
2.
What is the name of your MUNICIPALITY?
_____________________________________
3.

Please select the form of government used by your municipality.

_____Borough

______City

______Commission

_____Council-Manager (Council Manager Act of 1923)
_____Council-Manager (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
_____Mayor-Council (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
_____Mayor-Council-Administrator (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
_____Small Municipality (Optional Municipal Charter Law)
_____Special Charters

_____Town

_____Village

4.
What is your position/title?
________________________________________________
5.
Thinking about the year that includes September 2012, did your
municipality fund the public library in excess of the amount required by
state law (1/3 mil)?
______Yes

_____No

_____Don't Know

6.
Here are a group of statements about some of the ways that the
library can add value to a community. Please examine these statements
and circle the number that indicates your level of agreement with each
statement as it applies to the public library in your community.
The library adds value to the community by helping people with job search-related
activities
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree

218
The library adds value to the community by making books, CDs and DVDs available to
the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by keeping people informed about
community activities
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing access to new technologies such
as e-book readers, music/audiobook players, or tablet computers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing community meeting spaces
1
Strongly
Disagree

2

3

4

5

6

7
Strongly
Agree

The library adds value to the community by providing programs and activities for
adults
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing programs and activities for
teens and young children
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing free access to high speed
Internet
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree

219
The library adds value to the community by helping people access e-government
services (requesting permits, license renewals, etc.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing librarians who know the
resources available in the library and in the community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing librarians who can help people
find the information they want and need for everyday living and in extraordinary
situations that arise in their lives
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by helping people learn to use technological
devices, such as e-book readers, music/audiobook players, and tablet computers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
The library adds value to the community by providing access to e-books
1
2
3
4
5
6
Strongly
Disagree

7
Strongly
Agree

The library adds value to the community by providing access to databases
1
2
3
4
5
6
Strongly
Disagree

7
Strongly
Agree

The library adds value to the community by providing services and support for local
businesses
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Strongly
Strongly
Disagree
Agree

220

7.
Thinking back to the most recent public library budget request please
indicate the importance of the following types of information in your final
funding decision.
Information about the library’s partnerships with other local government agencies
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Not
Very
Important
Important
New Jersey public library standards for staffing levels and hours of service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Not
Very
Important
Important
Reports of media coverage of library activities and events
1
2
3
4
5
Not
Important

6

Information documenting how well the library manages its money
1
2
3
4
5
6
Not
Important

7
Very
Important

7
Very
Important

Information about the library’s partnerships with community organizations
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Not
Very
Important
Important
How many people use various library programs
1
2
3
4
Not
Important

5

6

7
Very
Important

Reports about the impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the
community
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Not
Very
Important
Important
User testimonials about various library programs
1
2
3
4
5
Not
Important

6

7
Very
Important

221

What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff levels
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Not
Very
Important
Important
8.
Thinking about the library's most recent budget request, what action by the
library had the GREATEST influence on your funding decision?

9.
Thinking about the library's most recent budget request, what action by the
library had the LEAST influence on your funding decision?

10.

Are you willing to answer additional questions on this topic?

_____Yes

_____No

11.
Do you wish to receive a summary of the survey results when they are
available?
_____Yes

_____No

15.
Please print your name and email address if you are willing to answer
additional questions OR if you wish to receive a summary of the survey results at the
end of the study.

Name: ____________________________Email address: __________________________

222
APPENDIX E: Survey Emails
«LibDirectorEmail»
Link to a research survey about public library value
Dear «LibDirectorSalutation» «LibDirectorLastName»:
I recently sent you a letter asking you to participate in my research study on public library value.
Library directors want to ensure that their libraries provide the best available services to the
people of their communities. Sometimes, even the best loved libraries do not always get the
financial support needed to sustain their operations, but many library directors have been able
to make successful budget requests. I believe that this study will help the library profession
come closer to identifying what kinds of ideas about library value have been successful in
helping public library directors get the needed financial support from their communities.
The survey should take no more than 20 minutes, and you will not be asked to provide any
confidential information about your library or its finances. All individual research results will be
kept confidential. Results will only be reported in group form, and upon request you will be
provided with a group summary of the results when they become available. Participation in this
research project is completely voluntary and your decision whether or not to participate will
remain completely confidential.
The goal of this study is to help the library profession learn more about what we can do to
ensure that our public libraries get the financial support necessary to continue to provide high
quality services to the people of our communities. Without your participation in this study, it
will not be successful.
If you have any questions or concerns, you may reply to this email or reach me by telephone at
609-310-1187. You may also contact Professor Dan O’Connor at Dan.OConnor@rutgers.edu or
at 732-932-7500, ext 8219.
Thank you in advance for your time and assistance.
Please click on this link to begin the survey:
https://surveys.comminfo.rutgers.edu/TakeSurvey.aspx?SurveyID=SPLD
Sincerely,
Edith K. Beckett
Ph.D Program
School of Communication and Information
Rutgers University
4 Huntington Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
609-310-1187

223
«MAYOR'S EMAIL ADDRESS»
Request for participation in a research study about public library value
Dear Mayor «MAYOR'S LAST NAME»,
Recently I sent you a letter asking you to participate in my research study on the similarities and
differences between the ways that local government officials and public library directors think
about the value that the library adds to the community. As a local government official, you
want to provide the best available services to the residents of your community. Fiscal realities
mean that you often have to make very hard choices between many services that affect the
quality of life for your residents. Librarians recognize this reality, and they want to know the
kinds of library services that you believe add the most value to the community.
The survey should take no more that 15 minutes, and you will not be asked to provide any
confidential information about your library, your municipality, or its finances. I am also
requesting that you complete the survey by [closing date of the survey]. Input from you and
other local government officials is essential to the success of this study. All individual research
results will be kept confidential. Results will only be reported in group form and upon request
you will be provided with a group summary of the results at the end of the study. Participation
in this research project is completely voluntary, and your decision whether or not to participate
will remain completely confidential. If you prefer to have someone else on your staff respond to
the survey, please forward this email to them. Thank you in advance for your time and
participation.
Please click on this link to begin the survey:
https://surveys.comminfo.rutgers.edu/TakeSurvey.aspx?SurveyID=SLGO
Sincerely,
Edith K. Beckett
Ph.D Program
School of Communication and Information
Rutgers University
4 Huntington Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1071
609-310-1187

224
APPENDIX F: Code Book for Quantitative Analyses
Library Value Statements
CODE

STATEMENT

CINFOR

My library adds value to the community by keeping people informed
about community activities (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT
TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

NEWTECH

My library adds value to the community by providing access to new
technologies such as e-book readers, music/audiobook players, or tablet
computers (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY
IMPORTANT)

BKCDDVD

My library adds value to the community by making books, CDs and DVDs
available to the community (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT
TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

JBSRCH

My library adds value to the community by helping people with job
search-related activities (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO
7=VERY IMPORTANT)

ADLTPRO

My library adds value to the community by providing programs and
activities for adults (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO
7=VERY IMPORTANT)

KIDPRO

My library adds value to the community by providing programs and
activities for teens and young children (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE;
1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

FREEINT

My library adds value to the community by providing free access to high
speed Internet (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY
IMPORTANT)

EGOV

My library adds value to the community by helping people access egovernment services (requesting permits, license renewals, etc.)
(Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

MEETSPA

My library adds value to the community by providing community
meeting spaces (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY
IMPORTANT)

BUSHLP

My library adds value to the community by providing services and
support for local businesses (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT
IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

RESLIBR

My library adds value to the community by providing librarians who
know the resources available in the library and in the community
(Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

225
EDLLIBR

My library adds value to the community by providing librarians who can
help people find the information they want and need for everyday living
and in extraordinary situations that arise in their lives (Responses: BLANK=NO
RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

DATABSE

My library adds value to the community by providing access to databases
(Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

EBOOKS

My library adds value to the community by providing access to e-books
(Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

LRNTECH

My library adds value to the community by helping people learn to use
technological devices, such as e-book readers, music/audiobook players,
and tablet computers (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO
7=VERY IMPORTANT)

Library Budget Information
CODE

STATEMENT

PROGUSE

How many people use various library programs (Responses: BLANK=NO
RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

BUDSTAF

What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff
levels (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

MONEY

How well the library manages its money (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE;
1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

IMPACT

The impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the
community (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY
IMPORTANT)

COMPART

My library's partnerships with community organizations (Responses:
BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

UTEST

User testimonials about various library programs (Responses: BLANK=NO
RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

MEDIA

Reports of media coverage of library activities and events (Responses:
BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

STANDS

New Jersey public library standards for staffing levels and hours of
service (Responses: BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY
IMPORTANT)

GOVPART

My library's partnerships with other local government agencies (Responses:
BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT IMPORTANT TO 7=VERY IMPORTANT)

226
Value for Library Colleagues
CODE

STATEMENT

LPROGUSE

How many people use various library programs (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT
LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

LBUDSTAF

What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff
levels (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

LMONEY

How well the library manages its money (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY
TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

LIMPACT

The impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the
community (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

LCOMPART

My library's partnerships with community organizations (BLANK=NO
RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

LGOVPART

My library's partnerships with other local government agencies
(BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

Value for Local Government Officials
CODE

STATEMENT

GPROGUSE

How many people use various library programs (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT
LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

GBUDSTAF

What the library was able to achieve given existing budget and staff
levels (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

GMONEY

How well the library manages its money (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY
TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

GIMPACT

The impact of library programs and services on specific segments of the
community (BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

GCOMPART

My library's partnerships with community organizations (BLANK=NO
RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

GGOVPART

My library's partnerships with other local government agencies
(BLANK=NO RESPONSE; 1=NOT LIKELY TO 7=VERY LIKELY)

Demographic and Other Data
CODE

DESCRIPTION

ANALGRP

Analysis Group (RESPONSES: 1=MAYORS; 2=LIBRARY DIRECTORS)

227
3RDMIL

Thinking about the year that includes September 2012, did your
municipality support your library in excess of the amount required by
state law (1/3 mil)?

CNTY

County

MUNI

Municipality

MUNICODE

State of NJ County/Municipal Code

FRMGOVT

Form of Municipal Government

JOB

Job Title

EQVAL

2010 Municipal Equalized Valuation

EXPER

Number of Years as a Library Director

2011TAXSUP

2011 appropriated and additional Municipal Tax Support Provided to
libraries

PERCAPITA

Per Capita Tax Support provided to libraries in 2011

POPSRVD

2010 Population Served

MILLAGE

2011 Local tax support/2010 Equalized Value

POP25+

2011 Municipal Population Aged 25 years and older

HSEHLDS

Number of Households in the Municipality

<9THGRADE

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older with Less than a
9th Grade Education

NODIPLOMA

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older Whose Highest
Educational Level is More than 9th Grade but Less Than 12th Grade

HSGRAD

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older Whose Highest
Educational Level is a High School Diploma

COLLEGE

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older Whose Highest
Educational Level is Some College, but no Degree

ASDEGREE

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older Whose Highest
Educational Level is an Associates Degree

BADEGREE

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older Whose Highest
Educational Level is a Bachelors Degree

GRADEGEREE

Percentage of Municipal Population Aged 25 and Older Whose Highest
Educational Level is a Graduate or Professional Degree

228
APPENDIX G: Results of the Survey of Respondents’ Websites to Identify Offered
Programs
VARIABLES
LRNTECH

EBOOKS

DATABSE

RESLIBR

EDLLIBR

BUSHLP

MEETSPA

EGOV

FREEINT

KIDPRO

ADLTPRO

JBSRCH

BKCDDVD

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

A

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

1

B

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

C

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

D

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

E

0

0

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

F

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

G

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

1

H

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

1

I

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

J

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

K

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

L

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

M

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

N

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

O

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

P

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

Q

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

1

R

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

S

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

T

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

U

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

V

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

W

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

X

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

Y

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

A

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

B

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

1

C

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

A

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

B

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

C

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

D

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

E

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

Camden

NEWTECH

A

Bergen

Burlington

CINFOR

MUNICIPALITY

Atlantic

COUNTY

229
VARIABLES
LRNTECH

EBOOKS

DATABSE

RESLIBR

EDLLIBR

BUSHLP

MEETSPA

EGOV

FREEINT

KIDPRO

ADLTPRO

JBSRCH

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

G

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

H

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

Cape May

A

1

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

Cumberland

A

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

B

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

A

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

B

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

C

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

D

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

E

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

F

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

G

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

H

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

I

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

A

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

B

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

C

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

D

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

E

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

F

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

A

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

B

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

C

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

D

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

Hudson

BKCDDVD

0

Gloucester

NEWTECH

1

Essex

CINFOR

MUNICIPALITY

F

COUNTY

E

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

1

1

1

Hunterdon
Mercer

A

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

A

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

Middlesex

A

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

B

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

C

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

D

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

E

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

F

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

G

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

230
VARIABLES
LRNTECH

EBOOKS

DATABSE

RESLIBR

EDLLIBR

BUSHLP

MEETSPA

EGOV

FREEINT

KIDPRO

ADLTPRO

JBSRCH

Somerset

BKCDDVD

Passaic

NEWTECH

Morris

CINFOR

Monmouth

MUNICIPALITY

COUNTY

H

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

I

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

J

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

K

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

L

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

M

1

0

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

N

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

A

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

B

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

C

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

A

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

B

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

C

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

D

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

E

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

F

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

G

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

H

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

I

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

J

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

K

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

L

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

M

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

N

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

O

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

A

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

B

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

C

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

D

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

E

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

F

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

G

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

H

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

A

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

B

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

1

1

1

C

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

231
VARIABLES

0

1

1

0

Union

A

1

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

B

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

C

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

D

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

E

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

F

1

0

1

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

0

G

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

H

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

A

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

106

9

57

11

0

50

110

102

33

93.9

92.2

7.8

49.6

9.6

0.0

43.5

95.7

88.7

28.7

LRNTECH

0

108

EBOOKS

0

84.3

DATABSE

RESLIBR

1

97

EDLLIBR

BUSHLP

1

60.0

MEETSPA

1

69

EGOV

1

95.7

FREEINT

1

110

KIDPRO

1

7.8

ADLTPRO

1

9

JBSRCH

0

34.8

BKCDDVD

0

40

NEWTECH

A

Warren

CINFOR

MUNICIPALITY

Sussex

COUNTY

TOTALS

PERCENTAGE
S

232
APPENDIX H: Instructions, Codes, and Coding Sheets for Open-Ended Survey
Responses

Coding Instructions
1. Use the codes on the following Code List to assign codes to the statements on the
attached coding sheets.
2. Please use the following procedure:
a. Read the description of the first code.
b. Read through the entire list of statements and mark those that you believe
fit the description of the first code.
c. Write the code in the box labeled CODE 1.
3. When you have read all of the statements and applied the first code as
appropriate, repeat the process with codes 2-11.
4. Once you have assigned a code to a statement, you may skip that statement on
subsequent readings of the list of statements.
5. Please assign the code or codes that you believe best describes each statement.
6. If you believe more than one code is appropriate for a statement please list the
additional codes in the boxes labeled CODE 2 and CODE 3.
7. If you are not sure which code to assign, please skip the statement and leave all of
the code boxes blank.

Code List
Code
1

CLGO

2

GFC

3

IDK

4
5

MC
MM

6

NA

Description
The statement specifically mentions communication (for
example a conversation, meeting, presentation, report, etc.)
between the library personnel and local government officials.
The statement specifically mentions what did or did not occur
as a result of the general fiscal condition of the municipality.
The statement specifically mentions that the respondent does
not know how to answer the question, or the respondent did
not attempt to answer the question [NO RESPONSE].
The statement specifically mentions media coverage.
The statement specifically mentions money management or
management of the library budget.
The statement specifically mentions that no budget action was
taken, and/or the library is given/receives only the 1/3 mil

233

7

NC

8

P

9

STC

10

UPS

11

XC

payment mandated by law.
The statement specifically mentions negative consequences
(for example loss of services, or citizen/voter displeasure) that
would result from a failure to fund the library.
The statement specifically mentions partnerships with
community organizations or other local government
departments.
The statement specifically mentions state standards for service
or comparisons to other libraries.
The statement specifically mentions library users, library
programs, or library services.
The statement specifically mentions extraordinary conditions
that affected the library budget (for example capital repairs, or
new building construction).

234

Open-ended Statements from the Survey of Public Library Directors
ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

1

LM

2

LM
LM

3
4

LM

5

LM

6

LM

7

LM

8

STATEMENT
I provided a power point presentation at
a council meeting, outlining who we are,
what we're doing with what we receive,
and showing our value to the
community.
We documented our circulation, over
the past few years, relative to the
amount of funding the town had
designated for the library's use.
only receive the mandated minimum
We do not get any additional funding
over the 1/3 mil, so this question really
does not apply.
The amount of patrons that use the
library on a daily basis.
We only receive the 1/3 mill, so we do
not have the opportunity to request
additional funding. However, in
meeting with borough officials, I always
stress the growing number of residents
who use the library each year.
Our municipality has funded the
minimum 1/3 mill since 1994. I've never
had to submit a budget request to the
Town, only to my Board of Trustees. The
amount of money we receive is never in
question, only the purpose to which it's
allocated.
Sadly, we are not asked to or allowed to
make a presentation to the governing
body regarding the needs/successes of
the library. We are funded at the 1/3 of
a mil and then the town adds to that the
cost of health insurance for the full time
staff members of the library.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

235

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

9

LM
LM

10
11

LM

12

LM

13

LM

14

LM

15

LM

16

STATEMENT
They did not argue because we only
asked for 1/3 mill. We pointed out that
we were operating on a deficit budget
and that was NOT sustainable
Programs offered at our branch library.
Discussion with Council about significant
use by local community members
The 1/3 mil funding law. I know
absolutely 100% that I will no receive
more than 1/3 mil. I don't request
funding. I simply inform the
municipality of their 1/3 mil obligation.
When there was money I was requested
to submit items for consideration to be
included in the municipality's capital
budget, but that ended several years
ago.
i think they had a specific amount in
mind and nothing I could say would
have changed that.
How well we manage our money and
our partnerships with community
organizations and local governemnt
agencies
The parking lot being filled with library
users is a clear sign of how much the
community values the library. I cite it
and they see it - over and over again.
The law regarding 1/3 of Mill funding
formula, makes it mandatory.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

236

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

17

LM

18

LM
LM

19
20

STATEMENT
My situation is unique. I have been the
Director of my library for almost 17
years. During that time there has been
little turnover in Town Council
members, mayor, Township
Administration and Library Trustees.
The lack of change in these positions has
enabled the Library to build a trusting
and cooperative realtionship with these
folks. This has had the greatest impact
in the Township's support of the library.
Specifically I think it's the nature of the
relationship (i.e. positive, trusting,
cooperative, communicative)that the
library has with the Township that has
had the greatest impact.
None of the above. The municipality
funded us at the 1/3 mill minimum, and
expressed a commitment never to
exceed that.
NJ law for municipal libraries
Only once did we make a request for a
capital improvement project at the
library. City council did support us in
renovating the lower level of the
building. We have not asked them for
additional funds since then.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

237

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

21

LM

22

LM

23

LM

24

STATEMENT
None of this is relevant because my
municipality has a long history of
funding the library at the third of a mil
level. For a period of 4 or 5 years,
concluding with 2009, the third of a mil
was providing us with more money than
we could reasonably spend on operating
expenses during a year for a library of
our size. Starting with 2012, our third of
a mil figure was significantly less than
what is needed for a year's operating
expenses, by roughly $55,000, an
amount that we can, fortunately,
withdraw from our fund balance. With
our third of a mil budget decreasing by
another $28,000 for 2013, our fund
balance may come very close to
depletion. 2014 will probably be the
first time that we will be forced to come
to the Borough Council with a request to
be funded beyond the third of a mil
level and what is going to happen then
will be anyone's guess.
Impact of library programs and services
on various segments of the community
and the number of people who use the
library.
The budget is only discussed with
Library Board of Trustess. We only get
the one third of a mill and won't get any
more from the municipality.We have an
active Friends group who we ask for
extra support with programs and
collections and sometimes capital
improvements.
The greatest impact was telling stories
about real people and how the library
has impacted their lives.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

238

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

25

LM

26

LM

27

LM

28

LM

29

LM

30

LM

31

LM

32

STATEMENT
The fact that our furnace was put in in
1972 and we needed a new one, so I
guess you can say building issues had
the greatest impact on funding...capital
funding, not regular budget which stays
put at exactly one third of a mil
It is not the custom to actually make a
budget request to our local government
- the library is funded at 1/3mil and the
understanding is that, that is all the
Borough can afford. Each year it is with
relief that the library doesn't get funded
below that - because the local
government would certainly like to do
that. Thanks to a very good CFO, they
don't try.
None. The community gave us the
minimum funding and never intended to
give us more.
the state law dictating a minimum level
of funding
NJ public library standards and talking
the the City Council members directly
Contact with local officials by prominent
Board members talking about the
library's importance. My interaction
with local officials in presenting a joint
program to Hackensack residents in the
Library which introduced the officials to
the residents in a personal, educational,
friendly forum.
Providing statistics/numbers of usage by
community members.
We get 1/3rd mil, period. There are no
budget requests.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

239

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

33

LM

34

LM

35

LM

36

LM

37

STATEMENT
We got flat funded for the fourth year in
a row despite pleas for increased
support. However, we have to consider
that a victory because of the deep cuts
City government has made in terms of
layoffs and cuts in service to all of their
departments that has amounted to over
50% in cuts and layoffs in the same time
period. This acknowledges the critical
role the library plays in this poor,
community with one of the highest
unemployment rates in the State. We
are an association library and could be
put out of existence at any time and
have no mandated level of support so
we know we are valued in our
community. However, we do remind
City government that over 82% of the
population holds a library card and that
library card holders tend to vote.
Becoming to go to organization for local
history (not just old but supplying an
article about the furniture in City Hall
when it opened in 1925.
We do not make budget requests to the
local government, but I answered the
above based on what I would consider
important
I have a very cooperative local
government that funds me at the 1/3
mil level- being a small library with
space restrictions and a stable
populatioj I am satisfied with my
budget.
User statistics, employee hours and
Government agencies that are
sympathetic to us.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

240

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

38

LM

39

LM

40

LM

41

LM

42

LM

43

LM

44

LM

45

LM
LM

46
47

STATEMENT
We automatically get 1/3 mill so I don't
make a budget request. I do, however,
try to make sure the boro council,
mayor, and administrative personnel
feel that the taxpayer is getting good
value.
Analysis of the recent history of the
library's budgets and funding.
Do not make budget requests to local
government officials.
We have not been successful at getting
full funding. We are also an association
library and in past years, our Mayor &
council have basically said take it of
leave it; we aren't required to fund you.
The West Milford Township Library does
not request more than the minimum
third of the mill funding. Therefore
there was no action that had the
greatest impact in getting the funding;
aside from the fact that the funding is
mandated.
I do not make a request. The Boro allots
the 1/3 mill only.
Show growth in library usage with
increased circulation, program variety
and attendance, increased services,
computer use, etc. Proving to the
government officials that the Library is a
vital and relevant community resource.
A request was not needed. The library
receives its funding at the minimum
level as specified by law.
This library gets the state-required
funding. No specific action seems to
have any great impact in regard to
funding - positive or negative.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

241

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

48

LM

49

LM
LM

50
51

LM

52

LM

53

LM
LM

54
55

LM

56

LM

57

LM

58

LM

59

STATEMENT
include public service sat; customer
success stories as a result of lebrary
services; value of services stats
Threatening to reduce service hours
(Sundays) to maintain collection budget
Last year's actual spending.
Statistics - circulation, lending items,
program participants
Did not make budget request. 1/3 mil
was provided by Township.
Explaining how leanly we are staffed to
illustrate that staff members would be
laid off if the funding request was not
met. Local officials forget that we are
open nights and weekends, thinking
interms of business week hours.
be truthful and blunt
My personal, supportive relationship
with City officials...
Positive relationship I developed with
the government officials I have
developed over the years.
We join Somerset COunty. So our
Municipal budget is sent to the COunty.
I do not think that ANYTHING I do
effects my funding -- it has always been
the 1/3 of a mil. For several years when
our funding decreased we were able to
keep our funding in spite of the 1/3 of a
mil going down, primarily because the
Mayor at that time was married to a
librarian, and therefore understood
what libraries can do and how much it
costs to run a library.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

242

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

60

LM

61

LM

62

LM
LM

63
64

LM

65

STATEMENT
I feel that talking about cuts to specific
programs and services, as well as talking
about potential personnel cuts and
decreased hours had the greatest
impact in our budget discussions. While
it did not increase our town
appropriation funding, our municipal
officials did negotiate with our library
regarding fees that the library pays the
municipality for custodial staff,
maintenance, landscaping, etc.
Testimony from local citizens about how
important the library is to their lives. In
our budget preparation, stressing
shared services, use of the NJ Library
Network, and how hard we work on
using every dollar to its maximum so
they can justify library funding.
We are a small Association Library and
our Board Treasurer handles all the
finances. However, our town is terrific
in supporting us as best they can. Due to
slim funding we are very lo-tech and our
audience is usually very young-under 6
years of age and a large senior group 60
plus years of age.
We only get 1/3 of a mil
We didn't get the requested funding.
We requested more than the 1/3 of a
mil, but were only given the minimum.
What the library was able to acheive
given exisiting budget and staff level as
well as how much more the library
could acheive with additional funding.
Expressing what the library acheived
with statistics and and public
testimonials is paramount to success.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

243

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

66

LM

67

LM

68

LM

69

LM
LM

70
71

LM

72

LM

73

STATEMENT
having sustained positive relationships
with elected officials as well as other
prominent members of the community
We are an assocation library so we go to
our Township Committee and make our
case every year. We get about a third of
the funds we would get if we were a
municipal library and have to fundraise
for about 1/3 of our operating expenses.
We make our case in a number of ways,
so I don't know what infuences them
the most. This year we emphasized the
fixed costs we incur because of being
part of a consortium.
Discussion of programs and services for
children and teens is always a positive.
Meeting with the Mayor, City Council
members, and the Business
Administrator to give data as to what
and how important it is for the Jersey
City Free Public Library to be funded.
Also, give data as to how many library
users we have, etc.
Library renovation completion
We get the minimum funding no matter
what cogent arguments I might present,
so I don't waste their time nor mine.
We receive 1/3 mil minimum funding
amount from the borough of Wenonah.
We have a good working relationship
with local gov. officials. We do not
request funding over the third of a mil
that we get from them. They do not
hold back the funding.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

244

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

74

LM

75

LM
LM

76
77

LM

78

LM

79

LM

80

LM

81

LM

82

STATEMENT
The daily actions that the library takes
to serve the community and the
constant awareness of the library and
appreciation of the service population
has greater impact than any budget
presentation. In budget presentation,
performance measures (library stats by
another name) are effective.
library moving forward in regards to
technology. a technology plan/budget
that list our needs.
I did not get the requested funding.
After 2 months of meetings and shared
information with no resolution, we went
to the community, spoke in the town
council meeting and called in the media
to make residents aware of the drastic
cuts being required. At that point, the
council was persuaded to compromise
on the budget.
We're funded at 1/3 mill and have made
a request for funding above this level.
Report from the State on the required
minimum
I have not been able to obtain more
than that minimum funding. NOTE: In
our situation, I would not discuss NJ
standards for staffing and hours, as our
library is already above the state
standard for number of librarians and
number of open hours for our
population. Bringing this up could
backfire for us.
The fact that they all are in the library
on a regular basis and see the impact of
our services.
The library has always received the
minimum funding required by law with
no particular discussion.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

245

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LM

83

LM

84

LL

1

LL

2

LL
LL
LL
LL

3
4
5
6

LL

7

LL
LL
LL

8
9
10

LL
LL

11
12

LL

13

STATEMENT
The state law, since we only got the
required minimum level of funding.
Success in repositioning my library as a
broad based community center
Trying to meet with the mayor & council
on an individual basis.
I have no idea. I'm not being evasive, I
just don't know how I would know such
a thing. For what it's worth, I know what
had the greatest impact because I
discussed it with my colleagues in the
Borough (Borough Administrator, CFO,
Treasurer, as well as the library board,
which includes former Borough officials)
and they helped guide me toward what
would make the most impact.
only receive the mandated minimum
Again, really not applicable.
[NO RESPONSE]
How we interact with community
organizations.
See above [Our municipality has funded
the minimum 1/3 mill since 1994. I've
never had to submit a budget request to
the Town, only to my Board of Trustees.
The amount of money we receive is
never in question, only the purpose to
which it's allocated.]
[NO RESPONSE]
We didn't argue
The loss of staff due to budget
constraints
Collaboration with neighboring library
The assumption that you are making is
that there is a request made. The
current economic crisis has in fact made
the 1/3 minimum, the maximum.
Same as above [i think they had a
specific amount in mind and nothing I

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

246

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

STATEMENT
could say would have changed that]

LL

14

LL

15

LL
LL

16
17

LL

18

LL

19

LL
LL

20
21

LL
LL

22
23

New Jersey public library standards for
staffing levels
this is difficult to say anymore. For the
last four years, we have been restricted
to zero to two per cent increases. As
long as we stay within the year's given
parameter, they say/ask very little about
the library budget.
Bringing up our lease with the borough.
Citing measurements such as program
attendance and circulation had little
impact. Also of little impact has been
statements about the rising costs of
benefits and declines in property value.
The Township is struggling with these
issues as well. Unless we can propose a
viable solution, citing rising costs and
lack of funding has little impact.
None of the above. The municipality
funded us at the 1/3 mill minimum, and
expressed a commitment never to
exceed that.
WD Township is struggling with funding
issues in many areas. And although the
municipality is supportive of the library
it is at this time not the top priority.
[NO RESPONSE]
Nothing really mattered one way or the
other because we are currently being
required to spend down our fund
balance.
[NO RESPONSE]
Doesn't happen...Library Board
president is liason to the mayor and he
reports to the mayor.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

247

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LL

24

LL
LL

25
26

STATEMENT
Despite the entire Town Council voicing
their appreciation and support of the
Library at the budget hearing, we did
not receive the additional funding we
requested. They stated that they could
not support the contractual salary
increases at the library when police and
fire unions had seen layoffs. However,
following the hearing, one of the Town
Council members did become a library
volunteer to help us with some of the
work that came about as the result of
library layoffs.
Comparison to other towns
I recently spoke at a series of Council
meetings to try to get a Handicapped
Parking Space in front of the library - the
council treated me rather rudely
(according to a member of my Board of
Trustees who was in the audience) and
refused to acknowledge my
interpretation of the ADA guidelines as
well as the NJ Statutes. They turned
down the request- claiming I didn't
know what I was talking about. (I had
contacted an architect, an engineer, as
well as the Middlesex County Office on
the Disabled to make sure I was correct
about the ADA - and I was warned that
if I continued take issue with the Council
for refusing to grant this one
handicapped parking space, they would
go after the library next. At present
there is only one handicapped parking
space - in the back of the library - 125
feet from the entrance. If they had
allowed us to establish a parking space
in front of the library it would have only
been 50 feet from the entrance. This is

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

248

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

STATEMENT
an example of small town government
and small town thinking - what do you
think they would say if I asked for an
increase in the library budget over the
1/3 of a mil?

LL

27

LL
LL

28
29

LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

LL

38

Again, none. Minimum funding was
taken as a given.
need
discussing value of services to
community
Showing the salary line increases.
na
NA
[NO RESPONSE]
Comparisons to other libraries.
[NO RESPONSE]
[NO RESPONSE]
Reports of media coverage of library
activities and comparisons of other
library budgets
[NO RESPONSE]

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

249

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LL
LL

39
40

LL

41

LL

42

LL
LL
LL

43
44
45

LL
LL

46
47

LL
LL

48
49

LL
LL
LL

50
51
52

LL
LL
LL
LL

53
54
55
56

LL
LL

57
58

STATEMENT
Outright requests for more funding.
Do not make budget requests to local
government officials.
We have not been successful at getting
full funding. We sent a very strong letter
requesting funding for a youth services
librarian (we have never had one on
staff) which fell on deaf ears.
Same as above; there is nothing that is
done to impact the funding that the
Library receives.
[NO RESPONSE]
not sure
See above [A request was not needed.
The library receives its funding at the
minimum level as specified by law.]
This library gets the state-required
funding. No specific action seems to
have any great impact in regard to
funding - positive or negative.
?
Describing the reduction in available
new materials
Testimonials.
N/A
Did not make budget request. 1/3 mil
was provided by Township.
Success stories, frequency of library use.
na
stating required support...
Statistics showing activity such as
circulation.
[NO RESPONSE]
Again, nothing *I* do or don't do has
any impact on our funding. It is always
(with the rare exception noted above)
only the 1/3 mil.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

250

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LL
LL

59
60

LL

61

LL

62

LL
LL
LL
LL

63
64
65
66

LL

67

STATEMENT

We do our annual budget request in the
form of a meeting, rather than a written
request, so it's difficult to determine
exactly what made or didn't make an
impact. However, generalized, broad
topics like potential cuts to our
materials budget (even large ones) or
cuts to the programming or new
equipment budgets overall didn't seem
to have a great impact on our
conversations.
We have had extensive discussions
about using furlough days to help
balance the budget. There is little
sympathy for the library or any other
part of government as the municipality
has downsized the workforce so much.
Since we are not unionized and they are
for the most part, strategies have
differed. The Library Board made a real
effort to preserve the staff although this
year we did reorganize our Technical
Services.
Our Town supports us greatly in most
areas as long as it is for the good of the
community. Again our Board Treasurer
handles all the finances and funding
issues.
[NO RESPONSE]
[NO RESPONSE]
NJ public library standards.
whining about not being able provide
services because of budget constraints
I don't know.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

251

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

LL

68

LL
LL
LL

69
70
71

LL

72

LL

73

LL

74

LL
LL
LL

75
76
77

STATEMENT
The borough routinely funds the library
at 1/3 mil, up or down depending on the
equalized assessed evaluation. When
values decline as they have for the past
three years they can rely on that to hold
the line. We have lost just under
$135,000 since 2011. Due to careful
planning for a 2010 renovation we had
excess funds and returned over
$500,000 to the borough for tax relief.
Now we have a new building,
tremendous use and public support,
greater upkeep expenses and declining
funds. With any luck we won't have
anything left to give back in 2013. We
always note our statistical/financial
value equation. They get it -just don't
feel compelled to support any more
than required under the law.
N/A
[NO RESPONSE]
See above. [We get the minimum
funding no matter what cogent
arguments I might present, so I don't
waste their time nor mine.]
We receive 1/3 mil minimum funding
amount from the borough of Wenonah.
Reporting that we are spending our
reserves to help cover our budget
seemed to have no impact. They have
their own tight money problems.
Talking about value library provides for
community - that is taken as a given...
not having a technology plan or budget
I did not feel that my request was heard.
Sadly, the Borough Manager and Council
were not impressed by program
statistics, lists of partnerships or any
evidence of the library's value to the

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

252

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

STATEMENT
community

LL
LL
LL

78
79
80

LL
LL
LL
LL

81
82
83
84

[NO RESPONSE]
[NO RESPONSE]
I have not been able to obtain more
than the minimum funding.
[NO RESPONSE]
Library as community center.
It is hard to tell.
Micro details: re: materials circulation

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

253

Open-ended Statements from the Survey of Local Government Officials
ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

MG

1

MG

2

MG

3

MG
MG
MG

4
5
6

MG
MG
MG

7
8
9

MG

10

MG

11

STATEMENT
Ability to work within a specific budget
and make cuts with keeping an eye on
services.
Librarian's presentation and backgound
information presented to Finance
Committee.
this question is totally irrelevant. We
fund the library the mandated amount,
plus the amortization of a $2,000,000
bond issue that paid for the library
expansion. None of the above factors
make any difference, even though we
are proud of our library for its heavy use
and community services, but angry
about the BCCLS mandated staffing
(rather than the volunteers we used to
have) and the luxury of the library decor
when the rest of the Borough is
skimping on every level.
We are mandated to budget the library.
2% cap
Our Library and staff do a great job
providing these services to the
community but that has had no impact
on funding decisions. The Library has
received the funding guaranteed by law
and our decision has been based solely
on that.
their commitment to excellence
The presentation
our private/public library occupies town
space and is well run on a small budget
The library was only funded by the state
mandated amount. However, the need
to build a new library for the community
warrants such funding.
union contract, staffing, hours of
operation

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

254

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

MG

12

MG

13

MG
MG

14
15

MG
MG

16
17

MG
MG

18
19

MG
MG

20
21

MG
MG

22
23

MG

24

MG
MG

25
26

STATEMENT
The budget that our library receives
every year is based on households and
the overhall assessment of the town.
The budget number is given to us by the
county. We as elected officials do not
decide year after year what our library
budget is going to be in the coming year.
Long range planning for building maint.
and e-tech. programs for the
community.
Joining a regional consortium.
Financial oversight however a
municipality has no control to cut any
funding due to lack of oversight.
Children's programming.
What steps they took to control their
budget spending.
Positive feedback from the Public.
The library operated well within the 1/3
mil so the governing body did not opine
on the budget. As a trustee of the
library the increased use of the library
was greatest.
nothing specific
Continuing well managed, careful,
budget practices.
the allocation of their funds.
Our library board has not requested any
funding. Since we fund the library based
on the statutory 1/3 of a mil there is no
decision or discussion about
funding.Since we do not fund above the
statutory limit question # 10 is not
applicable. Boonton is a small blue collar
town of 8600 residents.
Municipal budget vs. tax payerpossible
increase to fund
No action by the library -- state statute
We are very lucky to have an
outstanding librarian and staff providing

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

255

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

MG

27

MG

28

MG

29

MG

30

MG
MG
MG
MG

31
32
33
34

MG

35

MG
MG

36
37

MG

38

STATEMENT
exceptional service with diminished
funding
Their budget meets their needs & were
able to fund their own new addition
through a long-term business plan of
forethought. The township assisted by
bonding over $1 million for expansion &
Board is paying back from their funds at
their request.
We fund the library with the amount
required by law and allow them to use it
as they see fit
The number of people who use the
library for computer time
Working with the director & staff for the
last 20 years
[NO RESPONSE]
The service they provide to residents
Confidence in the director
It wasn't one particular action -- local
government and the library have always
worked well together. We also
recognize how important the library is to
our community. We also appreciate
them moving with the times we are
living in -- e.g. they started a Career
Center to help those out of work or in
need of updating their skills, resume,
etc.
We believe the library spends their
funds wisely; the library is efficient; the
number of patrons has significantly
increased over the past five years.
Service to the community
The library in coordination with the
Township Administrator
Our library was recently renovated and
we have paid a lot of attention to
technology

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

256

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

MG

39

MG

40

MG
MG
MG

41
42
43

MG

44

MG
MG

45
46

ML
ML
ML

1
2
3

ML

4

STATEMENT
NOTE: We are in the middle of an
approx. 3 million dollar
expansion/renovation.The
expansion/renovation project
We are funding as required by statute.
Additional funding would be provided
however current activity is outdated,
refuses to work with local government
or accept community input. Changes in
mission would be greatly appreciated.
Program changes are long overdue.
None
Report to Mayor and Council
Normal maintenance of free public
libraries
Their action of spending to max amount
allowed by the 2% CAPS & the township
layoff police officers at the same time.
Also using surplus monies to make up
for decrease in 1/3 mil funding.
Hours of service and staffing levels
We're putting an addition on our library,
we want to also update the current
facility with more modern shelving. We
recently added MANGO to coordinate
with our residents & schools for foreign
language studies: with the new addition
we will need a new full time employee.
We put that in the budget as well.
Building's use by other groups.
Outside Media Coverage.
As stated above, the decision was not
ours to make. It's a state mandate. The
library also is funded by private
donations. My own daughter' major gift
was one of the first ones received and
her name is among the many on a large
library plaque
There wasn't any as we are mandated to
budget.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

257

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

ML
ML

20
21

ML
ML
ML

22
23
24

ML
ML
ML

25
26
27

ML
ML
ML

28
29
30

ML
ML
ML

31
32
33

STATEMENT
political pressure
their want list versus their need list
none
hours of operation
see #11
n/a
See above
n/a
Staff reductions
Staffing levels
Media coverage
Inter-library services that cost money
None
Same issue as above,but as a trustee I
don't worry about the overall standards,
for staffing, just what we need to
provide an acceptable level of setvice.
n/a
Really do not know how to answer this
question. We evaluate the request
andgenerally find merit in the request
presented.
See # 11
Again, the important factor was the
amount needed in our budget to not
raise taxes. As Mayor, I do NOT vote.
No action by the library -- state statute
All requests are taken seriously
Township is always willing to meet
needs
[NO RESPONSE]
The type of programs
I believe the library & staff & director
are working for the good of all
[NO RESPONSE]
[NO RESPONSE]
State funding requirement

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

258

ANALYSIS
GROUP

CASE
NUMBER

ML
ML
ML
ML
ML
ML

34
35
36
37
38
39

ML

40

ML
ML
ML
ML

41
42
43
44

ML
ML

45
46

STATEMENT
N/A
None really
Salary increases
[NO RESPONSE]
Requests for monies above what the law
demands be given
Any request requiring additional funding
for perpetuating antiquated notions of
what a local free public library should
provide residents. Requests for pay
increases & staffing increases. Our
library has great unrealized potential.
Nothing to note
None
Stay within mandated budget
Service provided when you look at #8's
answer
Standard cos of operating the library.
Also new HVAC system & electric for the
building. It had to be done. Why worry
we thought as a whole, just get it done.

CODE
1

CODE
2

CODE
3

259
References
Aabø, S. (2009). Libraries and return on investment (ROI): A meta-analysis. New Library
World, 110, 311-324. doi:10.1108/03074800910975142
Aabø, S., & Audunson, R. (2002). Rational choice and valuation of public libraries: Can
economic models for evaluating non-market goods be applied to public libraries?
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 34, 5-15.
doi:10.1177/096100060203400102
Allen, B. (2003). Public opinion and the funding of public libraries. Library Trends, 51,
414-423.
American Library Association. (n.d.a). Funding news @ your library. Retrieved
December 8, 2011, from
http://www.ala.org/ala/issuesadvocacy/libfunding/index.cfm
American Library Association. (n.d.b). Library snapshot day: A day in the life of your
library. Retrieved December 8, 2011, from
http://www.ala.org/ala/issuesadvocacy/advleg/statelocalefforts/snapshotday/index
.cfm
American Library Association. Committee on Post-War Planning. (1943). Post-war
standards for public libraries. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
American Library Association, Coordinating Committee on Revision of Public Library
Standards. (1956). Public library service: A guide to evaluation with minimum
standards. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
American library directory : A classified list of libraries in the United States and
Canada, with personnel and statistical data (2005-06 ed.). (2006). New York:
R.R. Bowker.
American library directory : A classified list of libraries in the United States and
Canada, with personnel and statistical data (2006-07 ed.). (2007). New York:
R.R. Bowker.
American library directory : A classified list of libraries in the United States and
Canada, with personnel and statistical data (2007-08 ed.). (2008). New York:
R.R. Bowker.
American library directory : A classified list of libraries in the United States and
Canada, with personnel and statistical data (2008-09 ed.). (2009). New York:
R.R. Bowker.
Arns, J. W., & Daniel, E. H. (2007). Five propositions for reframing public librarianship
from a value-centered perspective. Public Library Quarterly, 26, 15-29.
doi:10.1300/J118v26n03_02

260
Baker, S. L., & Lancaster, F. W. (1991). The measurement and evaluation of library
services (2nd ed.). Arlington, VA: Information Resources Press.
Barron, D. D., Williams, R. V., Bajjaly, S., Arns, J., & Wilson, S. (2005). The economic
impact of public libraries on South Carolina. Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina, School of Library and Information Science.
Blasingame, R., & Lynch, M. J. (1974, June). Design for diversity: Alternatives to
standards for public libraries. PLA Newsletter, 4-22.
Bloss, M. (1976). Standards for public library service -- quo vadis? Library Journal,
101(11), 1259-1262.
Brooks-Kieffer, J. (2010). Yielding to persuasion: Library data's hazardous surfaces. In
D. Orcutt (Ed.), Library data: Empowering practice and persuasion (pp. 3-16).
Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Brown, M. (2011). Communicating value through strategic alignment. Information
Outlook, 15(5), 25-29.
Buchanan, J. M. (1969). The demand and supply of public goods. Chicago, IL: Rand
McNally & Company.
Buckland, M. K. (1982). Concepts of library goodness. Canadian Library Journal, 39,
63-66.
Burkett, R. (2009, March 15). It's the community [Letter to the editor]. Library Journal,
134, 10.
Carman, J. G. (2010). The accountability movement: What's wrong with this theory of
change? Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 39, 256-274.
doi:10.1177/0899764008330622
Chung, H.-K. (2008). The contingent valuation method in public libraries. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science, 40, 71-80.
doi:10.1177/0961000608089343
Clapp, D. (2009, April 15). Fairness ruled out [Letter to the editor]. Library Journal, 134,
10.
Cohen, C., & Johnson, F. (2004). Revenues and expenditures for public elementary and
secondary education: School year 2001–02 (NCES No. 2004-341). Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Cronin, B. (1982). Taking the measure of service. ASLIB Proceedings, 34, 273-94.

261
Cunningham, J. B. (1977). Approaches to the evaluation of organizational effectiveness.
Academy of Management Review, 2, 463-74.
Curran, C., & Clark, P. M. (1989). Implications of tying state aid to performance
measures. Public Libraries, 28, 348-354.
D'Andrade, R. G. (1984). Cultural meaning systems. In R. A. Shweder & R. A. LeVine
(Eds.), Culture theory: Essays on mind, self, and emotion (pp. 88-122). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, D. M. (2009). The condition of U.S. libraries: Trends, 1999-2009. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.
D'Elia, G. (1993). The roles of the public library in society: The results of a national
survey, final report. Evanston, IL: Urban Libraries Council.
Dellar, S., Hoyt, A., Hueth, B., & Sundaram-Stukel, R. (2009). Research on the economic
impact of cooperatives. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Center for
Cooperatives.
De Prospo, E. R., Altman, E., & Beasley, K. E. (1973). Performance measures for public
libraries. Chicago, IL: Public Library Association/ American Library Association.
DeRosa, C., & Johnson, J. (2008). From awareness to funding: A study of library support
in America. Dublin, OH: OCLC.
Diamond, D., Gillen, K. C., Litman, M., & Thornburgh, D. (2010). The economic value
of the free library in Philadelphia. Philadelphia, PA: Free Library of Philadelphia.
Division of Research, Moore School of Business. (2002). The economic impact of the
cultural industry on the state of South Carolina. Columbia, SC: University of
South Carolina.
Dugan, R. E., Hernon, P., & Nitecki, D. A. (2009). Viewing library metrics from different
perspectives: Inputs, outputs, and outcomes. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries
Unlimited.
Elliott, D. S., Holt, G. E., Hayden, S. W., & Edmonds Holt, L. (2007). Measuring your
library's value: How to do a cost-benefit analysis for your public library.
Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Finstad, K. (2010). Response interpolation and scale sensitivity: Evidence against 5-point
scales. Journal of Usability Studies, 5, 104-110.
Flagg, G. (1991, May). The recession and public libraries. American Libraries, 22(5),
381-384, 464.

262
Garrison, D. (1979). Apostles of culture: The public librarian and American society,
1876-1920. New York: The Free Press.
Geertz, C. (1973). Religion as a cultural system. In Interpretation of cultures: Selected
essays (pp. 87-125). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Griffiths, J.-M. (2003). Performance measurement in libraries. In J. Feather & P. Sturges
(Eds.), International encyclopedia of information and library science (2nd ed., pp.
504-510). New York: Routledge.
Griffiths, J.-M., King, D. W., & Aerni, S. E. (2006). Taxpayer return-on-investment
(ROI) in Pennsylvania public libraries. Chapel Hill, NC: School of Information
and Library Science, University of North Carolina.
Griffiths, J.-M., King, D. W., Tomer, C., Lynch, T., & Harrington, J. (2004). Taxpayer
return on investment in Florida public libraries: Summary report. Tallahassee,
FL: State Library and Archives of Florida.
Hamburg, M., Clelland, R. C., Bommer, M. R., Ramist, L. E., & Whitfield, R. M. (1974).
Library planning and decision-making systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hennen, T. J., Jr. (1999a, January). Go ahead, name them: America's best public libraries.
American Libraries, 30(1), 72-76.
Hennen, T. J., Jr. (1999b, September). Great American public libraries: HAPLR ratings,
round two. American Libraries, 30(8), 64-68.
Hernon, P., & Schwartz, C. (2011). Viewing libraries from the perspective of multiple
stakeholders [Editorial]. Library and Information Science Research, 33, 101-102.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2011.01.002
Hilder, P. (2008). Using the contingent valuation method for dollar valuations of library
services. Library Quarterly, 78, 437-458.
Hill, J. G., & Johnson, F. (2005). Revenues and expenditures for public elementary and
secondary education: School year 2002-03 (NCES No. 2005–353R). Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Hirsch, F. E. (1972). Introduction: Why do we need standards? Library Trends, 21, 159163.
Holt, G. E., Elliott, D., & Moore, A. (1999). Placing a value on public library services.
St. Louis, MO: St. Louis Public Library.
Imholz, S., & Arns, J. W. (2007). Worth their weight: An assessment of the evolving field
of library valuation (W. Zeisel & N. Sononberg, Eds.). New York, NY:
Americans for Libraries Council.

263
Indiana Business Research Center. (2007). Economic impact of libraries in Indiana.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University, Kelley School of Business.
Johnson, N., Oliff, P., & Williams, E. (2011). An update on state budget cuts: At least 46
states have imposed cuts that hurt vulnerable residents and cause job loss.
Retrieved from Center on Budget and Policy Priorities website:
http://www.cbpp.org/files/3-13-08sfp.pdf
Kamer, P. M. (2005). Placing an economic value on the services of public libraries in
Suffolk County, New York: A research report by the Long Island Association.
Bellport, NY: Suffolk Cooperative Library System.
Kelley, M. (2012). The new normal: Annual library budgets survey 2012. Library
Journal, 137(1), 37-40.
Kim, G. (2011). A critical review of valuation studies to identify frameworks in library
services. Library and Information Science Research, 33, 112-119.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2010.09.006
Kim, G., & Yu, S. Y. (2011). An exploratory study to develop an alternative model of
public library management using the Institute of Museum and Library Services'
public library statistics. Library Quarterly, 81, 359-382.
King, D. W., Boyce, P. B., Montgomery, C. H., & Tenopir, C. (2003). Library economic
metrics: comparison of electronic and print journal collections and collection
services. Library Trends, 51, 376-400.
Knightly, J. J. (1979). Overcoming the criterion problem in the evaluation of library
performance. Special Libraries, 70, 173-178.
Krathwohl, D. R. (1998). Methods of educational and social science research: An
integrated approach (2nd ed.). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Lance, K. C., & Cox, M. A. (2000, June/July). Lies, dam lies, and indexes. American
Libraries, 31(6), 82-86.
Lance, K. C., & Lyons, R. (2008, June 15). The new LJ index. Library Journal, 133, 3841.
Langholtz, H. J., Marty, A. T., Ball, C. T., & Nolan, E. C. (2003). Resource allocation
behavior. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Laughlin, S., & Wilson, R. W. (2008). The quality library: A guide to staff-driven
improvement, better efficiency, and happier customers. Chicago, IL: American
Library Association.
Leech, N. L., Barrett, K. C., & Morgan, G. A. (2011). IBM SPSS for intermediate
statistics: Use and interpretation (4th ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.

264
LeVine, R. A. (1984). Properties of culture: An ethonographic view. In R. A. Shweder &
R. A. LeVine (Eds.), Culture theory: Essays on mind, self, and emotion (pp. 6787). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Lynch, M. J. (2002, August). Economic hard times and public library use revisited.
American Libraries, 33(7), 62-63.
Lynch, T. (2000). Analyzing the economic impact of transportation projects using RIMS
II, IMPLAN and REMI. Springfield, VA: National Technical Information Service
(NTIS).
Manjarrez, C. A., Cigna, J., & Bajaj, B. (2007). Making cities stronger: Public library
contributions to local economic development. Retrieved from Urban Institute
website: http://www.urban.org/uploadedpdf/1001075_stronger_cities.pdf
Martin, L. A. (1972). Standards for public libraries. Library Trends, 21, 164-177.
Matthews, J. R. (2004). Measuring for results: The dimensions of public library
effectiveness. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Matthews, J. R. (2007). The evaluation and measurement of library services. Westport,
CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Matthews, J. R. (2011). Assessing organizational effectiveness: The role of performance
measures. Library Quarterly, 81, 83-110.
McClure, C. R. (1980-81). From public library standards to development of statewide
levels of adequacy. Library Research, 2, 47-62.
McClure, C. R., Owen, A., Zweizig, D. L., Lynch, M. J., & Van House, N. (1987).
Planning and role setting for public libraries: A manual of options and
procedures. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
McDonough, R. (1997). Public libraries. In E. Beckerman (Ed.), A history of New Jersey
libraries, 1750-1996 (pp. 1-25). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
McLaren, J., & Zappala, G. (2002). The 'digital divide' among financially disadvantaged
families in Australia. First Monday, 7(11), np. Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/issue/view/151
Missingham, R. (2005). Libraries and economic value : a review of recent studies.
Retrieved from National Library of Australia website:
http://www.nla.gov.au/openpublish/index.php/nlasp/article/viewArticle/1213/149
8
Moorman, J. A. (1997). Standards for public libraries: A study in quantitative measures
of library performance as found in state public library documents. Public
Libraries, 36(1), 32-39.

265
Morley, E., & Lampkin, L. M. (2004). Using outcome information: Making data pay off.
Retrieved from Urban Institute website:
http://www.urban.org/uploadedpdf/311040_outcomeinformation.pdf
Morris, A., Hawkins, M., & Sumsion, J. (2000). Economic value of public libraries.
Retrieved from Loughbourough University website: http://wwwstaff.lboro.ac.uk/~lsam/econvalu.html
Morse, P. M. (1968). Library effectiveness: A systems approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
National Bureau of Economic Research. (2010). U.S. business cycle expansions and
contractions [Pamphlet]. Retrieved from
http://www.nber.org/cycles/US_Business_Cycle_Expansions_and_Contractions_
20100920.pdf
NCES Common Core of Data National Public Education Financial Survey (NPEFS),
school year 2003–04 (fiscal year 2004) (Version Revised) [Data file]. (2004).
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics.
Neuendorf, K. A. (2002). The content analysis guidebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
New Jersey Dept. of Community Affairs. (2012). 2012 mayors Excel spreadsheet
(Version 20120809) [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://www.state.nj.us/dca/home/mayors.html
New Jersey Division of Taxation. (2011). 2010 table of equalized valuations: Certified
October 1, 2010, As amended by the New Jersey Tax Court on January 31, 2011
for use in tax year 2011. Retrieved from New Jersey Dept. of Treasury website:
http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation/pdf/lptval/2010tev.pdf
New Jersey Division of Taxation. (2012). 2012 NJ-1040 county/municipality codes
[Pamphlet]. Retrieved from
http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation/pdf/current/county-muni-codes.pdf
New Jersey Division of Taxation. (2013). Handbook for New Jersey assessors (Revised
ed.). Retrieved from
http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation/pdf/assessorshandbook.pdf
New Jersey Library Association. (2011). Legislative updates [Provides updates about NJ
legislative issues that affect libraries]. Retrieved September 21, 2011, from
http://www.njla.org/legislative/
New Jersey public libraries. (n.d.). Retrieved from Publiclibraries.com website:
http://www.publiclibraries.com/newjersey.htm

266
New Jersey State Commission on County and Municipal Government. (1992). Modern
forms of municipal government. Trenton, N.J.: New Jersey State Commission on
County and Municipal Government.
New Jersey State Library. (2012). 2011 raw library data [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://ldb.njstatelib.org/statistics/2011 Raw Data_0.xlsx
O'Connor, D. O. (1982). Evaluating public libraries using standard scores: The library
quotient. Library Research, 4, 51-70.
O'Connor, D. O., & Fortenbaugh, R. (1999). Socioeconomic indicators and library use.
Public Libraries, 38, 156-164.
Official directory of New Jersey libraries and media centers (2012 ed.). (1984-). Bayside,
NY: LDA Publishers.
Orr, R. H. (1973). Measuring the goodness of library services: A general framework for
considering quantitative measures. Journal of Documentation, 29, 315-332.
Owen, A. (1992). Current issues and patterns in state standards for public library service.
Public Libraries, 31, 213-220.
Palmour, V. E., Bellassai, M. C., & De Wath, N. V. (1980). A planning process for public
libraries. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Perkins, F. B. (1876). How to make town libraries successful. In Public libraries in the
United States of America: Part I, 1876 report [PDF] (pp. 419-430). Retrieved
from http://archive.org/details/publiclibrariesi04unit
P.L. 2011, c.38, 2011 Laws of New Jersey (N/A) (2011),
http://www.njleg.state.nj.us/2010/Bills/PL11/38_.PDF.
P.L. 2010, c.83, 2011 Laws of New Jersey (N/A) (2010),
http://www.njleg.state.nj.us/2010/Bills/PL10/83_.PDF.
Poole, W. F. (1876). The organization and management of public libraries. In Public
libraries in the United States of America: Part I, 1876 report [PDF] (pp. 476504). Retrieved from http://archive.org/details/publiclibrariesi04unit
Potomac, Incorporated. (2007). New Jersey public library survey: Customer survey of
New Jersey residents about libraries. Bethesda, MD: Potomac, Incorporated.
Powell, R. R. (2006). Evaluation research: An overview. Library Trends, 55, 102-120.
Priestly, B. (2008). An argument on why the city should contribute to the library budget
in a means similar to corporate funding of R&D. Library Administration &
Management, 22, 125-129.

267
Public Library Association. (1967). Minimum standards for public library systems, 1966.
Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Public Library Statistics Cooperative. (2011). Public library standards by state.
Retrieved February 8, 2012, from
http://plsc.pbworks.com/w/page/7422647/Public%20library%20standards%20by
%20state
Reed, S. G. (2001). Making the case for your library. New York, NY: Neal-Schuman
Publishers.
Reid, I. (2012). The Public Library Data Service 2012 statistical report: Characteristics
and trends. Public Libraries, 51(6), 36-46.
Rickman, D. S., & Schwer, R. K. (1995). A comparison of the multipliers of IMPLAN,
REMI, and RIMS II: Benchmarking ready-made models for comparison. Annals
of Regional Science, 29, 363-374.
Roberts, S. A. (2003). Financial management of libraries: Past trends and future
prospects. Library Trends, 51, 462-493.
Robson, C. (1993). Real world research: A resource for social scientists and
practitioner-researchers. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Rodger, E. J. (1990). Performance measurement and public library goodness. New
Zealand Libraries, 46(4), 17-20.
Rohlf, R. H. (1982). Standards for public libraries. Library Trends, 31, 65-76.
Rossi, P. H., Wright, J. D., & Anderson, A. B. (Eds.). (1983). Handbook of survey
research. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Rubin, R. J. (2006). Demonstrating results: Using outcomes measurement in your
library. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Rudd, P. D. (2000). Documenting the difference: Demonstrating the value of libraries
through outcome measurement. In Perspectives on outcome based evaluation for
libraries and museums (pp. 16-24) [Pamphlet]. Washington, DC: Institute of
Museum and Library Services.
Saracevic, T., & Kantor, P. B. (1997). Studying the value of library and information
services: Part I. establishing a theoretical framework. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 48, 527-542.
Saul, J. (2011). Not all outcomes are created equal. In The end of fundraising: Raise more
money by selling your impact (pp. 115-129). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

268
Sin, S.-C. J. (2012). Modeling the impact of individuals' characteristics and library
service levels on high school students' public library usage: A national analysis.
Library & Information Science Research, 34, 228-237.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2012.01.002
Smith, G. S. (2011). Cost control for nonprofits in crisis. Chicago, IL: American Library
Association.
Standard. (1999). In K. Rooney, F. Carney, & A. H. Soukhanov (Eds.), Encarta world
English dictionary (p. 1824). London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Standards for public libraries. (1933). Bulletin of the American Library Association, 27,
513-514.
State of Vermont, Department of Libraries. (2007). The economic value of Vermont's
public libraries, 2006-2007. Retrieved from
http://libraries.vermont.gov/sites/libraries/files/misc/plvalue06-07.pdf
United States Bureau of Education. (1876). Public libraries in the United States of
America, their history, condition, and management: Special report, part 1.
Retrieved from http://archive.org/details/publiclibrariesi04unit
U.S. Census Bureau. (n.d.). American FactFinder. Retrieved from
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml
U.S. Census Bureau. (2013a). Selected Economic Characteristics, 2007-2011 American
Community Survey 5-year Estimates. [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://factfinder2.census.gov
U.S. Census Bureau. (2013b). Selected Social Characteristics in the United States. 20072011 American Community Survey 5-year Estimates [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://factfinder2.census.gov
Van House, N. A. (1990). Output measures and the evaluation process. In B. J. Turock
(Ed.), Library programs: Evaluating federally funded public library programs
(pp. 5-13). Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Education, Office of Educational
Research and Improvement.
Van House, N. A., & Childers, T. A. (1993). The public library effectiveness study: The
complete report. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Van House, N. A., Lynch, M. J., McClure, C. R., Zweizig, D. L., & Rodger, E. J. (1987).
Output measures for public libraries: A manual of standardized procedures (2nd
ed.). Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Ward, D. J., & Hart, A. J. (2008). The economic contribution of Wisconsin public
libraries to the economy of Wisconsin. Madison, WI: Wisconsin Dept. of Public
Instruction, Division for Libraries, Technology, & Community Learning.

269
Wheeler, J. L. (1970, February 1). What good are public library standards? Library
Journal, 95, 455-462.
White, L. N. (2007). Unseen measures: The need to account for intangibles. The Bottom
Line: Managing Library Finances, 20, 77-84.
Wiedmann, T. (2010). Frequently asked questions about input-output analysis. York,
UK: Centre for Sustainability Accounting. Retrieved from:
http://www.censa.org.uk/docs/CENSA_Special_Report_FAQ_IOA.pdf.
Williams, P. (1988). The American public library and the problem of purpose. New
York: Greenwood Press.
Withers, F. N. (1974). Standards for library service: An international survey. Paris,
France: Unesco Press.
Zhang, G., Wang, Q., & Kolodinsky, J. (2010). The digital divide in internet information
searching: A double-hurdle model analysis of household data from Vermont. First
Monday, 15(11), np. Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/issue/view/325
Zhou, L. (2008). Revenues and expenditures for public elementary and secondary
education: School year 2005-06 (fiscal year 2006) (NCES No. 2008-328).
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics.
Zhou, L., Honegger, S., & Gaviola, N. (2007). Revenues and expenditures for public
elementary and secondary education: School year 2004-05 (NCES No. 2007356). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics.
Zickuhr, K., Rainie, L., & Purcell, K. (2013). Younger Americans’ library habits and
expectations. Retrieved from Pew Internet and American Life Project website:
http://libraries.pewinternet.org/files/2013/06/PIP_Younger_Americans_and_librar
ies.pdf
Zweizig, D., Johnson, D. W., Robbins, J., & Besant, M. (1996). The TELL IT! manual:
The complete program for evaluating library performance. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.
Zweizig, D. L. (1990). Adapting output measures to program evaluation. In B. J. Turock
(Ed.), Library programs: Evaluating federally funded public library programs
(pp. 15-26). Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Education, Office of Educational
Research and Improvement.

