© 2014 Derek Attig

HERE COMES THE BOOKMOBILE:
PUBLIC CULTURE AND THE SHAPE OF BELONGING

BY
DEREK ATTIG

DISSERTATION
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in History
in the Graduate College of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2014

Urbana, Illinois
Doctoral Committee:
Associate Professor Kathryn Oberdeck, Chair
Associate Professor Tamara Chaplin
Professor Kristin Hoganson
Professor Rayvon Fouché
Associate Professor Lori Newcomb

UMI Number: 3646479

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3646479
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	   ii
	  

Abstract
This dissertation explores the peculiar history of the bookmobile in the United States
from the close of the nineteenth century to the turn of the twenty-first. In the process, it insists
that a spatial politics of shared information was key to constructing and contesting community in
twentieth-century America. Grounded in cultural geography, American Studies, and book history,
it is an interdisciplinary investigation of the roles that bookmobiles played in efforts to build
what some reformers called “common consciousness,” a sense of cultural and spiritual
connection. Indeed, the bookmobile emerged not just as a tool for getting books into far-flung
hands but also as a way to confront two persistent questions: What should our communities look
like in this new century, and who should be included in them? This dissertation argues that the
bookmobile’s answers to those questions both shaped and were shaped by three factors—racial
segregation, imperial expansion, and consumer capitalism—that ultimately exposed the limits of
the dream of a common consciousness.
Drawing on research in archival and published sources, this dissertation looks at a series
of moments when bookmobiles, by moving purportedly public culture through supposedly
shared space, forced Americans to consider what it would mean to hold ideas and objects in
common. A set of five thematically distinct and roughly chronological chapters allows the
dissertation to touch down in particular times in particular places—in Progressive-Era Kansas, in
the Jim Crow South, in New Deal New Mexico and Cold War West Germany, in suburban
supermarkets, and in Silicon Valley—while offering an expansive view of the relationship
between community, space, and culture in America.

	   iii
	  

For Bodel, of course
“It is you talking just as much as myself”

	   iv
	  

Acknowledgements
This dissertation is very much a product of a time and place—of my years as a graduate
student at the University of Illinois. Indeed, the project began in the excited, anticipatory weeks
before my first semester, when I discovered a romance novel called Books on Wheels in the
library catalog. And it ends, or perhaps begins again in new form, with the pages herein.
From the start, faculty at the University of Illinois have supported and challenged me,
helping to make this dissertation what it is. My committee, of course, has been crucial. From my
very first semester at Illinois, Tamara Chaplin pushed me to think hard about the history of
media and supported my work in myriad ways. Kristin Hoganson made my writing clearer and
my arguments sharper. Ray Fouché supervised my first foray into bookmobiles and encouraged
an imaginative approach to technology and American Studies. Lori Newcomb kept me thinking
about books and readers, and about print culture before the 1890s. And Kathryn Obderdeck, my
advisor, encouraged me to think creatively and pushed my ideas to be both more capacious and
more precise. In addition to my committee, enormous thanks go to other Illinois faculty—
including Sharra Vostral, Clare Crowston, Dana Rabin, Bonnie Mak, Rebecca Ginsburg, Megan
McLaughlin, and Adrian Burgos—for contributing to this work and giving me opportunities to
present and discuss it with others. The History Department staff make everything that happens in
the department possible, including this dissertation. So thanks to all of the staff, especially to
Tom Bedwell, Elaine Sampson, and Stephanie Landess.
I would not have made it to Illinois, and I would not have managed to write this
dissertation, without the teachers and professors who taught me before I came here. Ellen Joyce
and Catherine Orr at Beloit College, in particular, were instrumental in the development of my

	   v
	  

thinking about books, ideas, institutions, and identities. And, before that, it was Jeanne Hanigan
who taught me how to really read a text and encouraged me to write.
This project benefited significantly from institutional support within and beyond the
University of Illinois. A Twentieth Century History Grant from the Massachusetts Historical
Society funded the research that made a large portion of Chapter Two possible. The project
incubated and developed through collaborations with the Graduate School of Library and
Information Science at the University of Illinois and during my time as a Google Policy Fellow
at the American Library Association’s Office for Information Technology Policy. Fellowships
from the History Department helped support the research and writing processes, and a Graduate
College Dissertation Completion Fellowship gave me the time and space to finish.
This project came into being and developed during my time here in large part thanks to
conversations and collaborations with my fellow graduate students. Particular thanks to
Stephanie Seawell, Emily Pope-Obeda, David Greenstein, Jenny Schwartzberg, Scott Harrison,
Heidi Dodson, and Chris D’Arpa for ideas, encouragement, and well-timed distraction.
More thanks than I can articulate to the dear friends who kept me sane (and, if we’re
honest, drove me productively crazy) while I researched and wrote. Thanks to Ariana Ruiz, Irina
Spector-Marks, and Eszter Sápi for making Urbana home and to Rose and David Robertson for
creating a home away from home. And thanks to Rose Pink for, well, everything.
Reading to me every night, telling me stories as I fell asleep, my parents first taught me
that books could connect, that stories could link people together. Without that lesson, and
without decades of support, I could never have done this.
And—“(Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house / that supports
them?)”— incalculable thanks to Bodel, the foundation of everything.

	   vi
	  

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION: ON COMMON CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE POLITICS OF PUBLIC
CULTURE………………………………………………………………………………………...1
CHAPTER ONE: “WE NEED UNION OF FORCE…AND GOOD LITERATURE”:
BUILDING INFRASTRUCTURES OF FEELING IN THE PROGRESSIVE ERA AND
BEYOND………………………………………………………………………………………...28
CHAPTER TWO: “SPREAD BY THE EXCHANGE OF BOOKS”: THE PERILS OF
PROXIMITY IN A SEGREGATED SOCIETY...........................................................................89
CHAPTER THREE: “A POWERFUL SPEARHEAD FOR ALMOST UNLIMITED
PROGRESS”: MANAGING TIME AND SPACE ON THE FRONTIERS OF
BELONGING…………………………………………………………………………………..155
CHAPTER FOUR: “HEMINGWAY AMIDST CHEESE AND CRACKERS”: PUBLIC
CULTURE AND THE COINCIDENCES OF CONSUMER CAPITALISM.………………...234
CHAPTER FIVE: “UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO ALL KNOWLEDGE”: DIGITAL BOOKS,
PHYSICAL SPACES AND THE REINVENTION OF COMMON CONSCIOUSNESS…….291
CONCLUSION: THERE WENT THE BOOKMOBILE?..........................................................340
BIBLIOGRAPHY………………………………………………………………………………350

	   vii
	  

“These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands,
they are not original with me,
If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or
next to nothing,
If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they
are nothing,
If they are not just as close as they are distant they are
nothing.
This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the
water is,
This the common air that bathes the globe.”
–Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself” (1855)

1
	  

INTRODUCTION

On Common Consciousness
and the Politics of Public Culture
“Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd
the earth much?
Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?
Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?”
–Walt Whitman (1855) 1
In twentieth-century America—in newspapers and magazines, novels and children’s
books, memoirs and annual reports—a certain phrase appeared over and over again. “Here
comes the bookmobile!” children shouted, headlines blared, book covers declared.2 The phrase
captured the intense optimism the bookmobile represented in the face of staggering and often
discomfiting change. And, indeed, confronted by a host of transformations that challenged older
ways of thinking, Americans repeatedly mobilized books in search of solutions. More than
traditional libraries, and differently than the car itself, their combination in the bookmobile
captured the minds and eyes of Americans and encapsulated their hopes (and fears) about the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

1

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” in The Complete Poems (New York: Penguin, 2005), 64.
See, for example, Dirk Gringhuis, Here Comes the Bookmobile (Chicago: Albert Whitman & Company, 1952);
Clair K. Knox and Jane C. Cotner, “Here Comes the Bookmobile,” in Up the Hemline: Being a True Account of One
Hundred Years of Classroom Experiences in Colorado (Colorado Springs: William and Field, 1975), 166-167;
Frank Trippett, “In Indiana: Here Comes the Bookmobile,” Time, September 8, 1980; Cherry Hills Newsflash
(Champaign: Cherry Hills Homeowners Association, May/June 2008), 2; “Here Comes the Bookmobile,” Daytona
Beach News-Journal, March 19, 1999; “Here Comes the Bookmobile,” Idaho Librarian 15-16 (1963): 67; “Here
Comes the Bookmobile,” The [Greensboro] News-Record, January 3, 1957; Herbert Mutschler, “King County
Library,” Hawaii Library Association Journal 12 (1966): 19; Linda Ratcliff, “Intimate Details in the Life of a
Library on Wheels,” California Librarian 39 (1978): 42; J. J. Jacobs, “Here Comes the Bookmobile!” Today’s
Education 40 (1931): 635; Pauline Beal, “Here Comes the Bookmobile!” New Hampshire Public Libraries 34-39
(1940): 1-2; Eula McDougal, “Here Comes the Bookmobile,” Arkansas Libraries (1957): 23-26; “Here Comes the
Library,” California Librarian 13 (1952): 151; Jane Bradt, “The ‘Library Ladies’ in Bernalillo County,” New
Mexico Library Bulletin 18 (1949): 6; “Here comes the Bookmobile!” Mississippi Library News 21 (March 1957):
18-19; “Ohio Scenes,” Cleveland Plain-Dealer, October 31, 1958; Dorothy Doyle, “Washington,” Pacific Northwest
Library Association Quarterly 32 (1968): 38; Virginia Sorensen, Curious Missie (New York: Harcourt Brace &
Company, 1953); “Library on Wheels Visits Parks,” Nashville Tennesseean, July 1936; Jack Cook, “The
Bookmobile Comes to Speck,” Clinton County News, n.d., http://clintonnews.net/pages/?p=2847.

2

2
	  

new world they were helping to create. The bookmobile embodied a faith—a particular, peculiar
fantasy—that mobile print could provide a perfect answer to questions that arose again and again
across the century: How do you build coherent communities in a place, and a time, marked by
expansion, acceleration, fragmentation, and upheaval—and, most importantly, what shape will
those communities take? Promoting a North Dakota bookmobile program in 1959, for example,
librarian Hazel Webster Byrnes tied the bookmobile to what she cast as a glorious march into a
beautiful future: “Just as people are catching thrilling new visions in many aspects of living, so
this expanded library program is offering its share of hope and promise in a wonderful new
outlook on life.”3 But the odd thing about “Here comes the bookmobile,” as with Brynes’s offer,
is that the realization of its optimism was perpetually deferred. The phrase kept the bookmobile’s
promise always just over the horizon, always just about to arrive.
Bookmobiles themselves did, of course, actually arrive at schools and crossroads and
parking lots across the country (and around the world), and this dissertation is about what
happened when they did. It is, in other words, about how the grand fantasy that the bookmobile
embodied fared when, well, the rubber hit the road.

Common Consciousness: Imagining Coherent Communities in National Space
This dissertation uses the story of the bookmobile as a lever into larger conflicts in
modern American life. It is a story of geography and belonging. It is a story of what it meant to
be an American in an uncertain landscape. It is a story about the ways that fantasies about space
and identity played out, and failed to, in the movement of books across uneven ground. It is, in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

3

North Dakota Farmers Union, 15th Annual Ladies Camp, Farmers Union Heart Butte Camp, June 14-17, 1959,
State Library Commission – Miscellaneous Files (Series 1064), North Dakota Historical Society, Fargo, North
Dakota, 38.

3
	  

its way, about a clash of images, about what people thought symbols (lines on a map, words on a
page) could do, about their reading and their rereading, about their imposition and their
appropriation, about their travels across America’s cultural and physical geography. To begin,
then, I want to offer two stories, each a tale of symbols, circulation, and consequences.
First: lines and borders. In 1958, the Catawba County Public Library made a map
[FIGURE 1]. Showing the routes the library’s bookmobile traveled, “over rugged and smooth
roads,” as it brought “cheer through books to the county people,” the map appears less a practical
document than a symbol of the bookmobile’s reach.4 In this vivid image of networked
information, the mapmaker offered a stark vision of print in space, one in which all other features
(rivers, topography, even cities) fade into the background as the dark, bold, thick lines of the
bookmobile’s route rise to the surface, marking the county like ink on a page. The visual space
of the county is filled up with the movement of books across its landscape. (Even the border is
not rendered in sharp lines; it is, rather, largely an effect of the bookmobile’s route, of its limits
and its ends.) This map offered a fantasy that was, we will see, incredibly influential: a dream
that filling up space with print would connect people as well as it connected areas on a map.
Books on the move would make the county into a community.
Second: houses of people. In the early 1970s, the El Paso Public Library began to send a
bookmobile to a largely Latino neighborhood in an effort to expand library use and, it would
seem, to connect the city together. Chicano nationalists and other activists in the neighborhood
banded together to paint the bookmobile with symbols that the poet Ricardo Sánchez later said

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

4

Mary C. Summers, On the March (Catawba County, N.C.: Catawba County Public Library, 1959), 8. In Catawba
County, the bookmobile circulated three times the number of books as the main library building (170,939 compared
to 54,465, for 1958-1959). Summers, On the March, 13.

4
	  

were something that “kids in the barrio can identify with.”5 Despite the fact that “the Chicanos in
El Paso are over 56% of the population,” Sánchez pointed out, “we have no voice.” But the
symbols, and thus the bookmobile as appropriated and adapted by the activists, refused the
narrow legal question of representation—and, even more importantly, any similarly narrow
conception of political geography. “Those symbols represent[ed] houses of people,” Sánchez
explained. “The eagle that is there represents the different Chicanos throughout the Southwest,
the five southwestern states. We are one people.”6 Containing political geography (“the five
southwestern states”) but reaching beyond it to articulate a common racial identity (“one
people”), this was, as you might imagine, not exactly what the El Paso Public Library had in
mind. And so the library’s board of directors met and voted to repaint the bookmobile, erasing
the symbols. “We’re trying to build up a meaningful community for all those who participate and
share,” Sánchez declared. But what “community” meant, and what it meant to “share,” was not
in the end very clear at all.
One of the central arguments of this dissertation is that the bookmobile embodied the
principle of “common consciousness”—at heart a will to connect, a conviction that it was
possible, and ultimately desirable, to share a mind, a spirit, a culture with those around you—
which crystallized in the 1890s and had a strong, if varied, influence in the century that followed.
Common consciousness was the ideological underpinning of a larger effort that emerged in the
Progressive Era to link Americans physically, emotionally, and politically—to build across the

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

5

All quotations from Delgado and Sánchez come from Interview with Abelardo Delgado and Ricardo Sánchez by
Manny A. Escontrías, 1972, "Interview no. 91.1," Institute of Oral History, University of Texas at El Paso.
6
The official transcription of this interview renders the beginning of this passage as “the people that are there
represent,” but in the actual recording of the interview, Sánchez refers to an “eagle” (and later to a “Mestizo head,”
another phrase absent from the transcription). “Interview no. 91.1,” Digital Commons @ UTEP,
http://digitalcommons.utep.edu/interviews/91/.

5
	  

nation what Terry Eagleton calls the “thick mesh” of social democracy.7 As different as the two
cases are, it was this idea, this devotion to building a connective web in space, that linked
Catawba and El Paso. Officials in Catawba County had a deep faith in political geography; the
activists in El Paso had a deep skepticism about it. But both groups believed that it was possible
to hold objects and ideas in common (and that geography had something to do with it) even as
they disagreed about what shape that sharing might take. If common consciousness was a belief
that you could share a culture with those around you, one of the central disagreements was about
what “around” really meant. Was common consciousness a matter of geographic proximity and
political units, as the Catawba library seemed to insist? Or was it a matter of like finding like,
across space, as El Paso’s Chicano nationalists imagined? This was a conflict—between
competing geographies of belonging, between different ideas about what it meant to be
American, between contending interpretations of common consciousness—that played out over
and over across the century, as the idea of common consciousness was adapted at various
moments and in various places. It is this conflict that lies at the heart of this project.
Common consciousness was influential throughout the twentieth century, a relative
consistency that was unusual given its progressive origins. After a zenith in the 1910s, many
progressive ideas and ideals had a rather rough century, at some moments attenuated by shifting
circumstances and at others abandoned, wholesale, in the name of free markets and rugged
individuals. But common consciousness had a longer, stranger life. This was in part because
library training and librarianship remained deeply influenced by progressive thought, particularly
in the form of the two Deweys (Melvil and John), long after the rest of the country fell largely
out of love with progressivism. As a consequence, it was picked up at various moments
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7

Terry Eagleton, “What is the Worth of Social Democracy?” Harper’s, October 2010, 78.

6
	  

throughout the century. Those particular contexts, and the particular concerns that impinged
upon and emerged from them, changed how common consciousness was imagined and enacted.
In the South under Jim Crow, for example, the will to connect that marked common
consciousness was inflected by massive resistance to certain kinds of cross-racial connection.
And during the New Deal and Cold War, the increasing power of the federal government
changed the scales on which it was possible to imagine (and manage) belonging. But despite
these differences, the fundamental idea remained largely the same, reworked for new eras but
with the bones still visible underneath. And so, as contexts shifted and ideas changed, common
consciousness remained central to how librarians were trained and bookmobiles deployed.
It would have a long career, but the idea of common consciousness began as a very
progressive idea, indeed. On June 19, 1902, Washington Gladden—a pastor and chief proponent
of the Social Gospel—gave a commencement address at the University of Michigan, explaining
what he hoped would come out of the “anxious and perilous days” ahead, on the way to a “new
order.”8 In the speech, Gladden laid out his vision of how human community should work in that
new order:
A tree is not an individual, but a republic rather, thousands of individual lives coordinated in a community, each bud being an individual life, so man is in himself a
society, a combined group of living cells united in a common consciousness. But this is
only the beginning of interdependencies and co-operations. For this human personality,
whom we wrongly name an individual, finds its life only in vital union with other
lives. … We are parts of a whole, and can no more consider our interest separately from
the rest, than one of the wheels of a watch or one of the links of a chain can set up a
separate interest and figure out its rights and liberties and possessions without reference
to the other wheels and the other links.9
It was a speech dense with incredibly material metaphors: community is a tree, a body, a watch,
a chain—it is not just a feeling but an object whose individual parts are physical and inextricable,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

8

9

Washington Gladden, Rights and Duties (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Board of Regents, 1902), [1].
Gladden, Rights and Duties, [3].

7
	  

whose commonality is necessary, and whose common cause is absolute. In this context, the idea
of a “social bond” which can be made (or “ruptured,” as Gladden threatens) takes on a newly
tangible cast.10 “Common consciousness” is community, corporealized. Josiah Royce’s 1898
declaration that “[l]ife is expansive, goes beyond itself, lives in social relations” was echoed by
Gladden and other progressive organizers.11 But it seems that such a going beyond might involve
something more than just words or feelings to facilitate the connection, commonality, and
belonging that would be such an important part of the progressive project. In Human Work
(1904), for example, Charlotte Perkins Gilman proposed her own solution, celebrating “the
extending light of common consciousness as Society comes alive!—the tingling ‘I’ that reaches
wider and wider in every age, that is sweeping through the world to-day like an electric current,
that lifts and lights and enlarges the human soul of kindling majesty.”12 Drawing again and again
on the “storage battery” to capture both human potential and its realization in the world, Gilman
describes a process by which “the human brain and the human hand have made force incarnate”
in objects and the networks that connect and circulate them.13
As striking as they were, both of these attempts to make the abstraction of “common
consciousness” matter nevertheless still lacked a physical, not just metaphorical, manifestation.
It was librarians who most fully took up the dream of common consciousness, materially.
“Libraries must be mobilized,” Melvil Dewey declared in 1901. “Books must travel more.”14
And they did. The practice of taking public books out of library buildings and into
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10

Gladden, Rights and Duties, [3].
Josiah Royce, Studies of Good and Evil: A Series of Essays Upon Problems of Philosophy and of Life (New York:
D. Appleton & Co., 1898), 375. Gladden quotes Royce at length in his speech, along these lines.
12
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Human Work (New York: McClur, Phillips, & Co., 1904), 889.
13
Quoted in Jennifer Lieberman, “Power Lines: Electric Networks and the American Literary Imagination, 18701916” (PhD diss., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2011), 181. For more on the “storage battery” in
Gilman’s work, see Lieberman, “Power Lines,” 176-178.
14
Melvil Dewey, “Traveling Libraries: Field and Future of Traveling Libraries,” University of the State of New York
Home Education Department Bulletin 40 (1901): 7.

11

8
	  

communities—a practice that came to be known, in a fascinating phrase, as “library
extension”—began with the emergence of traveling libraries in the 1890s. Particularly popular in
states with strong progressive politics (like Kansas, New York, and Wisconsin), these were
usually boxes packed with books from a central library that were sent, usually by train or wagon,
to outlying communities. And when a horse-drawn traveling library in Washington County,
Maryland, was struck by a train in 1910, and replaced by a truck shortly thereafter, the
bookmobile was born. Over the next several decades, wider (and cheaper) availability of internal
combustion, and increasingly smooth infrastructures of roads and highways, put this new tool for
library extension in the hands of libraries big and small across the nation. Not long after their
introduction and with greater and greater intensity over the decades, bookmobiles became iconic,
embodying an outsized faith in the possibilities of community and connection. This was because
books—as ideas incarnate—appeared an ideal and mobile material for creating a thick and
connecting mesh. And thus they seemed the best chance for the actual realization of common
consciousness. If you put books on a truck and drove that truck through an area, it seemed, that
area could become a community.
“Common consciousness” was, ultimately, a fantasy of cultural coherence—of a thick,
layered, and even mesh—on scales running from neighborhood to nation (and, at times, to
empire). William Sewell has identified two particularly popular ways of conceiving of culture: a
system of signs and as practices on the ground. While these have tended to be taken up by
opposing camps in the anthropological culture wars, Sewell argues forcefully that “[s]ystem and
practice are complementary concepts,” that they cannot be effectively understood apart from one

9
	  

another.15 In that they are semiotic systems, he asserts, cultures “must in some sense be coherent,”
even if the requirement for relatively mutual comprehension “actually only implies…a thin
coherence.”16 Cultures are constantly contested, only loosely linked, porously bounded, and
always contradictory, but they are, simultaneously, coherent and “powerfully constraining.”17
Cultural coherence is the product of symbolic systems, but also of “the succession of practices
that instantiate, reproduce, or…transform it.”18 In large part, this dissertation is an attempt to
understand how this cultural coherence was practiced—and contested—in space in the twentiethcentury United States. Taking one sort of symbol quite literally out into the world, bookmobiles
were powerful (if often inadequate) tools for practicing coherence on the ground. This project is,
thus, an investigation of the bookmobile as what Arjun Appadurai has called a “technique[ ] for
the spatial production of locality,” a practice that requires “hard and regular work…to produce
and maintain its materiality”—but where the sense of the coherently local, of the possibility of
common consciousness, could expand to include a range of spatial and emotional relations
beyond those of immediate proximity.19
The question of who gets to imagine, articulate, and construct this coherence—The state
or the people? The majority or the marginalized?—hinges on who gets to control space and
determine the scale of belonging. As Neil Smith argues, “the production of geographical scale is
the site of potentially intense political struggle,” with the state claiming a monopoly on scale and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15

William Sewell, Logics of History: Social Theory and Social Transformation (University of Chicago Press, 2005),
164.
16
Sewell, Logics, 166.
17
Sewell, Logics, 167.
18
Sewell, Logics, 164.
19
Arjun Appadurai, “The Production of Locality,” in Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996), 180-181.

10
	  

various others challenging that monopoly both ideologically and practically.20 Deciding where a
bookmobile would travel, what it would carry, and what it would look like were all ways that
power could be asserted and contested. Will common consciousness take the shape of a county,
in other words, or that of Chicano identity?
In the hands of state-run public libraries, bookmobiles were used to embody what Ernest
Gellner described as the “political principle” of nationalism, “which holds the political and
national unit should be congruent.”21 In other words, governmental agencies used the
bookmobile to assert geographies of belonging that were perfectly mapped onto the
administrative units of the state (city, county, state, federal). Deploying print as a tool for the
construction of imagined communities, these public programs sought to control the distribution
through space of the system of signs that produces cultural coherence, and to channel those signs
in ways that reinforce the nested loyalties of federalism.22 We can see this in the Catawba
County map, where the filled-up space of books and belonging stops, abruptly, at the county line.
The Catawba library, like so many others, attempted to organize the emotional and political
experience of space, using the bookmobile to map the contours of the county and chart the
possible communities within it. “Men live in a community in virtue of the things which they
have in common; and communication is the way in which they come to possess things in
common,” wrote John Dewey, whose work powerfully influenced librarians and educators for
much of the century. Thus, he continued, “[s]ociety not only continues to exist by transmission,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

20

Neil Smith, “Contours of a Spatialized Politics: Homeless Vehicles and the Production of Geographic Scale,”
Social Text 33 (1992): 62. Kathryn Oberdeck, too, has described the ways in which marginalized people create
“competing maps” that articulate “alternative affiliations across space” in the face of state or corporate control.
Kathryn J. Oberdeck, “Class, Place, and Gender: Contested Industrial and Domestic Space in Kohler, Wisconsin,
USA, 1920-1960,” Gender & History 13 (2001): 98, 99.
21
Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983), 1.
22
See Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (New
York: Verso, 1983).

11
	  

by communication, but it may fairly be said to exist in transmission, in communication.”23 By
transmitting particular information in particular spaces, state-run bookmobile projects aimed to
shape “the things which they have in common” to promote a friendly orientation to the state as
the proper scale for community and belonging. In other words, they tried to orchestrate what
Sewell calls “the succession of practices that instantiate, reproduce, or…transform” culture as a
coherent system of state-produced and state-distributed signs.
But, the state does not have an absolute, uncontested monopoly on what people have in
common—and thus on the scale and coherence of communities. Indeed, in the “new condition of
neighborliness” that Appadurai argues has emerged with new communication and transportation
technologies since the late nineteenth century, the congruence of community and nation-state has
been challenged on a number of fronts.24 Smith has urged scholars to look at “the concrete
production and reproduction of geographic scale as a political strategy of resistance.”25 By
“jumping scales,” he argues, people can wrest “political and cultural access to, and production of,
the space of community” from the exclusive control of the state.26 In the twentieth century, the
bookmobile was one tool for doing so—for challenging the clean lines of “common
consciousness,” for contesting political geography as the sole shape of belonging. The El Paso
activists, for example, were scale-jumpers par excellence, moving between the local and the
regional with relative ease. Their symbols said, in effect, that people in the barrio had more in
common with Chicanos living hundreds of miles away in Arizona or California than they did
with white citizens living just across town. If, as Sewell insists, a culture’s coherence is a product
of the need for its system of signs to be mutually legible, then the barrio bookmobile illustrates a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

23

John Dewey, Democracy and Education (New York: MacMillan Company, 1916), 5. Emphasis original.
Arjun Appadurai, “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy,” Public Culture 7 (1990): 2.
25
Smith, “Contours of a Spatialized Politics,” 60. Emphasis original.
26
Smith, “Contours of a Spatialized Politics,” 60, 65.

24

12
	  

failure of coherence on the borders—political, racial, cultural, spiritual—that divided American
society. At the same, it offers a paradigmatic example of how some marginalized people used the
bookmobile as a tool for building what Patricia J. Williams calls “a constituency of souls united
in allegiance to an ideal of community, an egalitarianism of society, the mutual shelter of a
nation”—but in ways that insist that nation is not necessarily the same as state.27
Conflicts over the relationship between culture and belonging were not, of course, unique
to America.28 But the problem at the heart of fights over common consciousness—Can you
really build a coherent community in a large and diverse country?—was especially troubling in
the U.S., where vastness has been a defining spatiality and a cobbled-together, contingent, but
supposedly universal fraternity its defining affect. Over and over again, building a cohesive
nation on the scale of the United States has required confronting, and either overcoming or
pointedly ignoring, the problems of distance and diversity. From the imagined landscape of
Manifest Destiny to the vinyl-sided fantasyland of suburbia, from the interstate highway system
to the World Wide Web, from the occupation of the Philippines to the High Commission for
Occupied Germany, from Progressivism to Jim Crow, Americans have struggled to resolve
fundamental tensions between distance and proximity, between difference and commonality. As
we will see, bookmobiles were there at all of these moments, in all of these places. This is
because, as a technology that made it possible to physically transport the stuff of culture over the
geographic distances that separated Americans—and thus, theoretically at least, over the psychic
and emotional gaps between them—bookmobiles were tools for answering two questions that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

27

Patricia J. Williams, “Corpus Ex Machina,” The Nation, 15 February, 2009, 9.
For instance, debates over the relative merits of “cultural democracy,” on the one hand, and “cultural
democratization”—between expanding access to a culture and fundamentally changing that culture—were a key part
of public life in postwar France. See Tamara Chaplin, Turning On the Mind: French Philosophers on Television
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), 9.
28

13
	  

have haunted the nation since the 1890s: What should our communities look like in this new
century, and who should be included in them? This dissertation will insist that the bookmobile’s
answers to these questions both shaped and were shaped by three elements—racial segregation,
imperial expansion, and consumer capitalism—which ultimately exposed the limits of the dream
of cultural coherence in national space. Other elements, like questions of gender and sexuality,
were crucial to how bookmobiles worked, and they are threaded throughout the history this
dissertation offers. But a focus on race, empire, and economic inequality, while taking account of
other factors, allows us a field of vision both sweeping and precise.

“Lines That Bind”: The Politics of Public Culture and the Circulation of Community
The stuff of culture, and the way it moves through space, are central to this project. The
bookmobile, more than most any other institution or tool in use in the twentieth century, makes
obvious the fact that so much of culture is bound up in physical objects that must travel (across
various scales) in order to have any effect at all. Nevertheless, many theorists of reception and
the public sphere often discuss the “circulation” of texts without always or actually talking about
their movement. Reading is privileged, leaving its very conditions of possibility unanalyzed.
Toby Miller, for example, asserts that “texts accrete and attenuate meanings on their travels,”
without really confronting the fact that texts must and do literally travel in order to make
meaning.29 For Michael Warner, who declares that “a public is a social space created by the
reflexive circulation of discourse,” the experience of being hailed by texts you consume (and
knowing others have precisely that experience, as well) is the fundamental constitutive feature of

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
29

Toby Miller, “The Reception Deception,” in New Directions in American Reception Study, ed. Philip Goldstein
and James L. Machor (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), 361.

14
	  

publicity.30 But despite referring to “the space of circulation” where publics take shape, Warner
is able at the same time to declare definitively that “[s]pace and physical presence do not make
much difference” in the constitution of publics.31 (Even D.F. McKenzie, who insisted so
passionately on the material forms of meaning made a similar elision in his influential 1985
Panizzi lecture, describing “the transmission of texts as the creation of the new versions which
form, in turn, the new books, the products of later printers, and the stuff of subsequent
bibliographic control.”32 But “transmission,” for McKenzie, refers primarily to the reproduction
of texts across time and not to their movement through space.) David Henkin has taken reception
and public sphere theorists to task for ignoring “physical space” by rendering the public sphere
as “decidedly abstract and dispersed” and reading as only ever private.33 But Henkin, who
relentlessly and brilliantly spatializes the concept of the public sphere, often seems more
interested in how humans were mobilized by text than in the ways in which print itself moves.
Understanding the way texts forge connections between people without confronting the fact that
texts are material, and that people live in space, is often ultimately ineffective. But by shifting
our gaze to questions of circulation, without leaving problems of connection and community
behind, we can uncover new avenues in the history of print.
Book historians have, of course, long thought physically about print. Examining the
importance of the circulation can reveal the material prerequisites— capital, presses, roads,
vehicles, labor—that must be met before discourse can create what Warner calls a “text public,”

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30

Michael Warner, Publics and Counterpublics (New York: Zone Books, 2002), 90.
Warner, Publics, 91.
32
D.F. McKenzie, Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999 [1986]),
21.
33
David M. Henkin, City Reading: Written Words and Public Space in Antebellum New York (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1998),10.
31

15
	  

requirements that affect who has access to it, physically and intellectually.34 Robert Darnton’s
influential “communications circuit,” for example, pays careful attention to carters and flooded
rivers and paper manufacturers.35 And, much more recently, Janice Radway argues that it is only
due to certain printing, binding, and circulation technologies (and the idea of intellectual
property) that “we can pose the question of what any book ‘says’ or ‘means’ and what it ‘does’
to those who ‘read’ it.”36 Additionally, since Natalie Zemon Davis’s call to “consider a printed
book not merely as a source for ideas and images, but a carrier of relationships,” scholars have
investigated the real-world process that links authors and readers (among others) in what
Radway calls a “cacophonous, chaotic, ongoing social conversation.”37 Indeed, thanks to several
decades of work in the history of the book, these material contexts of circulation, and their social
consequences, have been more and more thoroughly studied.38
But the history of libraries, and of public libraries in particular, has tended to be rather
isolated from the rest of book history and the larger field of cultural history. (When Darnton laid
out his circuit, and in the process essentially founded the history of the book in America, for
example, he left libraries out of the picture.) This is, in part, because library historians have often
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

34

Warner, Publics, 66.
For his original proposal, see Robert Darnton, “What is the History of Books?” Daedalus 111 (1982): 65-83. For
his revision see Robert Darnton, “What is the History of Books? Revisited,” Modern Intellectual History 4 (2007):
495-508.
36
Janice Radway, “What's the Matter with Reception Study? Some Thoughts on the Disciplinary Origins,
Conceptual Constraints, and Persistent Viability of a Paradigm,” in New Directions, 337.
37
Natalie Zemon Davis, Society and Culture in Early Modern France: Eight Essays (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1975), 191; Radway, “What’s the Matter,” 337.
38
Since Roger Darnton proposed his famous “circuit” in 1982, studies of specific presses or specific publications
proliferate alongside those of more broader issues of capitalist circulation and the intellectual implications of
printing. For work on a specific press, see David A. McKitterick, A History of Cambridge University Press: New
Worlds for Learning, 1873-1972 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004). For a thrilling examination of a
particular periodical, see Trysh Travis, “What We Talk About When We Talk About The New Yorker,” Book
History 3 (2000): 253-285. On the relationship to capitalism, see Ted Striphas, The Late Age of Print: Everyday
Book Culture from Consumerism to Control (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009); Laura J. Miller,
Reluctant Capitalists: Bookselling and the Culture of Consumption (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
For the relationship of form to intellectual life, see Adrian Johns, The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in
the Making (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).

35

16
	  

focused internally on the profession—on the politics and practices of librarianship, from training
regimens to collections management—sometimes to the exclusion of other, larger questions and
contexts.39 At the same time, scholars of twentieth-century America generally ignore libraries.
Indeed, aside from the occasional mention of Carnegie libraries as examples of Gilded-Age
philanthropy, libraries don’t appear at all in many large-scale histories of the modern United
States. Even as corporate cultural institutions (department stores, radio stations, film studios,
television networks) ascended, so did public libraries. But, perhaps too eager to buy into a
narrative in which the birth of a raucous, electronic, consumerist mass culture spelled the
inevitable death of older forms and measures cultural value —in which film, radio, television,
and the internet each, in turn, killed the book—historians of twentieth-century America tend to
ignore the coexistence, however strained, of libraries and mass media. As a consequence, in this
scholarship, you are more likely to find a discursion on an obscure radio broadcast or relatively
minor brand than you are to stumble upon a mention of these institutions which were crucial to
both the fantasy and the function of a shared, public culture.
This project is thus, in part, a call to take libraries seriously as influential and illuminating
parts of American life over the past century. Sara Ahmed writes that emotional and political
connections “depend[ ] on how objects move around,” that “[t]he lines that bind are also ones

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

39

The fate of the journal once known as Libraries & Culture is indicative of this problem and of attempted solutions
to it. In its 40 years (1966-2006) under that title, the journal published fascinating, thoroughly-researched articles
about library collections, policies, and so on, that were historically grounded but which spoke largely to librarians
and library scientists and only rarely to a wider field. In 2006, the journal’s name was changed to Libraries & the
Cultural Record in 2006, and then six years later to the even more general (and library-less) Information & Culture:
A Journal of History. “The journal honors its (45+ year) heritage by continuing to publish in the areas of library,
archival, museum, conservation, and information science history,” the editors explain. “However, the journal's scope
has been broadened significantly beyond these areas to include the historical study of any topic that would fall under
the purview of any of the modern interdisciplinary schools of information.” “About,” Information & Culture: A
Journal of History, http://www.infoculturejournal.org/about.

17
	  

that are created by the movement of objects that circulate as common goods.”40 All objects are
meaningful, certainly, but there is something particular and peculiar about books, about objects
filled with symbols which signify so directly and multiply and wildly, about objects which
contain their own worlds as they move through ours. Books contain claims for connection and, in
moving through space, assert yet more, as Benedict Anderson, for one, has argued.41 Libraries
are the places where we can most clearly see how this happens. Not simply purveyors of a sort of
vaguely common cultural experience, libraries are funded by taxes—which literalize a sense of
mutual obligation central to the idea of community—and filled with cultural resources to which
anyone is at least theoretically meant to have access. This is quintessentially “public culture”: a
set of objects and ideas acquired with public funds, quite literally held in common, and thought
to constitute a shared patrimony. Public culture is, thus, material (the actual shared stuff) and
imaginary (the fantasy of common consciousness) at the same time. It is, as we will see, a
material fantasy played out in space.
The content, language, and ideas embodied by these materials did, of course matter. As
Bernadette Lear writes, “choosing items for public library shelves was an intricate calculus, a
constant distillation.”42 And bookmobiles, having fewer shelves for fewer books, required
distilling this distillation even further.43 Bookmobile collections were, consequently, carefully
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

40

Sara Ahmed, Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 119120.
41
See Anderson, Imagined Communities, esp. 9-46. Other scholars have argued that print is insufficient, as well,
because it is often inadequately circulated; if people cannot or do not access the print that supposedly brings them
into being as national subjects in particular times and places, then how is that process actually supposed to work?
See, for example, Trish Loughran, The Republic in Print: Print Culture in the Age of U.S. Nation-Building, 17701870 (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 33-104.
42
Bernadette A. Lear, “Were Tom and Huck On-Shelf? Public Libraries, Mark Twain, and the Formation of
Accessible Canons, 1869-1910,” Nineteenth-Century Literature 64 (2009): 192.
43
Eleanor Brown wrote in her 1967 survey of the field that “the physical size of a bookmobile limits the range and
kind of material to be carried.” Eleanor Brown, Bookmobiles and Bookmobile Service (Metuchen, NY: Scarecrow
Press, 1967), 80.

18
	  

chosen, and often quite conservative. One sample policy from the 1960s, for example, said that
collections should be made up of “highly-readable, attractive, popular general books,” and that
only “the very finest, most highly-recommended titles for children” be offered, because of
limited space.44 Collections decisions were shaped by this need to appeal to the greatest number
of patrons with a small selection, but also by competing ideas about race, class, gender, sexuality,
language, ability, and more.45 In one 1956 romance novel, for example, all hell breaks loose
when a bookmobile staffer accidentally sends a child home with a “particularly unsavory
‘mystery’ of the hard-boiled type.”46 And as we will see, Civil Rights activists explicitly chose to
stock their mobile collections with books emphasizing African American experiences, and
American propagandists in postwar Germany chose carefully (if ineffectively) the books they
thought would best encourage sympathy with America’s cause. When questions of content and
selection boil over, when they highlight gaps between the ideas and intentions of different actors,
I will take them up and explore their contours.
But this dissertation is, for the most part, not a story about content. This is because
bookmobiles, by highlighting books’ materiality, made content less important than you might
expect. For many of the people you will encounter in these pages, in fact, it was more important
that books were shared (and where they were shared) than it was what books took part.
Discussions of and debates about content were remarkably infrequent among the proponents and
operators of bookmobiles, a fact that a narrow focus on literacy and content would obscure. (This
infrequency itself will be the subject of analysis later on, since it tended to result from and
reproduce the assumptions and preferences of middle-class, white librarians.) Rather than issues
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

44

Brown, Bookmobiles and Bookmobile Service, 81.
For one case of bookmobile-based censorship (of Go Ask Alice, in 1981), see Steven Otfinoski, Outsider Fiction
(New York: Chelsea House, 2009), 30-31.
46
Enid Johnson, Nancy Runs the Bookmobile (New York: Messner, 1956), 38.

45

19
	  

of content, it was questions of space and symbolism—about where bookmobiles would go, who
they would serve, and what meaning they would make along the way—that were much, much
more common. The idea of public books, and their presence in public space, more than the actual
content of any of those books in particular, was what mattered. As the El Paso conflict over the
bookmobile’s paint job makes clear, bookmobiles were themselves important and contested
symbols that “flagged” (in Michael Billig’s words) a particular, if perpetually uncertain, kind of
belonging.47 A fantasy of collective reading, produced by the both solidly material and
symbolically fraught movement of books through shared space, was enough, it seems, to allow
organizers to imagine a sense of community, a universal culture, a common consciousness.
While bookmobile administrators seemed somewhat ambivalent about which books
found their way onto the road, content may have mattered more to patrons and readers. But it’s
hard to know for sure; as is often and unfortunately the case in media history, evidence of
reception is fragmentary, unclear, or simply nonexistent. While production is often lavishly
documented (through authors’ correspondence, scripts, studio notes, and so on), the vast majority
of individual experiences of media are fleeting: brief, rarely documented, and even more rarely
preserved. In its focus on circulation—what happens between production and reception—this
study of bookmobiles offers a complication of this dichotomy, even as it cannot entirely escape it.
Librarians do not produce the cultural objects they circulate, but they do, importantly,
choreograph and facilitate encounters with them. The key feature of these interactions aboard the
bookmobile—the ability to meet people face to face, where they live—meant, though, that
evidence of its reception was even more ephemeral than usual. The sort of in-person interaction
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

47

Billig argues that in stable, modern states, nationalism has become banal, everyday—“unnamed” and “unnoticed.”
This is because belonging to the nation is “‘flagged’, in the lives of its citizenry”—with literal flags, but also with
language (“we,” “our”)—and thus “the citizenry are daily reminded of their national place in a world of nations.”
Michael Billig, Banal Nationalism (London: Sage, 1995), 6, 8.

20
	  

the bookmobile encouraged is precisely the sort of response that tends not to make it into the
archive. Most bookmobiles, for example, invited patrons to make requests for books not in the
bookmobile’s collection, which the librarian would find and bring around next time. But those
requests, while shaping individual experiences of the bookmobile and its contents, were almost
never preserved. (Additionally, the primary way that people could resist a bookmobile was
simply to not use it in the first place, a strategy that usually left little mark in the archive.48)
Where there are moments when audience reception is discoverable, as in a careful survey of
patrons undertaken by American bureaucrats in West Germany or in controversies like those in
El Paso, I will carefully analyze these responses to mine what they can (and cannot) tell us about
everyday experiences of the bookmobile by its users and non-users. In other cases, when
information about collections and circulation trends allow it, I will make informed deductions
about the messy relationship between administrative intent, collection content, and audience.
In this focus on circulation and space, on objects and feelings, this dissertation proposes a
somewhat unusual path into the history of libraries in America. The robust scholarship on the
“library as place” that has emerged over the past decade and a half suggests a turn toward issues
of space and geography, even if the focus tends to be on space in libraries rather than on libraries
in space.49 But despite this turn, an understandable if problematic trend in library history is a
relentless focus on questions of literacy and reading. The only monograph on the history of the
bookmobile, Christine Pawley’s case study of bookmobiles in two rural Wisconsin counties
during the Cold War, exhibits exactly that emphasis, narrowing the implications of a fascinating
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

48

See Sally Wyatt, “Non-Users Also Matter: The Construction of Users and Non-Users of the Internet,” in How
Users Matter: The Co-Construction of Users and Technology, ed. by Nelly Oudshoorn and Trevor Pinch
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003).
49
For a sense of the range of this scholarship, see the essays in John E. Buschman and Gloria J. Leckie, ed., The
Library as Place: History, Community and Culture (Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited, 2006).

21
	  

study.50 Pawley creatively and elegantly shows how the counties’ bookmobiles emerged from
and remained enmeshed in the long history of literacy and education in the United States. But
despite a titular interest in “place,” Pawley’s work does not thoroughly take up the spatial
questions—of networks, of cartography, of political geography, of distribution, of segregation
and separation—that the bookmobile raised in the twentieth century. This dissertation explores
the place of the bookmobile in the larger culture, as opposed to how that culture impinged on a
single local context. It also approaches the bookmobile outside of an institutional history
framework, examining a range of programs, including those not undertaken by public libraries. It
thus expands upon Pawley’s work, and upon the subfield of library history more generally, while
at the same time opening up a range of new possibilities for thinking about public culture in the
United States.

“Earthquakes of Change”—and the Shape of Things to Come
In 1959, popular and influential sociologist C. Wright Mills described his sense of a
world being transformed around him:
And now our basic definitions of society and of self are being overtaken by new realities.
I do not mean merely that never before within the limits of a single generation have men
been so fully exposed at so fast a rate to such earthquakes of change. I do not mean
merely that we feel we are in an epochal kind of transition, and that we struggle to grasp
the outline of the new epoch we suppose ourselves to be entering. I mean that when we
try to orient ourselves—if we do try—we find that too many of our old expectations and
images are, after all, tied down historically: that too many of our standard categories of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
50

Christine Pawley, Reading Places: Literacy, Democracy, and the Public Library in Cold War America (Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010). For other local library case studies, the first of which briefly discusses
bookmobiles, see Janice Radway, “The Library as Place, Collection, or Service: Promoting Book Circulation in
Durham, North Carolina, and at the Book-of-the-Month Club, 1925-1945,” in Institutions of Reading: The Social
Life of Libraries in the United States, ed. Thomas Augst and Kenneth Carpenter (Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 2007), 231-263; Jennifer Cummings, “‘How Can We Fail?’: The Texas State Library’s
Traveling Libraries and Bookmobiles, 1916-1966,” Libraries and the Cultural Record 44 (2009): 299-325.

22
	  

thought and of feeling as often disorient us as help to explain what is happening around
us.51
While the postwar moment was one of rapid and disorienting change, the real origin of these
“earthquakes of change” might easily be pegged to the 1890s. (“There can be no great change
without a terrible upheaval, a social earthquake,” Josiah Strong promised in 1891.52) It was in the
1890s that, in the wake of Reconstruction’s collapse, racial antipathy and racist legislation
solidified into Jim Crow. It was in the 1890s that rapid urbanization and immigration raised
specters of dangerous proximity to join the older American dream of wide-open spaces. It was in
the 1890s that progressivism emerged to change how it was possible to think about state power
and social welfare. It was in the 1890s that finance capitalism and consumer capitalism, together,
upended the American economy and American culture. It was in the 1890s that the invasion of
the Philippines changed the way Americans practiced empire and kicked off more than a century
of overseas interventions and occupations. And it was in the 1890s that the traveling library
movement began to send books out into the world.
The bookmobile was a tool for “struggl[ing] to grasp the outline of the new epoch,” for
“orient[ing] ourselves” to new realities. But despite the bookmobile’s youth its use involved—
more than most wanted to admit, lest it sour Byrnes’s “thrilling new visions”—carrying the past
into the future. The bookmobile was, of course, a twentieth-century technology designed to ferry
about technologies that hadn’t been new for almost half a millennium. But more than that, I want
to argue, when the bookmobile went out on the “rugged and smooth roads” of America, it carried
with it what Mills might call a set of “expectations…tied down historically.” As it embodied the
dream of “common consciousness,” in other words, the bookmobile also embodied a set of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

51
52

C. Wright Mills, The Sociological Imagination (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000 [1959]), 166.
Josiah Strong, Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis (New York: Baker & Taylor, 1891), 221.

23
	  

assumptions emerging from the great tragedies of America’s twentieth century: racial
segregation, imperial violence, and economic inequality. These assumptions—that communities
can form at a distance, that marginal spaces and people can be incorporated into a community
without requiring fundamental changes, that communities can be built by the movement of
objects through space—ultimately shaped what Doreen Massey calls the “power geometry” of
contemporary life, limiting the extent to which the bookmobile could actually orient a society on
the cusp of great change.53
Though bookmobiles may best illustrate their confluence in American culture, these
assumptions were not unique to mobile librarianship. And so, in an effort to think through the
dream of common consciousness, this project focuses on the bookmobile without allowing that
focus to become myopic or mechanical. It begins with the bookmobile, in other words, but does
not always end up there, as mobile libraries offer a way to pry open the larger debates that
refracted and fragmented American life in the twentieth century. In order to investigate those
debates in a variety of contexts, what follows is organized into a series of chapters, each
constructed of linked case studies, based on archival research in thirteen states as well as on
close readings of correspondence, newspaper articles, film reels, editorial cartoons, Supreme
Court opinions, poetry, photographs, and more. These chapters are both thematically distinct and
roughly chronological: Over the course of the project—as over the course of the century—we
will watch the traveling library and bookmobile emerge, we will watch the dream of common
consciousness founder on the shoals of segregation, empire, and capitalism, and we will watch as
common consciousness is reimagined (sort of) in digital space. In each, we will see how the idea
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
53

According to Massey, “power geometry” is that by which people in what is supposed to be a universally
mobilizing era are often “placed in very distinct ways in relation to these flows and interconnections.” Some move,
some don’t, and some can only move in certain circumstances for certain reasons. Doreen Massey, Space, Place &
Gender (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994), 149.

24
	  

of common consciousness could not quite survive its practice, how its hopes were dashed by
what those hopes failed to account for and transform.
Chapter One examines the early traveling library movement, focusing on the founding of
the Kansas Traveling Library by suffragists. It illustrates and analyzes the movement’s emerging
method: using books to bring people together to form communities on the scales of neighborhood,
town, state, and nation. It argues that this method depended on assumptions that—while useful to
middle-class, white clubwomen making claims on citizenship—would ultimately haunt the
bookmobile in the century that followed. The chapter ends by following the traveling library model
into the automotive age, exploring how new technologies and new infrastructures would change
and intensify the dream of common consciousness wrought by the movement of books.
The next three chapters track the failures of this dream on fractured ground, when librarians
and government officials used bookmobiles to offer visions of community limited by the key
assumptions described above. Chapter Two addresses the consequences of assuming you could
build community at a distance, especially when that assumption was taken up by people terrified
by the prospect of cross-racial intimacy. In particular, the chapter explores the place of
bookmobiles in the segregated South, where they embodied a version of common consciousness
that aimed to share culture without contact. It argues that many bookmobiles ended up reinforcing
segregation by bringing books to African Americans in order to keep them from white-controlled
spaces. And then, by looking at desegregation scandals and a 1966 Supreme Court case, the
chapter shows how the end of library segregation did not, ultimately, spell the end of control and
separation as central parts of American life. Chapter Three examines what happened when the U.S.
government tried to incorporate into the nation those spaces that had been marginal to (or
marginalized by) American identity, without aiming to change the nation itself. The chapter looks

25
	  

at two federal bookmobile programs—a New Deal project in New Mexico and a public diplomacy
effort in Cold War West Germany—in order to argue that memories and fantasies of the
nineteenth-century frontier shaped twentieth-century efforts to build and manage modern,
democratic, and “American” communities at home and around the world. Chapter Four examines
bookmobiles and supermarket-based library branches in postwar suburbia, arguing that the
conviction that you could build communities by moving objects through space ended up replacing
the values of public culture with those of consumer capitalism.
We continue to put incredible (and perhaps untenable) faith in the ability of shared
information to build communities, even if much of that information travels not county highways
but what used to be called the Information Superhighway. The final chapter of this dissertation
explores the fate of common consciousness in this seemingly new context. Turning away from
questions of intellectual property or jeremiads about decline and loss—both of which dominate
discussions of physical books and digital technology—this chapter emphasizes instead continuity
between the past and the present. Mobile text continues to bring the past into the future, in other
words. Ultimately, by focusing on the way the Internet Archive digitizes books and then distributes
them via bookmobiles, the chapter argues that (despite the claims of digital utopians) physical
books, physical spaces, and physical bodies remain central to fantasies of belonging in the twentyfirst century.
“Even when they do not panic, men often sense that older ways of feeling and thinking
have collapsed,” Mills wrote, “and that newer beginnings are ambiguous to the point of moral
stasis.”54 Always just on the horizon, about to arrive and change everything, the bookmobile’s
promise was perpetually deferred and, in fact, inherently limited by the remains of the past. So
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

54

Mills, Sociological Imagination, 4.

26
	  

when bookmobiles did arrive, they bore broken, troubled promises alongside books and
magazines. Let’s see what happened when they did. Here comes the bookmobile!

27
	  

Figures

Figure 1: Catawba County Map
From the North Carolina Digital Collections (http://digitalstatelibnc.contentdm.oclc.org/u?/p249901coll36,88)

28
	  

CHAPTER ONE

“We Need Union of Force...and Good Literature”:

Building Infrastructures of Feeling in the Progressive Era and Beyond
“Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of pavement and land,
Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.”
–Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself” (1855)55
“[O]ur weal is common weal; we thrive only in a commonwealth; our exaltation
is the exaltation of our fellows; their elevation is our enlargement.”
–Richard T. Ely (1896)56
“Libraries must be mobilized. Books must travel more.”
–Melvil Dewey (1901)57
In May, 1898, Mary Keating was in Cimarron, Kansas, on a tour to promote the new
Kansas Traveling Library in the sparsely populated, far western reaches of the state. Cimarron, a
tiny town about 300 long, flat miles from the state capital (and library headquarters) in Topeka,
was one of many small communities Keating hoped would benefit from the traveling library,
which sent boxes of books across the state to areas that could not afford public libraries of their
own. “These western counties need building up to a higher standard and I have a desire to be an
instrument in my Father’s hand to help in such formation,” she wrote back to Topeka. “We need
union of force to that end and good literature.”58 This chapter is about the relationship between
those two things—union and literature—and how their combination was used by people like
Keating to build communities, transform the landscape, and make claims as public persons and
civic beings decades before many of them were allowed to vote. Emerging out of a progressive
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

55

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 113.
Richard T. Ely, The Social Law of Service (New York: Eaton & Mains, 1896), 127-128.
57
Dewey, “Traveling Libraries: Field and Future of Traveling Libraries,” 7.
58
Mary Keating to Lucy Johnston, May 13, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Lucy (Browne) Johnston Papers, 1846-1937;
Kansas Historical Society (Topeka, Kansas).

56

29
	  

obsession with connection and common consciousness (union) and a faith in mobile print
(literature) as a way of achieving it, traveling libraries like the one in Kansas sought to develop
the physical and cultural systems necessary for the formation of social democracy’s “thick mesh.”
If that mesh was to take form, then the fantasies of cohesion and commonality that so
characterized the turn-of-the-century moment would have to come together materially in the
world, and progressive reformers sought to make it do so.59 Chief among those efforts were
educational movements. From compulsory schooling laws to Americanization programs to the
use of new technologies in classrooms to the rise and flowering of the public library movement,
progressives tried to transform the spaces, materials, and mechanisms of learning in the United
States.60 “[T]he great popular educational movement...is sweeping like a tidal wave over the
country,” declared Ellen Herontin, the president of the General Federation of Woman’s Clubs in
1898.61 But while it captured the fury and scope of that enterprise, Herontin’s briny analogy
undersold the structural nature of this attempt to use education to transform American life. With
books and periodicals, with university extensions and professional societies, with Chautauquas
and traveling libraries, progressive reformers and educators developed specific—and often
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

59

Recently, Glenn Gendzel, in an effort to determine what linked progressives into a movement, quotes reformers
like Mary Parker Follett and Edward Alsworth Ross on what they called “collective will” or “social will” and Simon
Patten on what he called“a state whose power will be superior to that of any combination of selfish individuals.”
Michael McGerr argues that association and state power were twin motivators of the progressive project. And
Richard Hofstadter influentially wrote in 1944 of progressivism that “its leading figures...share[d] a common
consciousness of society as a collective whole rather than a congeries of individual atoms.” Glen Gendzel, “What
the Progressives Had in Common,” Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era 10 (2011): 335; Michael
McGerr, A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the Progressive Movement in America, 1870-1920 (New York:
Free Press, 2003), especially 66-68; Richard Hofstadter, Social Darwinism in American Thought (Boston: Beacon
Press, 1992 [1944]), 168-169.
60
See, for example, McGerr, Fierce Discontent, 109-111; Andrew Chamberlin Rieser, The Chautauqua Moment:
Protestants, Progressives, and the Culture of Modern Liberalism (New York: Columbia University Press, 2003);
Peter Novick, That Noble Dream: The ‘Objectivity Question’ and the American Historical Profession (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1988), 188; James Robert Kalmbach, The Computer and the Page: Publishing,
Technology & the Classroom (New York: Greenwood, 1996), 117-120; Marion Casey, “Charles McCarthy’s ‘Idea’:
A Library to Change Government,” Library Quarterly 44 (1974): 29-41.
61
Ellen Herontin, introduction to The History of the Woman’s Club Movement in America, by Jennie June
Cunningham Croly (New York: Henry G. Allen & Co., 1898), x.

30
	  

specifically mobile—methods for creating and disseminating new kinds of knowledge, with what
they hoped would be new kinds of effects. But these were not just ways of transmitting
knowledge. They were attempts to move people, physically and emotionally, into new and
collective spaces—classrooms, churches, settlement houses, libraries—to learn and to find
something in common.62 This seemingly paradoxical combination of place-bound community
with new kinds of mobility was particularly progressive, as it necessitated an odd way of looking
at the world that emerged most fully in the late nineteenth century. Library historian Christine
Pawley has asserted that progressives “systematically channeled reading materials to particular
groups of people.”63 But while Pawley is perceptive on the political contexts of those efforts
(particularly as it relates to immigration and Americanization), she generally overlooks the
infrastructures that made it newly possible to really move people, in all registers of that word—
and, more importantly, the new ways of thinking about infrastructure those possibilities required.
Constructing new systems for producing and distributing information at the turn of the
twentieth century—for channeling the tidal wave—represented a task as monumental, in its way,
as the furious, early- and mid-nineteenth-century building of canals and railways. It, too,
required new approaches: to the landscape, to mobility, to the state, to enterprise, to the
relationship of urban and rural, to distance, and to newfound proximity. Just as the Erie Canal
and the railroads had been responsible for the “annihilation of space and time,” in the words of
Karl Marx and many of his contemporaries—or for “compress[ing] distance and time,” in
historian Carol Sheriff’s—new educational infrastructures like traveling libraries worked to link

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

62

That these spaces were primarily bourgeois, or aimed at achieving the middle-class progressive goal of
ameliorating without actually transforming the economic system of the country, is one of the particular ironies and
failures of this project.
63
Pawley, Reading Places, 67.

31
	  

a nation together by connecting people across vast and alienating space.64 And in this case, the
distance overcome was as much psychic as geographic. In order for this new ideal of community
to take shape in the world, the system to make it happen could not be either physical or
sentimental. It would, in fact, have to be both, which is why this chapter offers a different way of
looking at infrastructure, as something both material and emotional, both concrete and cultural:
an infrastructure of feeling.
Historian of technology Bruce Seely has described infrastructure as “an intricate—and as
we have been reminded, delicate—network of supporting elements.”65 And many in the
progressive movement, not least those who founded libraries, understood that for a shared
consciousness to happen, this sort of carefully-wrought, intricate, and delicate system would
need to be built across the landscape. This was, in many ways, especially true of those
progressives who worked in the sorts of rural areas where traveling libraries were most
prominent. Indeed, historian Daniel Rodgers has argued that North Atlantic “agricultural
progressives” in this period frequently turned to cooperation and combination—encouraged,
especially in Europe, by “thickly planted associational networks”—as a solution to a variety of
problems faced by isolated farmers confronting new economic, social, and geographic realities.
From dairy cooperatives to new educational efforts to planned communities, these efforts were
intended to inculcate “a deeper cooperative spirit.” In these movements, Rodgers asserts,
agricultural progressives demonstrated their belief that “the countryside was pliant and moldable,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

64

Wolfgang Schivelbusch, The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the 19th Century
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986 [1977]), 33; Carol Sheriff, The Artificial River: The Erie Canal and
the Paradox of Progress, 1817-1862 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1996), 4. On the development of public
transportation infrastructures in the Progressive Era, see Charles W. Cheape, Moving the Masses: Urban Public
Transit in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, 1880-1912 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980).
65
Bruce Seely, “A Republic Bound Together,” Wilson Quarterly 17 (1993): 20.

32
	  

its terrific inner motion bendable into consciously chosen channels.”66 While traveling libraries
tended to plug into existing agricultural progressive networks (rather than emerge directly from
them), this commitment—to developing technological and cultural systems that could link
people across a transformable landscape—deeply influenced the movement and the ways its
members thought about infrastructure and belonging. This was a context in which cooperation
was material as much as emotional, where combination could have immediate effects—where
the “glimmering of the grand truths of social solidarity,” which Richard Ely said was just
beginning to be seen in 1896, could take shape in paper, earth, and flesh.67
This chapter will examine how new ideas about infrastructure and belonging were
enacted in the movement of books through space. It begins by examining progressivism’s
rhetorical and material obsession with infrastructure, and by proposing “infrastructure of feeling”
as a useful way of thinking about the relationship between landscape, matter, culture, and
community. It then turns to the origins and intentions of the traveling library movement, which
emerged out of that broader ideological investment in building infrastructures to form
communities. Women’s clubs were particularly influential in building traveling libraries, and so
that section will also examine the ways that doing so meant clubwomen could claim a powerful
public role despite their disenfranchisement. The chapter will then zoom in on Kansas—that
hotbed of radical, Populist, and progressive organizing—by treating the Kansas Traveling
Library as a paradigmatic example of how these general ideas were practiced on the ground.
Specifically, we will see how the program used mobile print to turn isolated people scattered
across a lonely landscape—“many domestic women& lonely old ladies & all Mothers &
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

66

Daniel T. Rodgers, Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a Progressive Age (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1998), 325.
67
Ely, Social Law, 128.

33
	  

Grandmothers,” in the words of one patron—into neighborhoods, which could then be tied
together to build communities on even larger scales.68 Finally, in order to see how the fantasies
of infrastructure and community developed in the traveling library movement transitioned to new
contexts offered by automobility, the chapter closes by analyzing a series of visual and literary
representations of bookmobiles. Watching these ideal vehicles cross ideal landscapes in maps
and children’s books, we will see how not just moving books but putting them on the road both
extended and transformed the library’s capacity for creating infrastructures that might, just might,
have made common consciousness possible.

“The Thronged and Common Road”: Infrastructures of Feeling
In the last decades of the nineteenth century, and the first decades of the twentieth,
progressive reformers confronted the consequences of what Rev. Josiah Strong called “the
unprecedented and disproportionate development of material civilization” at the expense of the
moral, ethical, and emotional.69 Against “individualism,” which it saw as the dominant political
virtue of the Gilded Age and as inadequate amid new realities, progressivism (like Populism)
turned instead to new visions of community and connection that would understand the
relationship of the physical and spiritual as fraught but mutually constitutive.70 Historians of the
Progressive Era have argued that progressivism was marked by a desire to “solve” the problem
of class by transcending it, and that a commitment to “association” as a social and political
strategy (and to a collective “the People” as an abstract idea), as well as a faith in state power as

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
68

Lena Fuller to Johnston, June 11, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.
Josiah Strong, The Twentieth Century City (New York: Baker & Taylor, 1898), 11-12.
70
See Rhys H. Williams, “Visions of the Good Society and the Religious Roots of American Political Culture,”
Sociology of Religion 60 (1999): 27-29.
69

34
	  

an engine for positive change, were key parts of that project.71 Traveling libraries—which often
grew out of associations, which were devoted to connecting people through print, which
frequently sought to elide class differences and Americanize immigrants, and which typically
ended up as departments of state governments—combined these impulses in an illustrative
fashion.72 What is even more illuminating is the way in which traveling libraries embodied a
particular way of combining them: in a commitment to material and cultural systems that would
facilitate emotional connection, in a commitment to what I call infrastructures of feeling.
“Structures of feeling,” according to Raymond Williams, are “social experiences in
solution, as distinct from other social semantic formations, which have been precipitated and are
more evidently and more immediately available.” These common habits and ways of thinking, in
other words, structure cultural contexts without necessarily being visible. Williams argues that
these structures are “at the very edge of semantic availability,” unsolidified, but that does not, I
insist, mean that they are necessarily immaterial or non-systemic.73 A chemical solution may
appear homogenous, but it is in fact finely structured by physical linkages. In order to be shared,
even in the inchoate manner Williams intends, the ideas and assumptions that make up social
formations must circulate materially in the world. And in order to circulate, there must exist a
system that can support their transmission. An infrastructure of feeling, then, might be most
easily understood as less a set of shared ideas themselves but rather that which makes them
possible: the solution itself, the material framework and cultural grammar in which people are
immersed and that allow them to share (or, at least, try to share) common understanding.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

71

On association and state power, see McGerr, Fierce Discontent, especially 66-68. On the progressive project of
replacing class-conscious and class-riven society with “the people,” see Shelton Stromquist, Reinventing “The
People”: The Progressive Movement, the Class Problem, and the Origins of Modern Liberalism (Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 2006).
72
On Americanization and traveling libraries, see Pawley, Reading Places, 68-71.
73
Raymond Williams, Marxism and Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977), 133-134.

35
	  

In their commitment to materializing their feelings—in schools, settlement houses, urban
planning, public health policies, road beautification projects, and libraries—progressives worked
hard to develop those infrastructures that link people together in body and spirit, understanding
them to be key to the construction of social democracy. Such infrastructures would, ideally, not
simply create shared spaces. Those spaces would, they insisted, bring to the surface of social life
a common consciousness—sadly but only temporarily submerged in a sea of individualism—that
would change the world. As we saw in the introduction, Washington Gladden and Charlotte
Perkins Gilman turned to material metaphors—of trees, of watches, of batteries—to explicate
their dream of common consciousness. They were not alone, and others took it even further. Jane
Addams, for example, argued that the dawning of the new century demanded a “social
morality”—and thus a new kind of democracy—in place of an individual one.74 Americans had
become very good at “[c]ertain forms of personal righteousness,” according to Addams, wherein
they knew, say, not to steal. This excessively individual approach, however, “makes virtue easy,”
and fundamentally misunderstands “the exigencies of contemporaneous life.”75 This new kind of
morality is not easy to develop, Addams warned the readers of her Democracy and Social Ethics
(1902), and requires finding the kind of “common fund of memories and affections” that
characterizes family relations.76 Developing that fund in a social context marked in new ways by
massive scale, class stratification, and a cocooning individualism had its challenges. And for
Addams, the solution was about physical mobility in the physical world: “We are learning that a
standard of social ethics is not attained by travelling a sequestered byway,” she insisted, “but by
mixing on the thronged and common road where all must turn out for one another, and at least
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

74

Jane Addams, Democracy and Social Ethics (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2002 [1902]), 6.
Addams, Democracy, 5, 6.
76
Addams, Democracy, 7.
75

36
	  

see the size of one another’s burdens.”77 For Addams, the foundation of a truly social democracy
is the physical infrastructure of shared space and thus of shared experience.
This infrastructure is simultaneously, inextricably physical and emotional. Entering the
“thronged and common road” means not just existing alongside a mass of people but
empathizing with them, understanding their burdens in ways that change one’s relationship to
democracy and the commonweal. The physically shared space of the street is a condition of
possibility for a common experience which is, then, the condition of community. “[G]oing
forward as we must in the heat and jostle of the crowd” may be uncomfortable, Addams explains,
but it turns out that discomfort, and its eventual and collective amelioration, is precisely the
point.78 “It is as though we have thirsted to drink at the great wells of human experience,” she
writes, “because we knew that a daintier or less potent draught would not carry us to the end of
our journey.”79 For Gilman, the “tingling” of the “I”—in her description of common
consciousness as “the tingling ‘I’ that reaches wider and wider”—captures the carefully
harmonized vibrations of matter and spirit that characterized her utopian longing, vibrations that
could be organized in service of a newly connected world. Addams and Gilman thus carried
Gladden’s physical metaphors even further than his trees and chains, imagining systems for the
creation, distribution, and management of belonging, of collective consciousness
The gender politics of this move were complicated, to say the least. It could at times
suggest a flattening that actually wasn’t very flat. Gladden, in particular, promoted disappearance
into the family as a strategy somehow new and exciting, as if women had not been forced

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

77

Addams, Democracy, 7.
Addams, Democracy, 9.
79
Addams, Democracy, 9.
78

37
	  

socially and legally to do just that for centuries.80 And, as Caroll Smith-Rosenberg reminds us,
“rituals of cohesion” could be not “constitutive social dramas” but “potentially repressive of
legitimate female protest and supportive of male hegemony.”81 But, at the same time, finding a
“common consciousness” could, at least at some times and in some places, open women’s eyes
to the power of what historian Gayle Gullett calls “politicized solidarity.”82 Indeed, in women’s
hands, this way of thinking about infrastructure as both physical space and emotional circuitry
could be a tool for social change and political power. The intersection of physical and emotional
was, after all, a place women occupied quite thoroughly (if not always easily) in this period.
Gilman led the charge on this front, pushing women in particular to realize that the physical and
emotional space of “the home is not isolated,” a fact of which “we are made painfully conscious
through its material connections,—gas-pipes, water-pipes, sewer-pipes, and electric wires.” Even
“[t]he mere physical comfort of the home,” she insists, “needs collective action, to say nothing of
the psychic connection in which we all live.”83 Her plans for a feminist future often involved
exploiting the ways that the home was always shot through by networks (collective kitchens and
laundries, for example), and her utopian fiction frequently put women in charge of controlling
and maintaining those various networks.84 And even women far less radical than Gilman used a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

80

Gladden, “Rights,” 3-4. Gretchen Ritter has argued that women’s civic membership was depended, or at least
seemed to depend, on an autonomy that separated her from the family as the sole way of identifying herself and her
value. Gladden’s turn to identifying all value by a relation to the family network could, then, cause some problems.
Gretchen Ritter, The Constitution as Social Design: Gender and Civic Membership in the American Constitutional
Order (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006), 3. On the often complicated but always influential role of women
in the Social Gospel movement, see Wendy J. Deichmann Edwards and Carolyn De Swarte Gifford, eds., Gender
and the Social Gospel (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2003).
81
Caroll Smith-Rosenberg, Disorderly Conduct: Visions of Gender in Victorian America (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1985), 18.
82
Gayle Gullett, Becoming Citizens: The Emergence and Development of the California Women’s Movement, 18801911 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000), 2.
83
Quoted in Lieberman, “Power Lines,” 182.
84
On Gilman’s ideas for and influence on socialist and feminist design, see Dolores Hayden, The Grand Domestic
Revolution: A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes, Neighborhoods and Cities (Cambridge: MIT Press,
1982), esp. 182-279. On women in charge of networks, see Lieberman, “Power Lines,” 184.

38
	  

supposedly feminine knack for stewarding comfort to claim a right to transform communities
and their physical landscapes. The General Federation of Women’s Clubs, for example, took a
leading role in fighting billboards to preserve “the full enjoyment of outdoor beauty” in the first
decades of the twentieth century, and women’s organizations had for years before that used the
idea of “municipal housekeeping” to push for sanitation reform.85 Thinking about infrastructures
as something that needed not just the shaping of matter but also the organization of feeling let
women stake important claims in a nation newly obsessed with both engineering and
belonging.86
“Since the development of a society requires common service, and that common service
requires for its wise direction a common consciousness,” Gilman insisted in 1904, “therefore
every modification of human activity which develops common consciousness is
advantageous.”87 By the time she wrote that, many such modifications were already in process.
And one of them, the traveling library, was working hard to make the dream of a common
consciousness not just real, but material.

“Through New Channels”: Building the Traveling Library Movement
Grand plans to use print to create community, and to develop a consistently “thick mesh,”
were complicated across large swaths of the country by the fact that, as Christine Pawley writes,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

85

See Catherine Gudis, Buyways: Billboards, Automobiles, and the American Landscape (New York: Routledge,
2004), 172; Susan Strasser, Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash (New York: Henry Holt, 1999), 121-123
86
The engineer—”bureaucracy’s perfect symbol,” in Robert Wiebe’s phrase—took on an outsized role in American
society in the Progressive Era, as they came to represent the pinnacle of disinterested, efficient, and incorruptible
reason. Robert H. Wiebe, The Search for Order, 1877-1920 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1967), 153. See also Seely,
“Republic,” 29-30.
87
Gilman, Human Work, 277.

39
	  

“[r]ural isolation from print was profound” in the late nineteenth century.88 Without specific
physical infrastructures (home postal delivery, reliable roads, local libraries, etc.), print could
play only a minor role in constructing communities outside of cities, which made it difficult to
imagine ways of building a “common consciousness” across the wide and sometimes lonely
spaces of the United States. The public library movement, and the publicly- and Carnegie-funded
explosion of library buildings, Henry Legler pointed out in 1908, had “provide[d] city dwellers
with an amplitude of reading material, but there was until a few years ago no provision for
similarly meeting the greater needs of the isolated persons living...in thousands of little hamlets,
in mining and lumber camps, in uncounted farmhouses.”89 Or, as one applicant for a traveling
library in Kansas pointedly put it in 1898, she and her fellow rural residents “have all the hungry
craving for something good to read that the more pretentious town people have,” but fewer books
available.90 The traveling library emerged out of new ways of thinking about the systems of
belonging, and as an elegant solution to the problem of building communities that were both
material and affective across the vastness of national space. “Forc[ing] good books through new
channels into places where they had rarely been used,” in Wisconsin Free Library Commission
secretary F.A. Hutchins’s words, made it possible to imagine community taking shape on larger
scales and along new infrastructures.91
These libraries, which were usually operated either by states themselves or by federations
of women’s clubs, shipped books in boxes, some of which could double as bookshelves, by rail
and wagon to outlying communities, usually from a central stock. The box and its books would
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

88

Christine Pawley, “Advocate for Access: Lutie Stearns and the Traveling Libraries of the Wisconsin Free Library
Commission, 1895-1914,” Libraries & Culture 35 (2000): 442.
89
Henry E. Legler, Books for the People (Milwaukee, WI: Kessinger, 1908), 3. On Carnegie libraries and the
building boom, see Abigail Van Slyck, Free to All: Carnegie Libraries & American Culture, 1890-1920 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1998).
90
O.M. Record to Johnston, July 14, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.
91
F. A. Hutchins, Traveling Libraries (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1900), 6.

40
	  

remain in place at a particular location (like a store or living room made newly a library), and
after a set amount of time, it would be sent back and replaced by another, different box. This was
an answer to a problem as old as the codex (books are relatively expensive) and a newer one
emerging out of the public library and public education movements of the nineteenth century
(enabling wide access to an abundant and varied collection of books is difficult). The first largescale traveling library program was founded by Melvil Dewey in New York in 1892 (others
would follow in that decade in Michigan, Iowa, Maine, Ohio, Minnesota, Kansas, and elsewhere).
These libraries grew out of the same progressive ideas about infrastructure—that it should be
material and emotional, that it should be a cause and a product of both association and state
power—that influenced Gladden, Addams, and others. Traveling libraries like Dewey’s tried to
literalize “common fund” and “common consciousness” by making claims for a common culture
then developing the physical, bureaucratic, and emotional systems that would facilitate its being
shared. Traveling libraries allowed those areas “remote from centers of population,” in Legler’s
words, to share a collection of books—and thus, theoretically, a consciousness—with distant
places by specifically exploiting those infrastructures which did exist, like rail lines, and
carefully designing and deploying other systems to achieve the goal of using books to shape
belonging.92
Indeed, books—and more specifically, libraries that might contain and transport them—
were particularly potent tools for accomplishing that goal. They were objects, yes, but they were
objects that were densely packed with meaning, which could be carried across space and time.
They could embody and communicate something (as much as that something might be debated
or disliked), something that could approach an intellectual and cultural commons, a shared
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

92

Legler, Books, 3.

41
	  

consciousness—some complex, perpetually unfinished amalgam of ideas, stories, fears, desires,
prejudices, and values—made and remade in circulation. Moving books between people, and
thereby fostering connections between them, made it seem like it might be possible, as in Walt
Whitman’s earlier fantasy of social print, to “leap beyond yet nearer bring; / This printed and
bound book—but the printer and the printing-office boy.”93
Oddly, though, in the early period, and especially in the Kansas case to be discussed
below, there was remarkably little debate about what those books should be. From the
fragmentary evidence left of the actual books sent out by the Kansas Traveling Library, for
example, it seems that much of the requests by patrons were for non-fiction (an occasional
request would come in for Russian literature in translation or for Shakespeare), and that many of
the books sent out were the same. All extant evidence suggests that the librarians encouraged,
and the patrons enthusiastically undertook, a particularly non-fiction-focused version of what
Amy Blair calls “reading up.”94 Surprisingly then, the question of what really constituted “up,”
what counted as “good literature,” tended to be bracketed off.95 It was likely marked by some
basic shared assumptions—about the value of certain kinds of lives (white, elite, supposedly
exemplary) and about certain kinds of reading practices and cultural objects—that were widely
shared among the aspirational middle classes (the audience, for example, for Charles Eliot’s
“five-foot shelf” of Harvard Classics) from which the libraries’ organizers were most often
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
93

Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 112.
Amy L. Blair, Reading Up: Middle-Class Readers and the Culture of Success in the Early Twentieth-Century
United States (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2011).
95
A paper presented by Lucy Johnston about the value of traveling libraries, suggests only specific titles when they
would assist teaching in public schools on topics like slavery (Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin), the
history of American Indians (James Fennimore Cooper’s Leatherstocking Tales, Helen Hunt Jackson’s Ramona, and
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s Hiawatha), and geography (Bayard Taylor’s Library of Travel). It also briefly
mentions that Daniel Deronda, Swiss Family Robinson, The Virginian, and Helen’s Babies were acquired by the
Wisconsin system. These give some sense of the assumptions with which traveling librarians worked, but the paper
leaves largely unspecified the scope of what is meant by “good reading,” or “good literature.” Lucy Browne
Johnston, “Traveling Libraries,” folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers.

94

42
	  

drawn. These assumptions were, however, often left undiscussed and undebated, gestured at with
a “good” or a “fine” but hardly central to how the librarians imagined their project. Indeed,
organizers seemed much more interested in discussing and determining the shape of their readers’
social interactions than their specific engagements with specific texts. This suggests that to a
significant degree it was not the content of the books but the very fact of their circulation among
people that mattered most to the progressive dream of building a common consciousness. As we
will see in the next three chapters, however, that general indifference to content would—as other
assumptions unfolded—ultimately have devastating consequences.
For librarians like Dewey, being public or shared did not just happen. It was not an easy,
inevitable byproduct of the book. Rather, it had to be constructed as and by a system that would
make it possible. “[E]xperience has proved that unless knowledge is as free as air or water it is
fearfully handicapped,” Dewey explained in an influential 1901 pamphlet that summarized his
experiences over the previous decade, “and the state can not afford to allow even the smallest
obstacle to remain between any citizens and the desire for either inspiration or information.”96
Knowledge (and, more precisely, its material manifestation in the book) should, thanks to the
development of a public system for its distribution, flow as freely as water. (Whether water itself
should be free was a rather trickier question in this era of privatized utilities.) Only a few pages
later Dewey declares that “a library is like a reservoir of drinking water,” which must be

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

96

Dewey, “Traveling Libraries: Field and Future of Traveling Libraries,” 5. He was not alone in linking information
and public utilities. “I believe in the people’s ownership of human necessities such as light, heat, water, power,
telephone and telegraph,” insisted Wisconsin traveling library pioneer Lutie Stearns. Additionally, Lucy Browne
Johnston, who organized the Kansas Traveling Library (to be discussed below), also used water to explain the value
of traveling libraries: “Just as thirty-four little streams winding their way through Dunn county would do more good
than one large river miles away, so these thirty four little libraries, circulating through so many families, will do
more good than the one big library at the county-seat or State Capital.” Stearns quoted in Pawley, “Advocate for
Access,” 436; Lucy Browne Johnston, “Traveling Libraries,” folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers.

43
	  

replenished frequently or risk stagnation.97 This is his argument for the importance of a traveling
library system that would allow communities to trade and recirculate collections, to avoid the
problems that Hutchins identified as the cause of village libraries’ frequent failures:
“Uninteresting books” and “Infrequent supplies of new books.”98 But it is also, in its resonance
with Addams’s “great wells of human experience,” a claim for building a system that would
allow for shared experience.
In ways that also echo Gilman’s description of the home shot through with connections,
Dewey treated the library—as a system for the distribution of material books, as an infrastructure
of feeling that would facilitate the literacy necessary for a common consciousness—as a
foundation on which individual and social character is built:
By common consent the supreme thing in education is the building of character, but
character grows out of habits, habits are based in actions, actions on motives, and motives
on reflection. What makes most people reflect? It is usually reading that begets reflection,
reflection begets motive, motive begets action, action repeated begets habits and habits
beget that supreme thing character.99
This carefully structured, accumulative approach to reading captures a specific example of the
progressive impulse to judiciously organize and order life on all its scales and in all of its
spaces—from cradle to grave, from gutters to governance. Using “traveling book[s]” as a
foundation for this work, Dewey presented traveling libraries as a quintessential infrastructure of
feeling.100
Occurring again and again, throughout the literature of the traveling library movement, is
an emphasis on the inextricability of the emotional and the material in library work, in general,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

97

Dewey, “Traveling Libraries,” 8.
Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 1-2.
99
Dewey, “Traveling Libraries,” 4.
100
Dewey, “Traveling Libraries,” 3.

98

44
	  

and its “itinerant principle,” in particular.101 The purpose of a traveling library, Hutchins wrote in
1900, was “developing the ‘library spirit’ in all parts of the state.”102 This spirit was not simply
the books themselves as material objects, or just the knowledge they conveyed, but that
collective feeling, prompted by access to them, that such knowledge deserved to be shared
broadly. It was often inchoate and ineffable—an 1896 Public Libraries editorial insisted that
“[t]he library spirit which descends at [American Library Association] meetings cannot be
explained or described”—but it could have material, and even infrastructural, effects.103 The
library spirit closed a circuit: Like “common road[s]” which beget common consciousness,
shared books help create an emotional response which is the condition for the development of
physical channels allowing the further circulation of books, which then creates a community
which desires books.104
Inviting people to interact with both books and one another in this way, libraries had
effects far beyond the province of literacy. Indeed, the whole purpose of traveling libraries, its
architects seem to argue, was not books but contact, a productive friction: “Enthusiasm for the
work has seemed to kindle at the touch,” Hutchins wrote (presaging Gilman’s talk of a similar
kindling), “and the pioneers have often been overwhelmed with calls for advice and
information.”105 What is kindled by this touch is a way of thinking about books as central
features of social democracy’s “thick mesh.” As a report by a library committee in New York
explained it, the job of those who have decided to start a traveling library program is to “awaken
a sense of the obligation which rests on every citizen to make his less fortunate neighbor, so far
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
101

Dewey, “Traveling Libraries,” 9.
Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 11.
103
Public Libraries, Volume 1 (Chicago: Library Bureau, 1896), 134.
104
“The main purpose was to show people how greatly a library may benefit a community,” Hutchins explained,
“and to create a desire for a local library.” Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 3.
105
Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 6.

102

45
	  

as possible, a reader of good books.”106 This tingling, kindled obligation was an almost entirely
new product of progressivism, and it was also the point where the material and the emotional—
where the physical and the cultural—rubbed together so thoroughly they became
indistinguishable.
When it comes to shaping communities, the traveling library movement was
complicated—but also, in a way, animated—by the fact that such systems were as likely in their
early years to be run by the state as not. In New York, the traveling library was from the
beginning a department of the state government, funded by tax dollars, and organized from
Albany. But in Wisconsin, for example, J.H. Stout used a number of such libraries, funded
privately, to facilitate the circulation of books in Menomonie, Wisconsin, and the whole of Dunn
County.107 His system was imitated across the state (unified under the Wisconsin Free Library
Commission by Stout, Hutchins, and Lutie Stearns) and eventually incorporated into a state
department in 1903.108 In 1899, of the 2500 traveling libraries across the country, fewer than half
were funded by state governments.109
Who was responsible for these libraries, then? In many, if not most, cases, the answer
was a set of institutions that were incredibly influential in the Progressive Era: women’s clubs. In
particular, state federations of women’s clubs funded and operated traveling library systems,
large and small, “being appealed to therefor by the representatives of clubs in the smaller
communities in their state.”110 In 1899, for example, Hutchins recorded traveling libraries run by
women’s clubs in Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, California, Nebraska, Kansas, Illinois,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

106

Quoted in Dewey, “Traveling Libraries,” 11.
Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 5.
108
On the history of the Wisconsin program, which has been the subject of more scholarly attention than any other,
see Pawley, Reading Places, 67-111; Pawley, “Advocate for Access;” Legler, Books, 8-10.
109
Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 5.
110
Public Libraries, Volume 1, 180.
107

46
	  

Missouri, Minnesota, and elsewhere.111 Henry Legler gave, in 1908, just a taste of the range of
traveling library activities undertaken by women:
Some women in New Jersey have used them to lighten the long winter days and evenings
of the brave men who belong to the life-saving service...; other women, in Salt Lake City,
send them regularly to remote valleys in Utah; a number of state federations of women’s
clubs use them to furnish books for study to isolated clubs; Mrs. Eugene B. Heard of
Middleton, Ga., is devoting herself to...[a] system which reaches a large number of small
villages on the Seaboard Air Line in five southern states; ...to the ‘mountain whites’
libraries are sent by women’s clubs in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Alabama. In Idaho,
California, Nebraska, Kansas, Illinois, Missouri, Minnesota, and many other states,
women’s clubs are doing the same work for miners, lumbermen, farmers, and sailors.112
Small wonder, then, that so many libraries were not governmentally funded.
But this points to a fissure, of sorts, in the ideology of the traveling library. The “library
spirit” was a fundamental feature of public librarianship, but with women’s clubs running the
show, the definition of “public” was potentially paradoxical.113 Historian Amy Richter has
argued that women in the late nineteenth century were able to make claims for participation in
and influence on infrastructure (railroads, in her case) thanks to an ideology she calls “public
domesticity.” This “transplant[ation of] private expectations to public spaces” allowed women to
create and exploit a productive ambiguity in the distinction between public and private.114 Like
Gilman rupturing the supposedly sealed home, women’s clubs made the whole world private as a
way of acting in public—and libraries played a prominent role in this dynamic. (It is not, I think,
a coincidence that Legler described the library, and especially the extended library, as “this house
of the open door.”)115 One women’s club, for example, argued that libraries would provide a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

111

Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 6.
Legler, Books, 5-6.
113
Hutchins, for one, registers some confusion on this front. He suggests that a lack of public funding in some states
“has not stayed the rapid progress of the movement. It has probably helped it,” but later argues that “State
commissions…do more to communicate the ‘library spirit’.” Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 4, 7.
114
Amy Richter, Home on the Rails: Women, the Railroad, and the Rise of Public Domesticity (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2005), 61.
115
Henry E. Legler, Library Ideals (Chicago: Open Court, 1918), 11.

112

47
	  

“home-influence” on single young men.116 And traveling libraries, by their very mobility,
promised to increase the scope of that influence—and, importantly, the scale of women’s power
to act on the world.
Women’s clubs offered what the Historian of the General Federation of Woman’s Clubs
called, in 1898, “the training of power” alongside and through “the working of a spirit of human
solidarity, a comprehension of the continuity of life.”117 Traveling libraries offered women a
potent tool—print, mobile print—to accomplish that training and that work. Especially in the
West, as Suzanne Stauffer has pointed out, libraries offered women opportunities for mobility,
“autonomy, responsibility, and power” not as easily available in other fields and other
locations.118 Women, and especially women of the West, needed to “march forward in
concentrated action,” Idaho Traveling Library founder Margaret Stephenson Roberts insisted, to
“help turn this Great West into a paradise.”119 And moving print would help make that possible.
Indeed, as we will see in the case of the Kansas Traveling Library Commission, using traveling
libraries to organize print and an emotional consciousness across distances large and small
created opportunities to both claim and potentially reimagine citizenship in new ways.

“Little Neighborhoods”: On the Kansas Traveling Library Commission
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

116

Van Slyck, Free to All, 135.
Croly, A History, n.p. This sort of “training of power,” which might allow women to negotiate, complicate, and
challenge standard and often oppressive categories was not unique to the United States. Benjamin Cohen argues, for
example, that women’s clubs in India “networked together individuals and associations into complex webs that
challenge and span simple categories of ruler and ruled, and...revealed that the categories of colonizer and colonized
were constantly shifting and thus being renegotiated.” Benjamin B. Cohen, “Networks of Sociability: Women’s
Clubs in Colonial and Postcolonial India,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women’s Studies 30 (2009): 170.
118
Suzanne M. Stauffer, “‘She speaks as one having authority’: Mary E. Downey’s Use of Libraries as a Means to
Public Power,” Libraries & Culture 40 (2005): 40.
119
This, she declared, “can be done only through organizing, counseling and standing together.” Margaret
Stephenson Roberts, “Arise and Possess Thyself,” Reel 2, Margaret Stephenson Roberts Papers, 1896-1956,
Schlessinger Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

117

48
	  

The Kansas Traveling Library officially began in 1898, having been imagined and
planned by three leaders of the Kansas Social Science Federation of Clubs in 1897.120 Intended
to “provide books for the bookless,” to move print to those “miles from books of any description,”
the library within twenty years circulated over 1,500 libraries throughout the state.121 Particularly
influential was Lucy Browne Johnston, KSSF Library Committee Chair, who recalled her own
childhood of rural reading deprivation.122 “Fortunately, or unfortunately,” she remembered years
later, “the first years of my life were spent on a farm near a very small village without library
privileges.”123 Dedicating herself to preventing such an experience for other children in her
adopted state, Johnston took the lead in developing the idea for and organization of the library.
With echoes yet again of Gilman’s vision of the (always public) home, Johnston reported that her
early request for books from women in Topeka had an illuminating effect: “They began at once
to fulfill their pledge and soon our home was so crowded with books that the good husband said
either the books or the family would have to move out.”124 The books did eventually move out of
her house, but they did not move out of Johnston’s life for many years; she “remain[ed] an
effective and inspiring worker in [the library’s] cause and progress” for at least two decades after
its founding.125 Indeed, that role continued after the library became an official department of the
state, the Kansas Traveling Library Commission, in 1899—making Johnston an important state
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
120

For details on the founding and history of the commission, see James W. Drury, The Kansas Traveling Library
Commission: An Administrative History (Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Governmental Research Center,
1965).
121
Quotations from James L. King, et al., Third Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission
1902-’04 (Topeka: Geo. A. Clark, 1905), 6. By fifty years after its founding, the library circulated over 100,000
books, with that number doubling by 1962. Drury, Kansas, 8.
122
On Johnston, and women’s clubs more generally, in the founding of the Kansas Traveling Library, see Diana
Weaver, “Letters to Lucy Johnston: Addressing the Need for Literature on the Kansas Prairies,” Information &
Culture 48 (2013): 50-67.
123
Johnston to Mrs. E. G. Wickwire [draft], Sept. 25, 1915, folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers.
124
“Report of the Traveling Library Commission to the Kansas Social Science Federation of Clubs,” draft
typescript, ca. 1900, folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers.
125
King, et al., Third Biennial Report, 11.

49
	  

official in her own right. More on that transition, and the role of women in arguing for it despite
being denied suffrage, later. For now, let it suffice to say that the Kansas Traveling Library
program, and Johnston’s part in it, make an ideal case study for exploring the ideology and
operation of early library extension.
Johnston conceived of and designed the program to accomplish the progressive goals of
efficient governance and, most importantly, common consciousness.126 Johnston’s assistant,
Mary Keating, complained bitterly in 1898, for example, about a “county that can muster but one
soldiers [sic] boy; a county whose officers are elected by whiskey and money; a town where
much more money is spent for whisky than for the support of the gospel.”127 According to
progressive proponents of traveling libraries, the best way to solve the problem such
fragmentation and selfishness presented—to get everyone on the same page—was to more
efficiently use state resources like print to make local communities more cohesive and then to
link them together into a large-scale polity. A 1900 newspaper report, parroting the language of
the Traveling Library’s organizers, told the story like this: “For many years there has been stored
in the State Library...a wealth of knowledge practically useless to the mass of people because of
the laws which prevented its distribution. … Realizing the utter uselessness of the books in the
State Library, with no power to put them in the hands of the people, a standing committee on
traveling libraries was appointed and the result has proved its efficiency.”128

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

126

It is unclear whether Johnston herself would have called herself a progressive. She was an active suffragist and a
dedicated Republican, and some sources describe her as conservative. Insofar as the progressive movement
coalesced at all, though, it did so with shared assumptions and shared goals. Whether or not Johnston identified with
the progressive movement, or a member of a progressive movement, the ideas and tools she used were progressive
in nature. While I generally try to avoid calling her a progressive, I do (where warranted) call her actions
progressive.
127
Keating to Johnston, May 26, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.
128
“State Library: To be Placed at the Disposal of Organized Clubs,” ca. 1900, Kansas Traveling Library
Commission: Selected Newspaper Clippings, 1898-1964, Kansas Historical Society.

50
	  

Unleashing and wielding that “wealth of knowledge” more usefully, by creating
infrastructures for its distribution, was meant to develop what Keating called “union of force”
and Gladden might have called a common consciousness. This was to take place on intensely
local levels, building what Legler called “little neighborhoods” out of clusters of individuals, and
also on much larger scales.129 Shelton Stromquist argues that a key goal of the progressive
movement was “reinventing civic virtue, freed from slavish party loyalty,” which could
“constitute a more potent political force—the people—whose citizenship transcended differences
of class or neighborhood.”130 And this could easily describe the motivations and operations of
the urban institutions of progressivism, like settlement houses and city sanitation movements.
But off on the vast prairies of Kansas, like in so many places in the only recently urbanizing
United States, it was not unusual for miles to pass between houses, and for towns to seem to
barely hang together. In order to allow people to transcend mere neighborhood loyalty, an
intermediate step was necessary. Nellie Armentrout, secretary of the traveling library program,
explained in 1904 that “[w]e reach a class of people who do not have access to the city libraries....
We go into the homes of farmers and the people of the little hamlets and towns.”131 This was the
first step: taking individual homes and—by providing the emotional and material systems to
bring people together—making neighborhoods out of them. Indeed, Armentrout, like Johnston
and Keating, saw books and reading communities forming neighborhoods in the first place and
then (as we will see a bit later) connecting those newfound neighbors to an infrastructure that
allowed them access to the political center of the state and the intellectual life of the nation.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

129

Legler, Books, 4.
Stromquist, Reinventing, 56.
131
“Books in Demand,” Kansas City Journal, December 31, 1904.

130

51
	  

The Traveling Library was not just born out of an ideological context obsessed with the
idea of association and connection; one of its primary goals was to nurture and promote what
public sphere theorists call associational life.132 This life involved the sorts of clubs and
organizations that had been such an important part of American political and social life since the
nation’s founding—and which frequently involved combination, print, and mobility as central
components or tools. In 1773, for example, the New York Sons of Liberty crafted an “association”
which they “carried about the city…to unite with their fellow citizens,” gathering signatures to
indicate an official and conjoined public.133 And Benjamin Franklin’s circulating library was
born when he realized that members of his club could combine their books to “become a
common benefit,” and then sought to “render the benefit from the books more common, by
commencing a public subscription library.”134 By their very nature—and despite the excessive
baggage of rationality often thrust upon associational life and civil society—these sorts of
organizations mimic democratic politics more broadly by being simultaneously institutional and
emotional, about both governance and common bonds. Women’s clubs, as a particular variation
on this older form of association, were especially adept at exploiting this place where formal
politics bleeds into the organization of emotion. And they were even more skilled at amplifying
their influence by expanding the scope and the density of those associations. A newspaper in
1900 said outright of the Kansas Traveling Library that “the original intention was to provide
means and to encourage the organization of Women’s clubs.”135 The report is correct, but it
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

132

See, for just two varied examples, Albrecht Koschnik, “Let a Common Interest Bind Us Together”: Associations,
Partisanship, and Culture in Philadelphia, 1775-1840 (Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press, 2007); Aili
Mari Tripp, “Gender, Political Participation and the Transformation of Associational Life in Uganda and Tanzania,”
African Studies Review 37 (1994): 107-131.
133
Reprinted in Hezekiah Niles, Principles and Acts of the Revolution in America (Baltimore: William Ogden Niles,
1822), 188.
134
Benjamin Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (Philadelphia: Henry Altemus, 1895), 139.
135
“State Library,” Kansas Traveling Library Commission Clippings.

52
	  

vastly undersells the scope and importance of encouraging association on the prairie. To
illustrate, I want to now turn to a story that emerges from the archives of the Kansas Traveling
Library and captures this dynamic at work.
In late summer, 1898, May Pressly wrote in a tidy hand from her home in Protection,
Kansas, to Johnston, just under three hundred long miles away: “I write for information, can I as
an individual join the C.L. [circulating library] by remitting two dollars and guaranteeing safe
return of the books? I live on a ranch in a thinly populated county with but very little access to
reading matter.”136 Pressley had apparently discovered the Traveling Library’s existence the way
most potential participants did in those early years: by word of mouth.137 She knew that the
library required from potential recipients two dollars (to cover freight expenses) and a guarantee
of the books’ safety. But she missed what was probably the most important of the requirements.
Johnston, in response, likely sent the standard form letter that went to anyone requesting
information about receiving the library. A rather straightforward, bureaucratic document, it
explained that the Traveling Library insisted on the formation of a library club, which could both
raise funds and protect the books, as a prerequisite for receipt of a box. This was a relatively
common feature among traveling library programs nationwide. The New York traveling library
system, for example, required an “application of twenty-five resident taxpayers or of the officers
of a university extension center, a club, course, or circle.”138
With this requirement, the Kansas Traveling Library plugged into and increased the
efficacy of existing clubs, especially study clubs for women, like the Columbian Club of Ottawa,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

136

Mrs. W.W. Pressly to Johnston, Aug. 8, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.
As a 1902 report by the Commission explained, the traveling libraries had “never been systematically advertised
to the people,” unlike other programs like those in Wisconsin. Nonetheless, there was “a ready response” to the
libraries among the people. James L. King, et al., Second Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries
Commission 1901-1902 (Topeka: W.Y. Morgan, 1902), 5.
138
“New York’s Traveling Libraries,” Chicago Daily Tribune, February 15, 1897.
137

53
	  

the Ladies’ Shakespeare Club of Galena, the Coterie Club of Pratt, and the Current Literature &
History Club of Jamestown.139 A women’s club in Winfield, for example, planned to spend part
of 1899 studying constitutional history, and so requested a series of books to help them.140 (That
they were focused on studying political and legal history, two decades before any of them could
vote in federal elections, suggests the sometimes subtly radical purposes to which the traveling
libraries were put.) The club requirement also—and importantly—inspired the creation of new
clubs where there had not been any before. And this is just what happened in Protection. It had
seemed, from her talk of a thin population, that the task Johnston had put before Pressly might
have been too much. But several weeks after her first postcard, Pressly wrote back with good
news: “I received your letter some time ago and in the mean time made a circuit of our district
and f[ound] three families besides our own who are willing to enter in a club and form an
association, the school board included in the families, there are in all ten members over fifteen
years of age and all reliable and I think will take good care of your books.”141 With this small
and fragmentary record, it is difficult to know if Pressly’s desires and Johnston’s aims aligned
fully, but a carefully reading makes clear that this card carried with its good news at least a trace
of shared purpose. Indeed, in its single sentence, the card neatly encapsulates three specific ways
in which the women of the traveling library (Johnston and Keating but also Pressly and her
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
139

Existing clubs played a role from the other direction as well, with a number—including the Twentieth Century
Club and Friends in Council of Lawrence, the Saturday Club of Hiawatha, the Sigournean Club of Ottawa, and the
Ralston Club of Topeka—donated libraries of fifty books. Annie L. Diggs, et al., First Biennial Report of the Kansas
Traveling Libraries Commission, 1900-1901 (Topeka: W.Y. Morgan, 1901), 5. On women’s clubs in Kansas in this
period, see June O. Underwood, “Civilizing Kansas: Women’s Organizations, 1880-1920,” Kansas History (Winter
1984-85): 291-306.
140
Mrs. C.A. Place to Johnston, July 10, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.
141
May G. Pressly to Johnston, Aug. 22, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers. After research was completed for
this project, this correspondence was briefly quoted and discussed by a library historian examining letters to
Johnston in the first years of the Kansas Traveling Library in service of a discussion about reading on the prairie. My
analysis here aims to open up this correspondence in ways that connect it to larger dynamics in American life at the
turn of the twentieth century. See Weaver, “Letters to Lucy Johnston,” 59.

54
	  

fellow patrons) used print to organize association, and “common consciousness,” as a political
tool.
First, and most fundamentally, Pressly writes that she “made a circuit of [her] district” to
find fellows to join her. Here, we can begin to see a geography of reading and community take
shape in rural Kansas under the tutelage of Johnston and her crew. Science writer Brian Hayes
has remarked on the distinctiveness of agricultural geography in the United States. Whereas
traditional practices in Europe and Asia involved central villages whose residents worked
surrounding fields, American agriculture was long characterized by “widely scattered”
farmhouses.142 The result is the “peculiarly American sight” of “house and barn huddled together
in one corner of a giant cornfield,” meaning many rural residents “tend to live...at a considerable
distance from their neighbors.”143 In the early 1960s, literary scholar and cultural critic John
Kouwenhoven traced this distance back to the Land Ordinance of 1785, which divided the land
west of the Appalachian Mountains into a grid system. Remarking on its psychic effects,
Kouwenhoven argued that that system was “a blueprint for a future society in which men would
live each in his own domain, free and equal, each man’s domain clearly divided from his
neighbors.”144 Not exactly a recipe for social cohesion and shared consciousness. Indeed, where
progressives frequently decried the “promiscuous crowd[s]” of urban poverty—of the masses of
city-dwellers living “without knowledge of each other, without fellowship, without...public
spirit”—out on the prairies they could be just as worried about the similar effects of distance on

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

142

Brian Hayes, Infrastructure: A Field Guide to the Industrial Landscape (New York: Norton, 2005), 108, 109.
Hayes, Infrastructure, 109.
144
John A. Kouwenhoven, The Beer Can by the Highway: Essays on What’s “American” about America (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday, 1961), 44-45.

143

55
	  

the future of democracy.145 Women like Pressly were not only “isolated so far as city advantages
are concerned (living in the country),” as a similar library applicant put it that same year, but
they could be isolated from one another and from the frictional, tingling newness of the
progressive enterprise and its libraries.146 “Wherever the traveling library system is introduced,”
declared a 1901 report by the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission, “it makes friends with the
people.”147 But it also, as importantly, made friends among the people. Having Pressly move
through the space around her, bridging gaps between the dispersed people of her county, was
doubly important. It meant that the library would reach more people and be adequately supported,
yes, but it also meant something more: moving from door to door, Pressly quite literally traced
out a desire for print in the land around her, and in the process she marked a new shape for her
community.
Second is that desire itself. What better encapsulates the ideals of democracy, and of
common consciousness, than Pressly’s declaration that she and her fellows are “willing to enter”
into an association? Willingness and the voluntary are key features of democracy, according to
theorists of both civil society and liberal virtue.148 Willingly entered into and devoted to the
circulation and discussion of print and ideas—“organized for the mutual benefit of its members,”
as an applicant for the traveling library put it—clubs like those encouraged by Johnston were
meant to serve as microcosms, as embodiments of an idea of democracy both old and new.149
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

145

Jacob Riis, How the Other Half Lives: Studies Among the Tenements of New York (New York: Charles Scribner
and Sons, 1890), 7; Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull-House (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1990), 211.
Kouwenhoven was a bit more sanguine, writing that the landscape of the agricultural Midwest “embodies a number
of the forms and patterns which seem to me to be characteristic of a civilization based as ours is upon a distinctive
blend of technology and a somewhat untidy but dynamic form of democracy.” Kouwenhoven, Beer Can, 17.
146
Emma Troudner to Johnston, Nov. 27, 1898, folder 3, box 3, Johnston Papers.
147
Diggs, et al., First Biennial Report, 10.
148
See Will Kymlicka and Wayne Norman, “The Return of the Citizen: A Survey of Recent Work on Citizenship
Theory,” Ethics 104 (1994): 352-381.
149
Maurine Axline Fay to Johnston, Aug. 15, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.

56
	  

Educational historian Theodora Penny Martin argues that the women’s study club “functioned as
a smaller, orderly society where traditional community values could be expressed and
affirmed.”150 But this misses the ways that the clubs born out of the traveling library movement
were not just conservative, not only looking back for stability in a new age. Their very form
echoed those that came before them (like Franklin), but it also proposed something strange and
radical, something that came out of what Michael McGerr calls the “essential audacity” of the
progressive project.151 If nothing else characterized the progressivism, it was a faith that a
collective will could be enough to transform the nation and the world. Or, as Herbert David
Croly, a leader in the movement (and son of prominent clubwoman Jennie June Croly), put it in
1909, “an effective increase in national coherence looks in the direction of the democratic
consummation—of the...expression of the Sovereign popular will.”152 Indeed, insofar as
progressivism was a revision of American traditions in the face of what seemed to be ceaseless
change at “the threshold of a new century,” then individualism, a longstanding celebration of the
one over the many, was among the first in line.153 “The people are not Sovereign as individuals,”
Croly insisted. “They become Sovereign only in so far as they succeed in reaching and
expressing a collective purpose.”154
But one dominant way of approaching American life, even during and after the
Progressive Era was to celebrate space and openness. And nothing quite embodied that open
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
150

Theodora Penny Martin, The Sound of Our Own Voices: Women’s Study Clubs 1860-1910 (Boston: Beacon,
1987), 17.
151
McGerr, Fierce Discontent, xv.
152
Herbert David Croly, The Promise of American Life (Minneapolis: Filiquarian Publishing, 2007 [1909]), 308. On
Croly’s political philosophy, and his influence of Progressive ideology, see Will Morrisey, The Dilemma of
Progressivism: How Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson Reshaped the American Regime of Self-Government (Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield, 2009), 7-11.
153
Strong, Twentieth Century City, 11. Michael McGerr has noted “the progressives’ condemnation of
individualism.” McGerr, Fierce Discontent, 111.
154
Croly, Promise, 307-308. “The life of the world is continuous, morally and spiritually as well as materially,” his
mother had written almost a decade earlier, making a strikingly similar point. Croly, History of the Woman’s Club, 9.

57
	  

space as well as the cowboy. By the 1870s, folklorist Marshall Fishwick suggests, barbed wire
fencing and homesteading had largely ended the actual reign of the cowboy, but his iconic power
was hardly diminished by the dawn of progressivism, fed by novels, traveling shows, and other
media.155 Frederick Jackson Turner, in his hugely influential 1893 address on the frontier in
American life, argued that while the frontier had closed, the “expansive character of American
life” continued apace. “Movement has been its dominant fact,” he declared, and “the American
energy will continually demand a wider field for its exercise.”156 The white, masculine settler
colonialism of Manifest Destiny and the frontier fit itself to a newly transoceanic American
empire at the turn of the twentieth century, of course.157 (The Kanas Traveling Library’s first
library was sent to U.S. Soldiers stationed in Manila.)158 But—even in the absence of a technical,
census-certified frontier—Turner hints that there may have remained places in the continental
United States that felt the loneliness and mobility of the cowboy. “The ranges of the Great Plains,
with ranch and cowboy and nomadic life, are things of yesterday and of to-day.”159
But in Kansas, under the influence of the traveling library, something was happening to
(at least some of) the cowboys. In 1904, the Kansas City Star reported about “a request which
came in from some cowboys down on the border near the Texas Panhandle for a renewal of their
little library which they designated as the ‘Cowpunchers’ Library’.” The story continued:
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
155

Marshall W. Fishwick, “The Cowboy: America’s Contribution to the World’s Mythology,” Western Folklore 11
(1952): 77-92. While its heyday was probably the 1950s, that power would continue for decades afterward. In 1972,
for example, historian William H. Hutchinson argued that the cowboy was so distinctive (and distinctively
American) that European social theory was inapplicable to him and his surroundings, that “sea of space [which]
provided the foetal fluid that nourished an optimism...that is not yet extinguished in the people that this space
molded into Americans.” William H. Hutchinson, “The Cowboy and the Class Struggle (Or, Never Put Marx in the
Saddle),” Arizona and the West 14 (1972): 323.
156
Frederick Jackson Turner, The Frontier in American History (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1920), 37.
157
For a supreme example, see Owen Wister, “The Evolution of the Cow-Puncher,” Harper’s, September 1895, 602617. Amy Kaplan argues that this essay “draws a continuous line between the knight and the cowboy, as well as
between the West, now on the decline, and the dawning American interests in the Pacific.” Amy Kaplan, The
Anarchy of Empire in the Making of U.S. Culture (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005 [2002]), 119.
158
“Report of the Committee on Traveling Libraries,” draft, ca. 1906, folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers.
159
Turner, Frontier, 16.

58
	  

“According to the application blank, there were just eight of the cowboys, their library was
‘always open’, and the [cowboy] librarian’s remarks at the bottom of the slip were: ‘These
libraries, I think, are the best things for us lonesome fellows.”160 That same year, Armentrout
announced to another Kansas City newspaper that ranchers and cowboys were responsible for a
rather significant circulation of books. “You wouldn’t think it, but cattlemen are great readers,”
she explained. “I never knew it until I got into this work. ... It seems they read to drive away the
lonesomeness.”161 This is not, to put it mildly, the Anglo-Saxon “out-of-door spirit, most at home
when at large” that Owen Wister celebrated and eulogized in 1895.162 Instead, this is the
purposeful choosing, the intellectual engagement, and the alleviation of loneliness through
association that the infrastructures of progressivism were built to facilitate. Wister lamented the
fact the cowboy had been forced to “further[ ] a design outside himself,” fleeing structure in
favor of “self-government” but bringing “new creeds, polities, and nations...in his wake.”163 But
here, the cowboy does not simply trail “rapid new square miles of brick;” he actively brings
about for himself and his fellows both union and literature.164 Participating in a national culture
constructed and circulated by women’s clubs, these cowboys build something Wister probably
could not or would not imagine. At the “Cowpunchers’ Library,” always open, those icons of
lawless individualism, of remote and forsaken geography, find comfort—and company—in
books and in one another.
Third, and finally, not only does Pressly’s accounting—“ten members over fifteen years
of age”—have the sound of making quorum, but her insistence that they are “all reliable
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

160

“The Traveling Public Library in Kansas: Free Books for all the State,” Kansas City Star (11 September 1904).
“Books in Demand.”
162
Wister, “Evolution,” 606. Intriguingly, Wister’s The Virginian (1902) was one of only a few books specifically
mentioned by Johnston as sample traveling library acquisitions. Lucy Browne Johnston, “Traveling Libraries,”
folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers.
163
Wister, “Evolution,” 604.
164
Wister, “Evolution,” 608.
161

59
	  

and...will take good care of your books” says something specific about the kind of democratic
spirit inculcated by the library. Some of this was relatively conservative, or at least points to the
profound class privilege (and occasional class violence) in the progressive project. In an echo of
a time before even universal white male suffrage in the United States, for example, the New
York traveling library required “a responsible owner of real estate to act as trustee of the
library.”165 But it also suggests, at the same time, a revision of these older, class- and genderbound definitions of citizenship. In a 1958 novel about the traveling library’s successor, a
character insists that “the bookmobile helps teach the children to take care of things...proper care
of books and prompt return of them furnish pretty good training for citizenship.”166 This is, of
course, a bit unsettling, but it is also the result of a (deeply imperfect and unfinished) progressive
effort to make citizenship about actions rather than inheritances. When one clubwoman
explained to Johnston in 1898 that “in the year and a half we have been running our library we
have only lost one book and that was paid for in full,” she was not just explaining the status of
the books but also offering a defense of her fitness for citizenship.167 Given, for example, the
gendered metaphors of women’s participation in public in the Progressive Era—as “social
housekeeping,” Hannah Arendt later sniffed—evidence that one could maintain or even improve
collective assets was key to asserting citizenship.168 It was, indeed, what the organizers of the
traveling library (and not just its patrons) claimed to do. This stewardship of resources explains
why so many progressive women’s organizations were involved in improving the landscape by
restricting billboards, building parks, or agitating for urban sanitation. But it was an even more
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

165

“New York’s Traveling Libraries.”
Rosemae Wells Campbell, Books and Beaux (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1958), 177.
167
Fay to Johnston, Aug. 15, 1898, folder 1, box 3, Johnston Papers.
168
On the “social” and “social housekeeping” in feminism (and Arendt’s rejection of them), see Linda MariaGelsomina Zerilli, Feminism and the Abyss of Freedom (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 2-9. See also,
Denise Riley, Am I That Name?: Feminism and the Category of Women in History (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2003), 44-65.
166

60
	  

powerful act when the bit of public property one claimed to care for and enhance was, like a
book, not just a thing but a piece of a collective culture, a shared heritage made material.
Pressly’s ability to gather together a group of people to both use and preserve the books—like
the librarians’ ability to more efficiently distribute those books—positions her to claim
citizenship in new ways. As people capable of building a reliable infrastructure for the
circulation of a shared culture, Pressly and Johnston and Keating and Armentrout and all the
others could act as democratic subjects years before they could legally vote.
And reliable that infrastructure was. In the spring of 1899, about six months after her first
postcard, Pressly wrote again to Johnston in Topeka:
A few changes have taken place since I wrote. I have moved across the river and about
three miles from where I did live, so as it would not be right to take the books so far from
the readers that I left the books with Mrs. Campbell, one of the school board. I saw her a
short time ago, she said the books have been well taken care of.169
This was quite an abrupt change (and not, it must be said, precisely within the traveling library’s
rules). Pressly, who had called this association and this library into being, had been forced by
geography and circumstance—she was just completing a new home and expected to be “to [sic]
busy to think of reading for some time”—to leave it behind.170 She wrote back several weeks
later with a slight change of plans. “[W]e want another library,” she wrote, “although I think Mrs
Campbell would like to be the librarian and it will be satisfactory to me for she is near the center
of the readers and I live across the river and it is not as convenient for them to come to my
home.”171 One lesson to draw from this is that geography could not, in the end, be entirely
defeated by infrastructure; three miles and a river could not too easily be overcome. But, at the
same time, the fate of the Protection library demonstrates that the infrastructures progressives
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

169

May Pressly to Johnston, March 20, 1899, folder 3, box 3, Johnston Papers.
Pressly to Johnston, March 20, 1899, folder 3, box 3, Johnston Papers.
171
May Pressly to Johnston, April 4, 1899, folder 5, box 3, Johnston Papers.
170

61
	  

like Johnston (and, in effect if not necessarily ideology, Pressly) built could, in fact, last.
According to a report filed by the commission in 1918, Protection still regularly received
traveling library shipments.172 Two decades after May Pressly first opened up a channel between
Topeka and Protection, and built up other channels amongst her neighbors, books still moved
steadily along them.
These little neighborhoods—formed across space, and willingly entered into, for the
more efficient use of public resources—were not the end of the traveling library’s project.
Architectural theorist Dana Cuff argues that neighborhoods, and neighborliness, are necessary
parts of forming a public sphere, insisting that “[s]ociality located beyond the household...forms
a grain of sand around which participatory democracy or civil society can begin to take
shape.”173 These small grains of public life formed in Protection, in the Cowpunchers’ Library,
in Pratt and Galena, because of the ways the library personnel organized feelings—desire for
print, loneliness, care, respect—into politics. But for this newly emergent civil society to truly
take shape, it must be connected to formal politics and to larger scales of political life. As we
will see in more detail later on, official libraries tended to use mobile print to construct
communities precisely on the scale of administrative units running from the local to the national
(or even the imperial). First, in the ideal operation of the traveling library, the neighborhood
would organize itself, and its nearby fellows, into a local polity willing to fund a permanent
library. In New York, for example, applicants for a traveling library were required to “agree that
as soon as the public interest will warrant such action they will take steps to establish a free

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

172

James L. King, et al., Tenth Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission, 1916-’18 (Topeka:
Kansas State Printing Plant, 1918), 17.
173
Dana Cuff, “Enduring Proximity: The Figure of the Neighbor in Suburban America,” Postmodern Culture 15
(2005): para. 7.

62
	  

library.”174 On a local level, mutual regard and association, built through print, was to become a
collective political and economic obligation. The first fine strands of the thick mesh were taking
shape.
And these small nodes would be connected into a print-saturated state. A commission
report from 1900 boasts that library boxes “have traveled north to within ten miles of the
Nebraska line, south and west to the Oklahoma and Indian Territory border, east to the edge of
Missouri, and two are within three counties of Colorado.”175 Four years later, showing off the
program to a newspaper reporter, Armentrout similarly boasted that “[t]hese traveling libraries
go into every county in Kansas.” This time, she had a visual aid. Armentrout “held up a map of
Kansas on which was stamped numerous red rings, each ring indicating the location of a library.”
This map—which sounds similar to the maps included in many of the commission’s biennial
reports—shows traveling libraries literally filling up the state, every county marked with at least
one red ring, the whole big rectangle of Kansas bleeding (so to speak) with public print. This
visual filling up of cartographic space recurs across the field of library extension in the twentieth
century, on which more later, because it speaks directly and powerfully to the connective
capacity of print, to the physical and emotional infrastructures offered by books on the move.
Each of those rings, those dots, refers directly to a small collective drawn together by the desire
for print and association—in Protection, or on the range, or elsewhere—and the map shows how
they all combined to create Kansas itself.
That connection the traveling library promoted between recipients of library boxes and
the state as a whole was not simply representational. During the campaign to have the state take
over funding and help administer the program, the Kansas Social Science Federation of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

174

175

“New York’s Traveling Libraries.”
“Report of the Traveling Library Commission to the Kansas Social Science Federation of Clubs.”

63
	  

Women’s Clubs sent out a letter to clubs across the state. The letter gave them a script to copy as
they wrote their representatives to lobby on the library’s behalf:
Believing that all the people of Kansas who so desire should have the use of the
miscellaneous part of the State Library; that it should be a State Library in fact as well as
name. That hundreds of small libraries distributed over the State would do more for the
intellectual and moral uplifting of our citizenship than the one great library at the State
Capitol; and that a work for the State should be carried on by the State—
We, the undersigned members of the ................ Club, earnestly ask you to give
your vote and influence for the Traveling-Library bill that will be brought to your
attention by the Kansas Social Science Federation of Women’s Clubs.176
This did more than encourage legislators to put the library on an “effective…plane of usefulness,”
as another similar petition put it.177 These campaigns built a political infrastructure through the
emotional one the library had already established with print, linking both its administrators and
its patrons to the halls of power at the political center of the state. Like antebellum abolitionist
women—who, according to Susan Zaeske “seized the radical potential” of the petition to “assert
substantial political authority”—Kansas’s clubwomen both reinforced and radically challenged
the authority of the state to determine the shape, scale, and membership of communities.178 In
place of older models of citizenship, and of more limited geographies of belonging, they offered
an alternative system, built on an infrastructure of feeling, for imagining the space of Kansas.
When the campaign succeeded in 1899, and the state largely took over the financial and
administrative burden of the library, the systems built by the library (and the ways of thinking
about systems they emerged from and influenced) came along. “A great sweep of library spirit

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

176

Draft form letter to state representative or senator, n.d., folder 8, box 3, Johnston Papers. One clubwoman wrote
from El Dorado, Kansas, to Johnston, noting that her club had “been requested to write to our Senator and
Representative,” suggesting how the campaign enlisted women far afield. Mrs. Harry A. Miller to Johnston, Jan. 31,
1899, folder 4, box 3, Johnston Papers.
177
Attached to H.F. Mason to Johnston, Feb. 7, 1899, folder 4, box 3, Johnston Papers.
178
Susan Zaeske, Signatures of Citizenship: Petitioning, Antislavery & Women’s Political Identity (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2003), 1.

64
	  

has been created in Kansas through the little traveling libraries,” the commissioner wrote—and it
had, in fact, been swept into the very machinery of the state.179
And then the state could be incorporated into a reimagined nation. Johnston and others
involved in the library were in frequent contact with other traveling library programs around the
country, especially Hutchins, who offered advice during the “gallant struggle” that preceded the
library’s inception and, once it was founded, celebrated that Kansas would “furnish a new center
and an incentive to the states near you, which will be a very great help to the general cause.”180
This nation—constructed out of neighborhoods made into cities made into states made into
regions—would be tied together not by any simple political geography but by a network of
people desirous of, and willing to work to achieve, common consciousness. That those affiliated
with the library corresponded with national suffragists like Frances Willard, or that Susan B.
Anthony donated books to it, suggest how this new image might fit into other, contemporary
attempts to remake the nation.
Acting on individual people like May Pressly as a way of shaping the state and the nation,
moving from the local to the regional to the national, Johnston and her fellow organizers
“jumped scales” as part of what geographer Neil Smith calls the “the concrete production and
reproduction of geographic scale as a political strategy of resistance.”181 This simultaneity—the
relation and enmeshment of local, city, state, region, nation, and even globe—was made possible
by a carefully designed, multiscalar infrastructure that used print to bring people together into
local communities and then organized those common bonds into larger social and political units.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
179

King, et al., Third Biennial Report, 6.
F.A. Hutchins to Johnston, March 11, 1899, folder 3, box 3, Johnston papers. This language of newfound centers
was used at the local scale, as well. A report to the KSSF around 1900 explained that when a traveling library
“go[es] to strengthen an old library, its [sic] receives new inspiration and life, and that which was almost a lifeless
thing becomes a centre of interest and activity.” “Report of the Traveling Library Commission to the Kansas Social
Science Federation of Clubs.”
181
Smith, “Contours of a Spatialized Politics,” 60. Emphasis original.

180

65
	  

Scale jumping was not always a “strategy of resistance”—as we will see in Chapter Three,
the federal government repeatedly jumped scales in order to create and maintain an empire—but
for women often restricted to home or body, reaching out to influence far flung fellows could
have transformative effects. It could, for example, potentially change the role of the library, of
the librarian, and maybe even of women in American life. By 1926, an observer in Utah (another
state with a strong traveling library tradition) could remark on the fact that public libraries had
“grown more rapidly” since the dawn of the century than any other “branch of public service.”
This was because librarianship itself had changed: “Formerly, there was too much of the idea
that the library was merely a collection of books, and the librarian the keeper of the books.”
Women like Johnston put paid to that notion, as we have seen, and “[t]o-day the idea is that the
librarian is one who distributes books and makes the library the accepted center of a
community’s intellectual life.”182 This move from keep to distribute, and the centrality of
libraries in their communities that seemed a consequence of it, was at the heart of the project of
traveling libraries in Kansas and beyond. This sort of scale-jumping, which maintained the form
and spirit of political geography while insisting on a role for women within it, was
extraordinarily useful for middle-class white women working to assert their citizenship. But this
investment in the state as the source of social power, and as the motor of mobile print, would
have serious consequences for those less able, or willing, to claim a place in its halls of power.
First, though, the bookmobile had to arrive, birthed by the traveling library movement
and shaped by the new infrastructures of a burgeoning car culture.

“Strange Secret Roads”: From Traveling Libraries to Bookmobiles
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

182

Survey of Education in Utah 18 (Washington, D.C.: United States Department of the Interior, 1926): 349.

66
	  

It took Kansas until the 1950s to switch to bookmobiles, but other places turned much
more quickly to internal combustion to power the production of common consciousness.183 This
new technological form had some significant differences and possible advantages. For one, the
shipped boxes of traveling libraries could really only move from point A to point B and had to
return to A before they could move on to C. They also, because of this more bulky mobility,
relied on people like Pressly to actually “ma[k]e a circuit,” especially on small scales.
Bookmobiles, being libraries with wheels rather than libraries that borrowed the wheels of trains
and freight shippers, transformed and amplified the kinds of mobility available and allowed for
the production of more complex networks. Bookmobiles applied and refined the lessons of the
traveling library, pursuing similar goals but in the process making the infrastructure and
belonging they shaped—their thick mesh—far more fine-grained. Putting books on the road,
rather than the rails, promised to develop infrastructures both more flexible and more responsive.
But this did not, of course, guarantee that bookmobiles would avoid the racial, economic,
gendered, and political problems of imagining common consciousness in a stratified, unequal
society. Subsequent chapters will examine these fantasies of automotive connection, their
successes and their failures, on the ground in specific places at specific times. First though, it is
useful to examine how the legacies of the traveling libraries, and their dream of common
consciousness, lived on and were transformed in the ways people thought about bookmobiles. To
that end, this section will examine often idealized representations—cartographic and literary—of
bookmobiles and their infrastructures of feeling.
Physically and spatially, the finer grain made possible by the bookmobile is immediately
evident in the maps of routes that appear again and again in published reports, fiction, and library
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

183

See Zelia French, The Traveling Library Story (Topeka, KS: Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission, 1961);
“Progressive Farming—Rural Libraries Will Be Improved,” Topeka Capital, June 15, 1958.

67
	  

archives. Like Armentrout’s map of Kansas, or those included in the biennial reports [FIGURE
2], these images offer space filled to bursting with mobile print. But they differ in very important
ways. Where the map of the traveling library was about dots, the bookmobile’s is almost entirely
about lines. The traveling library map showed libraries, and their attendant communities as spots
on the page, and the system connecting those dots into a whole remained, in some ways, only
implied or intended, not explicit or represented. In maps of bookmobiles, however, rather than
dots we have lines, we have arteries—of flesh and paper and asphalt. In a 1910 map [FIGURE 3]
from the very first bookmobile program in the nation, in Washington County, Maryland, we can
see this quite literally take shape.184 There are dots representing library stations, as in the Kansas
map, but those dots are connected by a web of lines showing “Library Wagon Routes” as they
pass between the stations. Shown alongside (and occasionally atop) “Railroads,” “Trolley Lines,”
and “Country Roads,” the routes achieve the status of infrastructure as they fill up the space of
the county. And fill it up, they do. The map shows a networked county, made geographically real
and cartographically present by the circulation of print. This is even more the case in the
strikingly similar map, which we saw in the introduction, produced 48 years later in Catawba
County, North Carolina. The profound and wide influence of this way of thinking about and
representing mobile print in space can be seen in yet another map. In 1938, when a child at an
elementary school in Williamsburg County, South Carolina, wanted to show the bookmobile that
served the school, he or she pulled out tracing paper and an atlas. What that child drew [FIGURE
4] looks, in the end, like an only slightly stylized version of the Washington County or Catawba
County maps. It is a map of a county filled up with lines. Even a child, in other words, knew this
was the way of things.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
184

Reprinted in Brown, Bookmobiles and Bookmobile Service.

68
	  

In all of these maps, the lines—those arteries—stop at the border. Political and
administrative units are, often, the bounded bodies of the ideal bookmobile. Like the traveling
library, the bookmobile imagines compressing distance and filling up space, connecting people
with a circulating mass of text. As we will see in later chapters, some actors—like Civil Rights
activists and promoters of the Internet Archive—could use mobile print to challenge those
boundaries by subverting or reimagining the bookmobile’s official role and asserting the value of
communities formed across or against political borders. And, as Chapter Three will make clear,
even the state could make concerted attempts to link together local, bounded units into federal
and imperial structures. But in the local, ideal, and limited world represented by these maps—
once the potentially radical domesticity of the traveling library had, in fact, been domesticated by
the state—it was quite easy to mistake an electorate for a community and a tax base for a
common consciousness. These maps mark out a shape for the kind of belonging delivered by the
publicly-funded bookmobile. It is fine-grained, detailed, with more apparent and multiple
connections between places. But it is, somehow, still restrained and restricted despite its new
flexibility.
Two other maps, creating idealized (but less top-down, official) visions of how
bookmobiles actually operated, offer good examples of another common way of imagining the
bookmobile’s relationship to space. In 1952, Dirk Gringhuis published a children’s book called
Here Comes the Bookmobile.185 The actual story will be discussed in more detail later, but for
now I want to look at the endpapers [FIGURE 5], which provide a bird’s-eye view of the
landscape through which a fictional bookmobile moves. In the image, we see the bookmobile
loaded in the county seat, and we watch as it sets out on a day’s journey. It crosses the city limits
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

185

Dirk Gringhuis, Here Comes the Bookmobile (Chicago: Albert Whitman, 1952).

69
	  

and shortly thereafter moves from a paved road to rutted dirt. We see it stop at a school, then
pass a farm, then stop at another school, then pause for a pheasant crossing. We see a child race
back to get a book to a sick classmate, and we see the bookmobile stop at another school before
heading back to the city and calling it a day. What makes this so fascinating is that we see all
these things, all at once, in a single brightly colored image. The story is about one bookmobile,
but there are twelve pictured in the map. Even more explicitly than the route maps discussed
above, bookmobiles and their mobile books fill up and constitute the space around them. In this
case, these bookmobiles—away from which no land or structures or people seem to exist—
outline the shape of their community.
A similar dynamic is at work in maps created in the 1980s by drivers for the Utah State
Library’s bookmobile program. These maps were designed to aid in completing their routes, and
they are much more utilitarian documents than any of the other maps, but they nevertheless offer
their own glimpse at an ideal and idealized world brought forth by the bookmobile.186 One map
[FIGURE 6], of the Piute County route between Hoovers and Circleville, shows Highway 89
running through four different towns. Out of scale but relatively well detailed, the map shows the
bookmobile stopped in six locations, with landmarks (a courthouse, a trailer park, a theater, a
post office) nearby to mark the stops. Outside of the highway that allows passage between the
stops, and the immediate area of the stops themselves, nothing else exists. This makes a practical
sort of sense, of course: why take a lot of time and effort to draw other spaces in a map like this?
But it also represents, strikingly, an influential way of thinking about bookmobiles in the
landscape. As in the endpapers, there are multiple bookmobiles shown, and the community
seems constituted by their movement across the land. Literary scholar Patricia Fumerton has
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
186

Bookmobile Statistical Reports, 1940-, Utah State Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

70
	  

examined drawings and charts by an early modern English sailor that are intriguingly similar to
these. His drawings of ports and bays tend to primarily represent the places where ships, water,
and land meet; little of the inland world exists. Fumerton argues that “his focus is primarily on
the variable ways that sea meets land in an instance of siting or harboring.” Within his life of
work and mobility, she insists, place “is imagined as a disturbed or disconnected process that
never stays”187 Like traveling libraries, bookmobile programs were frequently the products of
middle-class fantasies about class and community, so the relationship to status and place is a bit
less precarious. But as in those charts, the interest is in “siting” and “harboring”—in the
connections and the various, temporary homes that mobility can offer. Representing the moments
of contact, the places and times when the bookmobile travels and when it stops and opens out its
bookish bounty, the maps suggest those moments’ capacity for transformation (and, perhaps,
their capacity for subversion). These maps show bookmobiles permanently altering the landscape
by their circulation but somehow a permanent presence on the land, taking roads of asphalt, dirt,
and gravel and transforming them into arteries for the transmission of bodies, paper, and ideas.
The ability to take direct advantage of the seemingly endless, and constantly expanding,
roads of the twentieth-century American landscape allowed for deeper spatial penetration by
bookmobile programs. And it also, at least conceivably, allowed deeper penetration into the
emotional and psychic worlds of their communities. Landscape theorist J. B. Jackson noted that
roads have inhabited an outsized role in human imagination because, among other things, of their
“tendency...to introduce unwanted outsiders into the self-sufficient community or house.”188 But
the twentieth century presented a revision of this narrative, Jackson suggests, as those intrusions
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

187

Patricia Fumerton, Unsettled: The Culture of Mobility and the Working Poor in Early Modern England (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2006), 108, 119.
188
J.B. Jackson, A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996), 189-190.

71
	  

turned from invasion to an often welcome, or at least productive, interpenetration. Indeed, the
rise of the bookmobile happened alongside a transformation that Jackson identifies in the history
of roads. From structures “identified solely with movement from one place to another,” roads
over the course of the twentieth century more and more became “the scene of work and leisure
and social intercourse and excitement.” According to Jackson, “[r]oads no longer merely lead to
places; they are places.”189 In this new context, then, not only could bookmobiles travel routes
that visually and physically filled up the space of counties, they could also use roads to amplify a
new kind of mobile sociability.
We can see this at work in a chapter book for children published at the height of the
bookmobile’s iconic power, in the 1950s. Virginia Sorensen’s Curious Missie (1953) tells the
story of a young girl growing up in rural Alabama. Constantly asking about her surroundings and
the world—hence the titular nickname—Missie endears herself to a librarian, who teachers her
that books can answer her many, many questions. The librarian then arranges for Missie to give a
speech to a state commission, explaining that a bookmobile would help her answer her questions
even better. The bookmobile is approved on a trial basis (the county will have to approve
funding after a set period of time), and it visits Missie’s school to much delight. Shortly
thereafter, Missie goes out on the route for the day. On the road, Missie makes a circuit of her
district. In an echo of both the Kansas Traveling Library and the Washington and Catawba
County maps, Missie uses the bookmobile to extend her immediate local bonds of neighborhood
and family to include the people of her entire county. As they begin the drive, Miss Sudie, the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

189

J. B. Jackson, A Sense, 190. Jackson, at the same time, emphasized that roads could also be intensely private,
natural spaces. This tension, it seems, animated his conception of odology, the study of roads, and his arguments
about its future. On Jackson’s contributions to that field, see Timothy Davis, “Looking Down the Road: J.B. Jackson
and the American Highway Landscape,” in Everyday America: Cultural Landscape Studies After J.B. Jackson, ed.
Chris Wilson and Paul Groth (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 62-80.

72
	  

bookmobile librarian, tells her that “there are people living everywhere.”190 And it is true; the
bookmobile’s arrival brings them pouring out of the woods. “Where did they all live?” Missie
asks herself. “Their houses were secrets…along strange secret roads” (150). Missie helps this
cascade of people get their books, chatting charmingly with them as she learns that “[a]t every
single stop somebody was different in an interesting way” (158). Ultimately, these “different,”
“secret” people come together around the figure of Missie, who accompanies Miss Sudie on
more trips during the summer. “People along all the roads became friends,” the narrator informs
us. “Missie knew their names. They knew her name” (172). Theorist Dana Cuff has argued that
“neighborhoods embody a social relation linked to specific land use…[to] living in close
proximity.”191 But as we see in Curious Missie, the automobile and its roads had “overthrown the
regime of…’space’,” as Marshall McLuhan put it about electric technologies in 1967.192 Unlike
in his vision of a world where “[t]he old civic...groupings have become unworkable,” a world
where “[y]ou can’t go home again,” though, Sorensen imagines the bookmobile producing
proximity, and neighborly bonds, over vast distances made accessible by new technologies.193
The bookmobile, in this imagining, combines automobility and transportation infrastructures
with the infrastructures of feeling offered by mobile print. It thus links the “hidden houses along
the twisting country roads” (186), ameliorating their isolated existence. The entire county
becomes Missie’s neighborhood.
This presents a smaller, more friendly, and more manageable vision of a public, which is
typically constituted as what Michael Warner calls a “relation among strangers projected from
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
190

Sorensen, Curious Missie, 149. Subsequent citations will be made parenthetically.
Cuff, “Enduring Proximity,” para. 5.
192
Marshall McLuhan and Quentin Fiore, The Medium is the Massage: An Inventory of Effects, prod. Jerome Agel
(Madera, CA: Gingko Press, 2001 [1967]), 16.
193
McLuhan, Medium, 16. We will see in Chapter Four some of the ways in which this could mean participation in a
process by which “strange secret roads” are made public in order to facilitate their being opened to capital.

191

73
	  

private readings of circulating texts.”194 In Curious Missie, circulation is not just a precondition
for the private, estranged construction of a public. Like many of those involved in traveling
libraries and bookmobiles, Sorenson partially (though only partially) rejects Enlightenment
rationality as the fundamental basis for political sociability. Instead, she insists that emotions and
sensations—familiarity, pleasure, movement, belonging—are necessary parts of building a
public as a community. Civil society, in this formulation less a “stranger relation” than a
neighbor-relation, depends on proximity for its form if not always its ultimate function. As we
will see below, the effect of bookmobiles always begins with the personal, direct, and emotional,
but those effects can amplify and extend beyond—while retaining the shape of—that direct
encounter. Roads, allowing for more encounters to be seeded throughout a community, made
possible an even more “abundant harvest” than was possible in the traveling library.195
This dynamic is also found, almost entirely intact, in Gringhuis’s Here Comes the
Bookmobile (1952), in which Tommy goes out on a bookmobile’s route with his Aunt Kay, the
librarian. Tommy, raised in a big city, is fascinated to learn about the ways of life out in the
country: “I’ve never been in a one-room school, just in big schools like the one I go to in the city,”
he tells Aunt Kay.196 When he first sees the schoolhouse, he decides it “looked strange,” with
“the children…all sitting and working together at their desks in only one room” (25). But in only
the next paragraph, he “decide[s]” that such a situation “might be fun” (25).197 Books themselves
also help Tommy form emotional and often gendered bonds along the road. When they load the
bookmobile at the top of the story, Tommy picks out four books he “think[s] some boys [his] age
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
194

Warner, Publics and Counter Publics, 116.
“Report of the Traveling Library Commission to the Kansas Social Science Federation of Clubs.”
196
Gringhuis, Here, 10.
197
Given that the replacement of one-room schoolhouses with larger, consolidated schools was a primary goal of the
progressive movement’s educational efforts, and its success, this decades-later nostalgia for the schoolhouse may be
part of a renewed longing for the small, the local, and the communal in the midst of the transformations discussed in
more detail in Chapter Four.

195

74
	  

might like” (15). At each stop, a boy chooses one of these books, signaling his affinity with
Tommy and creating a link between them. Even at the last stop, where angry former city-boy
Buzz at first sullenly refuses to check out a book, Tommy is able to use his pre-loaded book
about trucks to entice the boy into reading. And after agreeing to take the book, Buzz makes a
herculean effort to make sure a classmate will have a book he wants while he is sick at home
(42-47). Tommy is able to use a combination of books and roads to build connections between
himself and “his new friends” at each stop (47), and in so doing to amplify the effects of any one
interaction to include even those with whom, like the sick student, he has no direct contact.
In Curious Missie, these bonds between fellows cannot be entirely or only emotional; the
infrastructures of feeling that allow them must be made possible by strong links between citizens
and their government, as well. McLuhan wrote that since the introduction of the television, a
“new form of ‘politics’ is emerging, and in ways we haven’t noticed yet. The living room has
become a voting booth.”198 But Curious Missie resists (perhaps futilely) this atomization and
mediation of politics. Like the progressives, Sorensen sees state power and common
consciousness as inextricably linked. Indeed, Missie teaches strangers that their new proximity is
thanks to the wonders of government, embodied in the bookmobile, and thus that their
government has everything to do with these newfound connections. On Missie’s first trip out, she
and Miss Sudie encounter a woman who is intensely suspicious of the bookmobile, refusing to
believe that the books are free.199 Missie eagerly informs her that, in fact, “[i]t’s the government
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

198

McLuhan, Medium, 22. On the political ramifications of suburbanization, see Juliet F. Gainsborough, Fenced Off:
The Suburbanization of American Politics (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2001).
199
Reformed ignorance about the bookmobile was a trope of Sorensen’s. In an early draft of the book, she had
opened the book noting that “to begin with, nobody in that neighborhood dreamed of such a thing. Nobody even
knew there were such things. A rolling library? A Bookmobile? Even Missie never thought of that, as many curious
thoughts as she had every day.” Virginia Eggersten, “First Draft of Curious Missie,” folder 1, box MF719, Virginia
Eggersten Sorensen Papers, Children’s Literature Research Collections, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota.

75
	  

that pays,” because “[t]he government wants all the people to have books to read” (160,
emphasis original). The woman is shortly convinced, and checks a number of books out of the
library for her family, declaring, “Thank the good Lord for such a government, to be so good to
the people. … Ma’am—I hope we deserve it” (161, emphasis original). The woman has gained
access to books and learned a lesson about her place in the government. Making an increasingly
massive and bureaucratized government seem close, familiar, and friendly, the iconography of
the bookmobile helped citizens negotiate their place in an expansive, frequently fragmented
nation.
The friendly, helpful image of government has its limits, however; it must be managed by
the people almost as much as they are managed by it. In many representations of the bookmobile,
the government means well but remains partially ignorant of the good libraries do and must be
educated about the value of the bookmobile.200 In Curious Missie, the bookmobile service is cut
by the county commission, who reallocate the money to a rat-killing program. But (as in
Protection) the proximity and involvement of average people remains, and Missie is able to use
the neighborly networks she helped build to mobilize the entire county to lobby for the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

200

Perhaps unsurprisingly given that they are run with limited public money, bookmobiles (like libraries in general)
found themselves at the mercy of governmental structures with sometimes little interest in its services. Despite this
group of stories’ casting of government as positive, tension between it and devotees of the library and bookmobile
emerge repeatedly in the books. In Librarian’s Night Before Christmas (2007), in which a bookmobile-driving Santa
Claus arrives to help a beleaguered librarian, begins with this lament: “We toiled overtime at our library here, /
‘Cause the powers that be cut our staffing this year. / They spent pork-barrel money like a tidal-wave sea, / But no
funds trickled down far enough to reach me.” Interestingly, in this book, there is no appeal made to the government
within the story (Santa helps out, teaches children about the wonders of the library, rushes off, etc.), but the story is
clearly intended to mobilize its own readership in favor of library funding. Unlike other instances where funding
emerges as a problem, Librarian’s Night Before Christmas instead uses its story to incite the collective political
response the other stories also model within themselves. David Davis, Librarian’s Night Before Christmas (Gretna,
LA: Pelican Publishing, 2007), 1-2. The question of funding also plays a significant role in the career romances
about bookmobile librarians mentioned above, as well. Books on Wheels and Books and Beaux are both plotted
around the question of legislative and tax support for bookmobile service (and Nancy Runs the Bookmobile and With
a High Heart both make explicit mention of it). Mary Rebecca Lingenfelter, Books on Wheels (New York: Funk &
Wagnalls, 1938); Adele de Leeuw, With a High Heart (New York: Macmillan, 1945); Johnson, Nancy Runs the
Bookmobile; Campbell, Books and Beaux.

76
	  

bookmobile. Upon hearing the imminent demise of bookmobile service, Missie insists that she
must go back to the commission and make them keep the bookmobile. Her teacher tells her,
though, that they “do not listen to little girls very much” (182). Uncowed, Missie realizes she
knows a whole group of people to whom they just might listen: “My mother votes. My grandma
votes. My father votes. Mother Willowby and her daughter Phyllis vote. All those people who
came here for the voting—Remember how many there were? I saw them voting. There are Mr.
and Mrs. White. There are the Cat-Lady and her sister” (184). These narratives of the
bookmobile manage to critique government spending priorities without undermining faith in the
government: the problem is not the state’s callousness but that they have not heard the voices
they need to. But how to bring those voices together? Missie determines to spread the word using
established and emergent networks, insisting that “Harry and Dick [her brothers] will help.
Donna [her friend] will help. Mother Willowby will tell everybody who comes to the store. The
minister will help too, I know it. You just wait! Everybody will help!” (185, emphasis original).
Like the Kansas Traveling Library plugging into the dense associational life of women’s clubs,
Missie uses existing institutions and organizations to spread the news. She tells her aunt, who
tells the Home Demonstration Club. She tells her grandmother, who tells the Missionary Society.
She travels the bookmobile’s route in a horse-drawn wagon, letting people know what is going
on. And she does not even know how far her words have spread:
There was no way of knowing how many helpers they really had. … She did not know
how many people were walking back and forth on the red roads deep in the piney-woods.
She did not know that fishermen told each other along the creek. But it was true. While
people got their groceries, they talked of the bookmobile. Farmers stopped their wagons
and called to each other over fences. Women along the highway spoke to each other over
their telephones. (188)

77
	  

Using the material itinerary established by the bookmobile, Missie is able to mobilize her newly
expanded “neighborhood” to preserve the condition of its own construction.
Ultimately, “The County Goes to Town” (as the last chapter title has it) and appeals to the
commissioners for the continuation of the bookmobile. A two-page spread, illustrated by Marilyn
Miller, in the last chapter shows a large group of people gathered beneath trees on the front lawn
of the courthouse [FIGURE 7]. Miller has a distinct style, illustrating faces as series of parallel
and slanted lines and bodies in firm but sketched pen-strokes. The effect of the drawing is
striking. It includes only twenty people, but image is cut off on the sides, not cleanly contained,
suggesting a far vaster number present but not depicted. The use of a full two pages for this
image also lends it a sense of immensity. But this immensity is, in Miller’s rendering, unified
rather than chaotic; their aesthetic similarity seems, in the context of the chapter, to suggest their
political union, as well. (Their nearly uniform whiteness is, too, not beside the point. We will
explore the consequences of ignoring racism in celebrations of Southern bookmobile programs in
the next chapter.) Immediately after the image, Missie takes charge of the crowd, leads “all her
friends” (197) into the meeting room, and gives a speech, “talk[ing] for all the children in the
whole county” (197). When she turns to point out the large number of people there, she “had not
realized she knew so many of their names” (199) and actually “beg[i]n[s] to name them,”
demonstrating the mutual recognition and familiarity produced by the bookmobile’s route (199).
And her courage and determination encourages others to speak, including her father, who “as far
back as Missie remembered, had never made any kind of public speech” (201) but whom the
bookmobile has empowered to make himself public. Her grandmother, as well, stands up before
the crowd and admits that she was illiterate until she learned to read “from books that came on
the bookmobile” (206). Grandma Topping finishes her speech with a line that in many ways

78
	  

summarizes the lessons of the bookmobile in Curious Missie: “This county is us…. This county
is not just roads and woods and creeks and such things. This county is us!” (204, emphasis
original).
In Sorensen’s fictional rendering, the roads by themselves are insufficient, simply
marking out potential connections. And the books they read, too, are not enough. In its
combination of the two, however, the bookmobile has taught them more than simply how to
read, the names of birds, the varieties of geraniums, or anything else found in its books. It has
given them a model for social and political interaction embodied by the bookmobile itself. A New
York Times reviewer, forgetting the book’s fiction, wrote that Curious Missie “leaves the reader
of any age proud that in America even a little girl can talk to the Government and be heard.”201
The iconic, liberal fantasy offered by the bookmobile was so powerful it went unquestioned. As
blacklisted screenwriters in Hollywood or African Americans unable to use segregated
bookmobiles in the South knew, governments do not even always listen to adults, let alone to
children. Bookmobile or not, the state was not inevitably benevolent and the power of the people
was more than a little circumscribed. But because Curious Missie is part of the bookmobile’s
beautiful fantasy, the people win, and the novel ends with an image of the brand new bookmobile
(the original had been on loan) sitting on the courthouse lawn: “On the back it still said, though
in letters twice as tall, ‘Good Reading for All’” (207, emphasis original).
Missie echoed Why Not?, a pamphlet published in 1929 by the American Library
Association’s Committee on Library Extension as a “[d]ramatization of the arguments for and
against a county library presented before an open meeting.”202 Meant to be actually performed
during a meeting, with “every effort made to create the illusion of spontaneous discussion”—
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

201

202

Sarah Chokla Gross, “For Ages 9 to 12: Stories of Life in America Today,” New York Times, November 25, 1953.
Harriet C. Long, Why Not? (Chicago: American Library Association Committee on Library Extension, 1929), 2.

79
	  

including having the actors “scattered among the audience”—the mini-play depicts democracy
operating through reasoned discussion and debate. (Of course, as scripted by the ALA, the
opponents never have a chance, suggesting the ways that this vision of democracy, like
Sorensen’s, was rather more carefully managed than any “illusion of spontane[ity]” could
overcome.) At the opening of the drama, the strongest proponent of the prospective county
library’s effort to “get[ ] many books out near the people,” the character Graham Brooks makes
his argument with an appeal quite similar to Grandma Topping’s: “We ask you to provide for
everybody in the county the very same library privileges which city residents commonly
enjoy. … This is what we ask for—for ourselves and for our children. … Just think what it would
mean if…there would always be something different there for everyone to read.”203 We,
ourselves, our, everybody, everyone: Brooks speaks on behalf of, and in the process seems to
unify, the people of the county and their common needs and shared desires. Another proponent
later makes this claim even more bald, arguing that—in contrast to small, women’s-club-run
libraries where there are fewer books and “the responsibility falls on a few people” to run
maintain them—in a county library, many books “would pass all around the county” and “the tax
is on everyone.”204 The library’s chief opponent, on the other hand, makes his case in a cascade
of “I”s and “me”s and “my”s and “those people”s.205 The first-person plural (and encompassing
“everyone”s) of those in favor of the library, in contrast to the opponent’s singular (and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

203

Long, Why Not?, 3, 5.
Long, Why Not?, 11. The script has him deride libraries run by women’s clubs—funded by “pink teas and
socials”—as “picayunish,” rather erasing the contributions of women’s clubs to the very formation of the idea of
library extension in the first place. Long, Why Not?, 10.
205
Long, Why Not?, 5-6. Intriguingly, the opponent’s argument—especially his claim that “George Washington
never had no county library”—is later undermined by another character, who notes that the critic is “unwilling to
live the way…George Washington” did, seeing as he “did not come in a carriage or on mule back.” “Oh no,” the
character continues (“witheringly,” according to the stage directions), “he came in a Cadillac!!!” Automobility thus
not only facilitates modernity and circulation but precludes withdrawal from or refusal of it. Long, Why Not?, 6.

204

80
	  

distancing “those”), linked common access to books to common existence to common
consciousness.
The universalizing gesture of Sorenson’s “All” and Why Not?’s “everyone”—even in the
midst of, and perhaps as a constitutive part of, the various exclusions and failures that Chapters
Two and Four, in particular, will discuss—was vitally important to the image and ideology of the
bookmobile and to its development of common consciousness. Just as the automobile and the
highway aimed to make all the nation’s physical space accessible, the bookmobile aimed to
incorporate all of its psychic geography, as well. Indeed, this use of the bookmobile to model
civic participation and cohesion—to show and to build political, social, and emotional
belonging—was echoed twenty-four years later in Laura Enerson’s Our Library Lives in a Bus
(1977).206 In the book, the town bookmobile is wildly popular, except for the “few children who
never came” (14). But one day, the librarian and her bookmobile find themselves drafted
unexpectedly into a town parade celebrating the beginning of fishing season. In order to drive
and play the bookmobile’s calliope at the same time, the librarian picks up a braided library
skeptic. The girl is afraid at first, but “[t]ogether Miss Sarah and the little girl with her hair in
long braids marched the bus, played the calliope very loud, and kept the books in their neat
rows” (35). After the parade, the librarian parks the bus and children come pouring in, but not
only the regulars: When the non-users saw the little girl smiling and happy, “they came into the
library too, because now they knew the books were friendly” (42). Our Library Lives in a Bus
thus models the literal incorporation of marginal people into civic life. The hesitant girl is drafted
and becomes a vital part of the bookmobile’s movement through the heart of the town (and the
heart of the town’s collective, civic experience), thereby involving other marginal children in the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

206

Laura Enerson, Our Library Lives in a Bus (Grayland, WA: Cove Publishing, 1977), 8, 7. Subsequent citations
will be made parenthetically.

81
	  

bookmobile. By passing through what Jane Addams might have noticed was a “thronged and
common road,” filled with people joining together to celebrate their town, the bookmobile
becomes far more than simply a conduit for books.
In stories like these, as in the official representations in maps, books are social objects
that move along infrastructures of feeling. By virtue of being passed materially hand to hand—or
hand to bookmobile to hand—books created the conditions for shared experience, and their
movement along a communities’ arteries promised (at least in theory) to take those conditions
and make them reality. In Curious Missie, for example, Missie finds it easier to bond with the
people along the bookmobile route because “when all of them had read the same books, it was as
if they all had extra friends to love and talk about” (172). The material mobility of books on the
bookmobile mapped a geography of sociability—explicitly in the Here Comes the Bookmobile
endpapers and more imaginatively in the charting of Alabama’s “strange secret roads” or the
bookmobile’s incorporation of a shy girl into a central ritual of civic life. The combination of
book, which “let[s] us travel with the magic of words,” and the bookmobile, which “might really
take you far!,” let people construct and imagine a space shot through with roads and bound
together in a common consciousness and a collective project.207 While, as we will see, later
librarians frequently failed to follow it or to understand their limitations, these representations
offered a “fine road map glued to the gear box” of American culture.208 And they offer us, as
well, a useful guide to keep in mind as we follow the bookmobile on its travels through the
twentieth century.

“Out There—On the Edge of Things”: Coda
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

207

208

Lee Sullivan Hill, Libraries Take Us Far (Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group, 1998), 28, 17.
Gringhuis, Here Comes, 8.

82
	  

In 1914, Jessie Wright Whitcomb—Topeka author, lawyer, and reportedly the first
woman to lecture at a law school for men—published a story in The Craftsman, an influential
magazine of the Arts and Crafts Movement, about the traveling library’s place in the home and
on the landscape.209 “A Prairie Sod House and the Kansas Traveling Library” tells the brief story
of a pair of men driving across Western Kansas, “on a section or road that barely scratched the
prairie—the prairie that met the horizon on every side without let or hindrance.”210 In “this
horizon circle,” they see in the distance a sod house, which reminds one of them, Scotsman Alec
MacDonald, of home. He does not expect, though, to find a house as intellectually rich as those
of his native land, since “[h]ere it’s all culture of the soil—not of the mind.”211 He is wrong.
Welcomed into the house by a mother and her three blond children, MacDonald is agog; the
house is filled with paintings and books. Baffled, he has the following conversation with the
woman:
“Those pictures and books are not ours, Mr. MacDonald,” began Mrs. Hold.
“They belong to the State of Kansas.”
“To the State?”
“Kansas has a Traveling Library and a Traveling Art Gallery.”
“What is it you’re tellin’ me?”
“We can get the use of fifty books for several months for two dollars—where
there are ten or more people to use them. I am the librarian because our place is the most
central.”
“Central!”
“Yes, there are two houses in sight out there—on the edge of things—and three
others. … When each new library comes we have the greatest jubilation! You have to live
this way to love books!”
…
“Woman, it’s grand!” cried Alec MacDonald enthusiastically.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
209

On Whitcomb, see Nettie Garmer Barker, Kansas Women in Literature (Kansas City, KS: S.I. Meseraull & Son,
1915), 15.
210
Jessie Wright Whitcomb, “A Prairie Sod House and the Kansas Traveling Library,” The Craftsman (July 1914):
452.
211
Whitcomb, “Prairie Sod House,” 452.

83
	  

“Yes,” she laughed. “I think Kansas will prove before long that there is a way to
raise artists along with wheat and corn and alfalfa. These libraries make life wonderfully
rich for many a Kansas prairie home.”212
This conversation, and MacDonald’s later response to it (“I’ve widened my horizon...widened
it”), point us to the remarkable relationship of space and psyche at work in the story, and in the
traveling library itself.213 Convinced that they could transform their landscape—that they could
call forth from the soil not just grains but brains, that they could take a “circle of horizon” and
make it a community—people like Johnston and Whitcomb held an amazing faith in the power
of print on the move. As we have seen, that faith grew out of a larger conviction that common
consciousness was a worthy goal, and that achieving it would require the development of
infrastructures capable of moving both books and thoughts, both matter and emotions.
They were inspired by this dream of common consciousness, but these middle-class
white progressives—and, importantly, their descendants—sometimes found it difficult, in the
end, to find commonality with everyone. Their faith ultimately and ironically brought with it
assumptions that would stymie efforts to follow the dream of common consciousness to its
potentially radical end. In particular, in the decades to come, they would fail to realize the
possibilities that mobile print offered for challenging and transforming a landscape riven by
racial segregation, stretched thin by imperial expansion, and clotted by the detritus of
consumption.
	  

	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

212

213

Whitcomb, “Prairie Sod House,” 453-454.
Whitcomb, “Prairie Sod House,” 454.

84
	  

Figures

Figure 2: Kansas Traveling Libraries Map (1904)
Postcard included in James L. King, et al., Third Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling
Libraries Commission 1902-’04 (Topeka: Geo. A. Clark, 1905)

Figure 3: Washington County Map (1910)
Reprinted in Eleanor Frances Brown, Bookmobiles and Bookmobile Service (Metuchen: Scarecrow Press, 1967)

85
	  
	  

	  

Figure 4: Map of Williamsburg County, S.C. (1938)
From Bookmobile Map of Williamsburg County, South Carolina, 1938, folder, Carton 2, Lend a Hand Society
Records, 1843-1982, Massachusetts Historical Society (Boston, Massachusetts)

86
	  
	  

	  

Figure 5: Endpapers from Here Comes the Bookmobile
In Dirk Gringhuis, Here Comes the Bookmobile (Chicago: Albert Whitman, 1952)

87
	  
	  

	  

Figure 6: Piute County Map (ca. 1987)
From “#16 Maps” Envelope, Box 2, Series 21786; Utah State Archives (Salt Lake City, Utah)

88
	  

Figure 7: Illustration by Marilyn Miller (1953)
From Virginia Sorensen, Curious Missie (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1953), 192-193

89
	  

CHAPTER TWO

“Spread by the Exchange of Books”:

The Perils of Proximity in a Segregated Society
“I resist anything better than my own diversity;
I breathe the air, but leave plenty after me,
And am not stuck up, and am in my place.”
–Walt Whitman (1855)214

“I have called my tiny community a world, and so its isolation made it; and yet there was among us but a
half-awakened common consciousness, sprung from common joy and grief, at burial, birth, or wedding;
from a common hardship in poverty, poor land, and low wages; and, above all, from the sight of the Veil
that hung between us and Opportunity.”
–W.E.B. DuBois (1903)215
“The question in every case is whether the words are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature
as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about substantive evils. It is a question of
proximity and degree.”
–Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. (1919)216

The South “is American with a difference,” historian Ulrich B. Phillips wrote in 1928.217
What held Southerners in “considerable solidarity,” he insisted, was that they were “a people
having common joys and common sorrows, and, above all, as to the white folk a people with a
common resolve indomitably maintained—that it shall be and remain a white man’s country.”218
This was, of course, not limited to the South. Indeed, two years before the founding of the
Kansas Traveling Library, the United States Supreme Court had, with a 7-1 vote in Plessy v.
Ferguson (1896), formally sanctioned separation as an organizing principle of American life.
Nothing in the Constitution required “social, as distinguished from political equality” between
different races, Henry Brown declared on behalf of the majority, and so there was nothing
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

214

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 80.
W. E. Burghardt Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folks: Essays and Sketches (Chicago: A.C. McClurg & Co., 1903),
67-68. This portion of Souls was drawn from W.E.B. Du Bois, “A Negro Schoolmaster in the New South,” The
Atlantic Monthly (January 1899): 99-105.
216
Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47 (1919), 52.
217
Ulrich B. Phillips, “The Central Theme of Southern History,” American Historical Review 34 (1928): 30.
218
Phillips, “Central Theme,” 30, 31.

215

90
	  

unconstitutional about “[l]aws permitting, and even requiring, their separation in places where
they are liable to be brought into contact with one another.”219 With those words, the Court
authorized the expansion of Jim Crow, a legal and social system that saw proximity and contact
as profoundly dangerous and that sought order at any cost.
Thus, even as Gladden and Gilman articulated common consciousness, and as people like
Johnston worked to enact it with books, their dream of coherence and connection butted up
against and was inflected by this other emerging system for ordering space and managing contact.
Perhaps surprisingly, though, the dream of common consciousness was not necessarily at odds
with the strictures of Jim Crow. In fact, it turned out that common consciousness, and its
embodiment in the bookmobile, could be unsettlingly useful in the hands of segregationists. As
we have seen, the founders of traveling libraries believed that circulating books would create a
tingling, social friction that would cause feelings of neighborliness and connection “to kindle at the
touch.” But, born in sparsely populated rural areas—and thus calibrated for a racially homogeneous,
far-flung population—this conviction contained within it a paradoxical assumption: that community
could be enacted at a distance, particularly by the management of intimacy and proximity. Far from
undermining or openly challenging segregationist politics (as progressives largely failed to do more
generally) this assumption helped fuel a belief that it was possible to share a culture, and even to
share space, without necessarily coming into unwanted, uncontrolled contact with others.220 And that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

219

Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896), 544. With this ruling, the Court validated the fears of what dissenter
John Harlan sarcastically called “the astute men of the dominant race, who affect to be disturbed at the possibility
that the integrity of the white race may be corrupted, or that its supremacy will be imperilled, by contact on public
highways with black people.” Plessy, 562.
220
According to Shelton Stromquist, progressives “generally viewed the world as racially ordered, and their
disposition on matters of race led them to accept the logic of segregation, the fear of Negro criminality, and the
conviction that premature enfranchisement of blacks only fostered corruption.” Stromquist, Reinventing “The
People”, 152. See also McGerr, Fierce Discontent, 183. Unsurprisingly, African Americans who engaged with
progressivism had different ends, and different means, in mind, as scholars like Glenda Gilmore have shown: “Their
progressive visions if realized would have ended white supremacy.” Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore, Gender & Jim

91
	  

was a belief that abetted the ideologies and practices of American apartheid. Made a tool for both
connection and separation, simultaneously, the bookmobile was tasked, uncertainly, with building
the “thick mesh” of social democracy on fractured ground.
Michael Warner insists that “[s]pace and physical presence do not make much difference”
in the constitution of publics.221 But presence—of physical bodies and physical texts—is, in fact,
the actual and necessary foundation of publicity and of community. Forgetting that “circulating
texts” must pass from hand to hand before they are ever read, theorists like Warner often fail to take
account of how crucial issues of proximity, contact, and sharing are to the construction of
communities and publics.222 The ideal of the public sphere may require the ability to abstract oneself
out of the messy particularities of one’s body, as Warner himself has so usefully elaborated, but the
actual experience of public life is found in often untidy encounters with paper, flesh, and dirt.223
Looking at bookmobiles and public libraries requires taking circulation literally, and in this chapter,
we will see how they could shape these encounters, moving and channeling them in ways that
facilitated the limited, limiting connections of Jim Crow.
Racialization and racism profoundly affect how people and things can move through
space and build community, in ways that Dewey and Johnston—and later, Curious Missie—
failed to notice, let alone challenge. The dream of a common consciousness that emerged with
the traveling library and extended with the bookmobile depended on exploiting new forms of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Crow: Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in North Carolina, 1896-1920 (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1996), 1.
221
Warner, Publics and Counterpublics, 71.
222
Warner, Publics and Counter Publics, 116.
223
Warner has argued that entering the public sphere requires the assumption of a “public subjectivity” nonidentical
with one’s own body, an “indifference to those particularities [of race, class, gender, and sexuality], to ourselves.”
But that disembodied subjectivity is not universally available (if it is actually available at all): “the ability to abstract
oneself in public discussion has always been an unequally available resource.” Warner, Publics and Counterpublics,
160, 165. See also Nancy Fraser, “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing
Democracy,” in Habermas and the Public Sphere, ed. Craig Calhoun (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992), 109-142.

92
	  

mobility to create a new kind of communal, social space. But that dream ignored the blockages,
diversions, and restrictions that mark shared space in racist societies. Sara Ahmed, reading
Frantz Fanon, asserts that “racism ‘stops’ black bodies from inhabiting space by extending
through objects and others.”224 By contrast, “white bodies” are able to “extend their reach” in
this way, offering the ability to move, in all the registers of the word.225 White supremacy thus
depends on determining and regulating a particular relationship between mobility and
immobility, between whites’ ability to use objects (like bookmobiles, or books) to build new
spaces and move into new lives, and others’ enforced inability to do the same. It is not
coincidental that Plessy, like Dred Scott v. Sanford before it, limited access to freedom by
limiting movement, or that later civil rights battles often took place at sites of movement (buses,
hotels, train stations, cars).226 Within such a system, as we will see, bookmobiles could be tools
for distributing books, yes, but also and in the process tools for dispensing unequal access to
motion. Indeed, particularly in the South, bookmobiles often moved so that African Americans
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

224

Sara Ahmed, Queer Phenomenology, 111.
“If whiteness allows bodies to move with comfort through space…[s]uch physical motility becomes the ground
for social mobility,” she explains, though she notes that “[s]uch physical motility should not be confused with
freedom.” We will turn to the consequences of that confusion in Chapter Four. Ahmed, Queer Phenomenology, 112,
136.
226
Homer Plessy, a man classified as black by Louisiana, had boarded a segregated, white-only railcar and had been
arrested after being asked to move to a black-only car. Dred Scott had challenged his condition of slavery on the
grounds that he had traveled and lived with his master in states and territories in which slavery was illegal. The
Court declared that African Americans could not claim citizenship and thus had no grounds to sue. See Plessy; Dred
Scott v. Sanford, 60 U.S. 393 (1857). Movement continued to shape the pursuit of civil rights. In the interwar period,
for example, middle-class blacks claimed the “open road” in an attempt to open up public space, and the “Scottsboro
boys” were accused of rape on a train. Several decades later, bus boycotts, station sit-ins, and Freedom Rides all
challenged restrictions on movement at the heart of segregation. And “transportation racism” still shapes our world.
On the historical cases, see Kathleen Franz, “‘The Open Road’: Automobility and Racial Uplift in the Interwar
Years,” in Technology and the African-American Experience: Needs and Opportunities for Study, ed. Bruce Sinclair
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004); James A. Miller, Remembering Scottsboro: The Legacy of an Infamous Trial
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009); Raymond Arsenault, Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for
Racial Justice (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011). On “transportation racism” see Robert D. Bullard, “The
Anatomy of Transportation Racism,” in Highway Robbery : Transportation Racism & Routes to Equity, ed. Robert
D. Bullard, Glenn S. Johnson, and Angel O. Torres (Cambridge: South End Press, 2004), 15-31; Where We Need to
Go: A Civil Rights Roadmap for Transportation Equity (Washington, D.C.: The Leadership Conference Education
Fund, 2011).
225

93
	  

would not, serving segregated slices of a jurisdiction in order to keep boundaries from being
crossed and unexpected and threatening intimacies from taking shape. Deployed with the
seemingly progressive goal of equalizing access to culture, but by those unable or unwilling to
challenge the spatial restrictions of segregation, bookmobiles necessarily ended up reinforcing a
Jim Crow common consciousness.
This spatial restriction produces “disorientation,” Ahmed writes, which “diminishes
capacities for action.”227 But it did not erase them. This chapter is largely about the ways whites
in power used bookmobiles and libraries to chop up space and limit movement within it. But it
also takes seriously African Americans’ attempts to challenge that status quo, even if it finds
those attempts often fell short of fully transforming the landscape and the place of books upon it.
Offering both a critique of and alternative to dominant ways of using books to organize
communities in space, a variety of African American activists—from a former Crisis agent and
wartime nurse to a black historian working for the Association for the Study of Negro Life and
History to Congress on Racial Equality protesters—moved their own bodies along with books in
ways that challenged and exceeded the limitations of Jim Crow common consciousness. But,
troublingly, other efforts by African Americans (especially in cooperation with local
governments) to provide access to a common culture moved books in ways that could actually
keep blacks in place. Understanding these various efforts, and their complicated relationship to
the ideas that initially spawned the traveling library and the bookmobile, offers fuller
opportunities to understand how alternatives could both flower and whither in the face of
segregation.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
227

Ahmed, Queer Phenomenology, 111.

94
	  

This chapter takes up a relatively large amount of time (from the 1890s through the
1960s), in order to track the fate of common consciousness as Jim Crow expanded and then
crumbled in the face of protest. Drawing on a large but often fragmented record of
correspondence, administrative records, visual culture, unpublished and published memoirs,
court decisions, and press coverage, the chapter touches down to explore specific case studies at
moments central to that story: the solidification of segregation at the turn of the twentieth
century, the proliferation of civil rights protest (and of “massive resistance” to it) in the 1950s,
the emergence of an obsession with social and spatial order at the dusk of Jim Crow, and the
intensification of that obsession amidst the tumult of the late 1960s. The first section sets the
stage by examining one early attempt to use print to bring North and South together and to heal
the wounds inflicted by slavery, sectionalism, and Civil War. In the process, it vividly illustrates
how acting at a distance enabled Northerners to ignore the effects of racism and thus to reinforce
separation as a guiding principle. The next section explores the consequences of the progressive
investment in the “little neighborhood” in times and places when local control frequently meant
intense segregation. Investigating library segregation, that section demonstrates that the
bookmobile, that icon of mobile intimacy, could actually be used to enforce immobility and
prevent interracial contact. It also examines the sometimes fevered resistance of Southern
whites—prompted by fears of disease and disorder—to the emergence of such proximity in the
civil rights movement. The following section identifies a shift in how such resistance was
framed, as concerns about spatial order seemed to replace fears of racial contact, even as
separation crucially continued to shape public culture. In order to find the broader resonances of
that shift, the final section closely reads the only moment bookmobiles came before the United
States Supreme Court, in Brown v. Louisiana (1966), which is also the only time the Court

95
	  

considered the segregation of public libraries. This section finds obsessions with property,
propriety, and presence in public space—and thus insists that racialized concerns with ordering
space continued to restrict access to common consciousness even after the end of legal
segregation.
“If evils will result from the commingling of the two races upon public highways
established for the benefit of all,” John Harlan warned in his lone dissent in Plessy, “they will be
infinitely less than those that will surely come from state legislation regulating the enjoyment of
civil rights upon the basis of race.”228 As we will see, he was right. Restricting access to shared
infrastructures like libraries—and to the books and feelings that would pass along them—meant
exposing the ways in which the dream of a common consciousness was, for many, a terrible and
seemingly inescapable nightmare.

“Just Imagine”: Moving Books in the Long Shadow of Sectionalism
Many progressives believed that if union of force was to take shape at the close of the
nineteenth century, then the Union itself would have to be rebuilt, once and for all. Even several
decades after the end of Reconstruction, sectionalism still cast a long shadow, and to imagine a
nation unified by an infrastructure of feeling meant imagining ways to stitch North and South
more thoroughly together (and to the new lands in the west, but more on that in the Chapter
Three). One institution that took up this task, with mobile books as their primary tool, was the
Lend a Hand Society’s Book Mission. In this section, we will see how that organization used the
techniques that brought May Pressly into the intellectual life of Kansas to develop connections
on a grander scale and against the fragmentation of sectionalism. But looking at the Book
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

228

Plessy, 562.

96
	  

Mission—and at very different projects developed by African American activists—will also
illustrate how a focus on healing sectionalism could distract reformers from the lived realities of
segregation, and thus from the separation at the heart of their project. Indeed, this turn-of-thecentury attempt to bring North and South together with mobile print is, perhaps, one origin of the
assumption at issue in this chapter. It depended on the idea that these two disparate, disconnected
regions could be connected without Northerners needing to confront, face-on, in intimate
proximity, the horrors of slavery and segregation.
The Lend a Hand Society was officially incorporated in 1892, inspired by the writings of
Edward Everett Hale, a prominent Unitarian clergyman in Boston.229 In 1870, Hale had
published a short story, “Ten Times One is Ten,” that laid out his philosophy and inspired a
movement. Eighteen years later, surveying the proliferation of charitable “Wadsworth Clubs”
(named after the story’s protagonist), Hale insisted that “’Together’ is the central word of the
gospel.”230 Clearly thinking along the same lines that Washington Gladden and Jane Addams
would a short time later, Hale offered an almost mathematical formula for developing
togetherness:
The phrase ‘Ten times one is ten’…means this,—that a certain Wadsworth Club, once
imagined, found at the end of three years that, on the average, each of them had enlisted
ten friends to the service of Faith, Hope, and Love. Each of these had the same eagerness
as the first then had; and so, at the end of three years more, there were one thousand
apostles of Faith, Hope and Love. In three years more there were ten thousand—and in
three years more, a hundred thousand—by the same multiplication.231

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

229

Given the previous chapter’s focus on Kansas, it is worth nothing that one of Hale’s first significant public roles
was advocacy in favor of Kansas’s incorporation into the Union as a free state. See Edward Everett Hale, Kanzas
[sic] and Nebraska: The History, Geographical and Physical Characteristics, and Political Position of These
Territories (Boston: Phillips, Sampson and Company, 1854).
230
Edward E. Hale, The Ten Times One is Ten and Lend a Hand Clubs; How to Begin (Boston: J. Stilman Smith &
Co., 1888), 6.
231
Hale, Ten Times One, 7-8.

97
	  

And given the explicit orientation of the Lend a Hand philosophy (its motto reads “Look up and
not down; / Look forward and not back. / Look out and not in and / Lend a Hand”), this
amplification was conceivably infinite.232 Inspired by Hale’s insistence that a club should “have
for one, at least, of its objects, the uplifting of some person, neighborhood, or institution outside
the club itself,” the officially incorporated Lend a Hand Society committed itself to a variety of
projects designed to improve the lives of the Gilded Age poor.233 Many of the Society’s
programs looked close to home: one made fresh produce available to working-class Bostonians;
another built a floating hospital to treat the ill; another, called Noon-Day Rest, organized a
lunchroom for working women in the city. Occasionally, other programs would look much
farther afield, offering assistance to Boer prisoners of war being held in Bermuda, to Filipino
boys, or to Belgians during World War I. But the Society’s longest-lasting and most successful
program—the Book Mission—focused, intriguingly, somewhere in between.
Sometime in the late 1880s, the story went, white Bostonian Sarah Brigham took a trip to
Florida. While she was staying at a hotel, an African American waiter asked to borrow a book,
and Brigham’s eyes were opened, as a successor would later put it, to “the great lack of
education and books among the mountain whites as well as the Negroes” of the South.234
Inspired by this moment, Brigham founded the Book Mission, which sent books to a surprising
variety of institutions across the South. (The Mission was operated cooperatively with the Lend a
Hand Society beginning in 1892, and it was subsumed into it in 1914.) Shipping boxes of books
and periodicals to schools, libraries, and prisons across the region, the organization aimed to give
a sort of literary breathing room to the “thousands of men, women and children cramped for
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

232

Hale, Ten Times One, 7.
Hale, Ten Times One, 9.
234
“Conference on Library Extension, 1917,” Scrapbook, clippings about Lend a Hand Society 1897-1959, Carton 4,
Lend a Hand Society Records, 1843-1982, Massachusetts Historical Society, Boston, Massachusetts.
233

98
	  

opportunities, who were anxious to ascend the educational ladder and to keep pace with the
world’s progress.”235
That rhetoric, along with the organization’s name, suggest its place in a long line of
imperial enterprises, and the language Brigham and other Book Mission workers used to describe
the South at least into the 1930s—of “unexplored regions,” of “isolated mountain section[s],” of
“remote regions,” of people “awaiting the light we can and must bring to them”—also bears this
out.236 A 1910 report noted how books provided by the Mission had “cheered the aching hearts
of men in stripes behind prison bars and made them feel they have friends in the outside world
who remember them.”237 And they appear to have seen their work for all Southerners in a similar
light; in many ways, to these middle-class Bostonians, the South was another country. The
wounds of sectionalism lived on in massively uneven industrial resources, in almost separate and
vastly unequal economies, and in the disparate number and density of infrastructures between
North and South. A “New South” would emerge in the first third of the century, out of
groundwork laid in the last decades of the previous, but that economic renaissance—and the
physical infrastructures it promised—would not immediately translate in any direct way into a
common consciousness.238
The Book Mission workers insisted, indeed, that it was not simply physical or economic
differences that prompted the continued disconnect between the regions. At heart, the inability to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

235

Sara P. Brigham, “The Lend-A-Hand Book Mission,” Boston Evening Transcript, November 8, 1898.
Sarah P. Brigham, “The Lend-A-Hand Book Mission,” Boston Evening Transcript, October 24, 1899; “Lend a
Hand Book Mission Expands,” Boston Transcript (9 Dec. 1929); “Lend a Hand Book Mission Growing,” Boston
Evening Transcript, December 12 1931; Annie Florence Brown, “Annual Report of Lend a Hand Book Mission,”
Transcript, November 21, 1918.
237
“Lend-A-Hand Book Mission,” Boston Transcript, November 26, 1910.
238
A 1928 Book Mission report celebrated the “New South” for the millions “spent annually by all the States in
road-building, the first step necessary before consolidated schools can be possible,” but it also lamented that many
counties continued to list “from forty to seventy-five one and two-room schools for both white and negro children.”
“Lend a Hand Book Mission Reports,” Boston Evening Transcript, November 27, 1928.

236

99
	  

build a cohesive culture—and thus bridge the distance between North and South—was a result of
a failure of imagination, and of emotion. Northerners, the Book Mission insisted, struggled to
envision what it would be like to live in the South. “It is hard for us to imagine,” Mission
director Mary Coburn wrote to a recipient in Tennessee in 1937, “what it would be to live
beyond the reach of a public library, so it is especially challenging to be brought in touch with
people who, like you, live almost in the desert as far as books are concerned.”239 And one request
for donations from New England children asked them to “[j]ust imagine being five years old and
never having learned a single Mother Goose rhyme, never hearing anything about Peter Rabbit
and Mr. Macgregor.”240 Assuming everyone to have these shared experiences of a literate
childhood, when their universality was not yet fact, meant not just ignoring but widening the gulf
between North and South. Even into the 1940s the Southern teachers who received many of the
books struggled to express their gratitude across that gulf. “I wish you could have been hidden in
a corner where you could have watched their eager faces as I explained to them the contents of
the box,” one wrote in 1943, and three years later another wrote that she knew “that if you could
have seen the faces of the children as we unpacked treasure after treasure from your box that you
would have felt amply rewarded for your efforts.”241 Separated by space and by an often
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

239

Mary Coburn to Ellen Click, June 11, 1937, “Book Mission Correspondence, June-Aug. 24, 1937” folder, carton
2, Lend a Hand Society Records. A Bostonian wrote into a newspaper in the late 1910s to praise the Book Mission
and to castigate his fellow New Englanders: “The utter lack of reading matter among the great classes of people in
the South is something of which few of us, throwing away our papers and magazines and books so carelessly, have
any conception.” Edwin D. Mead, “Miss Brigham’s Book Mission,” “Book Mission, 20 March 1015-1 May 1920”
Folder, carton 4, Lend a Hand Society Records.
240
“This is an appeal to boys and girls who have books of their own and can borrow many more from libraries to
give other children of their own age a chance to read good books, too.”
241
“Lend a Hand Book Mission” Annual Report (1943), “LHS – draft annual reports, 1942-1943” folder, carton 5,
Lend a Hand Society Records; “Fifty-Sixth Annual Report” (1946), “LHS – draft annual reports, 1046-1947” folder,
carton 5, Lend a Hand Society Records. This specific trope was quoted at least three other times in Book Mission
annual reports written between 1943 and 1950, and in a letter from the director of the Hindman Settlement School in
1951. “Fifty-Eighth Annual Report” (1948), “LHS – draft annual reports, 1948-1949” folder, carton 5, Lend a Hand
Society Records; “Fifty-Ninth Annual Report” (1949), “LHS – draft annual reports, 1948-1949” folder, carton 5,
Lend a Hand Society Records; “Sixtieth Annual Report” (1950), “LHS – draft annual reports, 1950-1951” folder,

100
	  

profoundly different experience of the time since the Civil War, the North and South still
struggled to know one another, and books were one tool used to build a common consciousness
between them.
Ironically, the Book Mission’s argument depended on a refusal of the way their own
efforts fit into a longer history of education and regional relations since the end of the Civil War.
From Emancipation, freedpeople had demanded education, recognizing illiteracy as a major
factor in their subjugation. And in response to those demands, as well as to the immediate
postbellum transformation of abolitionism, white women from New England—from, in fact, the
same social circles from which the Book Mission women came—traveled to the South to staff
schools.242 This history is not once mentioned in any of the records preserved in the Book
Mission’s archive, suggesting both a misplaced certainty that the will to learn would have to
come from outside the South as well as an eagerness to forget Reconstruction in an effort to
undertake a less racially-beneficent reconstruction.
The bridge between North and South would be built not just out of books, the Book
Mission continued to argue, but out of bodies and intimate connections formed by books. Like
Mary Keating, who traveled western Kansas trying to build up systems that would link those
distant counties to Topeka, several Book Mission secretaries made trips through the South to
survey their work and to try and expand it.243 In 1935, Mary Coburn took a long-awaited, seven-

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
carton 5, Lend a Hand Society Records; Elizabeth Watts to Whitman, March 27, 1951, “Book Mission – Southern
Trip – Correspondence, Sept. 1951” folder, carton 2, Lend a Hand Society.
242
Carol Faulkner writes that “teaching in freedmen’s schools” was “the most common, traditional, and available
option open to women in Reconstruction.” Carol Faulkner, Women’s Radical Reconstruction: The Freedmen’s Aid
Movement (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007), 39.
243
Trips took place several times before the complete incorporation of the Book Mission within Lend a Hand, and in
1915, 1917, 1921, 1924, 1928, 1935, 1941, and 1951.

101
	  

week trip through what she called “the land of the Book Mission.”244 Driving through six
southern states “in a Ford…[with] my mother as my companion,” Coburn followed a route laid
out in a map earlier published in a request for funding [FIGURE 8].245 While the Book Mission
was still shipping boxes of books at this point (not too long after, they would switch to sending
money instead), this map is—like the bookmobile maps—about lines more than dots. Coburn
herself moved through the space, both observing and embodying the connections the Mission
sought to build. She discovered, for example, how the amplification of “Ten Times One is Ten”
could be practiced, through print, in the mountains of North Carolina. “In one distant
community,” Coburn explained, “only one man can read and [a librarian who struggles to find
enough books] loans him a number of books at a time and he reads them to his neighbors who
help him with his work, bring oil for the lamp, and come listen by the hour.”246 The dream, as
articulated in this story, was that books gathered from a location in Boston could touch down in a
rural hamlet and kindle local solidarities and a sense of mutual obligation. And then, ideally,
those communities would be forever linked across fading sectional borders; indeed, in this case,
even more explicitly than in the similar dreams of Lucy Browne Johnston and the Kansas
Traveling Library, the coherence of the nation seemed at stake.
But as late as the last trip by a director, made by Helen Merritt in 1951, the struggle to
truly understand the conditions of the South, and to assert connections against and across
foreignness, continued. Before taking to the road, she wrote that though she had never before
visited the South, “everyone I have written about my trip has been so cordial and co-operative I
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

244

Coburn, Draft letter to “Friends,” “Book Mission – Southern Trip – Notes, 1935” folder, carton 2, Lend a Hand
Society Records.
245
Mary Coburn to Katherine Pettit, Aug. 5, 1935, “Book Mission Correspondence, 1933-1935” folder, carton 2,
Lend a Hand Society Records.
246
Coburn, Draft letter to “Friends.”

102
	  

am sure I shall not feel at all like a stranger.”247 But she nonetheless felt initially estranged,
brought up short by a chasm between expectation and reality. “I can’t begin to tell you the
conditions we found in most of these schools,” she wrote eleven days later from Kentucky.
“They are typical of all the places we have ever heard of and from now on I’ll believe anything I
hear of conditions in these isolated sections.”248 She had heard of the conditions, but she could
not quite believe them until she had faced them, in person. This, of course, points to a
fundamental problem in the Book Mission’s dream: can information alone truly overcome
psychic, emotional, and economic difference and distance? The map of Coburn’s trip, and the
plans for all of them, show significant hopes that community could be constructed on scales large
and small. But, as we will see shortly, empowering local communities as a basis for larger ones
could mean relinquishing direct and personal control over what shape the dream of a common
consciousness could take.
Despite this interest in intimate contact, and in needing to see conditions in order to
believe them, the directors seemed largely unwilling to truly confront the conditions that
segregation had wrought. Indeed, one of the most significant fractures that threatened the Book
Mission’s plans was race. The racial politics of the Mission were, from its founding on the
inspiration of a black waiter, rather strange. The racially and economically unequal relationship
of Brigham to that waiter was replicated over and over again, on a variety of scales, as the
organization grew from that single interaction to thousands of them.249 That in the period after
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

247

Helen Merritt to Marie Turner, Sept. 13, 1951, “Book Mission – Southern Trip – Correspondence, Sept. 1951”
folder, carton 2, Lend a Hand Society Records.
248
Helen Merritt to Whitman, Sept. 24, 1951, “Book Mission – Southern Trip – Correspondence, Sept. 1951” folder,
carton 2, Lend a Hand Society Records.
249
The Mission shipped 4,000 books in 1912, 12,205 to 10 states in 1923, and a seeming height of 16,601 in 1928.
“Lend-A-Hand Reports Active Year” (1912); “Has Clubs in 24 States” (1923); and “Good Will and Good Works”
(1929) in Scrapbook, clippings about Lend a Hand Society, 1892-1931, carton 4, Lend a Hand Society Records. Just
one example of the strange class dynamics at play comes from a 1932 report by director Annie Brown, who wrote of

103
	  

the 1890s, these Northerners saw the linking of North and South as a product of books moved
interracially is striking. Historians have noted that that decade saw a kind of postbellum repair
take place around whiteness (and especially white masculinity). In politics, empire, sports, and
historiography, white men from various regions came together in ways that at least attempted to
heal the wounds of war by actively furthering or passively ignoring continuing racial
injustices.250 In contrast, the Book Mission sought books “for circulation among a scattered
population of both races,” and did send books to institutions serving both whites and blacks.251
This was indeed radical, if only in a truly relative sense.
But it seems the organizers of the Book Mission understood racism and segregation as
problems of efficiency rather than as fundamental injustices that challenged the dream of a
common consciousness. A 1928 report complained that while white students were increasingly
attending the sort of consolidated schools that allowed for the efficient and wide circulation of
books, there remained “very few for negroes,” who continued to attend one-room schools.252
And in 1941, the director noted that often books “must be kept separate for white and colored
schools,” meaning that white students had access to “[m]any more…good books” and African
Americans were left with a “lack of variety.”253 (In one case, a draft of a 1935 annual report even
suggested that sending books to black Southerners offered a bigger bang for the buck: “any
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
a project to provide “the unemployed, despairing miners” of West Virginia with books, quoting a minister there
describing them as “mostly English-speaking and intelligent, [who] read all the books they can find…[which] is far
better for them than sitting around brooding around the unemployment situation.” “Secretary’s report, 1932,” “LHSSecretary’s report 1932” folder, carton 5, Lend a Hand Society Records.
250
C. Vann Woodward argued that the “[t]he determination of the Negro’s ‘place’ took shape gradually under the
influence of economic and political conflicts among divided white people—conflicts that were eventually resolved
in part at the expense of the Negro.” C. Vann Woodward, The Strange Career of Jim Crow (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2002 [1955]), 6. See also Gail Bederman, Manliness & Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender
and Race in the United States, 1880-1917 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), esp. 20-25; Gilmore,
Gender & Jim Crow, esp. 61.
251
Brigham, “The Lend-A-Hand Book Mission.”
252
“Lend a Hand Book Mission Reports,” Boston Evening Transcript, November 27, 1928.
253
“Book Mission – notes of trip South, 1941” folder, carton 2, Lend a Hand Society Records.

104
	  

encouragement that can be given Negroes will be deeply appreciated and, in many cases, books
so placed will be more carefully used and treasured than they would be in white
communities.”)254 Segregation therefore often seemed to Book Mission staffers to stand in the
way of building efficient infrastructures more than it was a fundamental social problem and a
threat to their dream of common consciousness.
Unsurprisingly, African Americans often saw things in a rather different light. Kathryn
Johnson, for example, understood immediately from childhood that she was excluded from the
dream of a common consciousness embodied in print, at least as long as it failed to directly
confront segregation and discrimination. Born in 1878, in Ohio, Johnson attended an integrated
school—that glory of efficiency, according to the Book Mission—but wrote in an unpublished
memoir that, in fact, ‘[i]t was only after I had started school that I became acutely conscious of
the color line.” Books played a major role in this realization:
A little later an even worse blow came from one of the text books which we were given
to study and accept as infallible. … It was called Eclectic Geography. It contained many
large maps and took up most of the space on our desks. One section of the book was
given over to a discussion of the races of mankind. There were pictures of each race.
There was the white race, Caucasian; the red race; the brown race; the yellow race; and
the black race. All had been given fairly intelligent faces except the black man.
Underneath his picture it read, “This is an Ethiopian, he belongs to the most inferior race
on the face of the globe.” I was amazed, stunned. My schoolmates turned to me and said,
“That’s your folks!” I was crushed. I could not understand how a just God could make
man in five races and make one inferior to all the others! I began to think long about it. I
began to look in other books. But no book I could find which gave the African, or the
American colored man, credit for any accomplishment.
Had Johnson’s school been in the south, it very well might have received Eclectic Geography
from the Book Mission.255 The women of the Kansas Traveling Library, like those of the Book
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
254

At the same time, the report warned that “[a] willingness to accept hand-me-downs persists from the days of
slavery and state officials are quite right in asking us not to encourage this.” “Lend a Hand Book Mission, 1935,”
“LHS draft annual reports, 1934-1936” folder, carton 5, Lend a Hand Society Records.
255
The Mission mostly did not send textbooks but occasionally did so.

105
	  

Mission, could mostly put aside the question of what sorts of books they circulated, letting their
assumptions hold sway without having to think very much about their effects. Johnson, on the
other hand, understood intimately that—at least in many cases—the kinds of books circulated
could influence precisely the kinds of social relations they created. Just as the book filled up the
surface of her desk it also filled up the space between Johnson and her classmates, pushing them
further and further apart. This was part, Johnson realized, of a “conspiracy designed to create a
feeling of inferiority among all the peoples in whose veins ran the blood of Africa,” a conspiracy
of disinformation and silence.256
Because of what Shelton Stromquist calls the “racial gulf that separated the worlds of
white and black reform,” efforts to counter that conspiracy would have to take place apart from
white-run institutions like the Lend a Hand Society, either by individuals or within the
burgeoning institutions of the black freedom struggle.257 And they did take place, often by
mobilizing books and always by presenting a criticism of—and, importantly, an alternative to—
dominant ways of organizing communities. After returning from her work as a nurse in Europe
during World War I, Johnson decided to confront the problem head on, creating her own sort of
private, trans-regional bookmobile, “selling race pride” across the United States.258 Before the
war, Johnson had worked as a field agent for The Crisis, the official organ of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored Persons. In Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, and
Texas, Johnson sold copies of the magazine, which “laid the groundwork, and awakened the

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
256

Kathryn Johnson, unpublished memoir, folder 1, Kathryn M. Johnson Papers, Schlessinger Library, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
257
Stromquist, Reinventing, 152.
258
Mary White Ovington, “Selling Race Pride,” The Publishers Weekly, January 10, 1925, 111-112. Johnson’s
nursing experiences are what she is most famous for. See Addie W. Hunton and Kathryn M. Johnson, Two Colored
Women with the American Expeditionary Forces (Brooklyn: Brooklyn Eagle Press, 1920).

106
	  

people” and prompted the founding of NAACP chapters.259 After the war, working on her own,
she sold a different set of texts for an even broader purpose. Driving (much like the Book
Mission directors) through the Northeast and down into the South, Johnson visited a rather
different set of institutions: black churches, black colleges, and black homes, declaring she
sought “to reach the rank and file” and “get the colored people reading.”260 Drawing on the
model of Charles Eliot’s “five-foot shelf,” which aimed to make the classics of the (entirely
white) Western canon available to a wider range of (mostly white) homes, Johnson developed
what she called “The Two-Foot Shelf” of literature about African American experience, “to help
the colored people learn something about themselves.”261 Selling over five thousand volumes in
the two and a half years before 1925 (roughly at cost), she both explicitly tried to counter the
effects of the conspiracy she had earlier experienced and implicitly critiqued the methods of
programs like the Book Mission.262 Johnson borrowed the form of the five-foot shelf, much as
the earlier traveling libraries had, but she turned a much more critical eye on its contents. As we
saw in Chapter One, traveling librarians often let vague assumptions guide the choice of books,
paying more attention to their circulation than to their contents. What Johnson’s rejoinder
suggests is that passively ignoring the ideas embedded in circulating books would limit the
ability to create the sort of common consciousness the progressives imagined. Largely ignoring

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

259

Kathryn Johnson, unpublished memoir, folder 1, Kathryn M. Johnson Papers.
Ovington, “Selling,” 114. Among the states she visited were Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New
York, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, Virginia, North Carolina, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky,
and Illinois. Kathryn Johnson, unpublished memoir, folder 3, Kathryn M. Johnson Papers.
261
The precise contents of the shelf, other than Johnson’s own book about black soldiers in the war, are unclear.
Kathryn Johnson, unpublished memoir, folder 3, Kathryn M. Johnson Papers.
262
Ovington, “Selling,” 114. Johnson once proposed the formation of a black-run “Bureau for the Distribution of
Negro Literature,” which would distribute information about black history and life to whites so as to “increase the
white man’s respect for a people whose ancestry has done so much towards laying the foundation for a world
civilization.” Kathryn Johnson, “Educating Nordics,” The Messenger (May 1927): 144, 169.
260

107
	  

physical segregation and endorsing, in effect, cultural separation had doomed their project from
its inception.
Five years later, someone else’s attempt at “selling black pride” suggested something
quite similar.263 In June, 1930, Lorenzo Greene and four other men drove south from
Washington, D.C., aiming to sell books about African American history to black readers across
the country.264 Those books, which were mildewing in the basement of Greene’s employer, the
Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, were originally printed to spread the “the
gospel of Negro history” by mail-order.265 But they sat there, unordered and unread, until Greene
realized they could be bundled and sold like magazine subscriptions by agents on the road. Off
and on for several years, Greene drove from city to town to city, selling steeply discounted sets
of books to school, churches, and individuals.266 The goal of this work, he wrote partway through
his journey, was to “induce the Negro public to subscribe to and read more widely the books of

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

263

Lorenzo J. Greene, Selling Black Pride for Carter G. Woodson: A Diary, 1930-1933, ed. Arvarh E. Strickland
(Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1996).
264
For details on Greene’s career and his relationship to his mentor and boss, the prominent historian Carter G.
Woodson, see Pero Gaglo Dagbovie, The Early Black History Movement, Carter G. Woodson, and Lorenzo
Johnston Greene (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007).
265
Greene, Selling, 54.
266
Like Johnson, Greene priced his books at a level that would feed and house him on the road, but which would not
turn any significant profit. The ASNLH books were sold in bundles of eight for $9.98 ($127.12 in inflation-adjusted,
2009 dollars). According to an order slip published in Greene’s diary, the standard bundle included (all published by
Associated Publishers in Washington, D.C.): Maurice Delafosse, The Negroes of Africa: History and Culture (1931);
R. T. Kerlin, Negro Poets and Their Poems (1923); Kelly Miller, Everlasting Stain (1924); Willis Richardson, Plays
and Pageants from the Life of the Negro (1930); Carter G. Woodson, African Myths (1928); Woodson, History of
the Negro Church (1921); Woodson, Negro In Our History (1922); Woodson, Negro Makers of History (1928).
Greene also offered “Special Combinations,” including “Books on Africa,” “Books for Ministers,” “Economics,”
“Books for the Home,” and “Books for English Teachers.” Greene, Selling, 252. Selling black-oriented print more
for politics than profit remains a common means by which social change is effected (or attempted) by African
American activists. For example, Colin Beckles studied black bookstores as “PanAfrican ‘sites of resistance’.” He
found that in Britain, the U.S., and Jamaica, bookstore owners and employees were not just capitalists or workers
but “political activists who conceptualized the shop as a political ‘space’ in which the objective was to ‘liberate’ the
minds of Black people by ‘de-constructing’ racist notions of Black identity and ‘re-producing’ the ‘truth’ about
Black/African identity.” Colin Anthony Beckles, PanAfrican Sites of Resistance: Black Bookstores and the Struggle
to Re-Present Black Identity (PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1995), vii-viii.

108
	  

the Associated Publishers, dealing with the history and achievements of the Negroes.”267 Greene
was far more invested in the “uplift” tradition—as well as its middle-class assumptions and
prejudices—than Johnson, making his attempts seem often ham-handed and troubling.268 (He
was also different, in this respect, from Langston Hughes, who in this period traveled through the
South, selling to a wide cross-section of African Americans.)269 But despite their differences, all
of these itinerants paid careful attention to what they were actually distributing as well as where
and how they were distributing it.270 Connecting people through print as well as countering what
Johnson had called a conspiracy of silence were twin goals of their projects. In the process of
trying to achieve them, activists like Johnson and Greene expressed skepticism about the efficacy
of building the “little neighborhoods” that were such an important part of the traveling library
and its dream.
Like the Kansas Traveling Library, the Book Mission aimed to create building blocks for
local libraries that could then be put under local control and connected to a national culture.
(Remember, for example, the Kansas Traveling Library’s requirement that a library club be
formed to steward the collection.) As it turns out, though, the stronger the local libraries served
by the Book Mission became, the less interested they seemed in making those larger connections.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

267

Lorenzo J. Greene, “12,000-Mile Trip Through the South,” New York Amsterdam News, October 22, 1930.
He aimed, at least theoretically, to improve the lot of poor blacks, but at the same time he struggled to actually
interact with them. When his group stopped in Greenville, North Carolina, and sought out rooms for the night, he
recorded his response to a potential host: “When I saw her, I immediately knew that I could not stay at her home.
She was ugly, black, untidy, ignorant, and her house lacked the atmosphere that I desired.” “I had gotten in with the
wrong class of people,” he wrote, “and this despite the fact that I am very democratic.” Greene, Selling, 47. On the
uplift tradition, see Kevin Gaines, Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the Twentieth
Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996).
269
Complaining that “[l]ittle or no effort is made to reach the great masses of the colored people” with literature,
Hughes established, with illustrator Prentiss Taylor, The Golden Stair Press, which printed their collaborative work
in pamphlet and broadside format. Elizabeth Davey, “Building a Black Audience in the 1930s: Langston Hughes,
Poetry Readings, and the Golden Stair Press,” in Print Culture in a Diverse America, ed. James Danky and Wayne
Wiegand (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1998), 224.
270
Methods and networks were very important to these efforts, as Johnson and Greene, especially, both depended on
what the former called the “ready-made audiences” offered by black churches and schools. Kathryn Johnson,
unpublished memoir, folder 3, Kathryn M. Johnson Papers.
268

109
	  

Thanks to an influx of teachers who “were not progressive” during the war, “applications for
books…fell off very much” in the 1940s.271 This was the beginning of the Book Mission’s
decline. In the end, though, it was bookmobiles (and the efficient local governance that made
them possible) that killed the Book Mission:
The building of “black roads” throughout the mountainous counties where only creek bed
roads or mountain paths had been before, opened up the rural south for those who had
been more or less confined to their back country. … The bookmobiles began to make
their rounds and many of the schools which formerly had no way of getting reading
material were now able to have a few books which they could exchange each time the
bookmobile made its trip. These, and other economic changes took place and the demand
for our book service began to decrease.272
By the late 1950s, the Book Mission began sending money rather than books to the South,
abandoning not only the question of content but the physical books themselves as tools for
building common consciousness. The little neighborhoods had taken over.273
People like Johnson and Green, though, knew first-hand the isolation and exclusion this
turn of events could promise; they understood that more efficient governance under the same old
system could simply mean more efficient discrimination. Fostering institutions for local control
without confronting, dismantling, and rebuilding the ways that control would be exercised,
organizations like the Book Mission failed to grapple with the deepest scar left by slavery and
the Civil War: the continued subjugation of millions of black Americans. In contrast, Johnson
and Greene sought to build a trans-regional community based on racial solidarity, rather than
nationalist abstraction, to build a “common fund,” as Dewey put it, from which African
Americans could draw to find alternatives and demand recognition. Other individuals and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
271

“Fifty-Seventh Annual Report, 1947,” “LHS – draft annual reports, 1946-1947” folder, carton 5, Lend a Hand
Society Records.
272
“Lend a Hand Society,” “LHS – draft annual reports, 1960-1961” folder, carton 5, Lend a Hand Society Records..
See also “Sixty-Fifth Annual report, 1956,” “LHS – draft annual reports, 1955-1956” folder, carton 5, Lend a Hand
Society Records.
273
The Land a Hand Society, and the Book Mission, are still in operation, though much diminished.

110
	  

organizations, like the black sorority Delta Sigma Theta, pursued this by using bookmobiles to
assert a trans-regional and transformative racial community.274 But despite their best efforts,
many black Southerners remained tied geographically to local spaces and, often, isolated
culturally from anything so large. Eclectic Geography still held sway, and Southern
infrastructures—physical and cultural—remained segregated. In the next section, we will start to
see what role that ideas about proximity and community played in this, and how bookmobiles
sometimes even helped perpetuate it.

“A Fear…I Can’t Explain”: Segregated Libraries and the Politics of Place and Space
In a series of lectures given in 1954 before interracial audiences at the University of
Virginia, prominent historian C. Vann Woodward attempted to explain the strange and
segregated world in which they found themselves—a world the Lend a Hand society failed to
comprehend, let alone to challenge. Beginning with the compromises that ended Reconstruction
but intensifying toward the close of the nineteenth century, Woodward explained, the North
staged a “liberal retreat,” allowing an extreme approach to race relations to take hold.275 The
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

274

In 1950, after years of planning, Delta Sigma Theta purchased and sent a bookmobile from New York City to
Northeast Georgia. A gift to the state of Georgia for use by the West Gorgia Regional Library (on the condition that
it would serve black residents), the bookmobile circulated books, as well as serving as a site for educational classes
and film screenings. Six years later, the DST executive director declared that “[w]e ourselves are enriched by the
knowledge that we have opened a small part of the world of books to our brothers and sisters here” in the rural
South. The Deltas thus asserted a cross-regional emotional bond, like that imagined by the Book Mission, but with a
clear eye on the consequences of discrimination and a commitment to racial solidarity more than national cohesion.
(The Delta-provided bookmobile was, one newspaper reported, “primarily intended for the use of Negroes in rural
Georgia but its facilities would be available for the use of all of the rural people.”) The program earned broad
recognition, including an award for “most unique library service of the year” from the American Library Association.
“Bookmobile Project Declared Success By Delta Sigma Theta,” Daily Defender, September 5, 1956; “Deltas
Launch Bookmobile With TV, Luncheon, Tea,” New York Amsterdam News, June 17, 1950; “Deltas Receive Award
for Most Unique Library,” Philadelphia Tribune, July 17, 1951.
275
Woodward, Strange Career, 69. There were, Woodward explained, “forgotten alternatives” toward the beginning
of this period, wherein formal segregation might not have occurred. (Which is not to suggest a lack of oppression—a
position Woodward characterizes as “preposterous.”) He quotes, for example, a Northern reporter in 1880 puzzling
over the “the proximity and confusion, so to speak, of white and negro houses,” and a visitor to the 1885 New

111
	  

North, “eager to conciliate the South,” offered what Woodward called “permissions-to-hate,”
allowing white animosity toward blacks to take the place of Southern antipathy toward the
North.276 This was, in fact, the larger context of the Book Mission workers’ own set of
concessions, in which they gave up a principle in order to build a national community, in which
they complained about inefficiency but averted their eyes from its root causes and disastrous
effects. Out of this mass of compromises and diverted gazes dawned an “era of stiff conformity
and fanatical rigidity,” Woodward continued, in which a series of codes, called Jim Crow, “lent
the sanction of law to…racial ostracism.”277 And this ostracism most vividly took form as a way
of restricting access to public space and to public culture. Jim Crow was about determining who
could go where, do what, interact with whom, and share a common consciousness.278 Lived
experience of segregation varied on the ground, by time and by geography, and the rest of this
chapter will catalogue some of those different concrete experiences. But it will be mainly
interested in the cultural and physical system—the infrastructure of feeling—that enabled
segregation and which had a strong grip across space and time. Within this system, as the little
neighborhoods took shape, and took power, the politics of intimacy changed. If community was
the result of intimate proximity, and the local powers resisted local, cross-racial intimacies, then
the smaller communities conjoined into the nation—as opposed to those, like Johnson’s or
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Orleans marveling at the fact that “white and colored people mingled freely, talking and looking at what was of
common interest,” both vivid examples of what such alternatives might have meant in the realm of community,
culture, and education. Woodward, Strange Career, 43, 31, 32, 42.
276
Woodward, Strange Career, 81.
277
Woodward, Strange Career, 44, 7.
278
None of this is to suggest, of course, that the North was a racial utopia. But the oppression of African Americans
often (though not always) took a different form from the “ostracism” Woodward describes. Kathyrn Johnson, for
example, remarked of the Book Mission’s hometown: “There were few other enterprises operated by colored people
in Boston. Afraid of being segregated, they ate in restaurants run by white people, went to theatres where they
couldn’t play, patronized stores where they could work only as menials; in short, Boston at that time was a place
where you could get an education, but not employment where an education could be used.” Kathryn Johnson,
unpublished memoir, folder 3, Kathryn M. Johnson Papers.

112
	  

Greene’s, linked by black identities—would not incorporate (or be transformed by) African
Americans.
Indeed, as early—or, from another angle, as late—as 1903, W.E.B. DuBois wrote that
“there is little or no intellectual commerce” between blacks and whites; “they go to separate
churches, they live in separate sections, they are strictly separated in all public gatherings, they
travel separately, and they are beginning to read different papers and books.”279 This had a
profound effect, the implications of which should invite us to again look askance at the Book
Mission and its politics: “the very representatives of the two races, who for mutual benefit and
the welfare of the land ought to be in complete understanding and sympathy, are so far strangers”
that they do not, and cannot, know one another at all.280 The Book Mission (like many similar
projects) invited contributors to “just imagine” what it must be like to live hundreds of miles
away and thus to act at a safe distance. But it did not adequately consider that it could be just as
difficult for a black or white Southerner to “just imagine” life a small distance down the road.
Even at its height, the Book Mission reached only a handful of towns and hamlets in the South,
and Johnson and Greene only ever briefly passed through and only ever obliquely affected places
that were marked by quotidian and overwhelming divisions.
In fact, the vast majority of black Southerners had no consistent access to public libraries,
with even fewer opportunities for interracial contact in library contexts. According to figures
published in 1941 by African American library scientist Eliza Atkins Gleason, approximately
21% of black residents in thirteen southern states had access to public library service.281 Forty	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
279

“To most libraries, lectures, concerts, and museums,” he continued, “Negroes are ether not admitted at all, or on
terms peculiarly galling to the pride of the very classes who might otherwise be attracted.” DuBois, Souls, 183-184.
280
DuBois, Souls, 184.
281
Eliza Atkins Gleason, The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study of the Government and
Administration of Public Library Service to Negroes in the South (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1941), 90.

113
	  

three percent of whites had such access.282 Additionally, 22% of the total black population in
those states (roughly two million people) lived in jurisdictions that offered library service to
white residents but denied it to black citizens. And even in places where libraries were not
legally segregated, Gleason also noted, “these institutions do not publicize the fact that service is
available to Negroes,” making even the numbers reported for those with access likely
inadvertently inflated.
One prominent way that some tried to resolve this situation was to offer segregated
service for African Americans. These institutions, which existed at least from the founding of a
black library in Memphis in 1903 until full desegregation in the late 1960s, aimed to offer
African Americans access to books on terms largely acceptable under Jim Crow. They were also
(like traveling libraries in the earlier period) often begun out of private philanthropy and
sometimes involved later administration by government. By 1918, likely more than sixteen
segregated libraries serving black patrons had been founded across the Southern states, and
others would follow in the decades to come.283 But there was often a cruel irony to these efforts:
they supplied African Americans with books by undercutting one of the dreams that those books
might have represented. As we saw in Chapter One, one of the fantasies of the traveling library
was that moving books to people would move those people—emotionally and physically—into
new spaces, in new combinations. But in contexts where spaces were racially-coded, and where
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
This book was an adaptation of her 1940 dissertation at the University of Chicago; Gleason was the first African
American to earn a doctorate in library science.
282
As the Lend a Hand Society decried, this number is quite low compared to other parts of the country. Still,
though, it is twice the proportion of African Americans without access.
283
Klaus Musmann, “The Ugly Side of Librarianship: Segregation in Library Services from 1900-1950,” in Untold
Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, ed. John Mark Tucker (Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1998), 80. See also Michael Fultz, “Black Public Libraries in
the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation,” Libraries & the Cultural Record 41 (2006): 337-359. On one specific
and peculiar philanthropic effort, see Dan R. Lee, “Faith Cabin Libraries: A Study of an Alternative Library Service
in the Segregated South, 1932-1960,” Libraries & Culture 26 (1991): 169-182.

114
	  

movement in and through them was restricted, moving books could quite easily be used to keep
people firmly in place. And “place” was a powerful idea under Jim Crow; it was, as Glenda
Gilmore has described, “a stiff-sided box where southern whites expected African Americans to
dwell.”284 Bringing books into that box, and seeming to make it unnecessary to leave it,
segregated bookmobile service—even undertaken with the finest of motives—could reinforce its
walls.285 “With segregation a way of life, I realized that if we were to develop service for all, we
must make plans to include all,” one white Georgia librarian remembered of building a black
branch the late 1940s, “though necessarily a segregated framework, at that time.”286 These
projects could promote the development of a common consciousness, and of powerful sorts of
community, within those walls.287 But other than in some prospective future (when a newly
educated, united black population would demand its rights), they struggled to challenge the terms
of the box itself by insisting on intimacies and commonalities that violated the boundaries of Jim
Crow.
The case of the Richard B. Harrison library, in Raleigh, North Carolina, illustrates the
risks of this approach. The library was founded in Raleigh in 1935, after the North Carolina
Library Commission and an “interracial committee and a group of interested negroes”
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
284

Gilmore, Gender & Jim Crow, 3.
This sort of accommodationist library service could also tend to offer African Americans less contact with books
than fully desegregated service did. As late as 1961, the United States Commission on Civil Rights found that in
counties with segregated libraries, whites typically had access to more than six times the number of books available
to African Americans. Gleason, Southern Negro, 93; Stephen Cresswell, “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern
Libraries,” Libraries & Culture 31 (1996): 558.
286
Edith L. Foster, Yonder She Comes: A Once Told Li’bry Tale (Bremen, Ga.: Gateway Printing Co., 1985), 220.
287
Elizabeth Abel, for example, has uncovered a photograph taken in Mississippi by the Works Progress
Administration in the late 1930s or early 1940s. In it, a young black child approaches the Greenwood Public Library
for Negroes, and is confronted by a hand-painted sign reading “You Are Late.” Abel argues that this sign “speaks in
the vernacular rather than in impersonal bureaucratese,” turning the library into “the site of a complex instruction in
literacy: not only the decoding of written texts, but also initiation into the voice of community.” In effect, she
continues, the sign offers “a form of direct and honest speech that talks back to the texts at the library’s interior.”
Elizabeth Abel, Signs of the Times: The Visual Politics of Jim Crow (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010),
74.
285

115
	  

approached the mayor with the fact that the county, despite being home to “the largest negro
population in the State,” had “no provision for public library service” to them.288 The mayor
supported the development of a library, combining public funds (to pay for books and for a
librarian) with those raised in the community (to pay for rent, furniture, and other equipment).
Among the most difficult tasks, tellingly, was finding a location. “Various sites were
considered,” a 1945 pamphlet explained, “but after taking all factors under consideration it was
decided that a central, accessible location on the main Negro thoroughfare of the city was
best.”289 With even streets racialized, placing a library designed especially to serve one part of
the community was a task that required geographical precision. In that careful placement at its
founding, the library sated the hunger of the “book-starved Negroes of Raleigh and Wake
County,” as the pamphlet put it, but it did not explicitly question the root of that hunger or
always encourage its constituents to venture out to find new satisfactions.290
This was even more the case with the introduction of the Richard B. Harrison
bookmobile, in the early 1940s, to serve what a Wake County Commissioner called “the rural
colored people” outside of Raleigh.291 As Gleason had noted, rural African Americans had even
more limited access to public libraries than their urban counterparts (5.5% vs. 56% in 1935), and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
288

Marjorie Beal to Whom It May Concern, May 23, 1935, Mollie Huston Lee Collection, Richard B. Harrison
Library. Available at http://web.co.wake.nc.us/lee/rbhlib/history/formation/formdocs.pdf. For more information
about the individuals involved in founding and running the library, see Charles R. Frazer, “The Richard B. Harrison
Library: A Community Asset,” The Pamphleteer 1 (1963). Available at
http://web.co.wake.nc.us/lee/rbhlib/history/196307pamp/pamphleteer_1-1.pdf.
289
Richard B. Harrison Public Library, Tenth Anniversary, 1935-1945 (Raleigh, North Carolina: 1945), 1. (Even as
it describes the Location Committee’s ultimate success in finding a spot, the pamphlet announces the beginning of a
campaign for funds to find a new, permanent home.) Available at
http://web.co.wake.nc.us/lee/rbhlib/history/10ann/1945rbh10an.pdf.
290
Richard B. Harrison, 2. One 1949 report by a black newspaper described the library’s renowned “magnetic
personality,” suggesting the way it could attract and excite even while tying its patrons to it, making it difficult to
enter other orbits in other places. “Harrison Library Serves Many Patrons in Raleigh,” New Journal and Guide, June
4, 1949).
291
Richard B. Harrison, 5.

116
	  

bookmobiles like the Harrison Library’s aimed to solve that problem.292 The bookmobile
regularly made stops at sixty different locations, “extend[ing] the library to citizens throughout
Wake county,” in the words of one black newspaper.293 In Curious Missie’s vision of Southern
bookmobiles in roughly this same period, moving books along “strange, secret roads” could
bring people out of their houses and into common consciousness and shared citizenship. But in
the age of “fanatical rigidity” that Woodward described, the bookmobile’s goals could find
themselves turned upside down: the bookmobile moves and its black patrons do not.
A photograph taken in 1946 of a Harrison bookmobile stop makes this rather painfully
clear [FIGURE 9].294 The image shows a black man choosing books from the bookmobile with
the help of two black female librarians. But he does so, oddly, from the very table at which he
labors, processing cured tobacco. Just a quarter turn from his work, and with one hand still
grasping a bunch of tobacco, the man points with his other out the window, where the
bookmobile is parked. Taken from inside the tobacco house, the photograph shows a cramped
single room, the man crowded from all sides by piles of tobacco that spill from the table and rise
from the floor. Only a tiny sliver of open land shows in the corner of the window. Indeed,
perhaps tellingly, the bookmobile itself blocks most of the horizon, limiting the visual space of
the photograph and the physical space in which the man can act. As much as the proponents of
the bookmobile imagined it opening up the lives of its patrons, the bookmobile here acts as one

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

292

Gleason, Southern Negro, 95.
“Bookmobile Carries Library to Wake County,” New Journal and Guide, June 4, 1949.
294
The photograph appears not to have been published or circulated (and, indeed, exists as a negative in the North
Carolina State Archives). Though this is ostensibly an image of a triumph (bookmobile service for the isolated, poor,
and black), its failure to circulate is consistent with what Elizabeth Abel has identified as a general tendency by
which photographs of Jim Crow institutions were only rarely produced and even more rarely made publicly visible.
Abel, Signs of the Times, 103-120.

293

117
	  

side of the stiff-sided box of “place,” making it difficult to see beyond the immediate space of
labor or to imagine different orientations within it.295
The exact circumstances of this photograph—Was the farm his? Why did he not get up?
What other interactions did the librarians have over the course of the day? Why was it staged like
this?—are probably impossible to know. (It is unlikely, though, that he owned the farm, as only
28.4% of nonwhite farmers in southern states in 1945 were owners or part owners of the land
they worked.)296 But it does vividly, if somewhat idiosyncratically, illustrate what was at stake in
segregated bookmobile service. The bookmobile provided the man with books while making it
unnecessary for him to enter shared, interracial public space—or even to leave his work for a
moment. This was the paradox of the segregated bookmobile. At the June, 1952, celebration of
the Stanford L. Warren Public Library’s bookmobile, in Durham, North Carolina, the program
opened with James Weldon Johnson’s “Lift Every Voice and Sing,” which includes several lines
that put these painful ironies in sharp relief: “Keep us forever in the path we pray, /Lest our feet /
Stray from the places, our God, where we met Thee.”297 This is a song both plaintive and
powerfully hopeful, calling on its singers to “march on ‘til victory is won.” But its posture is one
looking forward in time, to a glorious future at the end of a set path, rather than sideways through

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

295

Contrast, for example, the economic, social, and cultural power tobacco offered in a fundraising flier distributed
by the Johnston County Library in Smithfield, North Carolina. The request features a bookmobile, with a white
librarian in the cab, with two white women and a white man clustered around the outside. “Will you give a bundle or
stick of tobacco,” it inquires, “for the Johnston County Library book fund?” folder 1, Johnston County Records,
Public Library History Files, State Library of North Carolina (Raleigh, North Carolina). Available at
http://digitalstatelibnc.contentdm.oclc.org.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/u?/p249901coll36,1378.
296
189,232 nonwhite farmers were in this category, compared to the 475,739 who worked as tenant farmers or
sharecroppers. By contrast, 68.3% of white farmers were owners or part owners. Black Farmers in America, 18652000: The Pursuit of Independent Farming and the Role of Cooperatives (Washington, D.C.: United States
Department of Agriculture, 2002), 23.
297
“Ten Years of Bookmobile Service, 1942-1952,” folder 1, Durham County Records, Public Library History Files,
State Library of North Carolina. Available at http://worldcat.org/oclc/433594394/viewonline. On library segregation
in Durham, including a brief discussion of bookmobiles, see Radway, “The Library as Place, Collection, or Service.”

118
	  

space, to and beyond the horizons of the present.298 This was, indeed, the posture of segregated
bookmobile programs more generally, which aimed to uplift the race through education in order
to prepare it for what was to come but which also often failed to directly challenge or transform
the present.
Why did some jurisdictions, either officially (a variation we will see in the next section)
or by constraining the actions available to black activists, use bookmobiles to keep African
Americans in place? Precisely because the alternative—the vision of kindling, frictional intimacy
that inspired the traveling library—could seem to threaten the racial system Jim Crow was meant
to enact. As Ernest Gellner argued, national community is born “if and only if” its members
“recognize each other as belonging to the same nation.”299 Sharing books, sharing space, sharing
consciousness: these portended a mutual recognition that would make the continuation of
segregation untenable. With recognition would come obligation, and with obligation would come
a need for justice to take shape on the land and in its people. As we are about to see, that threat
inspired powerful, terrified, and frequently strange resistance by those who sought to make sure
the South “remain[ed] a white man’s country.”
The South was not, certainly, homogenous in its approach to library segregation. By the
1950s, for example, Maryland had in place a law that would share funds with local communities
for library service, provided that service was open to all people of any race. In 1952, more than
half of the state’s 23 counties were using these funds to augment their library services.300 One
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

298

The cover of the program includes a quotation from Sir William Temple that similarly highlights the ways that
these programs often looked forward in time rather than horizontally in space: “Books, like proverbs, receive their
chief value from the stamp and esteem of ages through which they have passed.”
299
Gellner, Nations and Nationalism, 7. Emphasis original.
300
See “Bookmobile,” Washington Post, April 28, 1952. Other Southern municipalities which had officially
integrated library service by 1959 included: Nashville and Chattanooga, Tennessee; Little Rock, Arkansas (also
home to an integrated bookmobile program); New Orleans, Louisiana; Richmond, Virginia; Louisville, Kentucky;
Charlotte and Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Miami and Tallahassee, Florida; Atlanta, Georgia. See “Atlanta

119
	  

county that resisted, though, offers a glimpse at why the dream of common consciousness was so
frightening to many white Southerners. In the spring of 1952, Calvert County was overtaken by
what turned out to be a controversial question: should the county raise its taxes by 2 cents a
person in order to share bookmobile service with neighboring Anne Arundel County? This was a
proposal made by new resident “Mrs. Hilmer C. Nelson,” who objected to the lack of library
service in Calvert County.301 While much of the county supported the plan, a portion of the
population vociferously opposed it. One man delivering wood to Nelson’s home announced one
day, for example, that “I won’t be back with any more wood, and if you get the bookmobile,
we’ll burn it and all the books in it.”302 Nelson had butted up against what she referred to as “a
fear…I can’t explain.”303 But we can explain it, or can begin to, by putting this incident in the
context of the traveling library’s dreams and of segregation’s nightmares.
Much of the resistance to the library was couched in political and financial terms. One
resident, for example, wrote into the Washington Post to defend himself and his neighbors,
explaining that the decision hinged on “whether or not taxes should be raised,” not on race. But
despite his protestations—that “a mutual respect” existed “between white and colored people” in
the county—at the core of the resistance lay the fact that the bookmobile would serve all
residents, no matter their race.304 (In fact, the ways that taxes literalize the mutual obligations of
citizenship meant that the two arguments were inextricably intertwined.) The most prominent
opponent of Nelson’s plan was William W. Duke, a trial magistrate in Prince Frederick, who
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Abandons Segregation At All of Its Public Libraries,” New York Times, May 24, 1959. A 1955 article from the
Christian Science Monitor, reprinted in the Atlanta Daily World, suggested that this wave of desegregation was a
result not necessarily of any new feeling of racial harmony but of the fact that “[t]he provision of duplicate facilities
has been so costly and impracticable.” “New Blow at Segregation,” Atlanta Daily World, November 19, 1955.
301
All extant coverage of this incident refers to her as “Mrs. Hilmer C. Nelson.” Her own given name is currently
unknown, and I will henceforth refer to her as Nelson.
302
Richard Morris, “Calvert Foes Threaten to Burn Bookmobile,” Washington Post, April 20, 1952.
303
Morris, “Calvert Foes.”
304
“Bookmobile,” Washington Post, May 3, 1952.

120
	  

declared that “A Negro will never set foot in that library as long as I have anything to do with
it.”305 The main thrust of his argument, which appears to have been taken up in other quarters of
the county, is striking and not a little bit odd: many “Negroes in this county,” Duke explained to
a reporter, “have a venereal disease, which can be spread by the exchange of books.”306 The
principal of the county high school, while refusing to take sides, also noted that it was a fear of
disease, not the idea of African Americans reading, that disturbed opponents.307 In the end, this
panic was not entirely successful, but neither was it a failure. The 1952 effort to get a library
failed, and it was six more years before the county would take advantage of the Maryland library
act and offer integrated library service.
Duke’s was a rather strange and feverish position, but it also makes a certain kind of
sense within the context we have thus far explored. Traveling librarians had dreamed that
community and mutual obligation would be “spread by the exchange of books,” but what is
spread here is pestilence and social (or even physical) death. In ways that the progressives had
not understood, despite their own complicity with it, the restriction of intimacy and of mobility
were at the heart of white supremacist ideology and policy. It is not coincidental that African
Americans seemed to threaten infection, and more specifically venereal disease, given the ways
that fears of racialized sexual bodies and racist public health programs long shaped public life in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
305

Morris, “Calvert Foes.”
The other main objection Duke had was that “the Negro is not above stealing a book from a library.” Morris,
“Calvert Foes.”
307
The Washington Post reporter noted that “Many residents…seem to regard free circulation of reading matter as
harmful as the ruinous ‘dry rot’ in so many tobacco fields.” Morris, “Calvert Foes.” This is a rather striking contrast
to antebellum legal and social codes that limited slave literacy on the assumption that reading itself was a
threatening source of power, and which made black reading itself an act of resistance. See Stephanie H.M. Camp,
Closer to Freedom: Enslaved Women and Everyday Resistance in the Plantation South (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 2004), 93-116; Janet Duitsman Cornelius, “When I Can Read My Title Clear”: Literacy,
Slavery, and Religion in the Antebellum South (Charleston: University of South Carolina Press, 1991). At the same
time, separate and unequal funding of African American schools in the South suggests that there was not a whole lot
of interest in making that reading possible, either.
306

121
	  

the U.S.308 But as a Washington Post editorial and the high school principal both pointed out,
many white Southerners depended on cross-racial intimacies in their everyday lives. “But
colored people are employed hereabouts to clean homes, prepare meals, serve at table, make up
beds, and launder clothes,” the latter said. “I can’t see how handling books would be more
dangerous.”309 Indeed, a library might seem a strange place for these fears to materialize so
powerfully. But public libraries invite their patrons to quite literally hold books in common, and
to make passing them from hand to hand the foundation of community. (And integrated
bookmobiles, which threatened to cross-racial boundaries both spatial and social, could highlight
those possibilities even more.) White Southern society depended on intimacies between white
and black, and Jim Crow and its racialized economic system were attempts to manage, control,
and restrict those intimacies. Contact might happen, but it would ideally happen in situations
where hierarchies were clear and spaces could be controlled. Where contact was not under
contract, and where it could constitute a body politic, what Robin D.G. Kelley calls the
“infrapolitics” of everyday resistance that marked other intimate encounters under Jim Crow
might have seemed less manageable and more radically transformative.310 Outside carefully
ordered commercial exchange, that threat of unpredictable encounter, and of frictional and
tingling connections between black and white bodies, could thus inspire a sexualized panic of a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

308

See Evelynn Hammonds, “Black (W)holes and the Geometry of Black Female Sexuality,” in Feminism Meets
Queer Theory, ed. Elizabeth Weed and Naomi Schor (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997), 136-156;
Nayan Shah, Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s Chinatown (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2001); Natalia Molina, Fit to be Citizens?: Public Health and Race in Los Angeles, 1879-1939
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006); Warwick Anderson, Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical
Medicine, Race, and Hygiene in the Philippines (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006).
309
Morris, “Calvert Foes.” The Post remarked that the fear of disease arose “in the minds of men who have been
accustomed for years to having Negroes prepare their food and wait on their tables.” “Bookmobile,” Washington
Post (April 28, 1952).
310
Kelley defines infrapolitics, drawing on William Sewell, as “the daily confrontations, evasive actions, and stifled
thoughts” of the oppressed. He points, for example, to the practice of “pan-toting,” where black servants exploited
their access to white kitchens to appropriate leftover food for themselves and their families. Robin D.G. Kelley,
Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class (New York: Free Press, 1994), 8, 18-19.

122
	  

sort usually more associated with the “the rape-lynching rationale” that enabled the murder of
thousands of African Americans and the brutal policing of the color line.311 And the intimacies of
public libraries, while certainly different in scope and scale, also offer a window into the ways
that fears about contact and transmission would continue to structure encounters with the spaces
of public life in America, even as Jim Crow began to fail. Indeed, as libraries were integrated (or,
more precisely in many cases, de-segregated), the impulse to manage and control space—
embodied so devastatingly by Jim Crow—was not abandoned.312 It would, in fact, accelerate and
sharpen.

“VERTICAL NEGRO”: The Substitution of Space for Race and the Turn to Order
In April, 1960, a group of black high school students walked into the Danville, Virginia,
public library and were denied service.313 In many ways, Danville’s was a Jim Crow library like
many others.314 But there was something special about this library: it was located in “the last
Capitol of the Confederacy,” where Jefferson Davis had decamped after the fall of Richmond,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

311

While, as Cynthia Skove Nelson reminds us, fewer than a third of lynchings in the South involved accusations of
sexual violence against white women, it was a powerful (and often powerfully effective) rhetorical posture that
helped elide the larger political and economic purposes of lynching. Cynthia Skove Nelson, Lynching to Belong:
Claiming Whiteness through Racial Violence (College Station, TX: Texas A&M Consortium Press, 2007), 74.
312
Martin Luther King, Jr., explained this distinction between desegregation and integration to a Nashville audience
in 1962. Whereas desegregation “simply removes…legal and social prohibitions” against segregation, integration
reaches much further. “Integration is the positive acceptance of desegregation and the welcomed participation of
negroes into the total range of human activities,” he continued. “Integration is genuine intergroup, interpersonal
doing.” Martin Luther King, Jr., “The Ethical Demands for Integration,” in A Testament of Hope: The Essential
Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King. Jr., ed. James Melvin Washington (New York: HarperCollins, 1991),
118.
313
They were sent to what one organizer later called the “very, very small” black library down the street. The youths
were inspired by the sit-ins that February at Greensboro, North Carolina, lunch counters, the organizer explained.
They debated challenging local segregation at a lunch counter, but rejected that idea, deciding that the “first attack”
should be “against the public parks and the public library, because those were publicly funded.” Interviews with
Robert Williams, “Danville, Virginia, 1945-1975,” Mapping Local Knowledge,
http://www.vcdh.virginia.edu/cslk/danville/bio_williams.html.
314
Two years later, in Albany, Georgia, another group of black teenagers protested a similar set-up (large white
branch, white bookmobile, and small African American branch) and were arrested. “20 Youths Dragged from
Library in Ga.,” Philadelphia Tribune, August 7, 1962.

123
	  

and where the Confederacy had ultimately collapsed [FIGURE 10].315 It was, as one protest
organizer called it, “a seminal place” for a protest against segregation.316 And so, ninety-five
years later, Danville was once again home to a last gasp of a failing, racist system.317 But just as
the end of the Confederacy had not, ultimately, spelled total freedom for African Americans,
neither did the formal end of segregation mean the abandonment of restriction, control, and
separation as shaping principles of American life. After the students’ demonstration, and the
NAACP lawsuit it inspired, a federal court ordered Danville to desegregate its public libraries. In
response, first the city council and then 64% of voting residents chose to close the library rather
than comply with the injunction.318 They also, importantly, ceased operations of the town’s
bookmobile.319 After a plan to open a privately run, whites-only library failed, the public
libraries eventually reopened four months later, in September, but only on what Time called “an
odd basis”: all of the tables and chairs had been removed, and service was only available to
patrons who stood.320
The library had thus taken Harry Golden’s satirical call for “vertical integration” literally.
In his best-selling Only in America (1958), Golden noted that “white and Negro stand at the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
315

“Standing Room Only,” Time, October 3, 1960, 41-42.
Interview with Robert Williams, “Danville, Virginia, 1945-1975.”
317
In fact, one reported noted that Danville was one of only two towns in Virginia which maintained segregated
libraries, and suggested that “Danville probably long ago would have admitted Negroes had it not been for the
sentiment attached to the building,” which served as a “major Civil War shrine.” Elsie Carper, “Voters to Decide
Future of Closed Town Library,” Washington Post, May 30, 1960.
318
The final tally was 2,829 in favor of closure, with 1,598 against. According to the New York Times, intriguingly,
“[f]or the first time Negro workers manned fourteen precincts and urged voters to keep the library open.” “Library
Closing Voted,” New York Times, June 15, 1960. See also, “Library Desegregated,” New York Times, May 7, 1960;
“Town to Close Library,” New York Times, May 20, 1960. Closing libraries in response to attempts to integrate them
was a common tactic, used in at least Petersburg, Virginia; Albany, Georgia; and Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Cresswell,
“The Last Days,” 559-562.
319
The city also closed the parks that the protesters had sought to integrate. Carper, “Voters to Decide.” The
Danville bookmobile program had begun in 1949 for what one newspaper called, intriguingly, “the convenience of
the reading public which can not use the public library because of the limited space.” “Danville Residents Use
Library’s New Bookmobile,” New Journal and Guide, October 1, 1949.
320
“Standing Room Only,” 42.

316

124
	  

same grocery and supermarket counters…walk through the same dime and department stores,
and stand at the same drugstore counters.”321 Concluding, then, that “[i]t is only when the Negro
‘sets’ that the fur begins to fly,” he proposed what he termed the “GOLDEN VERTICAL NEGRO
PLAN.”322 Under this plan, North Carolina would “provide only desks in all the public schools of
our state—no seats.”323 With this modest proposal, Golden captured the strangely rigid caprice
of segregation, as well the ways it inexorably structured the possibilities of shared space.324 In
particular, he points us to important (if always somewhat fictional) distinctions—between
commercial and public spaces, between private and public property, and between economic and
emotional relationships—that affected who could share what and where.325 Relationships that
were based on money and on one-to-one exchange of money for services or for objects in private
or commercial spaces (like drugstore purchases or maid service) were acceptable. Relationships
arising from more mutual, interdependent exchanges of books and ideas and emotional
connection (like in schools or libraries) were threatening.
But somehow missing Golden’s caustically humorous take on these paradoxes, the
Danville library appears to have taken it up, seriously, in the interests of discouraging the kinds

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
321

Golden called this the end of “vertical segregation,” and argued that it was one source of the South’s
“tremendous…economic prosperity.” Harry Golden, Only in America (Cleveland, OH: World Publishing Company,
1958), 121-122. The piece in Only in America was originally published in Golden’s one-man newspaper, The
Carolina Israelite, in 1956. On Golden, the Israelite, and a brief mention of the proposal’s connection to the
Danville case, see Stephen J. Whitfield, “The ‘Golden’ Era of Civil Rights: Consequences of The Carolina Israelite,”
Southern Cultures 14 (2008): esp. 38-39.
322
Golden, Only, 122.
323
“In fact, this may be a blessing in disguise,” he assured his readers. “They are not learning to read sitting down,
anyway; maybe standing up will help.” Golden, Only, 122. Emphasis original.
324
Golden also noted that black women accompanying white children were frequently allowed into supposedly
white-only spaces, and so he also proposed a “WHITE BABY PLAN,” wherein African Americans could borrow white
children, who would be “sort of pool[ed]…at a central point in each neighborhood.” “Eventually,” he continued,
“the Negro community can set up a factory and manufacture white babies made of plastic” to take with them.
Golden, Only, 122-123.
325
On the racial control of consumption in the segregated South, see Grace Elizabeth Hale, Making Whiteness: The
Culture of Segregation in the South, 1890-1940 (New York: Vintage, 1999 [1998]), 121-197.

125
	  

of mingling and interaction that sitting at tables might inspire.326 “Today the library is a place of
wide open spaces,” a local newspaper editor noted just after the reopening.327 In December of
1960, the city returned limited furniture to the libraries, but promised that it would be “spread
out,” and that people who wanted to sit would be assigned numbers corresponding to a specific
“booth…where the applicant can study.”328 (Additionally, in an echo of poll taxes and literacy
tests, applicants for library cards in Danville after desegregation were required to pay a $2.50 fee
and fill out an application, including character and business references.)329 Clearly inspired by
lingering racism and the still-strong grip of a dying Jim Crow, the library nonetheless ceased to
use race to explicitly justify its actions.330
The Danville case is thus a spatially smaller-scaled variation on the bookmobile’s effort
to control movement, and it is also a temporally smaller-scaled variation on the shifts the South
underwent at mid-century. Over the course of less than a year, the Danville library started with
an openly racist position (keeping black citizens out), moved to an extreme act of resistance to
change (shuttering the library), then seemed to transmute those openly racial concerns into more
explicitly spatial ones (how people should be arranged and their movement organized). The
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
326

Some integrated Southern libraries in earlier decades had permitted black patrons to use the library to check out
books but did not allow them to browse or linger. Also, in 1963, the Carnegie Library in Albany, Georgia, also
integrated (after a series of sit-ins) on a standing-only “vertical integration basis.” Cresswell, “The Last Days,” 558,
562; “Albany, Ga., Public Library Reopens on ‘Vertical Integration’ Basis,” Library Journal 88, no. 8 (1963): 1638.
Furniture could also play a role in directing and determining patron behavior in less racially-fraught circumstances,
as when LIBRARY-21 staff at the 1962 Seattle World’s Fair removed chairs to, in the words of several organizers,
“discourage[e] individual visitors from monopolizing pieces of equipment” at the busy exhibit. Greg Downey, “The
Librarian and the Univac: Automation and Labor at the 1962 Seattle World’s Fair,” in Knowledge Workers in the
Information Society, ed. C. McKercher and V. Mosco (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2007), 45.
327
The library had also added another wing to the library, in an effort to make those spaces even wider. Gerard
Tetley, “Danville reopens with a difference,” Wilson Library Bulletin 34 (1960): 224.
328
“Va. Libraries Halt Standing,” Chicago Defender, December 17, 1960; Gerard Tetley, “A Library Closes in
Danville,” Wilson Library Bulletin 35 (1960): 52; “The Danville, Virginia Public Library,” Wilson Library Bulletin
36 (1962): 798.
329
Cresswell, “The Last Days,” 559.
330
“The Danville annual report makes no reference to race,” one professional journal noted two years later. “The
Danville, Virginia Public Library,” 798.

126
	  

library rearranged the furniture in the face of a massive rearrangement of the society that had
kept it segregated for decades.331 But this was more than just a randomly futile gesture, though it
was likely that as well. It was—in an odd way, like the traveling library—an effort to manage
new forms of community as they emerged, inviting some changes but forestalling revolution.
Rearranging the furniture, after all, seemed designed to limit interracial contact (as in Magistrate
Duke’s blustering), suggesting how racially charged these new concerns could remain. At the
same time, though, it portended an important shift in the debate about segregation, libraries, and
belonging: from the question of which specifically racialized bodies should go where to distinct
if related concerns with the proper arrangement of all bodies in space. Lynn Staeheli and Don
Mitchell assert that “the power to exclude entails an ability to reorder the public,” but in places
like Danville, the reverse also held: the power to order public space reasserted an ability to
exclude, even as the legal and social grounds for that exclusion partially changed.332 The safety
and propriety of space came to stand in for, and often to reinforce, earlier ways of delimiting
space; if proximity and contact were inevitable, they would have to be carefully controlled.
Separation, if of a somewhat different kind, would remain the order of the day.
“Few sections of the segregation code have escaped attack,” Woodward declared in 1954,
though the success of those attacks could be uneven and unexpected.333 Libraries were among
the sites—like schools, most prominently—at which legal battles over access to public life took
place. In the following section, we will look at the legacies of the shift embodied by Danville by
examining how in one Supreme Court case, concerns about race in public libraries and on
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
331

In an odd echo decades later, in the midst of another reorganization of public space, some downtown public
libraries used furniture to restrict access to homeless citizens, banning belongings that would not fit easily under a
library chairs. See, for example, David Eggert, “Popular with homeless, Tacoma library sets limit on stuff you can
bring in,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, May 15, 2002.
332
Lynn A. Staeheli and Don Mitchell, The People’s Property?: Power, Politics, and the Public (New York:
Routledge, 2008), 143.
333
Woodward, Strange Career, 9.

127
	  

bookmobiles continued to be transformed into debates about public property, proximity, and
propriety. The terms shifted, as did the legal landscape, but something remained of these older
and stubbornly enduring ways of ordering communities and restricting access to them.

“Someone Else’s Property”: Property, Propriety, and Presence in Brown v. Louisiana
Calvert County and Danville were only two in a string of (relative) victories in efforts to
desegregate public libraries during the civil rights movement. The first two years of the 1960s
saw a series of library sit-ins—with mass arrests in Memphis and near-riots in Greenville, South
Carolina—which frequently produced positive results. Other locations (like Savannah, Georgia,
and Bessemer, Alabama) integrated without any major conflict at all.334 Federal courts in
Alabama, South Carolina and Virginia all weighed in on the issue.335 But only one such case
reached the United States Supreme Court: Brown v. Louisiana (1966), which dealt with
convictions for “disturbing the peace” arising from a protest against a segregated library
system.336 (It is also the only Supreme Court case to centrally involve bookmobiles.)337 In his
survey of library desegregation, Stephen Cresswell declares that Brown “spoke to issues of
public protest and not directly to questions of equal access to libraries.”338 But “issues of public
protest” are issues of proper behavior in public space, of what kinds of presences are appropriate
in what kinds of places. And so they are, in fact, issues that are absolutely central to questions of
access to public culture and public space. In order to make that case, and to show one way that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

334

For a more detailed accounting of these cases, see Cresswell, “The Last Days,” 557-563..
The decisions ranged from demands for integration to side-stepping the issue by allowing cities to close their
libraries or institute fees and elaborate application procedures. See Cresswell, “The Last Days,” 564.
336
Brown v. Louisiana, 383 U.S. 131 (1966).
337
Bookmobiles have ended up before lower courts somewhat more often. In Morrow v. Hardwell, for example, the
5th Circuit Court of Appeals declared that weekly bookmobile service alone, with its limited supply of legal texts,
did not offer inmates in a Waco, Texas, prison sufficient access to the courts. Morrow v. Hardwell, 768 F.2d 619
(1985).
338
Cresswell, “The Last Days,” 564.

335

128
	  

the shift embodied in Danville wove its way into the fabric of American society, this section will
closely read Brown v. Louisiana less as legal history than social theory. Ultimately, I want to
argue that all of the opinions in Brown articulated a theory that predicated access to public space
on the maintenance of order and thus on a refusal of revolutionary change.
The facts of the case were largely undisputed. At around 11:30am on March 7, 1964, a
small group of African American men—including Henry Brown, L.C. Bibbins, Robert Smith,
and Cleveland Kinzie—walked into the Audubon Regional Library in Clinton, Louisiana, and
Brown requested a book. Echoing the demands of Johnson and Greene that books about black
people be part of their community’s collective culture, Brown asked for Story of the Negro
(1948) by Arna Bontemps, the Louisiana-born head librarian at Fisk University.339 (A children’s
history text written in direct opposition to white-authored books, like Eclectic Geography, which
tormented black children like Johnson, Story also won the Jane Addams Children’s Book Award
in 1956 for promoting peace and equality in the spirit of its progressive namesake.) After the
librarian had found that the book was not held by the library—a fact of which the men were
likely aware in advance and which suggests the ways that black ideas as well as black bodies
were unwelcome in the library—she informed Brown that it could be requested from the state
library and either mailed to him or picked up at the library’s blue bookmobile. Brown and his
fellows then remained in the library for around ten or fifteen minutes, at which time a sheriff
arrived and ordered them to leave. Refusing, the five men were arrested for disturbing the peace,
then convicted and sentenced by a judge who applied either a fine or jail time. Pretty much every
participant agreed that this is what happened. Two years later, when the case reached
Washington, though, the meaning of these facts inspired a passionate disagreement on the Court,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

339

Arna Bontemps, Story of the Negro (New York: Knopf, 1948).

129
	  

a disagreement that gets to the heart of the problems of intimacy and separation in midcentury
public life.
The book would only be made available to Brown by mail or blue bookmobile because
the Audubon Regional Library took the practices and ideologies discussed in the last section to a
rather illustrative extreme: the library system was, quite literally, color-coded. There was the
main library building in Clinton, two additional branch libraries, a red bookmobile, and a blue
bookmobile. When white patrons registered, they were given red library cards; when African
Americans registered, they were given blue cards stamped “NEGRO.” White patrons could use
the library buildings or the red bookmobile [FIGURE 11a-b], and black patrons could use only
the blue bookmobile [FIGURE 12]. Even more explicitly (and with seemingly more malice) than
bookmobiles like that of the Richard B. Harrison Library, these mobile libraries were used to
keep certain people in certain places.340
Brown and the other men did not just happen to want a book that Saturday morning in
March. Explicitly rejecting the ways bookmobiles could limit access to common consciousness,
and under the auspices of the Congress on Racial Equality (CORE), they purposefully violated
the careful ordering of space represented by the library’s colorfully rigid organization. Whether
that violation constituted a breach of the peace or not—and more fundamentally, what peace
means in a public library—was the fundamental issue at stake in the case. Eventually, on
February 23, 1966, the Court overturned the convictions in a 5-4 decision, but that issue
remained largely unresolved. Abe Fortas (joined by Earl Warren and William Douglas) wrote the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
340

This was of a piece with Louisiana librarianship more generally. The Louisiana Library Association, for example,
clung to segregation until the 1960s. Even in the wake of Brown v. Board of Education, the LLA refused to enact
widespread desegregation, and it and the American Library Association even parted ways for several years in the
early 1960s. See Steven R. Harris, “Civil Rights and the Louisiana Library Association: Stumbling toward
Integration,” Libraries & Culture 38 (2003): 332-350.

130
	  

prevailing opinion, vacating the convictions on the ground that Louisiana’s disturbing the peace
statute was unconstitutionally vague and unconstitutionally applied. William Brennan concurred
with an opinion specifically arguing that the statute was unconstitutional even when applied to
actions in public buildings, and Byron White concurred more narrowly. Hugo Black (joined by
Tom Clark, John Harlan II, and Potter Stewart) vociferously rejected the prevailing opinion. In a
17-page dissent, which he read aloud to the court in what one report called “a 30-minute verbal
assault,” Black insisted that nothing in the First Amendment grants the right to ignore authorized
orders to leave a public building—and especially not a public library.341 In all of the opinions, to
a perhaps surprising degree, the question of what was peculiar about public libraries was central.
And so careful attention to how libraries figured in these seemingly conflicting opinions will
reveal that this was more than just a run-of-the-mill First Amendment case. It was an opportunity
to reconsider common consciousness in the wake of segregation, but it was an opportunity
mostly lost. Robert Tsai argues that in Brown, “the Court refused to draw bright lines that would
have extinguished First Amendment rights” outside more traditional venues of “vigorous
expression.”342 And that is partly true: the majority did to some degree defend “widening circles
of protest,” even as they reached public libraries.343 But it misses a key part of the story. The
Court did not refuse outright to draw lines that would limit protest. And the lines it drew—
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

341

The eloquent vitriol of Black’s dissent guaranteed that Brown got relatively extensive coverage in the press
(including in letters to the editor) for a non-landmark case. Another report, for example, called it a “fiery
denunciation” that “blistered the majority.” And another—echoing a good bit of the coverage—openly celebrated:
“Well, hooray for Hugo Black!” “The Black Dissent,” Chicago Daily Defender, March 14, 1966; “Library Sit-In
Case,” Washington Post, February 26, 1966; James J. Kilpatrick, “Justice Black’s Library Case Dissent Clears Air,”
Los Angeles Times, March 3, 1966. See also John L. MacKenzie, “Has Justice Black Moved to the Conservative
Side?” Los Angeles Times, April 21, 1968; “Negroes’ Convictions Reversed,” Chicago Tribune, February 24, 1966;
“Supreme Court Sees Danger of Mobs,” Chicago Tribune, April 24, 1966; J.C.K., “The Law and Rights [Letter to
Editor],” Chicago Tribune, March 15, 1966; Gullie B. Goldin, “Dissent Cited on Right to Assemble [Letter to
Editor],” New York Times, April 24, 1966.
342
Robert L. Tsai, Eloquence and Reason: Creating a First Amendment Culture (New Haven: Yale University Press,
2008), 91.
343
Tsai, Eloquence and Reason, 91.

131
	  

around property, propriety, and presence, in particular—continued the tradition of separation and
a commitment to order at any cost.
Staeheli and Mitchell argue that “[t]he struggle over who can be on public property is a
struggle over who is and is not to be included as part of ‘the people.’”344 As taxpayers and
citizens, Brown and the other protesters entered and occupied public space in order to make
claims on it, forcing the justices to confront a seemingly simple question: Who owns public
space? Fortas, for his part, pegged his opinion on the library’s illegal segregation and the right of
anyone to use public space. The “petitioners’ presence in the library was unquestionably lawful,”
he intoned. “It was a public facility, open to the public.”345 He connected Brown to three
previous cases in which the Court struck down convictions under Louisiana’s breach of peace
statute for actions undertaken in civil rights protests.346 These protests took place in different
locations (lunch counters, a bus depot waiting room, public streets), which applied different
aspects of the law from the one at stake in Brown. The State of Louisiana argued, here, that
Brown and the other protesters violated a specific part of the statute, which criminalized a failure
to “disperse or move on” from public buildings when ordered so to do by any authorized
person.”347 But Fortas generally refused the claim that a public building is materially different
from a street (where the Court had previously protected speech rights), an argument made
specifically by Brennan. Both justices argued, in effect, that public space belonged—at least to a
certain degree, and with major caveats which will be discussed shortly—to all members of the
public.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
344

Staeheli and Mitchell, The People’s Property?, 30. Emphasis original. For a discussion of how various
approaches to property law imagine and shape social relations, see Joseph William Singer, Entitlement: The
Paradoxes of Property (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000), 95-139.
345
Brown, 139.
346
Garner v. Louisiana, 368 U.S. 157 (1961); Taylor v. Louisiana, 370 U.S. 154 (1962); Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S.
536 (1965).
347
Quoted in Brown, 143.

132
	  

Black explicitly and bitterly rejected that line of reasoning but, importantly, managed to
do so without endorsing open racism. Reworking the move made in Danville, Black replaced
Fortas’s questions of race with questions of space. Insisting flatly that “there was simply no
racial discrimination practiced in this case,” Black instead turned instead to property rights.348
Where for Fortas, the case pivoted on discrimination and protest, for Black it was simply a
matter of what he called “trespassers” on “someone else’s property.”349 Brown was asked to
leave by those authorized by the state to oversee its property. He refused. He was thus guilty of
breaching the peace. “It is high time to challenge the assumption in which too many people have
long acquiesced,” Black declared, “that groups that think they have been mistreated or that have
actually been mistreated have a constitutional right to use the public’s streets, buildings, and
property to protest…without regard to whom such conduct may disturb.”350 Transforming the
public into a possessive noun—“the public’s…buildings”—he cast protest as a use of its space by
others and outsiders. (Later, Black made this even more explicit, referring to protest as an
“[i]nvasion of another man’s property,” and to public buildings as “someone else’s property.”351)
Black thus functionally excluded protesters from membership in the public and from free and
rightful use of public space. The public became a subject of ownership, and public space its
object.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
348

Brown, 160. It is worth noting that Black does not once mention bookmobiles in his dissent, a move that is
necessary to deny that segregation was practiced by the library. This turn to property was, as an early biographer
pointed out, of a piece with a longer-standing interest Black had in protecting property rights, emerging from his
experience as a shopkeeper’s son and his conflicted thoughts about privacy. See Gerald T. Dunne, Hugo Black and
the Judicial Revolution (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1977), 394-395.
349
Brown, 162, 166.
350
Brown, 162.
351
Black argues that “[t]hough the First Amendment guarantees the right of assembly and the right of petition…it
does not guarantee to any person the right to use someone else’s property, even that owned by the government and
dedicated to other purposes, as a stage to express dissident ideas.” Brown, 162, 166.

133
	  

Though Black refused race as an aspect of the case, though he generally rejected
segregation, and though his arguments are pitched to apply broadly to any potential “mob,” the
racial implications of this move are unavoidable.352 African Americans had been so long objects
of property and were often still excluded (legally, socially, or economically) from ownership.353
Brown, like the Danville protesters, had sought to transform public space by making ownership
of it truly collective and interdependent. A Danville organizer, for example, remembered
reveling that if the protest failed to democratize access to the spaces they targeted, then at least it
desegregated exclusion from them: “We felt on that day, very, very triumphant—that we had
accomplished what we wanted—that was that if we could not use the park and the library, then
they would be closed to all.”354 But Black turned asserting such self-consciously mutual rights to
public space into crime, undermining one of the legal foundations for the actual realization of
common consciousness. Turning important challenges around proximity, intimacy, and
community into issues of property, Black (like the Court as a whole would ultimately do)
sidestepped an opportunity to confront and transform restricted access to public culture, public
space, and public libraries.
In fact, the question here—who owns public space?—became even more fraught when
the justices argued about how it applied to public libraries. All of the justices seemed certain that
there is something special about a library. In fact, the Court agreed to take the case despite its
similarity to previous cases precisely, in Fortas’s words, “because the incident…occurred in a

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
352

Brown, 168.
On housing covenants and red-lining, two practices that enforced de facto segregation, see David M.P. Freund,
Colored Property: State Policy and White Racial Politics in Suburban America (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2007); Manuel B. Aalbers, Place, Exclusion, and Mortgage Markets (West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011).
354
Interview with Robert Williams, “Danville, Virginia, 1945-1975.”

353

134
	  

public library and might be thought to raise materially different questions.”355 And it did, though
the justices did not always agree on what those questions were. “It is an unhappy circumstance
that the locus of these events was a public library—a place dedicated to quiet, to knowledge, and
to beauty,” Fortas wrote. “It is sad commentary that this hallowed place…bore the ugly stamp of
racism.”356 Having vacated race, though, the fact that the protest took place in a library is what
pushed Black over the edge. “I too lament this fact,” he responded, “and for this reason I am
deeply troubled with the fear that powerful private groups…will read the Court’s action…as
granting them license to invade the tranquility and beauty of our libraries whenever they have a
quarrel with some state policy which may or may not exist.”357 Even as they stated their
supposedly opposing arguments, there was significant overlap: libraries, for both men, were
“quiet,” “hallowed,” “tranquil[ ],” peaceful spaces. While they disagreed about whether that
peace had necessarily been breached in this specific case, both justices were certain that
upsetting the quiet order of a public library would take one beyond Constitutional protection.
Indeed, it turns out the justices were not as far apart as the intensity of their rhetoric
might suggest. As Nicholas Blomley argues, “[t]he enactment of property not only presumes a
definitional certainty…but also invites us to imagine that property and settlement are
synonymous.”358 And the justices all drew on a long history, legal and ideological, of judging
protest on the basis of whether it disturbed that (always imaginary) settlement—whether it
violated order and propriety.359 In 1905, for example, a district court judge declared that “[t]here
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

355

Brown, 135.
Brown, 142.
357
Brown, 167.
358
Nicholas Blomley, Unsettling the City: Urban Land and the Politics of Property (New York: Routeldge, 2004),
xv.
359
There was also, tellingly, a tradition of using propriety to limit the actions of (especially female) librarians in the
South. See James V. Carmichael, Jr., “Southern Librarianship and the Culture of Resentment,” Libraries & Culture
40 (2005): esp. 338-339.
356

135
	  

is and can be no such thing as a peaceful picketing, any more than there can be chaste vulgarity,
or peaceful mobbing, or lawful lynching.”360 And a public forum doctrine developed by the
Court during the first Red Scare established “time, place, manner” restrictions that granted the
state the ability to regulate speech on numerous fronts while preserving the right to orderly
protest.361 And so manners and proper behavior, along with the mere potential for violence, came
to mark the bounds of the right to speak in public. This continued into the postwar period, as it
was applied by various courts to civil rights protests. Drawing on this tradition, for example,
Louisiana’s lawyers in previous cases argued that the presence of angry white spectators, and
thus the possibility violent reprisal, could negate the rights of African Americans to mount even
peaceful protests. (Increasingly, explains Robert Tsai, “the Court armed citizen-speakers on both
sides…with the Heckler’s Veto” to counteract this argument, though it still continued to frame
much analysis of order and disorder.)362
But in the library, it was the space itself—not just the people in it—that could be
disturbed in ways that scared every single one of the justices in Brown, regardless of their vote.
Fortas described, in almost gleeful terms, how the protest “challenged” the library’s “tidy plan”
to enact segregation via bookmobiles.363 But that was the only bit of tidiness he was willing to
see disturbed. The fact that the case took place in a public library, a place of quiet and beauty,
made Fortas ultimately and severely qualify his claim that the public had an automatic right to
public property. So in order to find in favor of the petitioners, Fortas went to great lengths to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

360

That last oxymoron, of course, was only supposedly contradictory in the South, at that moment, making the
judge’s claims especially important in this context. From Atchison Topeka & Santa Fe Railway v. Gee (1905).
Quoted in Mitchell, Right to the City, 55.
361
Mitchell, Right to the City, 48.
362
Tsai, Eloquence and Reason, 91.
363
Brown, 136. Undercutting an argument by Louisiana, Fortas commented that when the library sent Brown the
book and told him he could either mail it back or deliver it to the blue bookmobile, “[t]he reference to the color of
the vehicle was obviously not designed to facilitate identification of the vehicle” only, since “[t]he blue bookmobile
is for Negroes and for Negroes only.” Brown, 137.

136
	  

defend their behavior while in the library, in order to keep it within acceptable bounds. Their
“deportment within the library was unexceptionable,” he insisted. “They were neither loud,
boisterous, obstreperous, indecorous nor impolite.”364 The legal argument Fortas made was based
essentially on the fundamental overbreadth and discriminatory application of the Louisiana
statute, but he again and again framed it around assertions of the unobjectionable, appropriate
behavior of the Brown and the other men. There was “no disorder” occasioned by their silent
protest, he reminded his readers.365 After Brown sat down to wait, he and the other protesters
“said nothing,” meaning “there was no noise or boisterous talking.”366 “There were no other
patrons,” he also noted, and so no one was disturbed from their use of the library.367 Even the
sheriff admitted this, Fortas pointed out, and the protesters were arrested solely for failing to
leave when ordered to do so. It was, in fact, the protesters who engaged in “normal activity” that
was “completely disrupted” by their arrest. Fortas’s investment in order as the foundation of
rights is clear, and two years later, in a primer on the principles of dissent, he would make a
similar claim in more vivid language, insisting that we do not in fact “live in a trackless jungle”
because there is “a path that law and integrity mark out through the maze of tangled obligations
and conflicted loyalties” that is speech in a free society.368 Conflating legal precision with
regimented space with integrity, Fortas used propriety to mark the boundaries of sanctioned
dissent.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
364

Brown, 139.
Brown, 141.
366
Brown, 136.
367
Brown, 140.
368
Abe Fortas, Concerning Dissent and Civil Disobedience (New York: World Publishing Company, 1968), 15.
This path, for Fortas, was marked out by “the rule of law,” wherein one can choose to disobey laws one finds unjust,
but one must accept the punishment that goes with that violation. In the process, Fortas delineates sharply between
moral and legal evaluations, seeming to mark that as the clear path through the thicket. Accepting legally supported
penalties for violating an immoral statute is, Fortas insists, “action in the great tradition of social protest in a
democratic society where all citizens, including protesters, are subject to the rule of law.” Fortas, Concerning
Dissent, 48,58.
365

137
	  

The concurrences hold to the same pattern. White’s is the most conservative of them,
holding that if there was “some explicit statute, ordinance, or library regulation of general
application” banning hanging around in a library for a few minutes, then there would be no
constitutional problem with the convictions. The First Amendment, he wrote, does not “forbid a
municipal regulation limiting loafing in library reading rooms.”369 His argument for overturning
the convictions was twofold, and somewhat internally contradictory: the imprecise statute was
applied here only to maintain the library’s segregation, on the one hand, and that the protest was
not in fact disruptive.370 If the former holds, then the latter should be largely irrelevant, but once
again, White spent much of his opinion casting the protesters’ behavior as proper as a
prerequisite for considering it legal. Like Fortas, he noted that “they were quiet and orderly, they
interfered with no other library users and for all this record reveals they might have been
considering among themselves what to do with the rest of their day” as they lingered in the
reading room.371 They were not, of course; Brown and the others stayed in the library that
morning in order to upset the library’s functioning as a segregated space. But White engaged in
such hypotheticals repeatedly in order to transform that protest against explicitly racist policies
into something less confrontational and more orderly. “In my view,” he wrote, “the behavior of
these petitioners and their use of the library building, even though it was for the purposes of a
demonstration, did not depart significantly from what normal library use would contemplate.”372
(Fortas argued, by slight contrast, that “[w]e need not assume the petitioner Brown and his
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

369

Brown, 150. Even Fortas would, several years later, say that the Court might well have ruled differently in Brown
had the protesters “stayed in the library after the regular hours,” as that “would have been symbolic speech
accompanied by a violation of a lawful and appropriate regulation.” Fortas, Concerning Dissent, 27.
370
He writes, in support of the first part, that “it is difficult to believe that if this group had been white its members
would have been asked to leave on such short notice, much less asked to leave by the sheriff and arrested, rather
than merely escorted from the building, when reluctance to leave was demonstrated.” Brown, 150-151.
371
Brown, 150.
372
Brown, 151.

138
	  

friends were in search of a book for night reading” in order to find in favor of them, though he
still returned again and again to the library-appropriateness of their conduct in the course of their
demonstration.)373 And even Brennan, whose entire argument was that a public street and a
public library are not different enough to warrant a different application of the statute, reassured
readers that the protesters “were orderly and quiet” and “did not interfere with the functioning of
the library.”374
In their efforts to normalize the protesters’ actions, and to protect the library’s space
itself, Fortas and Brennan did reduce the power of white response to undercut civil rights protest.
The State of Louisiana argued that five men (black men, of course) simply sitting in the library
and “staring vacantly” was “enough to unnerve a woman in the situation” the librarian was in.375
Fortas called this a “piquant version of the affair,” but says it is not sufficient for determining a
breach of peace.376 He found nothing in the statute “which would elevate the giving of cause for
Mrs. Reeves’ discomfort, however we may sympathize with her, to a crime against the State of
Louisiana.”377 Brennan agreed, noting that the protest “might have embarrassed and unnerved the
librarians, who had in the past faithfully observed the policy of segregation; but such ‘vague
disquietudes’ do not take petitioners’ conduct outside the appropriate limits.”378 Both took pains
to express their sympathy for the librarians’ discomfiture—though both, perhaps, also raised a
skeptical eyebrow at its source—but they roundly rejected the idea that sheer discomfort, without
a threat of imminent violence, was enough to justify restricting speech. In Cox, the Court had
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
373

Brown, 139. Black refutes Fortas here, noting caustically that the note Brown passed to the librarian misidentified
the book he wanted and that, though he asked “what about the Constitution?” when told to leave, he “did not request
that any copy of the Constitution be given to him.” Brown, 160, 153.
374
Brown, 148.
375
Brown, 140.
376
Brown, 141.
377
Brown, 141.
378
Brown, 148. Brennan draws this phrase from Arthur Goldberg’s opinion ordering the desegregation of
Memphis’s municipal parks in Watson v. Memphis (1963).

139
	  

decided that Louisiana’s statute could not be applied, in Fortas’s words, “despite the large scale
of the demonstrations and the fact that petitioner's speech occasioned ‘grumbling’ on the part of
white onlookers.”379 The small and “hallowed” library reduced the scale necessary to create a
disturbance, certainly, but Fortas and Brennan both argued that it was the interior of the library
itself, not the interiors of its librarians, that was at issue here. As long as the space itself
remained ordered, and behavior within it orderly, then the speech that behavior expressed was
constitutionally protected.380 Propriety granted a right to public property, and according to Fortas
and Brennan, the petitioners in Brown had not behaved inappropriately.
Unsurprisingly, Black disagreed rather strongly, arguing that the space had, in fact, been
disturbed. He argued that it “goes against common sense and common understanding” to claim
(as the majority did) that people disturb the peace of a library only when they “stay there an
unusually long time after being ordered to leave, make a big noise, use some bad language,
engage in fighting, try to provoke a fight, or in some other way become boisterous.”381 Failing to
follow orders and cluttering the space of the library, for Black, was enough to constitute a breach
of peace. “Short of physical violence,” he wrote, “petitioners could not have more completely
upset the normal, quiet functioning of the” library.382 To support this case, Black’s dissent made
a move that calls back to Matthew Arnold, whose Culture and Anarchy (1869) had identified the
violation of propriety with the violation of space. Dismissing an 1866 working-class
demonstration in Hyde Park, Arnold wrote the rioters were “put[ting] in practice an
Englishman’s right to do what he likes; his right to march where he likes, meet where he likes,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

379

Brown, 134.
In some ways, this is of a piece with a liberal shift in public forum doctrine that Don Mitchell charts especially to
Hague v. CIO (1939) and Lamont v. Postmaster General (1965), in which the Court sought “a means of regulating
not speech itself but the space in which speech occurred.” Mitchell, Right to the City, 70.
381
Brown, 162.
382
Brown, 163.
380

140
	  

enter where he likes, hoot as he likes, threaten as he likes, smash as he likes. All this, I say, tends
to anarchy.” There was a place for everyone in the social system, but “the rioter has not yet quite
found his groove and settled down to his work, and so he is just asserting his personal liberty a
little, going where he likes, assembling where he likes, bawling as he likes, hustling as he
likes.”383 A century later, Black objected to those who claimed a supposed right “to protest
whatever, wherever, whenever they want,” who insisted on “the constitutional right to go
wherever they want, whenever they please.”384 The cast of characters changed (with workingclass, white Britons replaced by African Americans), and the scene shifted (with a Louisiana
public library standing in for a London park), but the script stayed remarkably static: desires that
threatened the disposition of public space by the powerful were invalid on their face.385
Wanting—or worse yet, demanding—in ways that clogged or cluttered space, that invited
unpredictable proximities or uncontrollable intimacies, were necessarily and automatically
disturbing, regardless of how orderly they might actually be.386
Intriguingly, given the Danville incident, Black’s opinion regularly referred to furniture
and the library’s layout to make this case. Fortas had opened his discussion of the facts of the
case with a strangely detailed description of the library reading room.387 And the particulars of
the space were important to Black’s dissent, as well. But where Fortas and White described a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

383

Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy: An Essay in Political and Social Criticism (London: Smith, Elder and
Co., 1869), 58, 65. See Mitchell, Right to the City, 14.
384
Brown, 162, 166.
385
The script was even older than that. In 1829, one Virginia man had defended slavery and opposed abolitionism
on the grounds that “[t]he property we seek to protect…is not mere brute matter” but rather “beings, that have
passions to be inflamed…and who are capable of catching the flame of enthusiasm from the eloquent effusions of
agitators.” Quoted in Phillips, “Central Theme,” 31. Also along strikingly similar lines, Fortas’s 1968 book on civil
disobedience insisted that the individual “cannot substitute his own judgment or passion, however noble, for the
rules of law.” Fortas, Concerning Dissent, 55.
386
The Hyde Park demonstration, for example, was declared illegal before it even took place.
387
“The front room of the building was used as a public library facility where patrons might obtain library services.
It was a small room, containing two tables and one chair (apart from the branch assistant's desk and chairs), a stove,
a card catalogue, and open book shelves.” Brown, 135.

141
	  

library empty of other patrons (and thus free of disturbance), Black narrated a space clotted with
bodies that overwhelm it. After being told that he could pick up the book at the blue bookmobile,
in Black’s telling, “Mr. Brown then sat down in the only chair in the library room other than the
chair at Mrs. Reeves’ desk, and the four other petitioners stood around him,” and “when Mr.
Brown continued to sit and the others continued to stand, she asked them to leave.”388 And there,
framed by monopolized furniture and crowded rooms, emerges the true foundation of Black’s
legal argument. The request to leave—which for Black represents a lawful and authorized
exertion of control of over the space—came as a response to the presence of too many bodies in
too small an area, to monopolized furniture and crowded rooms. This was sufficient for Black to
sustain the convictions. There were not hundreds of angry whites in the library, Black conceded
rather caustically, “but surely, in the prevailing opinion's futile effort to rely on Cox, it is not
meant that 300 or 100 grumbling onlookers must be crowded into a library before Louisiana can
maintain an action under this statute.”389 A few bodies and the discomfort they inspire can be
enough to render a space disordered and a peace disturbed.
As in Calvert County and Danville, it is impossible to understand Black’s narrative
outside the context of the racialized fears of intimate proximity that plagued the dream of a
common consciousness. In fact, all of the writing justices—even as every last one of them
rejected open racism—failed to also reject demands for order in public space, demands that had
and would continue to structure and limit black participation in public culture. According to the
justices, the law’s job was to make access technically possible to everyone without inviting the
sorts of revolutionary disruption that would change the terms on which the exclusion was
originally based, and so they abetted attempts to reframe extreme racist anxieties as utterly
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

388
389

Brown, 153.
Brown, 163.

142
	  

reasonable concerns about disordered space. They insisted with their words, as the librarians in
Danville did with their actions, that proximity and intimacy must be managed and that order is
often more important than justice.
By the late 1960s, this had diffused, broadly and culturally, in horrified responses to
“race riots” in major cities and, by the mid-1970s, in a virulent rejection of busing and the
specter of blacks on the move.390 After the end of legal segregation, spaces continued to be
marked racially, often through identification or disidentification with violence, crime, and
disorder. Legal scholar Richard Thompson Ford has tried to explain the persistence of racial
segregation, finding that in many cases such “[s]patially and racially defined communities
perform the ‘work’ of segregation silently.”391 (We will return to the consequences of this kind
of residential community separation in Chapter Four.) And this conflation of black protest with
spatial disorder could, in the end, foreclose full remediation of the injustices that prompted the
protest in the first place, as an interest in order justified yet another averted gaze. “Riot produces
fear,” Fortas wrote in 1968, “and fear has a tendency to still the response of conscience.”392 And
in the face of this refusal to truly confront old oppressions in a supposedly “New Frontier,” black
activists increasingly articulated what Peniel Joseph calls “a militant race consciousness” that

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
390

On the spatial politics of riots, see Janet L. Abu-Lughod, Race, Space, and Riots in Chicago, New York, and Los
Angeles (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007). On popular and legal responses to busing plans, see Ronald F.
Formisano, Boston Against Busing: Race, Class, and Ethnicity in the 1960s and 1970s (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 2004).
391
Richard Thompson Ford, “The Boundaries of Race: Political Geography in Legal Analysis,” Harvard Law
Review 107 (1994): 1852. And as Manuel Aalbers puts it, specifically in the context of redlining, “place-based
disparate treatment results in race-based disparate impact.” Albers, Place, Exclusion, and Mortgage Markets, 189.
392
Fortas, Concerning Dissent, 65-66. “The Negroes in Detroit and Newark and Washington and Chicago who
rioted, pillaged, and burned may have generations of provocation,” he also wrote. “They may have incontestable
justification. They may have been pushed beyond endurance. …But that provides no escape from the consequences
of their conduct.” Fortas, Concerning Dissent, 53-54.

143
	  

rejected common consciousness on white terms in favor of “community control” of the
institutions (and the ideologies) that structured black citizens’ lives.393
What was fundamentally at issue here, both in Brown and in the larger cultural shifts it
participated in, was presence: was the sheer presence of bodies, and especially of black bodies in
the “wrong places,” a sign of disruption? By the time Brown reached the court, many formal
barriers had fallen, and an affirmative response was harder to make. Earl Warren had, for
example, declared in an earlier case that the “mere presence” of blacks could not itself qualify as
a breach of peace.394 But concerns about black presence remained powerfully influential legally
(in the absence of consistent definitions) and culturally (in the absence of a consistent
commitment to revolutionary racial justice). Legally, the question was often whether silent
action, like mere presence, counted as speech under the protection of the First Amendment.
“Symbolic conduct is an exceptionally vivid means of communication,” a 1968 Columbia Law
Review article declared, but the Court had yet to develop “a refined definition of symbolic
speech.”395 Unsurprisingly, especially without any such clear definition, the justices disagreed on
some of the particulars of this issue. Fortas insisted that First Amendment rights “are not
confined to verbal expression,” and Brennan claimed that Brown’s actions fell under the
amendment’s “guarantees of speech, petition, and assembly.”396 Black, on the other hand,
systematically excluded conduct from First Amendment protection.397
But again, the justices were not as far apart as it might first appear. Oddly, it seems that
for Fortas, when nonverbal action was at issue, protection as “speech” required silence. The
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

393

Peniel E. Joseph, “Introduction: Toward a Historiography of the Black Power Movement,” in The Black Power
Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights Black Power Era, ed. Peniel E. Joseph (New York: Routledge, 2006), 3.
394
Garner, 170.
395
“Symbolic Conduct,” Columbia Law Review 68 (1968): 1091-1092.
396
Brown, 142, 146.
397
This was a relatively consistent position on Black’s part. See, for instance, his dissent in Griswold v. Connecticut,
381 U.S. 479, 508 (1965).

144
	  

rights of the First Amendment, he wrote in Brown, “embrace appropriate types of action which
certainly include the right in a peaceable and orderly manner to protest by silent and reproachful
presence, in a place where the protestant has every right to be, the unconstitutional segregation of
public facilities.”398 Though he argued for a broad application of the amendment, his defense
overflowed with qualifications: “appropriate,” “peaceable,” “orderly,” “silent.” He recognized
that their presence was disruptive of segregation—that the library’s “tidy plan” would be
upended—but once again paradoxically required it to be orderly for it to qualify. Fortas
fetishized silent passivity (and rejects a frictional, communicated fury) as a tactic of resistance.399
A presence that expressed loudly cannot be protected.
Or a presence that lasted too long. Fortas, Brennan, and White all returned over and over
to the briefness of Brown’s stay in the library. “There is no claim that, apart from the
continuation—for ten or fifteen minutes—of their presence itself,” wrote Fortas, “their conduct
provided a basis for the order to leave, or for a charge of breach of the peace.”400 In the very next
paragraph, he reiterates that that the men had “remained in the library room for a total of ten or
fifteen minutes.”401 Shortly thereafter he noted that the statute applied in the convictions
“contains not a word about occupying the reading room of a public library for more than 15
minutes.”402 And Brennan argued that “[t]heir presence, for a relatively short period of time, did
not interfere with the functioning of the library.”403 So, even as the majority granted Brown and
his fellow protesters the right to be in the library, that presence had to be kept within certain
bounds. They could be silent “monuments of protest,” in Fortas’s words, but they would be
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
398

Brown, 142.
This appreciation for Gandhian nonviolent resistance, and distaste for most other methods of dissent, suffuses his
Concerning Dissent and Civil Disobedience.
400
Brown, 139.
401
Brown, 139.
402
Brown, 141.
403
Brown, 148.
399

145
	  

denied the permanence or the pride of place monuments are usually accorded.404 Despite the fact
that they found in favor of the plaintiffs, the majority returned once again to Danville—and to
the “VERTICAL NEGRO”—in a desire to get people in and out in and out quickly, in a need to
manage time and space to preserve order in the face of rapid change. Creating what amounts to a
First Amendment version of a sundown town, the justices restricted presence temporally as a
way of regulating space.405
In late 1966, the Court heard another case in which hundreds were arrested for
trespassing during a protest against a segregated jail. And once again, Black insisted on the
government’s right to control its property. “The State,” he wrote in familiar terms, “no less than
a private owner of property, has power to preserve the property under its control for the use to
which it is lawfully dedicated.”406 But this time, something was different. Hugo Black was
speaking for the majority. Only six months after Brown was decided, the Chicago Tribune noted
of the new case, “[t]he Black dissent appears to be the doctrine of the court majority.”407 Seventy
years earlier it had sanctioned segregation, and twelve years earlier it had revoked that sanction
in Brown v. Board of Education, but through it all, the Court retained overarching interest in
carefully ordering space as a way of managing—and limiting the impact of—larger changes. By
the end of 1966, that interest had been theoretically cleansed of race and became once again the
law of the land. And more than that, it became part of the common sense that produced “free

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

404

Brown, 139. For a striking examination of the ways an actual monument can shape the use and regulation of
public space, see Staeheli and Mitchell, The People’s Property?, 23-45.
405
On sundown towns, see James W. Loewen, Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism (New
York: New Press, 2005).
406
Adderley v. Florida, 385 U.S. 39 (1966), 47.
407
“A Kind Word for Law and Order,” Chicago Tribune, February 14 1967.

146
	  

speech zones” and with which we continue to live today.408

“Few of Our Errors Go Unnoticed”: Coda
In 1961, the Wilson Library Bulletin, which had covered the Danville story extensively,
published a letter from Rosemary Neiswender. As a librarian at the RAND Corporation—a major
center for Sovietology at the height of the Cold War—Neiswender warned that “any attempt at
segregation of public…facilities has extensive propaganda possibilities” for the Soviet Union.409
To make her case, Neiswender pointed to a 1960 news report in the Soviet library journal
Bibliotekar’, which purported to be a reprint of a Wilson article. Neiswender offered a
translation, which included some rather intriguing passages:
On May 20, 1960, the city council of Danville, Virginia, passed a resolution to close the
city’s central public library, in defiance of a federal government decree on desegregation.
By a majority vote, the council also voted to close the branch library and the
bookmobile…. As grounds for the closing of these libraries, it was evidenced that twelve
Negro students had entered the library for whites. This seemingly unremarkable fact
provoked a storm of indignation and controversy. … The referendum proposed a series of
such dubious (from the standpoint of common sense) propositions as furnishing the
library with separate, individual cubicles where no one could see the color of
readers….410
As Neiswender was quick to point out—even as she lamented the “distressing realities” of
library segregation—that the Bibliotekar’ article contained what she termed “conscious

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

408

See, for example, Dahlia Lithwick and Raymond Vasvari, “You Can’t Occupy This,” Slate, 19 March 2012,
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2012/03/the_anti_protest_bill_signed_by_barack_ob
ama_is_a_quiet_attack_on_free_speech_.html.
409
Rosemary Neiswender, “Danville and Russia,” Wilson Library Bulletin 36 (1961): 218. She wasn’t wrong.
Discrimination and segregation provided the Soviet Union with a powerful tool in its efforts to influence recently
decolonized countries to reject U.S.-style capitalism and embrace socialism. See Mary Dudziak, Cold War Civil
Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002); Thomas
Borstelmann, The Cold War and the Color Line: American Race Relations in the Global Arena (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2003). On American Sovietology, including the role of RAND, see David C. Engerman,
Know Your Enemy: The Rise and Fall of America’s Soviet Experts (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).
410
Neiswender, “Danville,” 218.

147
	  

distortions.”411 The decree was a court order, the referendum did not include the cubicle
proposal. More striking, though, is the fact that whoever translated and condensed the Wilson
article for a Soviet audience incorporated one fact that was hardly reported at all (and not
mentioned in Wilson): when Danville shuttered its library, it also stopped running its
bookmobile.412 “[T]he use made of this incident by the Soviet library press,” Neiswender fretted,
“reveals that very few of our errors go unnoticed or unpublicized.”413
Indeed, conflicts over bookmobiles, space, and the politics of common consciousness
could resonate on a variety of scales running from the local to the global. Not only could the
actions of a small library find their way, unconsciously, into a debate on the nation’s highest
court, but they could also show up on the pages of a journal printed halfway around the world.
Neiswender’s letter makes clear how threatening those reverberations could seem. But as we will
see in the next chapter, the United States government frequently tried to harness those
resonances—to manage them—pursuing the goal of managing communities across various scales in
an effort to solidify the interlocking systems of federalism and empire. Using bookmobiles to
incorporate indigenous communities in New Mexico and to bring West Germany into the U.S.
sphere of influence, the state—in moving books, transforming the landscape, and changing its
people—took up the project of ordering space and managing community on an almost inconceivably
massive scale.
But even as it sought to order land at home and export that order abroad, the nation was
haunted by the still-unresolved problem of separation that lay at the heart of American life. “We
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
411

Neiswender, “Danville,” 218.
The only mention of Danville’s bookmobile I have found is in a single Washington Post article. Carper, “Voters
to Decide.”
413
“The image of American public library practices in regard to racial segregation (and worse, the underlying
actuality) conveyed by this and doubtless other similar news releases from the Soviet Bloc and the uncommitted
nations” she continued, “should surely be an increasing cause for our concern.” Neiswender, “Danville,” 218.
412

148
	  

boast of the freedom enjoyed by our people above all other peoples,” John Harlan had lamented
in his Plessy dissent. “But it is difficult to reconcile that boast with a state of the law which,
practically, puts the brand of servitude and degradation upon a large class of our fellow-citizens,
our equals before the law.”414 Decades later, that law had changed, but much had also stayed the
same—and so common consciousness would continue to fail on a fractured landscape marked by
division, discrimination, and distrust.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

414

Plessy, 562.

149
	  

Figures

Figure 8: Book Mission Trip Map (1935)
From “Book Mission Appeal for Funds for Trip South” folder, carton
2, Lend a Hand Society Records

150
	  

Figure 9: A tobacco house worker selects from
the Richard B. Harrison Bookmobile (1946).
From the North Carolina State Archives

151
	  

Figure 10: Danville Public Library—and “last Capitol of the Confederacy.”
From Gerard Tetley, “Danville Reopens – with a difference,” Wilson Library Bulletin 35 (1960): 224

152
	  

Figure 11a: Children in the Audubon Regional Library in Clinton Louisiana (1962).
From the State Library of Louisiana Historic Photograph Collection

153
	  

Figure 11b: Patrons visit the Audubon Regional Library’s
red bookmobile in Norwood, Louisiana (1962).
From the State Library of Louisiana Historic Photograph Collection

154
	  

Figure 12: Patrons aboard the blue bookmobile in Clinton, Louisiana (1961).
From the State Library of Louisiana Historic Photograph Collection

	  

	  

155
	  

CHAPTER THREE

“A Powerful Spearhead for Almost Unlimited Progress”:

Managing Time and Space on the Frontiers of Belonging
“The past and present wilt—I have fill'd them, emptied them.
And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.”
–Walt Whitman (1855)415

“[W]e stand today on the edge of a new frontier. … It would be easier to shrink from that new
frontier, to look to the safe mediocrity of the past…. But I believe that the times require
imagination and courage and perseverance. I’m asking each of you to be pioneers toward that
New Frontier.”
–John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Jr. (1960)
Cowboy 1: Injuns! Run for cover, boys!
Roger Ramjet: Nonsense. There are no hostile Indians anymore.
Cowboy 2: Yeah. You know that, and I know that, but them Indians don’t know that.
–“The Cowboy,” Roger Ramjet (1965)416
In late July, 1959, a bookmobile on loan from Delmar, New York, was carefully lowered
by crane into the heart of Moscow’s Sokolniki Park, in order to serve as a display—organized by
the American Book Publishers Council and the American Library Association—during the
American National Exhibition.417 Chosen because it was “a dramatic method of illustrating the
distribution of books,” and almost vetoed by Soviet authorities, the bookmobile was a massive
hit.418 Each day, thousands of Russians toured the mobile library and, as a New York Times
report noted a few weeks later, they “[o]bviously…found many—one might say most—of the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
415

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 123.
Roger Ramjet, episode 8, first broadcast 12 September, 1965, directed by Fred Crippen and written by Gene
Moss and Jim Thurman.
417
On this exhibition, which was designed to display American life (from Coca Cola to a much-debated kitchen),
see Jack Masey and Conway Lloyd Morgan, Cold War Confrontations: US Exhibitions and Their Role in the
Cultural Cold War (Zürich: Lars Müller Publishers, 2008), 152-283. On Soviet responses to the exhibition, see
Susan E. Reid, “Who Will Beat Whom?: Soviet Popular Reception of the American National Exhibition in Moscow,
1959,” Kritika 9 (2008): 855-904. On the “Kitchen Debate,” which took place there, see Ruth Oldenziel and Karin
Zachmann, eds., Cold War Kitchen: Americanization, Technology, and European Users (Cambridge: MIT Press,
2009), esp. 33-162.
418
A.L. Remley, “An American Bookmobile in Moscow,” ALA Bulletin 53, no. 9 (1959): 766.
416

156
	  

books irresistibly attractive.”419 They must have, since they walked off with thousands of them.
By August 17, three quarters of the bookmobile’s original stock of 4,000 books had disappeared.
Shakespeare, Hemingway, Faulkner, Steinbeck: all stolen. Even a volume of New Yorker
cartoons that had been “nailed to a shelf with six-inch nails” was nearly carted off by an
enthusiastic Russian visitor.420 Worried that the “almost denuded van” would give visitors the
wrong idea about America’s information abundance, organizers closed the bookmobile.421 The
New York Times editorial page, while it did not “condone this kind of book-borrowing,” cited
“ameliorating circumstances” (communism, presumably) and called for a “Book Airlift to
Moscow.”422 The call was heeded, and thousands of new books were flown in to restock the
vehicle. The “beautiful red, white, and blue bookmobile” opened for the last weeks of the
exhibition, once again offering Russians a view of this “new way in the pursuit of
knowledge.”423
In Moscow this chaos could be comforting, contrasted as it was with the rigidity of
totalitarianism: the desire for American books overcame the “spiritual starv[ation]” of
communism, and the rules of capitalism (like, say, paying for goods or following rules) could be
taught later.424 “Denied this privilege” of buying American books, one organizer explained,
“they satisfied their hunger for books by taking them.”425 Elsewhere, though, in spaces that were
meant to be already under U.S. control or influence, officials found this sort of disorder much
more unsettling. What would it mean if West Germans stormed a bookmobile, for example, or if
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

419

Osgood Caruthers, “U.S. Closes Bookmobile at Fair After Many Volumes Disappear,” New York Times, August
19, 1959.
420
Caruthers, “U.S. Closes Bookmobile.”
421
Osgood Caruthers, “Bookmobile Reopens in Moscow,” New York Times, August 28, 1959.
422
“A Book Airlift to Moscow,” New York Times, August 20, 1959.
423
Remley, “An American Bookmobile,” 767.
424
“A Book Airlift.”
425
Remley, “An American Bookmobile,” 767.

157
	  

U.S. citizens in New Mexico failed to seem, well, American enough? In these places, prompting
anti-communist (if larcenous) ecstasy would not be enough. As we will see in this chapter,
bookmobiles were meant to carefully manage their patrons in order to create a smooth and
legible state that could incorporate spaces at its margins without compromising or changing its
basic character.
Three moments in the middle of the twentieth century, all part of the story of this chapter,
fundamentally transformed the relationship between state power and association that the
progressives had imagined to be central to the realization of common consciousness. The New
Deal, World War II, and the advent of perpetual, existential conflict in the Cold War together
birthed a federal government that was more powerful and more centralized than ever before. This
significant shift in the balance of power in American public life led to a crisis in, then
repurposing of, common consciousness. But this was not a break with the past so much as a
reinterpretation of it. From its origins, there was a centralizing tendency present in the dream of
common consciousness, as state agencies took on the task of identifying and then distributing a
shared culture. In the middle of the twentieth century, that tendency would be enhanced and
exploited. Under the watchful eye of the federal government, no longer would common
consciousness be a coherence built from the small to the large, from the neighborhood to the
nation. It would, instead, be a smooth connectivity imposed, by federal power, from above.
Writing specifically of the desert West but capturing something far larger, Patricia Price
writes that, “[f]or the nation-state, smoothness, ease, and internal homogeneity are but a
recurring wish for intact fullness.”426 This wish—which we might understand as a geographic
corollary to common consciousness—was a rather paradoxical thing. To accomplish this
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

426

Patricia L. Price, Dry Place: Landscapes of Belonging and Exclusion (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2004), 36.

158
	  

smoothing, the American nation-state had to play with time and space.427 More precisely, it
frequently gained authority by engaging with, and then orchestrating, tensions between old and
new and between open and closed. Even though, as Eric Hobsbawm puts it, “the concept of
nation is historically very young,” nations have typically formed through appeal to an ancient,
shared identity often (though not always) based in blood.428 Despite some attempts to the
contrary, American nationalism has had a hard time supporting those sorts of claims.429 The state
has been too young, and its constituents from places too far-flung, to really make them work.
Instead, American national identity has been constructed through paradoxically twinned appeals
to progress and to tradition: this country is new and exciting, and in order to remain so, we must
keep to the same path.
Nations typically also emerge out a conviction that the nation and the state must line up,
that the spirit of the nation and the space and power of the state should match.430 In the U.S.—a
state with no prior nation and a fondness for geographic expansion—this meant not minor
realignments of or conflicts over a few square miles but rather a more than century-long project
of rather frantically, unevenly increasing the emotional shape of the nation to fill the sprawling,
stretching space of the state. (At times, the reverse also held, and the state engaged in violence to
allow its government to reach those who, like the erstwhile Texans of 1846, lay beyond its
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

427

I follow, in part, from Doreen Massey’s insistence—against the claims of critics like Ernesto Laclau, John Berger,
and John Urry—that time and space are not dichotomously opposed, with the former dynamically social and the
latter static. Space is, she argues, is not “an absolute dimension” but rather “a moment in the intersection of
configured social relations” and therefore is fundamentally dynamic and inseparable from time. Doreen Massey,
Space, Place, and Gender, 265.
428
Eric J. Hobsbawm, Nations and Nationalism since 1789: Programme, Myth, Reality (Cambridge University,
1992), 18. Emphasis original.
429
J. Hector St. John de Crèvecoeur, for example, insisted in 1783 that “the Americans were once scattered all over
Europe.” Despite this claim, Crèvecoeur also insisted that coming to American dramatically changed immigrants.
Late-nineteenth-century Anglo-Saxonists, too, made claims for a primordial, lily-white Americanism. J. Hector St.
John de Crèvecoeur, Letters from an American Farmer; and Sketches of Eighteenth-Century America, ed. Albert E.
Stone (New York: Penguin, 1983), 70. On Anglo-Saxonism, see Matthew Frye Jacobson, Whiteness of a Different
Color: European Immigrants and the Alchemy of Race (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998), 39-90.
430
See Gellner, Nations and Nationalism.

159
	  

borders but claimed to be its nation.) This expansiveness, though, was both fuelled and tempered
by a commitment to exclusion and limitation as large as the continent itself.431 The nation could
encompass anywhere—but not just anyone.
Bookmobiles were, perhaps unexpectedly, enormously useful tools for accomplishing
this play with time and space. The bookmobile was, for much of the twentieth century, a shiny
new technology a main task of which was to cart around another technology, books, which had
not really been shiny or new since long before the United States even existed. It embodied, then,
a fundamental tension between tradition and progress, a tension central to managing American
national identity.432 At the same time, bookmobiles were prized for being both wide-ranging and
geographically precise. Their mobility meant that they could go anywhere, but their routes were
carefully planned and specifically plotted. (And as we saw in Chapter Two, that planning and
plotting could be precisely designed to exclude while encompassing.) They thus captured the
tension between theoretical boundlessness and practical limitation. And it is not, I think, an
unmeaningful coincidence that each of the three transformative moments in federal power—New
Deal, world war, early Cold War—brought with it a heavy federal investment in bookmobile
programs.433

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
431

John Breuilly writes that “[t]he idea of the state is marked by internal tensions between universality and
particularity and between boundlessness and limitation.” The geographic and demographic peculiarities of the U.S.
only exacerbated this general principle. John Breuilly, “Nationalism and the State,” in Nations and Nationalism: A
Reader, ed. Philip Spencer and Howard Wollman (New Brunswick: Rutgers University, 2005), 61.
432
That a bookmobile called “The Pioneer” could be introduced in Queens, New York, in 1930, suggests how useful
the iconic past could be to efforts to build a new future. “The Pioneer Introduces County Library Service to Queens
Borough,” Bookmobiles (national) folder, Library for the Blind, Mobile Services, Bookmobile records, Seattle
Public Library, Seattle, Washington.
433
The New Deal saw the first significant federal monies spent on mobile libraries (through the Works Progress
Administration and other agencies), World War II turned bookmobiles into weapons of war (as will be discussed in
a later section), and the 1950s saw a massive infusion of money from the federal government into local library
extension programs with the Library Services Act of 1956.

160
	  

Beyond these crucial but general features, bookmobiles also carried with them a set of
more specific assumptions and expectations about the relationship of time and space,
assumptions and expectations formed on the crucible of the frontier. As we saw in Chapter One,
the inclusion of the Cowpunchers’ Library, the overcoming of their loneliness out on the far
corner of the prairie, was part of the work of the Kansas Traveling Library and thus part of the
ideology that ultimately birthed the bookmobile. What the Cowpunchers did was to embed the
national habit of incorporating frontiers in the project of the mobile library. And that habit was,
at heart, a habit of geography and history: What was Manifest Destiny if not a mad and terrible
theory for filling space (the stretch of the continent) with time (the always already)? “In its
magnificent domain of space and time,” John O’Sullivan wrote in 1839, “the nation of many
nations is destined to manifest to mankind the excellence of divine principles”434 The future of
the nation is the already-having-happened-but-yet-to-be-realized, the manifest and manifesting,
extension of God’s will and the state’s power over the land. The present is, as it always is, the
future’s past, but here that bit of folding takes on particular power. The frontier—in the joy and
horror of open spaces and dark bodies, and in the melancholy triumph of their inevitable
incorporation or destruction—is where the nation truly makes itself.435 One of my arguments
here is that this image of the “frontier,” particularly as a place the bookmobile both revels in and
overcomes, remained a useful, if sometimes troubling, way for people to deal with the temporal
and spatial tensions required for creating and managing community in the twentieth century. As I
will show, the bookmobile became what one administrator called “a powerful spearhead for

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

434

John L. O’Sullivan, “The Great Nation of Futurity,” The United States Democratic Review 6 (1839): 427.
As Price writes, “a rhetoric of emptiness has allowed an array of stark, transformational, and sometimes violent
acts…to be committed upon the land and its inhabitants.” Price, Dry Place, 37.

435

161
	  

almost unlimited progress” by, perhaps paradoxically, relying on the memory of the past to build
and manage a glorious, democratic, modern future.
The memory of the frontier, that fantasy of national incorporation, fueled the “spearhead
for almost unlimited progress” not only within the United States but around the world. This
chapter will examine both a New Deal program in New Mexico, in the land that had been
manifestly destined in O’Sullivan’s imagination, and a remarkably similar program (also run by
the U.S. government) in Cold War West Germany. In doing so, this chapter makes its own
interventions in time and space—historiographically, at least—by troubling distinctions between
pre-1898 and post-1898 U.S. imperialism, on the one hand, and between “domestic” and
“foreign,” on the other. Until the 1990s—with the “imperial turn” in American Studies—an
attention to empire was often missing in histories of the United States.436 And when gazes did
turn in that direction, they were often characterized by a frequent obsession with the wars and
occupations of 1898 as part of a fundamental break with previous, non-imperial U.S. history.437
In this approach, the “closing” of the frontier in 1893 was the end of one story, and the SpanishAmerican War was the beginning of another. Scholars like Shelley Streeby and Laura Wexler
have challenged that approach, arguing that 1898 and its aftermath cannot be understood outside
the context created by both westward expansion and race slavery.438 As we saw in the last
chapter, the spatial politics of slavery and segregation forged a shaky and riven ground on which
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

436

For a foundational text that challenged this blindness, see Amy Kaplan, “‘Left Alone with America’: The
Absence of Empire in the Study of American Culture,” in Cultures of American Imperialism, ed. Amy Kaplan and
Donald E. Pease (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993), 3-21.
437
Even William Appleman Williams’s brilliant 1955 critique of the effects of Turner’s Frontier Thesis on
American historiography—which lamented that “[o]ne of the central themes of American historiography is that
there is no American empire”—claimed that “[t]he United States has been a consciously and steadily expanding
nation since 1890.” William Appleman Williams, “The Frontier Thesis and American Foreign Policy,” in The
William Appleman Williams Reader, ed. Henry W. Berger (Chicago: I.R. Dee, 1992), 89.
438
See Shelley Streeby, American Sensations: Class, Empire, and the Production of Popular Culture (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2002); Laura Wexler, Tender Violence: Domestic Visions in an Age of U.S.
Imperialism (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000).

162
	  

to build common consciousness. In this chapter, we will see how an obsession with expansion
and incorporation, developed long before and in place long after 1898, had similar but distinct
effects that revealed the limits of common consciousness. More specifically, the passion for
expanding into untamed territory brought with it another fixation—with overcoming,
incorporating, and carefully managing that territory (and the people who lived on it)—that
privileged political administration over emotional connection.
This chapter refuses easy distinctions between different kinds of spaces—between
domestic and foreign, between inside and outside.439 In doing so, this chapter links three
American Studies scholarships that often fail to intersect: on the practice of U.S. imperialism in
places like Haiti and the Philippines, on the rich connections between the Black Freedom
Movement and Cold War geopolitics, and on the practice and effects of U.S. cultural imperialism
in postwar Europe.440 Examining an object (the bookmobile) and an idea (the frontier) that linked
projects in the New Mexico and West Germany, this chapter questions the divisions that have
kept these three scholarships separate and, perhaps, limited their application to seemingly
“domestic” questions of American identity. Federal policies in the twentieth-century Southwest,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

439

I aim, here, to follow Amy Kaplan’s call to understand “how international struggles for domination abroad
profoundly shape representations of American national identity at home, and how, in turn, cultural phenomena we
think of as domestic or particularly national are forged in a crucible of foreign relations.” Amy Kaplan, Anarchy of
Empire, 1.
440
For the first, see Anderson, Colonial Pathologies, 31. For other examples of this scholarship, see Mary Renda,
Taking Haiti: Military Occupation and the Culture of U.S. Imperialism, 1915-1940 (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina, 2001); Paul Kramer, The Blood of Government: Race, Empire, the United States, & the Philippines
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006). For the second, see Dudziak, Cold War Civil Rights;
Borstelmann, The Cold War and the Color Line. Other work has looked at black Americans’ relationships to Africa
in roughly the same period, with significant overlaps. See Penny Von Eschen, Race Against Empire: Black
Americans and Anticolonialism, 1937-1960 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996); James Hunter Meriwether,
Proudly We Can Be Africans: Black Americans and Africa, 1935-1961 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2001). For the third, see Reinhold Wagnleitner, Coca-Colonization and the Cold War: The Cultural Mission
of the United States in Austria after the Second World War (University of North Carolina Press, 1994); Uta G.
Poiger, Jazz, Rock, and Rebels: Cold War Politics and American Culture in a Divided Germany (Berkeley:
University of California, 2000); Victoria De Grazia, Irresistible Empire: America’s Advance Through Twentieth
Century Europe (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005).

163
	  

U.S. interventions in the Philippines, and the American presence in postwar Western Europe
were, of course, not identical. Racial ideologies, levels of violence, and political systems all
distinguished them. But as the bookmobile illustrates, a constellation of elements—like uses of
mobility, ways of managing democracy, ideas about improving rural space, and so on—linked
American domestic and foreign policy and linked Europe to the U.S. not just through rock music
or Coca-Cola but through older, more violent, and yet more excruciatingly controlled models of
imperial expansion.
“All landscapes are haunted by ghosts,” Patricia Price writes.441 But sometimes, as we
will see, it is a landscape itself that haunts. In this chapter, I argue that memories of imperial
expansion, of the frontier, shaped the ways it was possible to imagine belonging long into the
twentieth century. More specifically, I insist the federal government tried to use bookmobiles to
incorporate two populations that were both marginal and crucial to the U.S. state’s power and
coherence—Mexican-Americans and West Germans—into modern, democratic, “American”
communities. The first three sections of the chapter deal with the Taos County Project, which ran
in New Mexico in the early 1940s. The first uses the Project to illuminate how concerns about
frontiers and American identity prompted a program of belated Americanization. The second
addresses the way the Project sought to manage and control democracy in order to finally
overcome the frontier. The third looks at the books and films circulated on the Project’s
bookmobile, focusing particularly on how they facilitated play with time (by smoothing over the
violence of the past) and space (by connecting Taos to the nation in the midst of a world war).
The following section focuses on that war to see how the Taos idea worked elsewhere in the
midst of a global conflagration. Turning then to the Cold War, the final two sections watch the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
441

Price, Dry Place, xxi.

164
	  

U.S. Information Service use bookmobiles to build a modern, managed democracy on the West
German countryside in the early 1950s. The first explores how images of the bookmobile as a
“spearhead for…progress,” first established in Taos, became newly useful in West Germany.
The next examines the imposition and limits of managed democracy there.
Just a few months after the American National Exhibition in Moscow, in the rugged
southwest corner of North Dakota, a librarian “had a harrowing experience” when “a band of
masked and armed horsemen held up the large Bookmobile unit” demanding “books.” This was
covered lightheartedly in the local newspaper because, it turns out, the hold-up was part of an
elaborate practical joke—a “bit of fun”—orchestrated by a local saddle club.442 This story, as
bizarre as it is, reminds us how useful, and popular, the memory of a rough-and-tumble frontier
could be for those encountering bookmobiles in the twentieth century. In what follows, we will
see the geographic and emotional range of that memory, and the complicated intensity of its
force in the world.

“The Area Abounds in Relics and Lore”: The Problem of the Twentieth-Century Frontier
On the afternoon of August 31, 1910, Theodore Roosevelt climbed atop a kitchen table in
Osawatomie, Kansas, and called for a “new nationalism.”443 Arguing that a powerful central
government should be “the steward of public welfare,” the ex-president outlined a series of
specific policy proposals that would become his platform when he ran again for the presidency in
1912. But in the process, Roosevelt also articulated what was in essence a political theory of
common consciousness:
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

442

“Posse Rescues Bookmobile Demonstrator,” The Dickinson Press, November 5, 1959.
For a discussion of the political context and actual operation of the event at which Roosevelt spoke, see Robert S.
La Forte, “Roosevelt’s Osawatomie Speech,” Kansas Historical Quarterly 32 (1966): 187-200.
443

165
	  

We are all Americans. Our common interests are as broad as the continent. I speak to you
here in Kansas exactly as I would speak in New York or Georgia, for the most vital problems
are those which affect us all alike. The national government belongs to the whole American
people, and where the whole American people are interested, that interest can be guarded
effectively only by the national government.444
Roosevelt thus linked commonality to the shape and scale of a nation-state. The people’s
“common interests” were not simply large, in Roosevelt’s telling. They spanned a continent
claimed by imperial expansion and managed by a federal government. The occupation and
control of that vast space would, under a “new nationalism,” produce not just political but
emotional wholeness, what Mary Keating called “union of force.” The nation would become a
community. Somewhere, not far from Roosevelt’s kitchen table and the crowds of people
gathered to hear him speak, likely sat a box of books from the Kansas Traveling Library, which
had been regularly sending libraries to Osawatomie since at least 1900.445 This was quite a
meaningful coincidence.
The closure of frontiers, the incorporation of supposedly “untamed” space into the body
and life of the nation, required the careful management of imperial and federal scales. As one
might expect, given the contexts explored in Chapters One and Two, this meant drawing on a
politics of community that was profoundly gendered and racialized, and which depended on
linking and dividing people in space. With an alchemy of text and violence, residents old and
new were made to feel in common (or to feel so excluded from that commonality that they could
seem beside the point) by asserting links between the spaces they inhabited. The westward
expansion of the U.S. involved the overlapping, nesting enclosures of reservation, territory, state,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
444

Theodore Roosevelt, “The New Nationalism,” in The New Nationalism (New York: The Outlook Company,
1910), 27.
445
Diggs, et al., First Biennial Report, 8; James L. King, et al., Fourth Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling
Libraries Commission (Topeka: State Printing Office, 1907), 11; James L. King, et al. Seventh Biennial Report of
the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission, 1910-’12 (Topeka: State Printing Office), 13.

166
	  

and nation—the assertion of boundaries and borders, political and cultural, that connected some
people as they separated others.446 Creating nation that was both vast and smooth was about
controlling the perception, experience, and exercise of scale.
And as we have seen in previous chapters, managing scale and producing nationhood is
about controlling and structuring two interrelated dimensions: information and emotion.
Historians of empire like Ann Laura Stoler and Tony Ballantyne have established the ways in
which the management of intimacy and emotion, alongside the control and circulation of
information, was central to the administration of empire.447 And ideas about race, space, and
belonging were inextricably part of it. The “shuttling of paper” across oceans (in Ballantyne’s
words) and “managing the domestic” relations between individuals (in Stoler’s) worked together
to both establish who could fully belong and how the empire would operate.448 This dynamic was
a key part of how traveling libraries, and then bookmobiles, operated in the United States. In
Chapter One, we saw the Kansas Traveling Library move books through space in order to
orchestrate intimate encounters between neighbors, and in Chapter Two how those intimacies at
the same time depended on and were shaped by exclusion and refusal. Here, we will see how
inclusion of the previously excluded drew heavily on both traditions.
In the nineteenth century, the conviction that the United State should expand, manifestly,
to the Pacific emerged and helped add an obsession with time to the administration of space.
O’Sullivan’s grand declarations (of a “magnificent domain of time and space”) met the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

446

As Kaplan has famously shown, the domestic space of the home and the domestic space of the nation were
frequently mapped onto one another, helping to make the violent extension of national space seem both comfortable
and natural. Kaplan, Anarchy of Empire, 23-50.
447
Ann Laura Stoler, Carnal Knowledge and Imperial: Race and the Intimate in Colonial Rule (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2002); Tony Ballantyne, Orientalism and Race: Aryanism in the British Empire
(New York: Palgrave, 2002).
448
Tony Ballantyne, “Mr. Peal’s Archive: Mobility and Exchange in Histories of Empire,” in Archive Stories: Facts,
Fictions, and the Writing of History, ed. Antoinette Burton (Durham: Duke University Press, 2005), 96; Stoler,
Carnal Knowledge, 13.

167
	  

establishment of the Department of the Interior, an interior now destined to be manifest. Messy
engagements and violent struggles begot rectangular territories and agencies for administering
them, a begetting suddenly natural and ever thus.449 Supposedly blank spaces were mapped “as
surfaces…tightly partitioned by networks of straight lines and punctuated by place names.”450 A
concert of iron and steel and wire, rail and rifle and telegraph, continued the work of tying East
and West, both spatially and temporally. They facilitated extensive westward migration of
native-born and immigrant Americans, the continued murder and enclosure of native people, and
both closer and faster ties between territories and the nation’s capital. Indeed, by Frederick
Jackson Turner’s announcement at 1893 Chicago World’s Fair, and the subsequent 1898
invasions and occupations of places like the Philippines and Puerto Rico, and Roosevelt’s 1910
speech, the continental frontier was meant to be closed. The past was to be past, and the frontier
was to have become merely part of the nation.
But despite this more than century-long tradition of using information and emotion to
fully incorporate and manage the continental stretch of U.S. territory, Roosevelt’s declaration
was more wish than statement of fact. The incorporation and development of the ersatz frontier
had proceeded unevenly in the new century. And it would continue to do so. By the 1930s, the
federal government was asserting a power to encompass all of human activity—to produce, like
the new nationalism the first President Roosevelt had imagined, a common consciousness across
the continent. But it was stymied, in some areas, by the fact that in certain spaces the stubborn
persistence of the past inhibited the growth of a federal future.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

449

On the origins of this rectangularity, see Bill Hubbard, Jr., American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the
Rectangular Survey (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009).
450
Price, Dry Place, 47.

168
	  

The Taos County Project was a New Deal collaboration between multiple federal
agencies, the New Mexico state government, the University of New Mexico, and the Harwood
Foundation. Its stated aim was to ameliorate the effects of rural poverty in the area by, for
example, establishing health clinics and instituting modern irrigation practices. But, more
generally, its goal was to induct a population stuck in the wrong space and the wrong time—a
community seemingly foreign and seemingly antiquated—into the space and time of American
modernity. It sought to make these people, and their land, both legible by and available to the
bureaucratic machinery of the nation-state. Indeed, as narrated by its director several years after
its end (in the retrospective It Happened in Taos, which will form the basis of the rest of this
section) the project emerged most clearly out of the seemingly-stunned realization that the
frontier remained a frontier.451 “[T]he area abounds in relics and lore of the early trappers and
traders, the raiding Comanches and Apaches, Father Martinez the pioneer priest, the Indians’ war
of rebellion,” Jesse Taylor Reid wrote of the county. “In the center of the plaza of Taos stands a
flagpole from which Old Glory flies night and day—a concession granted by a special act of
Congress in the days of siege by the daring Plains tribes.”452 But as much as that flag had
claimed and continued to claim the territory as formally American, the social, political, and
cultural structures—the systems for managing information and emotion—that would make those
claims effective on the ground were missing. The “relics and lore” were not really past at all, and
the frontier remained.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

451

According to Suzanne Forrest, the Taos County Project was partly inspired by an influential 1940 study, by
George L. Sanchez, of Hispanic poverty in Taos. The study was, intriguingly, called Forgotten People: A Study of
New Mexicans. Suzanne Forrest, The Preservation of the Village: New Mexico’s Hispanics and the New Deal
(Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1998 [1989]), 249-250.
452
J[esse] T[aylor] Reid, It Happened in Taos (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1956), 6. Emphasis
original.

169
	  

As Reid described them, the descendants of the original Spanish settlers in the region,
and the isolated land they occupied, had largely escaped attention from any of the successive
central powers that had laid ostensible claim to them. “For more than two centuries they were a
‘lost people,’” he wrote, “isolated in the hinterland of New Spain, forgotten by warring Mother
Spain…neglected by Mexico with its newly won independence after 1821, and finally all but
ignored by Uncle Sam for three quarters of a century after he had gobbled them up.”453 This was
not simply a political failure. The states—cast two times out of three as family—“forgot[ ],”
“neglected,” and “ignored” the people they might have nurtured and with whom they might have
bonded with love and consanguine obligation. Reid writes this, of course, as if the acquisition of
the land had not required this erasure, this forgetting—as if it was not precisely, in Price’s words,
“the perceived blankness of the Western landscape in the national geo-imagining…upon which
white expansionism was predicated.”454 Forgetting the reasons for forgetting, Reid also notes that
the people themselves lacked the mettle to cope with this inattention, especially as Uncle Sam’s
other nieces and nephews moved Westward and into future. “Progress plodded its inevitable,
stubborn way,” and the “militant, forceful, reckless race” of American pioneers arrived, but the
Nuevo Mexicanos supposedly “lack[ed]…a driving response to the challenge of an expanding
frontier.”455
That “driving”—that ability to move which we saw so unequally distributed in the last
chapter—was somehow distinctively American. And the residents of Taos lacked it, utterly.
“Their roots are deep in the soil,” Reid explained.456 They were “bound to the land” and “truly

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
453

Reid, It Happened, 7.
Price, Dry Place, 46.
455
Reid, It Happened, 8.
456
Reid, It Happened, 6.

454

170
	  

indigenous.”457 But at least on the latter point, in fact, they were not, really. Reid himself
narrated their descent from Spanish imperialists, and their forebears’ pitched battles against
Indians in the region. And yet he seemed to have no language for describing their status. Suzanne
Forrest has asserted that “colonial status” was frequently “impos[ed] upon both Hispanos and
Indians,” which disadvantaged them economically while it “enabled some Anglo Americans to
establish a special protective relationship over them—one that assuaged their guilt even as it
enhanced their sense of themselves as socially and intellectually superior human beings.”458
(Indians are essentially absent from Reid’s narrative.) In the iconic, imaginative vocabulary of
the West on which Reid often drew in this way, one was either mobile or rooted, powerful or
under power, colonizer or colonized, American or indigene. The spread of this way of thinking
and talking and being was itself an imagined memory of the frontier past and, simultaneously,
part of the system that was laid over the land and that worked to incorporate it.
According to its technical demographic definition, the frontier was closed when the
population was distributed across the landscape without significant gaps, but it was also to have
meant the closure of the epistemic and ontological confusion the frontier occasioned. But a halfcentury later, the actual complexity of the frontier past seeming to weigh on him, Reid still
flailed about for a precise way of talking about the Nuevo Mexicano residents of Taos. He thus
arrived, twice, at the peculiar, paradoxical “native settler.”459 This inbetweeen-ness, this
uncertainty, was one of the “relics” Reid saw scattered about the county, and which he (perhaps
unconsciously) saw at the heart of its problems. In this place that was neither firmly now nor

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

457

Reid, It Happened, 10.
Forrest, Preservation of the Village, xix.
459
Reid, It Happened, 6, 7.

458

171
	  

then, among these people who were not clearly us or them, what sort of Americanness and what
sort of democracy could flourish?
And so Reid was confronted with the presence “in the Southwest [of] some two million
of these Spanish-speaking citizens of the United States, who are proud of their allegiance to the
Stars and Stripes,” but who were also, in some ways, still not American.460 Ignored by Uncle
Sam, these proud citizens were not reaping the benefits of their nationhood and their nation was
not successfully claiming all of its right in land and love. The aim of the Taos County Project
would be to finish the work of westward expansion and—by filling the country with modern and
democratic communities—make the West American.
Against the messy uncertainty of this surprisingly extant frontier, the Taos County
Project embodied the hope (itself a relic of programs like the Kansas Traveling Library) that the
solution was to organize belonging on a national scale. The Project emerged, Reid claimed,
because Taos’s residents “live among their peaks with their handicaps….a challenge to every
red-blooded fellow-citizen of this great democracy of ours.”461 In a true and large-scale
democracy, Reid thus claimed, local problems cannot remain local. What the Project tried to do
was to take the challenge that sharing presented, the affect-at-a-distance produced by nationalism,
and channel it into the carefully nested bureaucracies of federal governance. But Reid rejected
work that happened only at those largest scales, complaining, for example, that “[t]he tendency
in recent decades toward centralized responsibility, authority, and control in state and federal
government has minimized the importance of the county and its people as the functioning force
in our social and economic life.”462 The real, complicated “challenge” of the twentieth-century
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

460

Reid, It Happened, 8.
Reid, It Happened, 8.
462
Reid, It Happened, 101. Emphasis original.

461

172
	  

West, Reid suggested, would be met by an organizational impulse that ran on scales from faceto-face interaction to geopolitical conflict, by “a getting together of heads all along the line, from
Washington down to the grass roots.”463 It was an impulse that rehearsed the process by which
the United States had—through the organization of towns, counties, and territories out of
seemingly independent settlers—initially incorporated the West in the nineteenth century.
Despite paeans to modernity and progress, and a hostility to relics, the Taos County
Project depended on memories of the frontier to understand the present. As a consequence, the
sort of democracy it built would be shaped and limited by that past.

“Everybody’s Business Is Everybody’s Business”: Managing Democracy in Taos
From the Project’s gestation, Reid wrote of Taos’s residents, “it was obviously necessary
for them to organize against their problems.”464 This organization would not take place solely on
a local level, however, and certainly not by people acting separately. The people would need to
come together “coöperatively and in harmonious effort with the many organized agencies
available for their assistance.”465 And that cooperation would not be merely logistical or
technical. “A very unusual thing has happened in Taos County, New Mexico,” Reid wrote. “It is
so much of a departure from the ordinary that it is hard to believe. Yet it is true. Everybody got
together on everybody’s business! No longer is everybody’s business nobody’s business.”466 This,
Reid insisted, was the signal accomplishment of the Taos County Project: the opening up of
individual lives to public scrutiny and collaborative problem-solving. (Indeed, the first chapter of
It Happened in Taos is titled “Everybody’s Business Is Everybody’s Business.”) And by
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
463

Reid, It Happened, 103.
Reid, It Happened, 16. Emphasis original.
465
Reid, It Happened, 2.
466
Reid, It Happened, 1. Emphasis original.

464

173
	  

bringing those individual lives together to form a more, well, perfect union, the Project was to
make a nation. Indeed, it made the general statement of Roosevelt’s “new nationalism”—that
common interests linked people in Kansas, New York, and Georgia—and Reid’s “challenge to
every red-blooded fellow-citizen” literal. The isolation of deserts and mountains and revenant
frontiers had kept people apart, and the Taos County Project would use “g[etting] together” to
end once and for all the loneliness of the West.
The key mechanism for accomplishing this was that quintessentially American event: the
community meeting.467 As we saw in Curious Missie and similar texts in Chapter One, town or
county meetings were often used to illustrate the bookmobile’s connective capacity. In Taos
County, however, that dynamic was reversed: it was the bookmobile that made successful
meetings possible. The bookmobile, though it carried 800 books as well as a projection system,
did more than simply “supply[ ] reading materials and educational moving pictures to the
communities,” Reid wrote.468 The “little red wagon” had become, in fact, “the spark plug” of the
entire project.469 (In 1946, the same year It Happened in Taos was published, the Los Angeles
Times published a profile of two “Virginia Pioneers” with the University of Virginia Extension
Division, hard at work in the foothills, doing “a frontier job…making democracy work in the
back woods,” by holding meetings, showing educational films and planning a bookmobile. One
resident, the reporter noted, called them “Democracy’s spark plugs.” This not only suggests the
infiltration of mechanical metaphor into civic life but also the way that the sorts of Southeastern
mountainous regions the Lend a Hand Society served may have also struggled to realize full
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

467

Almost two decades later, in North Dakota, a state bookmobile program staffer crashed a Farm Bureau meeting
in order to argue that bookmobile service suited two main goals of the group—like “Promote good citizenship
programs”—plugging into both the community meeting and the yeoman ideal of American life. Margaret Stav to
Hazel Webster Byrnes, October 8, 1959, “Lib Comm Correspondence for 1959” Folder, Box 1, State Library
Commission – Miscellaneous Files (Series 1064), North Dakota Historical Society, Fargo, North Dakota.
468
Reid, It Happened, 38.
469
Reid, It Happened, 38.

174
	  

Americanness.)470 In Taos, the “spark” caused by the bookmobile’s “novelty and unique
usefulness attracted people to gatherings as nothing else had done,” raising meeting attendance
considerably.471 The Project thus joined a long history of using bookmobiles to amplify the
efforts of a central agency.472 Residents were attracted to the bookmobile, and especially to its
films, and that allowed “a wide distribution of information and education relating to the
individual programs of the coöperating agencies on the one hand and the coöperative nature of
the Project on the other.”473 As we’ve seen happen in other times and places, the bookmobile
shared books, information, and cooperation, which itself facilitated the sharing of books and
information.
What made the Project’s bookmobile distinct was that it was meant to be centralizing.
The bonds that the bookmobile would enact would not only be organized by a central authority;
the precise shape those bonds would take would be determined by that authority in advance and
arranged along lines that suited bureaucratic needs over local desires. Most other library
extension efforts were, of course, centralized, with routes and collections organized by a main
library office. And, from the traveling libraries of the 1890s, those efforts attempted to
consolidate scattered people into communities. The Taos County Project aimed to do that, but to
do it in a very particular and more extreme way, by bringing people together for the purposes of
administering their relationships to one another. This was an enactment, on the level of the
interpersonal relationship, of a New Deal approach to governance more broadly: “Searching for a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

470

Howard Whitman, “Virginia Pioneers,” Los Angeles Times, August 25, 1946. During the New Deal (and
overlapping with the Taos County Project), one Works Progress Administration program in Appalachian Kentucky
employed women to ride horses with saddle-bags full of books to promote literacy and connect isolated residents
with the rest of the country. See Donald C. Boyd, “The Book Women of Kentucky: The WPA Pack Horse Library
Project, 1936-1943,” Libraries & the Cultural Record 42 (2007): 111-128.
471
Reid, It Happened, 38.
472
The Project’s head librarian was first “sent on a round of the country” to examine other similar programs, so this
similarity was no accident. Reid, It Happened, 39.
473
Reid, It Happened, 38.

175
	  

way to direct the rapidly growing federal government,” Jason Scott Smith writes, “New Dealers
turned not to the task of amending the Constitution, but rather to the arena of administration and
management.”474 In Taos, the communities, and the democracy, that the bookmobile created
under this rubric were to be more managed than ever before.
Before the Project launched, the seventeen agencies initially involved (eventually thirtysix would cooperate) held planning meetings, but “it was realized that these meetings could not
accomplish the purposes of the Project unless the people were represented in all of the
deliberations.”475 This question of representation was a crucial one in the conception of the
Project, but the system the organizers developed would insist on popular representation but
would resolutely not confirm and extend the messiness of democracy. It would, rather, be a
means by which the conclusions of any uncertain contest might be known, or at least adequately
predicted, in advance. It thus extended the small-but-important enticing role of the bookmobile
(come to a meeting, and there will be books and movies we have chosen for you, and we can
bring you into the system we have devised) into a larger model of political life: come to a
meeting to have your voice heard, provided we know the content and intent of that voice first.
During the summer and autumn of 1940, before holding the initial county-wide
organizing meeting, Project staff members visited the county’s thirty-one villages in order to
spread the word and have the residents choose representatives to the Project’s planning staff.
This worked in some ways quite similarly to the Book Mission directors’ journeys across the
South, or Mary Keating’s trips around the far reaches of Kansas, garnering support for the
Kansas Traveling Library. (It was on one of those trips, remember, that Keating wrote home to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

474

Jason Scott Smith, Building New Deal Liberalism: The Political Economy of Public Works, 1933-1956 (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 190.
475
Reid, It Happened, 17.

176
	  

Topeka of the need for “union of force…and good literature.”) But in Taos, far fewer chances
were being taken when it came to determining what shape that “union” would take. When staffmembers arrived in a particular community, Reid explained, “[t]he procedure was to…call on
one of the leading citizens…who knew the people and their problems in an intimate way.”476
That citizen would be convinced, then the staff would “propose to him that he call four or five of
his close neighbors into his home that evening, at which time the field worker would explain the
program to them and see what they thought about it.”477 This was advantageous, according to
Reid, as “[t]he fact that the neighbors were invited to another neighbor’s home to talk over
something would condition the meeting favorably in most cases.”478 And it usually worked, after
which the field worker would “suggest[ ] that if the gentlemen thought well of the idea, they
might invite a small number of their friends and neighbors to their homes on consecutively
arranged nights” for discussion.479 After a number of such discussions on such nights, a meeting
for the entire community would be held. “The field man knew by this time,” Reid explained,
“what the community action would be.”480
This process recapitulated but intensified key elements of the bookmobile in place by this
time. As we saw in Chapter One, the traveling library (and thus the bookmobile) was borne out
of a concerted effort to manage emotion on scales running from the local to the national. The
Kansas Traveling Library, for example, required May Pressly to search out her neighbors as a
prerequisite for receiving a library. The state and nation were rebuilt, on this model, from the
foundation of neighborly bonds occasioned by the library but constructed by their participants. In
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
476

Reid, It Happened, 18.
Reid, It Happened, 18.
478
Reid, It Happened, 18.
479
Reid, It Happened, 18-19.
480
Reid, It Happened, 19.

477

177
	  

Taos County, however, that neighborliness is not simply encouraged but arranged. In Kansas,
strict requirements for participation had clearly influenced the development of neighborhoods
that could be linked together on broader scales. But neighborhoods could conceivably, as well,
have failed to take shape. In Taos, on the other hand, they would be manufactured to exact and
predictable specifications.481 With this method, the Project made practically literal the plan of
Why Not? (1929), the bizarre American Library Association pamphlet featuring a
“[d]ramatization of the arguments for and against a county library presented before an open
meeting,” meant to actually be performed at a meeting, perhaps fooling attendees into thinking
they were witnessing a reasoned and passionate debate, the outcome of which—county libraries
for all!—was always already determined.482 What was in 1929 a peculiar (and probably not
terribly, or at least not literally, effective) effort by a professional organization had become a
method actually undertaken by the federal government. The intimacy and knowledge that linked
citizens to their neighbors would be identified, exploited, and organized into something useful.
They would have democracy, whatever it took.
One of the effects of this method of managed democracy was to bureaucratize emotion,
to make emotional connections seem like administrative ones and then to replace the former with
the latter. The neighborhood gatherings in homes, followed by local meetings during which the
communities would approve of the Project and elect their representatives to it, were merely
preliminary steps. The true work of the Project began on November 8, 1940, with a meeting at
which agency staff-members and community representatives were present. The minutes of the
meeting, reproduced in It Happened in Taos, capture the Project’s strange democratic alchemy.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

481

Reid noted with pride that at the first staff meeting, through their representatives, “the communities reported their
problems as they saw them, without any coaching from agency personnel.” But how much coaching would be
required when the selection process was managed so closely? Reid, It Happened, 21.
482
Long, Why Not?, 2.

178
	  

At the meeting, Reid said that the staff was currently made up of agency representatives, but that
community-members were present because they would be included in the staff, as well. “Then,”
he explained, “we would have the people and the agencies represented together for the purpose
of discussing common problems.”483 Representation, in democratic systems, is meant to be what
allows collective will to gain practical, effective force. And communities emerge, in part at least,
out of a sense of shared experience. Both communities and their representations are, thus, meant
to be products of the emergence of common consciousness. Saying that agencies and people can
have “common problems” and be “represented together” asserts that people can, in essence,
share common consciousness with institutions. The bonds of community become procedural—
the product of meeting attendance and agenda-following—rather than emotional. This
substitution of administrative bonds for emotional ones, and the new sorts of connection it made
possible—primarily in the form of unprecedented interagency cooperation and “band[ing]
together”—was one of the signal accomplishments of the Project, as touted in It Happened in
Taos, as well as in journals like Human Organization and the American Sociological Review.484
This could make the more manageable virtues of bureaucracy—predictability,
measurability, orderliness—stand in for the virtues of democracy and community. And so, in
organizing information and emotion, those former virtues were key to overcoming the messy
uncertainty of the frontier and making Taos American. As we will see in the next section, the
bookmobile supported this process not only by attracting people to the places where it happened,
but by attracting them to particular kinds of information in the process.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

483

Reid, It Happened, 24.
Reid, It Happened, 106. See also Charles P. Loomis and Jesse Taylor [Reid], “The Taos County Project of New
Mexico—An Experiment in Local Cooperation Among Bureaus, Private Agencies, and Rural People,” Human
Organization 3 (1944): 21-33; Charles P. Loomis, “A Cooperative Health Association in Spanish Speaking Villages,”
American Sociological Review 10 (1945): 149-157.

484

179
	  

“Frontiers of the Future”: Reading Progress and the Past in Taos
The triumph of this managed, bureaucratic democracy was most evident in the operation
and evaluation of the Project’s bookmobile. It was the “spark plug” of the entire operation
because it attracted people to meetings, yes, but also, it seems, because that attraction could be
quantified. The chapter about the bookmobile in It Happened in Taos is rife with numbers: the
bookmobile boosted attendance from ten percent of family heads to over eighty; the introduction
of the bookmobile and small community libraries raised circulation from 10,712 to 38,279 in the
first year of the program; 832 people attended a film screening in one rural village, and 52,745
people attended screenings in a single year.485 That last number was followed swiftly by a note
that in many places, “almost the entire population turned out for the shows, some of them
walking with young children in the arms for as much as three miles.”486 The bookmobile offered
the opportunity to link the sentimental (babes in arms) with the statistical (52,745 in attendance).
This relation of emotion and order was meant to take place in the lives of the bookmobile’s users,
as well in the assessment of its programs. “The regularity of its visits to the communities and the
growing confidence inspired in the people by the friendly, sympathetic service of the bookmobile
operator,” wrote Reid, “contribute a stabilizing influence in their lives, a dependability of service
for which isolated rural residents and underprivileged people everywhere hunger.”487 Rather than
the bookmobile’s flexibility, its mobility and unpredictable connections, Reid was himself and
imagined his constituents to be attracted to its regularity, its fixed routes and set schedule.
Friendliness and sympathy—in other contexts cornerstones of democracy—here serve mainly as
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

485

Reid, It Happened, 38, 44, 45.
Reid, It Happened, 45.
487
Reid, It Happened, 48.

486

180
	  

handmaidens of routine, helping to establish a “stabilizing…dependability” that is the object of
both the Project’s work and the people’s hunger. And this gets to the heart of the Project’s
project: it was built on a conviction that feelings of community could be administered and thus
measured and thus controlled. As we will see in that section, that administration depended on
controlling a frontier past by linking it to the present and the future, with the bookmobile’s
contents as the connecting threads.
The impulse to evaluate also manifested in the examination of individuals’ library records.
Not content with circulation statistics, or librarians’ reports about books’ popularity, the Taos
County Project adapted the social science methods of federal governance (sampling and
demography) to the Project’s library. Reid reported the results of the sampling:
Children, as expected, were reading adventure fiction; teen-age young people confined
themselves mostly to popular Western fiction; young adults seemed most interested in
current fiction and some books on the war and international affairs; the older adults, those
whose reading was confined mainly to Spanish materials, read what they could get on
subjects of general adult interest, mostly those relating to the war and rural
occupations.488
This passage contains numerous threads, three of which I want to examine here: language, genre,
and war. Taking each of these in turn, and using them to contextualize the Taos County Project
and its bookmobile, will reveal how the Project used the frontier to frame and manage literacy
and democracy. It will also highlight the ways in which even this seemingly domestic program
was enmeshed in a global system of expansion, violence, and cooperation.
First, the question of language influenced the bookmobile’s collections and the Project as
a whole. Complicating Roosevelt’s earlier pronouncement of national similarity, Reid argued
that the county’s education system was flawed precisely because it was the same as “one would
find in Iowa, Vermont, or Oregon,” conducted entirely in English for children raised by Spanish	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

488

Reid, It Happened, 44-45.

181
	  

speaking parents.489 It was “not practical, functional, or fitting,” misunderstanding the
frustratingly in-between status of the region.490 But it did work in its way, and most Taos
residents were literate, the older ones only in Spanish and the younger in English, as well.
Almost all of the books carried by the Project bookmobile were in English, rather to Reid’s
chagrin. “It was a disappointment that we could not secure from any source reading materials in
Spanish that dealt with current American Problems in a satisfactory way for these readers,” Reid
lamented, suggesting that the federal government undertake to produce some, “since it would
serve not only the millions of our citizens of Spanish descent in the Southwest, but could be used
to good advantage in exchange with our neighbors to the south.”491 Here reemerged Reid’s
uncertainty about the status of Taos’s Nuevo Mexicano residents: they were “our citizens,” but
reaching them was like reaching residents of other nations. This was, perhaps, in part due to the
way the technology of the bookmobile, the dream of common consciousness, and the linguistic
politics of the Western Hemisphere met in Taos. As Ricardo Salvatore argues, “U.S. visions of
hemispheric integration were built upon notions of connectivity, circulation, and modernity that
promoters and policymakers considered embedded in machines.”492 The bookmobile was one of
those machines: the U.S. Information Service ran bookmobile programs in Mexico City in the
early 1950s, for example, and in 1962 the Bureau for Inter-American Affairs proposed running
bookmobiles in Peru and elsewhere.493 (It is also no surprise that among the film strips shown at
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

489

Reid, It Happened, 12.
Reid, It Happened, 12.
491
Reid, It Happened, 41-42.
492
Ricardo D. Salvatore, “Imperial Mechanics: South America’s Hemispheric Integration in the Machine Age,”
American Quarterly 58 (2006): 664.
493
The records of the Mexico City program are held by the National Archives and Records Administration (College
Park), in Record Group 306. They were declassified after I submitted a Freedom of Information Act request, but
they became available only after research for this project had been completed. The Inter-American Affairs proposal
can be found in Marvin Weissman, Office of Institutional Development, to Arturo Morales-Carrion, Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs, Department of State, July 26, 1962; BOOKS—Bookmobile Proposal

490

182
	  

bookmobile stops around the county was “Good Neighbors,” a record of a 1938 good-will tour of
South America made by Franklin Roosevelt and Cordell Hull.)494 As we saw in the introduction,
this intimation—that fellow-citizens could have less in common with one another than one might
have with linguistic fellows miles and nations away—would later become ground for
bookmobile-based resistance by Chicano nationalists. But in the context of Reid’s Americanbuilding enterprise, it was a curious suggestion, indeed, and one that illustrates the limits of
1940s liberalism and technocracy when it came to forming a multicultural and multilingual
nation.
The second striking feature of Reid’s description is the manner in which teenagers
“confined themselves mostly to popular Western fiction” (and, to a lesser extent, the way
younger children “were reading adventure fiction”). Fictions of the West had played a significant
role in the annexation of Texas, the promotion of the Mexican-American War, and the expansion
of the U.S. state to include newly occupied territories afterward.495 Encounters between bodies,
in texts that created imaginative encounters between east and west, stood in for and managed
vast and violent encounters between nations. Almost a century later, in that mythologized land,
the descendants of the occupied read the offspring of those earlier stories. As is so often the case,
evidence of reception and its effects is illusory or nonexistent. (This may, indeed, be part of the
point: where the fact of someone’s reading is measurable, their emotional response is rather more
obscure, and so the Project’s attention was directed at the former.) But reading Reid’s list, one is
forced to wonder about both the psychic and political work performed by Nuevo Mexicano youth
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Folder; Box 17; Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary; General Records of the
Department of State, Record Group 59; National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland.
494
Reid, It Happened, 45. “Good Neighbors,” Motion Picture Films, Record Group 178, National Archives, College
Park, Maryland.
495
Shelley Streeby has documented, for example, how romances written about the West and circulated among
working-class readers in Eastern cities attempted to turn force into loving consent by mapping imperial expansion
onto heterosexual romance and marriage. Streeby, American Sensations, 102-138.

183
	  

reading those stories. Usually written from the perspective of white settlers—and usually
depicting the violent and mercenary conquest of the land as both an inevitable triumph and an
unqualified good—Western fiction helped create the imaginative conditions necessary for the
extension of the state across the stretch of the continent. But read as part of a project to make it
both full and permanent, these fictions perhaps turned that extension inward, incorporating not
just political geography but the frontiers of the mind. These teenagers lived in a community
where, Reid notes, funerals offered the most potent “occasion…for social get-together and
interchange” and for “community-wide pause and celebration,” where contemplation of a finegrained community history was the central cultural activity. By injecting “popular Western
fiction” into the life of that community and the lives of its young members, the Taos County
Project attempted to make these teenagers come of age as Americans. The history of their place
would not be series of gatherings around death and remembrance but rather the shared, national
myths of that place’s incorporation—and thus the seemingly true and final closure of frontiers,
both internal and external.
And Reid’s public announcement of their reading habits also closes a sort of nationalhistorical circuit, using “native settlers” in the present to sanction and smooth over the violence
and injustice of the past. This was not an unprecedented strategy at that moment. In the 1920s
and 1930s, for example, Glacier National Park in Montana was advertised using photographs of
Native Americans, including one in which Pikuni Blackfoot chief Two Guns White Calf sits in
traditional dress, on a rocky outcropping, reading a book by Zane Grey, master of the violent and
morally ambiguous Western.496 The photo explicitly, like Reid’s description implicitly, invites
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

496

Tomer J. Hileman, “Two Guns White Calf Reading,” Great Northern Railway Collection, Glacier Park Views,
Minnesota Historical Society. Reprinted in Victoria Bissell Brown and Timothy J. Shannon, eds., Going to the
Source: The Bedford Reader in American History, Volume 2: Since 1865 (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2008), 44.

184
	  

the viewer into a world where the experience of the West is framed by white culture and a white
state—by the photographer, by authors, by the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of
Indian Affairs—for the passive consumption of people of color. In this imagined present, people
of color cease to be subjects of their own lives, or authors of their own history, but are instead
objects used to promote continued conquest while erasing painful pasts. This framing had staying
power. Two decades later, in 1962, public health educator Anne M. Smith interviewed a
bookmobile librarian serving Navajo pueblos in New Mexico. On hearing that the Navajo “like
reading about themselves,” Smith suggested that “they have been in this cultural bind for so long,
and books about themselves gives them a sort of status in their own eyes.”497 White knowledge
and white representation grants status to the native people, in this view, and sanction to the
nation that slaughtered and sequestered them.
There is another way to understand these images—from the Two Guns White Calf
photograph to Reid’s declaration to Smith’s interpretation—of people of color passively
consuming and retroactively forgiving. Indeed, the librarian Smith interviewed complicated
matters, agreeing to an extent with Smith but adding that “they have been suspicious of the white
man and want to know what he is saying about them.”498 Reading Western fiction, the Taos
teenagers were gaining both the literacy skills they would need for—and, perhaps more
importantly, awareness of the tropes and assumptions that would shape—their engagement with
the larger, white-dominated America outside their villages. Even as these images helped solidify
the appearance of a closed frontier (everyone reads Westerns because they depict a glorious but
ended past), they also depict Latino and Native American subjects grappling with what that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
497

“Interview #29: Bookmobile Services – State Library” (May 11, 1962),” Folder 5, Box 1, Anne M. Smith
Collection, Fray Angélico Chávez History Library, Museum of New Mexico, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
498
“Interview#29.”

185
	  

closure might mean. They knew there was a set of systems—cultural, legal, geographic—
extending and solidifying around them. From government boarding schools and the continued
application of the Dawes Act to public health departments and land grant programs, the first half
of the twentieth century in the West and Southwest saw the development of numerous
bureaucracies designed to either assimilate or exclude both natives and “native settlers.”499
Figuring out how to use these systems, how to work them, could be one strategy for survival and
success in the region. Thus the desire “to know what he has been saying about them” was part of
a larger desire to understand and thrive within the world that “saying” had wrought. There were
distinct risks to this sort of approach (as we saw in Chapter Two, with the stiff-sided box the
Robert B. Harrison Library accidentally helped reinforce), but it was a potentially transformative
one.
The temporal folding at work in the teenagers’ reading habits (portraying the past in the
present in order to imagine the future) played out, differently, in some of the bookmobile’s film
screenings. The Project’s bookmobile-based screenings were part of a larger midcentury
movement to create encounters with what Charles Acland and Haidee Wasson call “useful
cinema.”500 Especially in Taos, these “useful” films were not merely educational in the sense that
they taught about nutrition and farming techniques. They were pedagogical more broadly,
offering training for becoming American and slotting into the right part of the national culture.
This can most clearly be seen in Frontiers of the Future, one of the film strips Reid
reported showing Taos residents. Produced in 1937 and funded by the National Industrial
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

499

See, for example, Frederick E. Hoxie, A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians, 1880-1920
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2001 [1984]); Molina, Fit to Be Citizens?; Forrest, The Preservation of the
Village.
500
See Charles R. Acland and Haidee Wasson, Useful Cinema (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011). See also
Film Centre, The Use of Mobile Cinema and Radio Vans in Fundamental Education (Paris: UNESCO, 1949).

186
	  

Council, this “screen editorial” was on the surface rather standard industrial propaganda:
Technology! Engineering! Progress! Test tubes!501 But the language in which Frontiers of the
Future cast its subject makes it particularly remarkable as a part of the Taos County Project. The
film was narrated by Lowell Thomas, famous at the time as a broadcaster and author of With
Lawrence of Arabia (1924), who in the film sits at a desk and narrates an immense change.
“America for three hundred years has been the land of promise for the rest of the world, the land
of new frontiers, new opportunities for all,” he intones. “Today, the job of building this nation
geographically is completed; there are no new frontiers within our borders.” As he speaks, a
political map of the United States appears on the screen and as a screen onto which are projected
moving images of buildings, bridges, airplanes, and cars [FIGURE 13]. Technology and the
infrastructures that make it run literally overtake the continental space of the nation. (Bits of
Canada and Mexico are visible but, importantly, remain undifferentiated and un-illustrated.) “To
what new horizons can we look now?” he asks, as a glowing question mark appears on the map,
reaching from Minnesota to the Rio Grande, superimposed on an oil refinery, a factory, and
finally a crowd of people busily walking down a sidewalk [FIGURE 14].502 There was no longer
a West to look to, but Thomas’s next two questions illustrate an important shift in the rhetoric of
the frontier: “Where are tomorrow’s opportunities? What’s ahead in America, for you, for your
children?” The answer is, of course, “the frontiers of the future”—“not on any map,” they are
“ahead of us.” The geographic and the temporal blend, such that the future becomes a space in
which to expand. As the West had represented the future to nineteenth-century boosters and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

501

“Frontiers of the Future” (1937), Audio Productions, Inc., and National Industrial Council, Prelinger Archives,
Internet Archive, http://archive.org/details/Frontier1937.
502
That it was asked by Thomas, widely lauded as one of “the world’s foremost globe trotter[s]” and an inventor of
the audio-visual travelogue, lent particular force to this question. “Lowell Thomas: His Brief Biography,”
Milwaukee Journal, August 27, 1933.

187
	  

thinkers (“we go west as into the future,” wrote Henry David Thoreau, and O’Sullivan
proclaimed that “[t]he expansive future is our arena” for expansion), in this film the future comes
to represent the West.503
The context in which this film was screened in Taos amplified this effect. Bookmobiles
in general still represented at this moment a mobile, technological, educational and “expansive
future.” (It’s no coincidence, for example, that Lowell Thomas was also featured in a 1961 U.S.
Steel advertisement touting the bookmobile as “a good example of the fast-growing American
appetite for learning and culture.”)504 And this was only more true in Reid’s depiction of Taos as
a land where the past had a stranglehold on the future. The “little red wagon” rode into Taos, in
Reid’s telling, both carrying and representing the future. One of the Irving Rusinow photographs
printed in It Happened in Taos shows the bookmobile stopped in front of a school in Llano de
San Juan [FIGURE 15]. The front of the bookmobile sits in the right foreground of the image,
gleaming against a rough-hewn adobe schoolhouse, its overhang held up by a cracked timber and
its façade a windowless, dull, and ragged grey. Lined up between the bookmobile and the
school—poised between mud and metal, between past and future—is what the caption calls a
“flock” of community-members, arriving to watch a screening of educational films.505 “Many of
them have never seen a movie before,” the caption explains, and so we can imagine a screening
of Frontiers of the Future in this “secluded mountain community” calling into being the world
the film describes, where technology has, indeed, traversed and enfolded the sprawling continent
and its myriad people.506 The bookmobile—jutting metallic and new into frame of the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
503

Henry David Thoreau, “Walking,” in Atlantic Monthly Vol. XI (Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1862), 662;
O’Sullivan, “Great Nation of Futurity,” 427.
504
“Watching America Grow, with Lowell Thomas,” Wall Street Journal, January 11, 1961.
505
Reid, It Happened, Plate VIII.
506
Reid, It Happened, Plate VIII.

188
	  

photograph and the lives of Taos’s residents—could thus become, in all of the violent and spatial
and temporal force of the phrase, what Reid called “a powerful spearhead for almost unlimited
progress.”507 The phrase encapsulates and culminates the history-folding temporal play at work
in the Project’s effort to erase the frontier and create an audience for the new and the wonderful.
No longer a weapon used to resist white encroachment, the spearhead becomes instead a tool for
the fashioning of a future. It becomes a bookmobile.
The third striking part of Reid’s description of the residents’ reading habits was the adults’
interest in reading about war. Not that the popularity of this material is surprising, given that the
Project began as war raged in Europe and ended after the U.S. had entered the fray. But the way
in which the Project’s library programs both facilitated and managed that popularity is striking.
As we saw in Chapter One, the Kansas Traveling Library, having (supposedly, at least) linked
isolated people together into neighborhood and nation, turned its attention to connecting them to
the globe. The Taos County Project again and again borrowed components of the early traveling
library programs and both intensified and managed them. This violent, global turn was no
exception. Reid explained that the staff at the community libraries set up by the Project and
serviced by the bookmobile “had regular times of day, usually in the evenings, for reading aloud
to adults (who could not read English) the war news…; for pointing out the location of faraway
places on the map which had been mentioned in the news or at which they had sons in military
service.”508 The sequence here is striking: news of the outside world would be read to or by the
residents, creating an occasion for them to be situated explicitly within it. Depicting the people
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

507

Reid, It Happened, 48. The photograph would be uncannily echoed almost two decades later in a painting by Eric
Sloane published in his Return to Taos (1960), which recorded an earlier westward journey. In the latter image,
Sloane’s automobile sits in the right foreground, curvaceous and metallic in front of the flat adobe lines of Taos
Puebo, which the caption notes is possibly the oldest “lived-in place on the continent.” Eric Sloane, Return to Taos:
A Sketchbook of Roadside Americana (New York: Wilfred Funk, 1960), 89.
508
Reid, It Happened, 43-44.

189
	  

of Taos, Reid repeatedly describes them as “bound to the land” and to their families.509 The
geographic scope of the war and the intensity of the nationalist fervor it helped create allowed
the Project to get the people thinking about their lives in connection to the nation and its
undertakings—to spread them across the stretch of the continent and then, as part of the nation,
the globe. However “faraway” a place, it could be located on a map in relation to Taos. Its
residents were, these lessons illustrated, part of a nation asserting itself in the world. That nation
was to be the shape their belonging took in the new and modern lives the Project offered. By
putting hearing about a location on the news and having a child serving there in same clause, for
example, Reid collapsed the bonds of blood and of nation. With the latter coming out on top, this
became, once again, a way to continue the process of separating Taos County and its people from
the past and incorporating them into the United States.
That process began in war almost a century earlier, and so the presence of this particular
war in Taos (and of Taos in this particular war) inevitably highlighted the centrality of violence
and conquest to this slow Americanization. Perhaps inadvertently illustrating this was another
Rusinow photograph, this one not published in Reid’s book but preserved in Project records
[FIGURE 16]. This image, like the one discussed above, is of the Project bookmobile in Llano
de San Juan.510 In fact, it appears to be of the bookmobile in Llano de San Juan on the same day
as the previous photo, only this time from the rear. But where the front acted as a figurative
“spearhead” of modernity, the back carried its gun. Crowded with children, many holding books,
the bookmobile sits with its rear door swung open. Two children stand in the doorway, looking
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

509

Reid, It Happened, 10.
“Taos County, New Mexico. Taos County project bookmobile visits Llano San Juan, circulates books, showed
educational films in schoolhouse, sells defense stamps” (12/1941), Photographic Prints Documenting Programs and
Activities of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and Predecessor Agencies, Record Group 83, National Archives
and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland.
510

190
	  

out at the throng below. And next to them, on the inside of the rear door, glowingly lit by the sun,
stands a white soldier. Well, an image of one anyway. “FOR DEFENSE,” the poster shouts,
“BUY UNITED STATES SAVINGS BONDS AND STAMPS.” Next to the words is a
reproduction of Daniel Chester French’s sculpture of a minuteman, which was cast from melteddown Civil War cannons and erected at the site of the battle of Concord on its centennial. Just as
the statue itself closed a circuit—celebrating the violent creation of the union with the weapons
that had almost a century later had violently reasserted union in the face of secession—its
appearance in a New Mexico village closed another one. Bringing white military force once
again to Taos, but this time in the guise of a noble farmer-soldier (carrying a rifle but with one
hand resting on his plow) from the eighteenth-century founding of the nation, the bookmobile
created a through-line from distant past to present that ostensibly smoothed over the violent and
uncertain middle. The poster thus invited the now self-evidently American residents of Taos to
emulate the minuteman and defend their land not from Americans but as Americans. But, at the
same time, that smoothing was not complete and the poster ably illustrated the links between
violence and landscape that powered the kind of Americanization the Taos County Project
embodied so well.
It also illustrated an alchemy of information and emotion. The sculpture itself had
embodied a sort of quiet, careful nationalism that was of particular use after the ruptures of the
Civil War. In 1900, as The Kansas Traveling Library and the Lend a Hand Society each worked
to build a nation, renowned sculptor Lorado Taft—whose daughter would co-sponsor the failed
Library Services Demonstration Bill of 1950 in the House and whose son-in-law would cosponsor the successful Library Services Act of 1956 in the Senate, both of which aimed to
provide federal support for bookmobiles—praised the sculpture for being a “stern, tense

191
	  

embodiment of patriotism” in contrast to the “usual exuberant productions.”511 Forty years later,
that “stern, tense” emotionalism found a home in New Mexico, as part of a program dedicated to
inciting feelings of nationalism in order to manage them. Looming over a seemingly chaotic
throng, the poster (and the bookmobile to which it was attached) centralized and organized it.
The poster’s address, like the bookmobile’s, turned the crowd into an audience, the mass into a
nation. That address was occasioned by a war which, like the New Deal that preceded and
influenced it, created opportunities to attempt to use bureaucracy to once again bring about a new
and total nationalism.512 The war was a massive undertaking that depended on the willingness of
citizens to struggle and die. From rationing to conscription to the shift to wartime production,
that willingness—that patriotic and nationalist fervor—had to be first called forth and then
managed. The movement of information, of books and images and newspapers and posters and
politics and belonging, was one way that happened. And so the Taos County Project was both a
site where that took place and a site that offered a model for its successful implementation. To
see one way that worked, in the next section, we will look at how the Taos County Project’s
bookmobile related to other wartime library efforts.

“Total War”: Learning Lessons in the Shadow of Guard Towers
Beyond bringing information about the war (or war bond posters) to Taos, bookmobiles
supported the management of national feeling, as well as the U.S. war effort more generally.
They supported “war work” in a variety of capacities, and like the Taos bookmobile they often
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

511

Lorado Taft, “Daniel Chester French, Sculptor,” Brush and Pencil 5 (1900): 147. On the bills sponsored by the
Douglases, see Lowell A. Martin, Enrichment: A History of the Public Library in the United States in the Twentieth
Century (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 1998), 142.
512
Jason Scott Smith has, for example, argued that the New Deal did not simply fade away with the advent of the
war, as many previous interpretations have suggested. Focusing on public works and infrastructure, he argues that
the war actually became “a powerful rationale for continuing to fund programs that were becoming unpopular.”
Smith, Building New Deal Liberalism, 192.

192
	  

collapsed the boundaries between the home front and the battlefield. Even before the United
States entered the war, in the summer of 1941, bookmobiles “follow[ed] the men into the field”
for an elaborate set of war games played out within U.S. borders.513 And once the nation did
enter the fray, the rigid, bureaucratic control of entertainment and education, embodied so well in
Taos and abetted by the bookmobile, continued apace. One 1942 report, for example, noted that
the Special Services Division of the War Department emerged as a government-run alternative to
organizations, like the YMCA and Knights of Columbus, which had “care[d] for the off-duty
needs” of soldiers during the World War I.514 Under its auspices, that earlier piecemeal,
charitable entertainment was to be replaced by a system in which every military unit “not only is
accompanied by several Special Services officers who have been rigorously trained at devising
ways and means of entertaining men, but is equipped with A and B kits which contain practically
every type of available athletic equipment as well as a short-wave radio, a phonograph, records,
radio transcriptions, books and games.”515 Mobility was key to this extension of central
entertainment amidst “modern, global warfare,” and so bookmobiles and traveling libraries
joined portable pianos, mobile post exchanges, and portable “motion-picture kit[s]” on a circuit
through a worldwide network of wartime installations.516
That network included “posts all over the world,” as the army’s Recruiting Journal put
it—from Fort Benning in Georgia, where a bookmobile provided books to African American
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

513

“Take Books to Soldiers,” New York Times, August 25, 1941.
Lloyd Shearer, “Brightening the Corners Where They Are,” New York Times, November 1, 1942.
515
Shearer, “Brightening.” Organizations like the Red Cross did continue off-duty services to military personnel,
including mobile libraries. See Christy Fox, “Book Depot Appeals for Army Literature,” Los Angeles Times,
February 28, 1942.
516
Shearer, “Brightening.” The mobility of the books themselves mattered, too. As Christopher Loss argues, the
Armed Services Edition (cheap paperback editions produced by publishers in collaboration with the United States
Army Library Service) served as “a cost-effective transportable alternative” to hardback books and “perform[ed]…a
critical…role in the United State’s worldwide military struggle.” Christopher P. Loss, “Reading Between Enemy
Lines: Armed Services Editions and World War II,” Journal of Military History 67 (2003): 812.
514

193
	  

servicemen, to Australia to Panama to Western Europe, where Special Services programs were
deployed.517 Bookmobiles in the war thus frustrated simple distinctions between home front and
front lines. Indeed, the bookmobile pushes us to reconsider what exactly a site of war might be.
“Total war,” Emily Miller Danton wrote in a 1942 report in an American Library Association
publication: “It’s being fought in Libya and in Houston, in Chekiang and in Pittsburgh, in your
kitchen and in your neighbor’s garage.”518 And libraries were working hard to respond to this
new context. In cities around the United States, as factories shifted to the production of war
materiel, and as their workers’ lives were accordingly transformed, libraries developed new
programs to serve them. One “war time innovation,” as the Chicago Tribune put it, was
undertaken by the Henry E. Legler Branch of the Chicago Public Library (named after the
traveling library pioneer who dreamed of “little neighborhoods”). Like other libraries around the
nation, the Legler Branch ran a bookmobile to war plants in its area, bringing “complete library
privileges to war workers whose increased hours allow no time for library visits.”519 Technical
books were popular for leisure reading (total war, indeed), and vegetable gardening was another
widely-requested topic, as patrons tended Victory Gardens—or, at least, worked to have enough
to eat under rationing.520 But the way the bookmobile plugged into the war effort meant that
books were more than just “weapons in the war of ideas,” as the wartime colophon and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

517

“Army Libraries’ Short Story Contest Winners Are Named,” Recruiting Journal (June 1950): 6; “Mobile Library
to Service Men at Fort Benning,” Atlantic Daily World, August 4, 1943.
518
Emily Miller Danton, “Victory Begins at Home,” ALA Bulletin 36 (1942): 535.
519
“West Libraries Stress War Needs,” Chicago Daily Tribune, April 30, 1944. See also “Literature to Lettuce,”
Irish Times Pictorial, January 29, 1944. Bookmobile programs did struggle under rubber and gasoline rationing, as
described by Danton and dramatized in one wartime novel about a bookmobile librarian. Danton, “Victory,” 543; de
Leeuw, With a High Heart.
520
Rationing was another way in which the foreign-domestic distinction was torn asunder by war, as the political
and even military significance of seemingly homebound production and consumption decisions was made clear. See
Amy Bentley, Eating for Victory: Food Rationing and the Politics of Domesticity (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois
Press, 1998).

194
	  

propaganda programs had it.521 They had become part of the production and distribution of the
weapons themselves. The dynamic of Taos was replicated but reversed. Where the Taos County
Project bookmobile brought the residue of violence packed in alongside the books, here the
residues of books were packed in with the instruments of violence. A book was read in Chicago
and a bomb dropped in Berlin, and a bookmobile helped mark a line between those two
seemingly distinct, seemingly distant events.
Other aspects of the home front were invisible in It Happened in Taos. Indeed, Reid was
entirely silent about another federal effort being undertaken at the same time as the Taos County
Project, an effort that was also about deciding who was not yet a true American, an effort that
was also a proving ground for applied social science, for new breeds of bureaucracy, for
managed democracy. As the Taos County Project wore on and its bookmobile traveled the
county, less than three hundred miles away—the same distance as Cimarron was from Topeka
when Keating wrote back calling for “union of force”—sat the Granada War Relocation Center,
where from August 1942 thousands of Japanese Americans were detained following Executive
Order 9066. Like the nine other euphemistically-named “relocation centers,” Granada was run by
a new federal agency (the War Relocation Authority, created by Executive Order 9102),
influenced by applied social science, and dedicated to Americanization through work and
education.522

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
521

On this idea, and the programs it spawned, see Patti Clayton Becker, Books and Libraries in American Society
during World War II (New York: Routledge, 2005).
522
On the decision to remove Japanese Americans and creation of the WRA, see Brian Masaru Hayashi,
Democratizing the Enemy: The Japanese American Internment (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004), 76106. On the role of anthropologists in relocation policy, see Orin Starn, “Engineering Internment: Anthropologists
and the War Relocation Authority,” American Ethnologist 13 (1986): 700-720. On education policy in the camps,
see Thomas James, Exile Within: The Schooling of Japanese Americans, 1942-1945 (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1987).

195
	  

Grenada did not have a bookmobile, but, like all the other centers and like the Taos
County Project, it did have both managed democracy and community libraries. As the first
prisoners were transported to Granada that August, the War Relocation Authority was codifying
a system of what they called “evacuee self-government.”523 This system involved the
establishment “community government at the relocation centers” in “a form roughly comparable
to municipal governments throughout the United States.”524 The system also, however, involved
a series of checks and channels. Before the organization committee (“comparable to a
constitutional convention”) could put a governance plan in place, it would have to be “approved
by the Project Director and by a majority of the qualified voters.”525 Not only did this mimic the
choreographed democracy of the neighborhood meetings the Taos County Project used to
acquired the approval of its constituents, it also borrowed the Project’s technique of having “the
people and the agencies represented together” as a means of managing the relationship of
citizens to government. The problem was not simply that the WRA failed to enact even this
anemic form of democracy (helping to prompt strikes in the camps), but that the idea of building
democracy at the point of a gun—of trying, in historian Brian Masaru Hayashi’s words, “[t]o
maintain control while having democracy”—was always already flawed.526 The cruel irony at the
heart of this form of self-government was that cooperation was not the root of democracy but its
destruction: “We the people of the Granada Relocation Center, in order to develop a democratic
form of Community government, to further the common welfare, to provide for the internal
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

523

Second Quarterly Report of the War Relocation Authority, July 1 to September 30 1942 (n.d.), Papers of Philleo
Nash, Harry S. Truman Library & Museum, available at
http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/study_collections/japanese_internment/documents/index.php?documentda
te=1942-00-00&documentid=15&studycollectionid=JI&pagenumber=1, accessed September 21 2012, 22.
524
Second Quarterly Report, 23.
525
Second Quarterly Report, 23-24.
526
Hayashi, Democratizing, 108. On the failure of the self-government policies and its influence on an October 1942
strike at the Tule Lake camp, see Starn, “Engineering Internment,” 107.

196
	  

harmony, to co-operate with the War Relocation Authority, do establish this charter.”527 This was
democracy as submission, a slippage also evident in the camps’ educational programs, as well,
from libraries stocked with cast-offs from the Victory Book Campaign to schools where—in the
words of two observers in 1943—teachers tried “to teach the fundamental freedoms upon which
our democracy is based in a classroom from whose windows guard towers are plainly visible.”528
These ironies and hypocrisies and unhappy juxtapositions were less extreme in Taos,
certainly, but they were very much present, as a happy shining bookmobile—that “little red
wagon”—wandered its way through the villages, bringing books to one and all as federal
agencies worked to erase centuries of tradition and enclose and enlist the county’s residents.
Educational programs in camps like Granada were modeled on community schools established
for Navajo people in the 1930s, and to veteran Indian Service staff, in one historian’s words, “the
evacuated Japanese Americans were a familiar quantity: a dependent population under federal
authority.”529 Thus even at the height of war, of seemingly outward-focused energy, the
organization and management of seemingly domestic people in seemingly domestic space
remained paramount. Hence the emergence of a constellation of what Heather Fryer calls
“security towns,” federally-constructed communities in the American West designed for
“security, surveillance, and social control.”530 These towns drew on and transformed a longer
history of occupation, separation, and control. In a pattern that should now feel familiar, the open
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

527

“Granada Relocation Center Charter,” Online Archive of California, available at
http://content.cdlib.org/view?docId=hb2c600258&brand=calisphere, accessed 5 April 2012.
528
Grace Lewis and Robert Dierlam, “School for Japanese Evacuees,” The Clearing House 17 (1943): 280. On the
relationship between the Victory Book Campaign and the WRA, see Andrew B. Wertheimer, “Japanese American
Community Libraries in America’s Concentration Camps, 1942-1946” (PhD diss., University of Wisconsin, 2004),
99-109.
529
James, Exile Within, 37.
530
Heather Fryer, Perimeters of Democracy: Inverse Utopias and the Wartime Social Landscape in the American
West (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2010), 4, 3. In Fryer’s telling, this constellation included relocation
camps, Indian reservations, Los Alamos, and temporary war-worker settlements like Vanport outside Portland,
Oregon.

197
	  

spaces of the West went from feeling free to feeling threatening—especially with the seemingly
sudden realization that people of color, and “un-American” political minorities, were so
disturbingly present, and especially in moments of turmoil and conflict—and so called out for
arrangement, for management.
“The Project served the war,” Reid wrote, but it turns out he didn’t even know the half of
it.531 Taos County was—like Granada—a site for learning lessons in the shadow of guard towers,
for figuring out how to fold unpredictable emotions into steady systems, for papering over
dissident ways of being or unruly alternatives, for designing and managing a bureaucracy of
belonging. These were lessons were put hard to work during the war, certainly. But it would
really be after it was all over, as an apparently new world (and a new and colder war) began, that
they would fully pay off.

“We Have Extended the Frontiers”: Reading Progress & the Past in West Germany
At the June 1952 dedication of the American Memorial Library in Berlin, Secretary of
State Dean Acheson declared that the building was a “symbol of our common cause,” of the
dedication to knowledge that both America and Germany shared. But the United States also
offered something new. “We are indebted to the Old World for the basis of our cultural heritage,”
he explained, “but we have extended the frontiers of knowledge to the common man.”532 With
that sentence, Acheson may or may not have succeeded in extending any frontiers of knowledge
to anyone, common or otherwise. But he did extend the frontiers of America, and specifically the
history of their occupation and incorporation, to the project of Cold War information
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

531

Reid, It Happened, 97.
Dean Acheson, “Truth and Freedom,” Information Bulletin (July 1952): 11. He continued, noting that knowledge
“is the property of everyone who strives earnestly to attain it.” As we saw in Chapter Two, however, notions of
property are very tricky ground on which to make claims for access to information.

532

198
	  

management. Nations establish authority in part from an ability to span seemingly disparate
moments and seemingly distant spaces. As we have seen, the Taos County Project accomplished
this by connecting 1940s New Mexico to the earlier occupation and incorporation of land
acquired under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, and by linking Taos to the geographic breadth
of the nation-state. This section will show how Taos’s frontier, and its spearhead the bookmobile,
became useful a decade later and halfway around the world. We will look at how programs,
especially in West Germany, borrowed assumptions, techniques, and vocabularies that connected
Cold War politics to those of the frontier. In the process, we will see how the bookmobile’s
mobility, when combined with its technological constancy across the two times and spaces and
its facility for building communities, made it an ideal tool for extending—and then
incorporating—the frontiers of knowledge and of belonging.
As Acheson spoke, U.S. bookmobiles were crisscrossing the West German countryside
(and West Berlin), amplifying U.S. information efforts there.533 (Focused on reaching local
populations, these bookmobiles were distinct from the military versions that served soldiers
stationed in Europe and around the world.)534 The bookmobiles—by 1957 there would be 24—
were attached to existing U.S. Information Centers in West German cities and Berlin, known as
America Houses, or Amerika Hauser. These centers offered lectures, showed films, distributed
publicity about American programs, and, crucially, housed libraries, which were the “growing-

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

533

The bookmobiles joined other efforts to put American information on wheels in Germany and the rest of western
Europe. In the first years of the 1950s, the Marshall Plan offices sent caravans—on trains and unfolding trucks—to
places like Germany, Greece, Holland, and Italy to promote the Plan. See Masey and Morgan, Cold War
Confrontations, 8-35.
534
“Books follow the American soldier wherever he goes,” as one report put it. “Books travel the Berlin airlift. They
fall out of the sky to soldiers in remote jungle outposts and isolated arctic weather stations. Traveling up and down
the European continent, the soldier knows that the bookmobile is not far behind.” Josephine Ripley, “Global Army
Library,” Christian Science Monitor, March 24, 1949. On military bookmobiles in the Pacific, see Benjamin Fine,
“Books as Weapons to End War Urged,” New York Times, June 20, 1946.

199
	  

soil” and “backbone” for all other information activities.535 Stocked primarily with Germanlanguage translations of American books (from popular novels to medical reference texts), these
libraries, like most Amerika Haus programming, had two main purposes. The first was to offer
information that countered wartime propaganda, helping Germans, as one public relations officer
put it in 1950, “realize that America was more than a nation of lady wrestlers, bloody strikes and
boogie-woogie fiends such as Hitler portrayed.”536 The second was to prevent West Germans
from falling victim to the siren song of communism amid postwar “chaos” and frequently
“explosive” inequality.537 These proximate goals—endearing America to non-Americans and
keeping them away from Soviet influence—were key not just to American programs in Germany
but also to similar programs around the world. While these smaller aims were not those pursued
in Taos, the ultimate goal of the programs, to use information to emotionally and politically
incorporate those perceived as foreign into American systems, most certainly was. Bookmobiles,
as we have seen, were particularly adept at this sort of incorporation. And so they were put to
work for the Amerika Hauser, serving small towns in the Landkreise (districts) their headquarters
occupied, and also by other federal agencies in places like Libya, Indonesia, Mexico, and the
Philippines.
This section and the next will focus on Germany for two reasons. First, the records for
U.S. bookmobile programs in Indonesia, Mexico, and the Philippines were classified at the time
research for this project was completed. (They have since, after I submitted a Freedom of
Information Act request, been declassified.) The program records from Germany and Libya, on
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

535

“Amerika Haus,” Information Bulletin 148 (November 1948): 20; Management and Budget Division and Office
of Public Affairs, The America Houses: A Study of the U.S. Information Center in Germany (Office of the U.S. High
Commissioner for Germany, 1953), 17.
536
Haynes R. Mahoney, “Windows to the West,” Information Bulletin (August 1950): 4.
537
“Bookmobile Report 1952;” Box 2; Library Programs Division, Special Collections Branch, Oversize
Scrapbooks, 1947-1958; Records of the United States Information Agency, Records Group 306; National Archives
and Records Administration (College Park, Maryland), 3.

200
	  

the other hand, were never classified and were therefore available for research. Second, thanks to
a variety of factors (including the their relationship to the High Commission for Occupied
Germany, their proximity to the command’s many photographers, and luck, among others), the
Amerika Haus bookmobile programs were rather lavishly documented, at least compared to most
similar programs, including those back home in the U.S. (Except, of course and intriguingly, the
Taos County Project.) Staff at the Amerika Haus in Giessen, for example, created a printed
scrapbook full of photos of the bookmobile and its patrons. Staffers in Mannheim created an
elaborate “diary” of their program’s first eight weeks, with photographs pasted in. Still more
photographs and descriptions were published in in the High Command’s monthly magazine, the
Information Bulletin. And U.S. Information Service staff undertook an internal evaluation of the
program’s effectiveness, complete with statistics and quotations from patrons. The openness and
richness of the records for West Germany is a quirk of archival categorization and preservation,
but its consequences are anything but unhappy. In fact, West Germany is an ideal place to watch
Americans “extend the frontiers” and U.S. bookmobiles repeat and reimagine the lessons of Taos.
It is hard to picture, really, a site of U.S. Cold War programs less like rural New Mexico than
West Germany. And yet they are linked, in ways that are unacknowledged and probably
unintentional but also undeniably, again and again, there. Specifically, what we will see in West
Germany is the deployment of bookmobiles as instruments of progress for a new age. But
ironically, as in Taos, it is a progress—a bright and shining future—that depended on a long
history of incorporating frontiers by managing space and community.
Indeed, bookmobiles in West Germany were to be, once again, “powerful spearhead[s]
for almost unlimited progress,” as Reid had described the Taos vehicle.538 Surviving scrapbooks
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
538

Reid, It Happened, 48.

201
	  

and other records reveal a visual and textual vocabulary shared by the Amerika Hauser and the
Taos County Project. One photograph from a scrapbook documenting the Giessen Amerika Haus
bookmobile [FIGURE 17] strikingly reprises multiple themes crucial to the mission and framing
of the Taos program. The bookmobile fills the central foreground of the image as it fills the
narrow dirt road on which it sits surrounded by fachwerk (half-timbered) buildings with stone
foundations. As with Taos’s adobe, the smooth metal of the bookmobile, highlighted here by the
shiny Americanness of the GMC logo, stands in sharp contrast to architecture that serves as
visual code for the rough and unrefined past, for that which is quaint but which will be overcome.
(It is also worth noting, too, that this photo also reprises the likely still-familiar image of large
American vehicles entering and occupying German towns and cities, as in Taos the minuteman
poster had echoed another history of invasion and occupation.)
The bookmobile also towers over the only human visible—an exceedingly small child,
who looks intently up at the vehicle—and, quite importantly, over the iron frame of an oldfashioned plow. The Amerika Hauser did not aim directly to transform indigenous farming
practices, unlike in Taos, but the changing lives of farmers factored significantly into the
program. According to the introduction to the Giessen scrapbook, “the arduous but happy and
historic isolation of the farmer” was at an end, replaced by a “hunger now for information…a
desire for knowledge; and insistance [sic] on the facts, the trends, the imminencies.” The
bookmobiles were meant to fulfill this emerging hunger with the right sort of information—and
even more importantly in the right sort of way. “Now, through personal contact, through the
printed word and through films projected from the Bookmobile,” the introduction intones in
terms that should sound mostly familiar, “the country folk are being told about the dangers of

202
	  

Communism, the values of cooperation, the blessings of democracy.”539 With a fear of
communism encroaching from the East taking the place of the fear of aborted Americanism in
the Southwest, the methods and lessons of Taos found a home on a new continent. Cooperation
(if administered by a federal agency) and democracy (if controlled in advance) ride along on the
bookmobile and incorporate new spaces and new people into a new future.
This image of “progress” was not without its skeptics, especially as progress and
Americanness came—as they had in Taos—to be conflated, and the process of Americanizing
seemed to become as important as the result. On the Mannheim bookmobile’s fourth trip to the
village of Ladenburg, a photographer came along. He wanted to use as a model the town crier,
who had been employed by the bürgermeister to promote the bookmobile program. The crier was
game, but as the Mannheim diary records, a city clerk “tried to discourage the town-crier from
having his picture taken, saying that he would not pose for an American photographer for
anything in the world, because it might give the Americans the idea that Germans are a backward
people, who don’t even know modern means of communication.”540 The bürgermeister agreed
that it was a troubling idea, and it was not until the bookmobile staff promised not to release the
photo to newspapers that he relented. The skepticism was not entirely misplaced, judging by the
photograph that resulted and was pasted into the diary [FIGURE 18]. In it, the crier stands—with
a grizzled, bespectacled, slightly confused-looking face—bell in hand, astride a bicycle. Behind
him hangs a row of posters, smooth and clean against the rough and dirty wall, advertising the
bookmobile. From their sans serif fonts to their graphic two-toned images of a bookmobile and a
book, the posters shout modernity and innovation. The crier, on the other hand, isn’t even caught
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

539

Ex Libris: Giessen Box 2; Library Programs Division, Special Collections Branch, Oversize Scrapbooks, 19471958; Records of the United States Information Agency, Records Group 306; National Archives and Records
Administration (College Park, Maryland).
540
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 28.

203
	  

mid-cry; on his outmoded vehicle, with his outmoded communications technology, he shouts
nothing at all, frozen before harbingers of the new.541 Another photo, in which the crier appears
even more frozen in time as villagers look on, found its way into the Information Bulletin, rather
violating the staff’s pledge to keep the photos private [FIGURE 19]. In both, the old man and his
bell represent, in contrast to the shiny bookmobile, a personal and ultimately fallible distribution
of information.542
Other photos taken along West German bookmobile routes show that, as in Taos, this
progress would require not just moving forward but doing so while looking back. For this
bureaucracy, time was not an entirely straight line but instead was folded back in order to smooth
out the past and facilitate unobstructed transit into a glorious future. The Americanization of
Taos depended on the cheerful return and revision of white occupation and annexation of the
land, in the form of a white soldier watching over the county’s boisterous children, or of young
readers enjoying the rip-roaring fun of a Western novel. Surprisingly, something very similar is
at work in West Germany. It is not the occupation of Germany that returns but rather, again and
oddly, that of the American West. In the Giessen scrapbook, the first image of a German
engaging with a specific book is of a young boy happily reading a book called Lederstrumpf, the
cover of which is emblazoned with a painting of a Native American man, in three-quarter profile,
wearing a feather headdress [FIGURE 20]. The book is one of James Fenimore Cooper’s
Leatherstocking Tales, published between 1827 and 1841, which depict the life of Natty Bumppo.
The character was an archetypical frontiersman, steadily advancing west to stay just beyond the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

541

The town of Edingen, which is on the bookmobile’s route, had a 70-loundspeaker P.A. system installed, a fact
that is mentioned in the diary but not—unlike the crier—immortalized on film. “Bookmobile Report 1952,” 15.
542
It is not a coincidence that the Giessen scrapbook plays a similar contrast, between old and new kinds of mobility
and communication, for laughs. “The word [of the bookmobile’s arrival] was passed along—sometimes slowly…”
the caption reads under a photograph dominated by a cow and a wagon carrying yet another iron plow. Ex Libris:
Giessen.

204
	  

bleeding edge of federal control. He was, according to Cooper’s preface, “a veteran of the forest,
who having commenced his career near the Atlantic, had been driven by the process of
increasing and unparalleled advance of population, to seek a final refuge against society in the
broad and tenantless plains of the west.”543 The books are, in some ways then, a chronicle of the
supposedly inexorable, inevitable extension of federal power in the West. So what is it doing on
the Giessen bookmobile? The caption of the photo gives a clue: “Lederstrumpf…for Lederhans,”
it proclaims, punning on the prevalence of lederhosen (leather breeches) among the boys who
visit the bookmobile. But it is more than a pun; it links the German boy to Leatherstocking
himself, creating a temporal and cultural overlap. This happens again on the next page, when
another young boy intently reads Robert Louis Stevenson’s Buffalo Bill [FIGURE 21]. “Boof-aloo Beel (‘Buffalo Bill’) still has his admirers,” the caption notes. Still, despite the fact that such
cultural artifacts were far from unpopular in the 1950s. Still, which puts the boy in the audience
of the Wild West Show, decades past, watching the creation and perpetuation of the idea of the
wild frontier even as federal troops and federal agencies extended control over it.544 A
photograph published in the Information Bulletin shows that Buffalo Bill was also popular
outside Mannheim; children raise books in a forest of mostly unidentifiable titles punctuated by
two copies of the frontier novel [FIGURE 22]. And in another Information Bulletin photo
[FIGURE 23]—captioned “American Indian books are popular with German boys”—there is

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

543

James Fenimore Cooper, The Prairie: A Tale (New York: Hurd and Houghton, 1871 [1827]), x.
For a look at how Buffalo Bill—and frontiers more generally—had been useful to Europeans a half-century
earlier, see Louis S. Warren, “Buffalo Bill Meets Dracula: William F. Cody, Bram Stoker, and the Frontiers of
Racial Decay,” American Historical review 107 (2002): 1124-1157.

544

205
	  

another boy, with another book, emblazoned with another Native American man in another
headdress, this time carrying a tomahawk, an emblem of past violence.545
At the same time, the more recent cataclysmic violence appears only rarely in the
Amerika Haus bookmobile records. The Americans comment about the devastation of World
War II internally, but on those few moments when the war emerges in the relationship between
Germans and the bookmobile, it emerges within a frame of oddly happy memories. The Giessen
scrapbook, for example, shows Wilhelm Frischholz standing smilingly in front of the
bookmobile, holding a book and a dachshund, and quotes him saying that “Amerika is a good
place to visit—even as a prisoner of war” [FIGURE 24].546 Mostly, though, the world war is
absent where the conquest of the West is excessively present. “Needless to say,” noted the
Mannheim diary, “the boys all asked for books about ‘Cowboys’ and ‘Indians.’”547 Needless to
say, but, nevertheless, they said it and showed it over and over again.548 Why? Connections
between Germany and the frontier were, in some ways, striking equivalences to draw. Germany
had recently and disastrously undertaken its own campaign of expansion and incorporation, and
initial American presence in the western zones was meant to prevent the possibility of another
attempt. But by the 1950s, the continued presence of institutions like the Amerika Hauser had
more to do with a new conflict than with the one most recently past. This new conflict—between
capitalism and communism, between the United States and the Soviet Union—required a rapid
revision of the recent past. Germany, at least the western section, was now an ally, as was Japan
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

545

Another photograph in the Giessen scrapbook shows two young boy eagerly reading National Geographic,
suggesting the continued relevance of a different textual model of imperialism, as well.
546
Ex Libris: Giessen.
547
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 10.
548
There is some indication that the Mannheim bookmobile, at least, did not stock similar books for adults. “We
explained again and again that detective and western-stories were not on our shelves,” the diary reads, shortly after
explaining how popular similar children’s books were. “Bookmobile Report 1952,” 10.

206
	  

(where U.S. bookmobiles also roamed in the early 1950s), and the recently, if always awkwardly,
familial visage of Uncle Joe was now an unquestioned enemy.549
A 1952 article in the Information Bulletin noted that “boys are mostly interested in books
of adventure or the ever-popular stories about American Indians,” as if that popularity was a
static fact and not a recurrence with political causes and political consequences.550 In order to
enroll Germans in this new struggle and to bring them into an American future, the Amerika
Hauser folded time. Like the Mad Magazine fold-ins that would become popular a decade later,
the consumption of frontier literature made it so the present and the distant past met, obscuring
the recent past and offering a brand new image in the process. Here, though, in contrast to Taos,
the availability and popularity of these books folded not only time but space. The frontier West
was overlaid onto Cold War West Germany, casting Germans as capitalist cowboys against the
dangerous Indians of communism. The previous, disastrous German militancy is gone, and a
noble tradition of overcoming frontiers became a more useful past.
This is what the Amerika Haus staff seemed to intend, but that isn’t, of course, the end of
the story. Just as it is possible, even likely, that teenagers in Taos read “popular Western fiction”
for reasons oblique to those Reid intended—to know what white Americans were saying about
them, to gain a fluency in the tropes of the larger American culture, for what they experienced as
sheer pleasure—it is pretty much inevitable that German children picked up Westerns for a range
of reasons that eluded, or even evaded, Amerika Haus staffers. Stories of the American West had
been popular in Germany for well over a half-century before the American occupation, thanks in
large part to works by Karl May, a German who did not leave Europe until shortly before his
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

549

On bookmobiles and books in the Japanese occupation, see William H. Stewart, “The American occupation of
Japan 65 years ago,” Saipan Tribute, September 14, 2010, available at
http://www.saipantribune.com/newsstory.aspx?newsID=102959&cat=22.
550
Liselotte Goldbeck, “Library on Wheels,” Information Bulletin (April 1952): 4.

207
	  

death.551 And after the war, Westerns remained extraordinarily popular in West Germany, far
beyond the reach of the Amerika Haus bookmobiles (if not beyond the reach of American
cultural imperialism more generally).552 Importantly, there is no indication that this fact had
anything to do with the presence of these books on the Amerika Haus bookmobiles, which aimed
to highlight “American accomplishments” in their collection, not to respond to local desires.553
But the books were received into a context the staffers seem not to have fully understood.
Mays’s extraordinarily influential books, the books that established the Western tradition in
Germany, explicitly invited identification with Native American protagonists and a rejection of
modernity and industry, precisely the values the Amerika Hauser were meant to promote. Julian
Crandall Hollick writes that, in Europe, the American West “has been…a mythical place to stage
their own adventures,” and thus, we might add, not a place to do with America at all.554 (Just as,
we might say, the Amerika Haus bookmobiles’ adventures in the German countryside often had
less to do with outreach to Germans than they did with internal questions about what it meant to
be American in the Cold War.) There was certainly mapping going on, and the folding of time,
but it remains tantalizingly uncertain what shape that map, and that time, would take in the minds
of German readers.
At times, this spatial folding, and its uncertain reception, could take place on a seemingly
smaller, differently gendered scale. In Ketsch, near Mannheim, “[t]he books by L. Ingalls Wilder

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

551

See Tassilo Schneider, “Finding a New Heimat in the Wild West: Karl May and the German Western of the
1960s,” Journal of Film and Video 47 (1995): 50-66; Lutz P. Koepnick, “Unsettling America: German Westerns and
Modernity,” Modernism/Modernity 2 (1995): 1-22.
552
According to Joe Hembus’s Western-Lexikon, a German encyclopedia of the genre, there were 1,324 Westerns
released on film or television in Germany between 1945 and 1985. Schneider, “Finding a New Heimat,” 50.
553
Management and Budget Division and Office of Public Affairs, The America Houses, 131.
554
Julian Crandall Hollick, “The American West in the European Imagination,” Montana: The Magazine of Western
History 42 (1992): 17.

208
	  

are favorites with the little girls,” the diary explains.555 Only boys can be cowboys, it seems, but
it is not only boys who tame frontiers. As Robert Moeller has described, postwar West Germany
experienced a crisis around “the ‘woman question,’” with communism as one
“powerful…negative point of reference.”556 And, in answer, the Amerika Hauser imported a
contemporary interest in “containment” (on geopolitical and, as Elaine Tyler May argues,
domestic levels), as well as a much older tradition of using the home as a microcosm of and
testing ground for national expansion.557 Amy Kaplan has insisted that westward expansion in
the nineteenth century depended on a slippage between the “domestic” (the home) and the
“domestic” (the nation) that allowed the potential dangers of the American West to be worked
out in concerns about white domesticity in the more familiar East.558 It is not, in this context, a
coincidence that the first American bookmobile to reach German soil was part of an exhibition of
American buildings and domestic technology in Hanover, or that it carried materials on
architecture and home economics.559 (Or, for that matter, that the American National Exhibition
in Moscow had both a bookmobile and a kitchen, which occasioned the infamous “Kitchen
Debate,” on display.) The circulation of Wilder’s books mapped her “Little House”—like the
frontier itself, sometimes precarious but always ultimately resolved into a vision of domestic
cohesion—onto German homes still riven by demographic, sexual, and cultural crises.560 It
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
555

“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 24. In U.S.-occupied postwar Japan, General Head Quarters carefully censored and
limited book publication but approved of and encouraged the distribution of Wilder’s The Long Winter, which
became hugely popular. See Suzuki Noriko, “Japanese Democratization and the Little House Books: The Relation
between General Head Quarters and The Long Winter in Japan after World War II,” Children’s Literature
Association Quarterly 31 (2006): 65-86.
556
Robert G. Moeller, Protecting Motherhood: Women and the Family in the Politics of Postwar West Germany
(Berkeley: University of California, 1993), 4-5.
557
On “domestic containment,” see Elaine Tyler May, Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era
(New York: Basic Books, 2008 [1998]).
558
Amy Kaplan, Anarchy of Empire, 23-50
559
“Homes for Better Living,” Information Bulletin (September 1951): 49.
560
On these crises, see Elizabeth Heineman, What Difference Does a Husband Make?: Women and Marital Status in
Nazi and Postwar Germany (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999), 75-175; Dagmar Herzog, Sex After

209
	  

linked postwar uncertainty back to a different, more successful project of incorporation, and
forward to a righteous struggle against communism. Thus, on nesting scales (home, farm, village,
Landkreis, nation) orchestrated by American bureaucrats, West Germany was to take its place in
the future.

“Uncontrolled Sources”: Open Shelves and the Limits of Managed Democracy
As in Taos, this transformation was to take place thanks to a bit of democracy symbolized
and made possible by the bookmobile. In West Germany, that democratic fragment was not the
town meeting. It was the open shelf. As a public relations officer with the Allied High
Commission explained, “[t]he traditional German library is a ‘fortress of culture’ which guards
its books with jealous care,” with closed stacks and onerous requirements (including character
references) for potential borrowers.561 In the U.S. Information Centers, by contrast, “the German
visitor was not only invited, but urged by a friendly librarian to wander among the bookshelves
and take his choice.”562 Open shelves were nothing particularly new in most American public
libraries, but they surprised patrons at U.S. Information Service libraries around the world, as
one U.S.I.S. official remembered years later.563 But it was not novelty alone, or simply the
increased accessibility of books, that accounted for the open shelf’s influence. “This transfer of

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Fascism: Memory and Morality in Twentieth-Century Germany (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005), 101140; Moeller, Protecting Motherhood; Poiger, Jazz, Rock, and Rebels, 71-105, 168-205.
561
Mahoney, “Windows,” 4.
562
Mahoney, “Windows,” 4. See also Robert Behrens, “Democracy Stalks the Library,” Information Bulletin
(February 1951): 35; Jean Kinnaird, “Information Uncensored,” Information Bulletin (December 1951): 14.
563
Wilson P. Dizard, Jr., Inventing Public Diplomacy: The Story of the U.S. Information Agency (Boulder: Lynne
Rienner, 2004), 93, 179. For a collection of articles from the turn of the century on the establishment of the openshelf model in the U.S., see Laura M. Janzow, ed. The Library Without the Walls (New York: H.W. Wilson, 1927),
151-236.

210
	  

U.S. library practices abroad not only spread American ideas,” the official explained, “it also
provided a working example of how a democratic society educates itself.”564
Acheson, for his part, used his speech to draw a bright line between freedom and tyranny,
between the open shelf and the closed:
There are nations today who seem to be deathly afraid of this freedom. Free access to
knowledge, open shelves, unchecked selection of books—all this is anathema to them.
They have placed their books under lock and key, they ban the written word and spoken
word when it originates with uncontrolled sources. They punish severly [sic] those who
seek the truth wherever it may be found.
Nothing can point up in more telling fashion the nature of the conflict which
divides our world today than this: where others retire behind barbed wire, we open wide
the doors to knowledge so that the truth may guide us.565
What Acheson and others did was to map time (tradition vs. progress) onto geopolitical and
cultural space (open vs. closed, west vs. east, capitalist vs. communist) in important ways. The
irony, though, was that the open shelves, those symbols of freedom, were stocked with books
chosen very carefully to determine, in advance, what truth a reader might find there.566 A 1953
report, for example, explained that in book selection, “the aim is always toward showing
American accomplishments” in various fields, and it proposed an accelerated “weeding program”
designed in part to remove books “which have no relationship to the objectives of the America
House program.”567 There was nothing particularly unusual about this; virtually all libraries use
selection criteria in building their collections. But the vast gulf between propagandistic internal
plans and democratic external rhetoric, threw a key assumption into contrast. This was the
assumption, which we saw at work in Taos, that the best kind of independence is independence
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

564

Dizard, Inventing, 179.
Acheson, “Truth and Freedom,” 11-12.
566
Controversy raged in 1953, for example, over bans preventing certain books from finding their way into USIS
libraries. See Dorothy Ferebee, “Amerika Haus and the Bookmobile Overseas,” New Journal and Guide, July 25,
1953.
567
Management and Budget Division and Office of Public Affairs, The America Houses, 131.

565

211
	  

arranged by someone else, that self-government is best when the self doesn’t get too involved in
governance.568
Not simply allowing patrons to come to books, but taking books to the people, the
bookmobile essentially turned the library inside-out and thus intensified the open-shelf ethos.
But this openness was supposed to be leavened by control—the library’s doors were to be open
but doors nonetheless—and so the bookmobile could prove dangerous when it took American
freedom on the road. On January 8, 1952, the Mannheim bookmobile went out on its first trip
ever, to Ketch. The results were not entirely expected. “We arrived punctually,” the diary reads,
and “were immediately beleagered [sic] by a swarm of noisy children, who greeted our arrival as
they would that of a circus.” The children kept coming, and “[i]n their eagerness…trampled the
grass and shrubs bordering the street.” The staff tried, at the mayor’s behest, to move to a
“vacant place where the children could do no harm, but by this time the storming crowds
jammed between the bookmobile and a house,” making it impossible to close the bookmobile’s
door, let alone move the vehicle. The personnel were exhausted, wishing for a break “to build up
strength for further service (and assault).” And no wonder, since they found themselves with
unexpected duties. The two assigned to help children choose books also ended up “acting as
policemen, in order to keep the interior…from being overcrowded,” a position the diary also
refers to as “act[ing] like a gate.”569 And yet the children kept “trying to storm the bookmobile”
long after they ran out of books for them.570 The next day, in Gross-Sachen, the “[c]hildren were

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

568

At one point, the Mannheim Amerika Haus offered to provide “a basic collection of American books in English”
to the Volksbücherei (people’s libraries) in three large towns in the Landkreis. “with the understanding that the
open-shelf-system for these collections be used.” “Bookmobile Report 1952,” 18.
569
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 10.
570
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 11.

212
	  

better controlled,” but the day after that, in Neulussheim? “Same thing! Crowds of children!”571
From this point on, the staff decided, children would be issued numbered cards determining
when they could access the bookmobile, and their hands would be examined before they were
allowed entry: “dirty hands, no books.”572
Rather a different vision, in other words, than Acheson’s unproblematic contrast of
American “open shelves” with Soviet (and Nazi) “books under lock and key.” The bookmobile is
“gate[d]” and guarded by makeshift police, its crisp punctuality contrasted to invading, animal
swarms. At the same time, the opposite of the children’s “galvanized” and “extremely
undisciplined” response was also rejected.573 The adult population in Ketch, where the children
were among the worst-behaved, was described as “rather heavy and uninspired.”574 And an
account of the bookmobile’s first trip to Hemsbach is accompanied by a note that the village’s
residents “are known as being ‘stur’ (stubborn and narrow-minded).”575 And, indeed, the
Hemsbach adults, far from storming the bookmobile, were suspicious: “What you are lending
books free of charge? There is something funny about this.”576 Too much enthusiasm? Calls for
“discipline” and order.577 Not enough eagerness? Then you are not, alas, a “good public.”578

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
571

“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 11-12. Intriguingly, it seems that U.S. military librarians could run into similar
problems with American children in the Philippines. The library at Clark Air Base held “story hours” for the
children of occupying troops in the late 1940s. They ran into trouble, though, when serving fruit juice afterwards
caused an overwhelming crowd. The librarians discontinued juice service and instituted multiple story hours to ease
the chaos. It is difficult not to see in this (very faint) echoes of the Lamarckian racial theories—which in the imperial
context held that prolonged exposure to a tropical climate would turn white Americans savage—that had so worried
the occupation government a century earlier. Ripley, “Global Army Library.” On theories of health in the occupied
Philippines, see Anderson, Colonial Pathologies.
572
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 13.
573
Goldbeck, “Library on Wheels,” 3; “Bookmobile Report 1952,” 17.
574
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 20.
575
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 22.
576
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 22.
577
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 16.
578
“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 15.

213
	  

The difficult, limited position that the American bookmobile’s notion of freedom and
openness offered German patrons can be seen in two pairs of photos pasted into the Mannheim
diary. Each offers a rather Manichean view of bookmobile behavior, and together they converge
on an exceedingly (perhaps even impossibly) narrow window of proper conduct. The first pair
[FIGURE 25], from Neulussheim, contrasts the orderliness and guidance of proper library usage
with the horror of the swarm. In the first image, the Mannheim U.S. Information Center director
Naomi Huber stands in the bookmobile’s doorway, but decidedly not because she must act as a
gate. There are, after all, only two children in the photo, both bright and blond, looking intently
on as Huber “advises” them. They stand a respectful distance from the bookmobile, and the
displays of American life on the side are clearly visible. In the second photo, a group of children
“storm “ the bookmobile, pressed tightly up against its side, facing every which way, jostling,
laughing. The bookmobile’s displays are blocked and its door is closed. Just above the crowd in
the frame sits a horse-drawn wagon; the left edge of the photo shows the bookmobile, the right
an undisciplined mass and an archaic technology. The second pair [FIGURE 26] comes from
Hemsbach and purports to show the shift there from “scepticism [sic]” to “enthusiasm.” The first
photo depicts several worried- or confused-looking children, an old woman, and a hostileseeming man—none hold books or, for that matter, seem eager to hold them in the future. Not an
ideal audience for a bookmobile, certainly. In the photo meant to capture enthusiasm, a mass of
children are, finally, eager for books, but they are so eager that they push and shove, surrounding
an adult who is trying to distribute books. Ultimately, this eagerness is practically
indistinguishable from the unacceptably unruly crowds the staff bemoans; the “bad” half of the
first pair and the “good” half of the second are close, indeed. Storming, after all, can look a lot
like enthusiasm.

214
	  

The open shelf in Germany thus offered an odd microcosm of the frontier back in the U.S.
Manly independence was prized as truly American but was always at the same time about to be
dissolved into America; the chaotic frontier and the frontier’s orderly end together made the
nation. And so, paradoxically, the open shelf offered Germans freedom in order to make them
easier to control. Both too much liberty (read: anarchy) and too little eagerness (read: tyranny)
threatened this delicate, impossible balance and thus the coherence of the project of
Americanization. In the end, nothing captured the heart of the Amerika Haus bookmobile project,
of the open shelf, quite like a photo printed in an Intelligence Report pictorial about the Berlin
bookmobile [FIGURE 27]. In it, the director of the Amerika Haus installs “security straps”
across the front of the bookmobile’s open shelves. These straps (which were, in Mannheim,
“wood-slats”) were meant to “keep the books in the shelves while the bookmobile is in
transit.”579 Offering insurance against mobility, the straps and slats were practical solutions to a
practical problem—but also and at the same time perfect symbols of the constraints that
animated the bookmobile’s freedom.
It turned out, though, that open shelves (filled with carefully-chosen books) were not
quite enough to incorporate Germans into “American” communities. The U.S. Information
Service, like the Taos County Project, was obsessed with measuring patrons and impact. The
diary and scrapbook were attempts to offer qualitative reporting on the programs. But the
Mannheim diary also included a statistical section, in keeping with the zest for numbers
displayed in Taos, and rendered as a series of layered, overlapping graphs and charts [FIGURE
28]. Demographic data is sliced and diced to a point that—while colorful (pie charts showing
patron careers are rendered in vibrant yellow, pink, and blue)—it is nearly incomprehensible.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

579

“Bookmobile Report 1952,” 13.

215
	  

One thing is clear, though, and it cannot have been very encouraging. At best (in Gross-Sachen),
12% of the local population used the bookmobile, and at worst (in cranky Hemsbach) the number
was only 2%. The four towns where the bookmobile did not serve local schoolchildren had the
lowest rates of use (from 2% to 5.2%), suggesting that residents who lacked a headmaster to herd
them were unlikely to bother visiting the bookmobile.
This was a consistent problem. A comprehensive 1957 internal report on the Amerika
Haus bookmobile programs—based on a survey of over 6,000 Germans as well as interviews—
found that while 64% of residents in bookmobile service areas knew about the program, only 4%
were current users (another 4% had used it in the past).580 Most of those who did not use the
bookmobile (70%) did not do so because they had no time or interest. “My business takes all my
time; I’m dead tired in the evening,” one respondent said.581 A small minority (2%) explicitly
rejected the bookmobile’s American content. “I’m not interested in American books,” one said,
rather mildly. “I’m not at all interested in American affairs,” said another, a bit more firmly. And
another took it all the way: “The literature they offer there is un-German.”582 A healthy chunk
those who were unaware of the bookmobile said, after being informed, that they still would not
use it. In addition to the usual reasons (no time), there were more anti-American ones. “I’m
against our being swamped with American literary products. We have enough genius in Europe,”
one said.583 Eight percent of non-users said the bookmobile’s purpose was to spread American
propaganda (an intriguingly high 6% of users agreed), and four percent worried the goal was to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

580

Research Staff, The Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, Part I: Who Are the Bookmobile Users? (American
Embassy, Germany: United States Information Service, 1957), 1.
581
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 3.
582
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 4.
583
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 6. Additionally, at least two respondents rejected the very idea of a lending
library “for hygienic reasons.” This, of course, echoes the racial fears of book-borne venereal disease that terrified
the Calvert County magistrate five years earlier.

216
	  

Americanize Germans.584 “Perhaps they mean to win sympathies for America,” one respondent
speculated.585 “The idea is to impregnate the German people with American ideas,” said
another.586
There were small successes, but they were ultimately quite limited. Bookmobile users
were slightly better informed regarding basic facts about the U.S., about the Mutual Inspection
Plan, and about what the report termed the “atomic energy problem.”587 Users also were “clearly
more in harmony with American policy toward West Germany than…the non-users.”588 Users
were more likely to reject criticisms of Americans. Seventy-eight percent of users, compared to
63% of non-users, disagreed with the statement, “The Americans are presumptious [sic].”589 And
similar proportions rejected the curious “Americans are a traditionless nation and culturally
backward”—curious because Acheson’s speech, for example, suggested that a dearth of tradition
helped America have a surplus of culture.590 (Intriguingly, though, only 48% of users rejected the
statement, “Americans keep meddling in affairs of other countries.”)591 But there was a chickenor-egg problem here, though it remained largely unremarked. Were users already more
predisposed to American ideas, or did the bookmobile change their minds?592 The questions that
the surveys posed could not say, and staffers made no effort to ask ones that could. So the USIS
research staff was left in an awkward position, trumpeting encouraging data and muddling about,
a bit confused, with the more discouraging results.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

584

Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 24.
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 25.
586
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 26.
587
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 20-21.
588
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 27.
589
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 29.
590
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 29.
591
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, 29.
592
There was also, it seems, a bit more intellectual diversity among the users that the report explicitly acknowledges.
In the Mannheim diary, we are told that patrons in Edingen requested both books about the United States and
Marx’s Das Kapital. “Bookmobile Report 1952,” 17.

585

217
	  

In particular, they seemed stymied by what patrons were reading—or, perhaps more
precisely, what they weren’t reading. “[T]he type of books read fall [sic] somewhat short of the
ideal,” the report admits.593 The Americans opened shelves and channeled patrons past gates and
guards, but they could not actually and entirely control what the West Germans read. And it
seemed, too, that the users could not really be trusted. They did not steal books, like the
Muscovites, but they still were not entirely honest: “an actual count of books borrowed shows
that patrons take out fewer non-fiction books than they say they expect to take out.”594 People
tend to respond to surveys in ways that make them look better, certainly, and this was a relatively
small thing. But it was precisely such small things—such eruptions of local inconsistency in the
face of a towering bureaucracy—that troubled a project designed to establish, and then carefully
manage from above, democracy and community on scales running from the small to the large.
This uncertainty, this unreliability, was just one more reminder that managing from afar is tough
and unpredictable work, that margins cannot simply be gobbled up and assimilated without
consequence, that humans (and their desires, in particular) are not, in the end, very easily
controlled. So at the margins of U.S.-aligned Europe, at the edges of American military might—
at the nation’s geopolitical frontier—the U.S. government found again the problems, not just the
promise, of the American West.

“How the West is Being Won Over”: Coda
In the early 1970s, author Norbert Blei rode with a state bookmobile on a three-day run
through northwestern New Mexico. He was there to watch, as the subtitle to the 1975 American

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

593

594

Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, iii.
Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, iii.

218
	  

Libraries article he published about the experience put it, “how the West is being won over.”595
Three decades after Jesse Taylor Reid wrote about the Taos County Project, the incorporation of
the Southwest was still seen as unfinished and incomplete, and the adaptation of violent
metaphor to describe the bookmobile’s role in that process still seemed to make perfect sense.
Indeed, Blei’s essay captures, again and again, the stubborn persistence of the frontier—and thus
the concerns that drove the programs in Taos and West Germany—in fantasies of universal
connection. Blei accompanied two men on his trip, Jay Johnstone, an Anglo librarian, and Lee
Platero, a Navajo driver and clerk. Platero comes to stand in, ultimately, for the haphazard
incompleteness of Americanization. “He looks Contemporary Americana,” Blei writes. “He
harbors, however, the authentic Indian mystery of silence.”596 Beneath and within the appearance
of true and modern American identity hides something else entirely—not threatening, exactly,
but unsettling and un-American. As much as Blei tries to organize his article around the
movement of the bookmobile through geographic space (the trip from El Morro to Gallup to
Thoreau, and so on), he ultimately follows a different, but still familiar trajectory: the opening up
of indigenous mysteries to American knowledge. “I take a look at Platero again,” Blei writes. “I
would like to get under that silence.”597
In part, he does (though at times Platero frustrates this effort and “merges into
the…landscape”).598 As Blei philosophizes about time and distance as “the two inner and outer
imponderables in the New Mexican landscape,” for example, Lee tells him about “Navajo
time—which is no time at all.”599 This is, Blei realizes, why the bookmobile loses many of its
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

595

Norbert Blei, “Three-Day Run on a Navajo, New Mexican Spirit Trail,” American Libraries 6, no. 2 (1975): 86.
Blei, “Three-Day,” 97.
597
Blei, “Three-Day,” 99.
598
Blei, “Three-Day,” 99.
599
Blei, “Three-Day,” 98.

596

219
	  

books: They are stolen, but less by the patrons than by what he later calls “an old Indian, cosmic
landscape.”600 Out in the desert, it seems, the state does not effectively play with time and
space—time and space toy with it, preventing the successful process of Americanization. Platero
spent fifteen years “in the white man’s world” as a soldier and then a computer maintenance
professional in New York—his friends on the reservation, he explained, call him “the guy who
went east and forgot to turn around”—but even he is stuck in a past and on a landscape that has
not yet been smoothed.601 “Old fears,” like the sound of an owl in the woods, Blei writes of
Platero, “continue to haunt him.”602
But as was the case in Taos, and outside Mannheim, the most haunting old fears were
those of white officials and observers like Reid, Huber, and Blei. Out of a passion for
expansion—a passion for “bring[ing] the word,” as Blei put it, and for “be[ing] in the space”—
grew fears of untamed (untamable?) space, uncontrolled (uncontrollable?) bodies, and unsurmounted (insurmountable?) histories.603 Bookmobile programs, from New Mexico to West
Germany, sought to complete the work of expansion and close the uncertainties of the frontier.
Common consciousness would span the continent, and perhaps the globe, and the state would
finally be a coherent, complete whole. As we have seen, these two dreams (of common
consciousness and of political coherence) were, indeed, inextricably linked. But that link
exposed the limits of the dream of a common consciousness that was planned in advance, or
learned in the shadow of guard towers, or built on a deformed vision of the past, or managed
beyond all spontaneity.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

600

Blei, “Three-Day,” 102.
Blei, “Three-Day,” 99.
602
Blei, “Three-Day,” 99.
603
Blei, “Three-Day,” 96.

601

220
	  

Figures

Figure 13
From “Frontiers of the Future” (1937), Audio Productions,
Inc., and National Industrial Council, Prelinger Archives,
Internet Archive (http://archive.org/details/Frontier1937)

221
	  

	  

Figure14
From “Frontiers of the Future” (1937), Audio Productions,
Inc., and National Industrial Council, Prelinger Archives,
Internet Archive (http://archive.org/details/Frontier1937)

222
	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

Figure 15: Taos County, New Mexico. Taos County Project bookmobile visits
Llano San Juan, circulates books… (12/1941)
From Photographic Prints Documenting Programs and Activities of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics
and Predecessor Agencies; Records of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, 1876-1959, Record Group
83; National Archives and Records Administration (College Park, Maryland)

223
	  

Figure 16: Taos County, New Mexico. Taos County Project
bookmobile visits Llano San Juan, circulates books… (12/1941)
From Photographic Prints Documenting Programs and Activities of the Bureau of
Agricultural Economics and Predecessor Agencies

224
	  

Figure 17: American bookmobile in Giessen, West Germany
From Ex Libris: Giessen, Box 2, Library Programs Division, Special Collections Branch, Oversize Scrapbooks, 19471958; Records of the United States Information Agency, Records Group 306; National Archives and Records
Administration (College Park, Maryland)

225
	  

Figure 18: Town crier in Ladenberg
announces the bookmobile
From “Bookmobile Report 1952,” Box 2, Library
Programs Division, Special Collections Branch,
Oversize Scrapbooks, 1947-1958; Records of the
United States Information Agency, Records Group 306;
National Archives and Records Administration
(College Park, Maryland)

226
	  

	  

Figure 19: Town Crier in Ladenberg announces the bookmobile
Photo by Jacoby (HICOG), from Lisolette Goldbeck, “Library on Wheels,” Information Bulletin
(April 1952): 3

227
	  

Figure 20: Boy reads James Fenimore Cooper’s
Leatherstocking Tales
From Ex Libris: Giessen

228
	  

Figure 21: Boy reads Buffalo Bill
From Ex Libris: Giessen

229
	  

Figure 22: Children in Ketch return books
Photo by Jacoby (HICOG), from Goldbeck, “Library on Wheels”

230
	  

Figure 23: Boy with book
Photo by Jacoby (HICOG), from Goldbeck, “Library on Wheels”

Figure 24: Wilhelm and his dachshund
From Ex Libris: GIessen

231
	  

Figure 25: Order and chaos in Neulussheim
From “Bookmobile Report 1952”

232
	  

Figure 26: Skepticism and enthusiasm in Hemsbach
From “Bookmobile Report 1952”

233
	  

Figure 27: Security straps installed
From “Bookmobile of Berlin’s America House,” Information Bulletin (July 1952)

Figure 28: Patron data
From “Bookmobile Report 1952”

	  
	  

	  

234
	  

CHAPTER FOUR

“Hemingway Amidst Cheese and Crackers”:

Public Culture and the Coincidences of Consumer Capitalism
“I know I am solid and sound,
To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,
All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.”
–Walt Whitman (1855)604
“Can mass production of knowledge, now needed more urgently than motor cars or refrigerators, be
stepped up?”
–Malvina Lindsay (1946)605
“I’m all lost in the supermarket. I can no longer shop happily.”
–The Clash (1979)

In “A Supermarket in California” (1955), Allen Ginsberg describes a peculiar encounter
with the previous poet laureate of queer America. Perhaps surprisingly, they wander their way
into an iconic institution of consumer capitalism:
What thoughts I have of you tonight, Walt Whitman, for I walked down the
sidestreets under the trees with a headache self-conscious looking at the full moon.
In my hungry fatigue, and shopping for images, I went into the neon fruit
supermarket, dreaming of your enumerations!
What peaches and what penumbras! Whole families shopping at night! Aisles full
of husbands! Wives in the avocados, babies in the tomatoes—and you, Garcia Lorca,
what were you doing down by the watermelons?
…
We strode down the open corridors together in our solitary fancy tasting
artichokes, possessing every frozen delicacy, and never passing the cashier.
…
Will we walk all night through the solitary streets? The trees add shade to shade,
lights out in the houses, we’ll both be lonely.
Will we stroll dreaming of the lost America of love past blue automobiles in
driveways, home to our silent cottage?
Ah, dear father, graybeard, lonely old courage-teacher, what America did you
have when Charon quit poling his ferry and you got out on a smoking bank and stood

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
604

605

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 81.
Malvina Lindsay, “Race Against Ignorance,” Washington Post, July 11, 1946.

235
	  

watching the boat disappear on the black waters of Lethe?606
Ginsberg offers, here, a relationship between goods and literature that is both ironic and erotic; it
is about possession, about inspiration, about memory, about sensuality, about spectacle. And it is
also, like the traveling library, like Curious Missie, about distance and closeness. But here, it
seems, there is something possibly dangerous about nearness. The proximity of poets and
produce, of artists and artichokes, is both embrace and repudiation. It suggests a landscape
clotted with things but still “solitary,” still “lonely.” Objects and ideas, like bodies and brands,
rub together until we struggle to remember the difference between them. We are immersed first
in a sea of neon, then in the smoothing tide of suburbia, and then in the sorrowful amnesia of
Lethe—and the distinction between them fades and fades. The republic of letters and the
consumers’ republic collide in unexpected and unsettling ways.607
In his characteristic combination of play and darkness, Ginsberg took up in “A
Supermarket in California” a series of questions that had broad resonance as American
capitalism reoriented itself around consumption, and communities reoriented themselves in new
ways—physically, economically, emotionally—around the transportation and acquisition of
things.608 As we saw in Chapter One, out of the foment of the 1890s emerged an intense and
optimistic conviction that moving objects through space could create communities. By the 1950s,
as this conviction remade the American landscape, fantasies of what could be possible if there
were enough—roads, motors, information—began to fracture.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

606

Allen Ginsberg, “A Supermarket in California,” in Howl and Other Poems (San Francisco: City Lights Books,
2006 [1956]), 29-30.
607
On the “consumers’ republic,” see Lizabeth Cohen, A Consumer’s Republic: The Politics of Mass Consumption
in Postwar America (New York: Vintage, 2003), 127.
608
Rearranging political and physical geography around commerce was not entirely new in the postwar moment, of
course—as the history of canals, railroads, irrigation, and industrialization makes clear. But the intense remapping
and reorientation of local life had something of a new character, in a shift in infrastructure from raw materials to
finished products, and from creation to consumption as the principal activity of society.

236
	  

In the decades after the war, American economic and consumer cultures saw a fierce
contest between two groups with claims on common consciousness. First were the advocates of
perpetual growth, of the glory and promise of new objects, of democracy by purchase, of
equality at the checkout stand. A shared consumption of things, they believed, as Johnston and
Dewey had, would link the country together. But the second group found that the dream of a
common consciousness wrought by the circulation of things seemed newly a nightmare. What,
this later group wondered, might be the cultural consequences of organizing life around the
pursuit of objects? What happens when ideas (which often take material form) and merchandise
(which often expresses ideas) come to seem not just imbricated with one another but entirely
indistinguishable? What happens when what we hold in common is only that which is
purchased—if the “thick mesh” of social democracy turns out to be only a thin tissue of goods?
This chapter tells the story of libraries ultimately and largely siding with the first group, and of
the myriad consequences that decision wrought. Like Ginsberg and Whitman, this chapter
wanders its way into the supermarket and out onto the boulevards of America’s car culture. In
the process, and finding libraries there, the chapter traces the way postwar debates about
consumption influenced ideas about space, community, and public culture.
The 1950s and 1960s saw a flood of popular sociology and criticism that, worried about
the new consumer culture, tried to explain what Americans might actually have in common—
“what’s,” as John Kouwenhoven put it in 1961, “‘American’ about America.” Among these were
a number of works that worried that the answer was stuff. Kouwenhoven’s book was titled The
Beer Can by the Highway, poet-critic Randall Jarrell wrote a jeremiad he called A Sad Heart at
the Supermarket, and sociologist David Riesman asked the central question in a 1964 collection

237
	  

of essays: Abundance for What?609 Artists like Ginsberg and Andy Warhol created works that
played, to lighter and darker effect, with the fact that American culture seemed better suited to
the mass production and supermarket consumption of what Warhol called “harsh, impersonal
products” than with any older model of artistic genius or cultural value.610 And Dwight
Macdonald seconded that emotion, with his theory of “mass culture”—called such because “it is
solely and directly an article for mass consumption, like chewing gum.”611 Critics, artists, and
social scientists pondering postwar American identity repeatedly turned to the supermarket, as a
newly iconic institution and an epicenter of consumer culture, to understand the future of
American public life. (Even these “anxieties were products of abundance,” Michael Harrington
pointedly noted in 1962.612)
By contrast, in the postwar years, librarians were confronting reports that “other agencies
of mass communication reach far larger groups and reach more of them more frequently and
regularly” than libraries.613 Film, radio, and television each seemed in turn to upend culture and
displace books, and thus libraries, as the chief instruments of communication. But for many
librarians, this bred not contempt but envy, as they grew more and more eager to use the tools of
mass culture to promote public culture. As a result, they thought hard, and more optimistically,
about the emergent consumer society and its sparkling supermarkets. Tasked with not just
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

609

John A. Kouwenhoven, The Beer Can by the Highway: Essays on What’s “American” about America (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday, 1961); Randall Jarrell, A Sad Heart at the Supermarket (New York: Atheneum, 1962); David
Riesman, Abundance for What? (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1964).
610
“Warhol created a pertly designed window into the abyss, in a sense,” argues Gary Indiana, “erasing the sense of
spirituality that earlier generations had associated with art.” According to Indiana, Warhol’s famous 32 Soup Cans
(1962) forced viewers to “confront glut: a ceaseless proliferation of objects for sale, objects that defined modern
lives as quanta.” Gary Indiana, Andy Warhol and the Can that Sold the World (New York: Basic Books, 2010), 73.
611
Dwight MacDonald, “A Theory of Mass Culture,” in Mass Culture: The Popular Arts in America, ed. Bernard
Rosenberg and David Manning White (Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1958 [1957]), 59.
612
Michael Harrington, The Other America: Poverty in the United States (Baltimore: Penguin, 1968 [1962]), 9.
613
Bernard Berelson, The Library’s Public: A Report of the Public Library Inquiry of the Social Science Research
Council (New York: Columbia University Press, 1949), xi.

238
	  

reflecting on culture but building infrastructures for distributing it, librarians’ thoughts
sometimes took a strange material form. In the mid-twentieth century, and with special energy
after World War II—building on decades of experience using bookmobiles to appropriate a
burgeoning, consumerist car culture—public libraries in cities across the country (like Freeport,
Illinois; Evansville, Indiana; Augusta, Georgia; St. Louis, Missouri; Nashville, Tennessee;
Wichita, Kansas; Lincoln, Nebraska; and Troy, Ohio) engaged in a collective experiment by
opening booketerias [FIGURE 29; FIGURE 30]. These new spaces were small, mostly selfservice branch libraries located in the supermarkets that increasingly dotted the urban and
suburban landscape. Putting libraries inside grocery stores, librarians materialized the fantasies
and anxieties of people like Ginsberg and Jarrell. Booketerias themselves were never a hugely
popular model for library extension (branch libraries and bookmobiles would hold that title
throughout the twentieth century). But the booketeria’s place alongside the bookmobile in what
librarian Wyman Jones called the “era of colorful locational innovation” in library service was a
particularly illustrative one, especially since they quite literally put Garcia Lorca down by those
watermelons.614
Considering the bookmobile and the booketeria together, this chapter explores how
assumptions embedded in older definitions community were both laid bare and transformed by
the infiltration of market logic into everyday life. Melani McAlister has called on scholars to
“‘explain the coincidence’ that brings specific cultural products into conversation with specific

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

614

Jones argued in 1966 that that era had “more or less declined,” and that “[m]ost contemporary public library
administrations are dedicated to the notion that a branch should operate in a facility located and built for that
purpose,” rather than in leased or loaned space. This evaluation seems accurate, though Jones’s dismissal of
“locational innovation” failed to more fully understand the coincidences it gave rise to, and their reverberations far
beyond the specific administrative politics of branch location. Wyman H. Jones, “The Role of the Branch Library in
the Program of Metropolitan Library Service,” Library Trends 14 (1966): 402.

239
	  

political discourses.”615 And booketerias and bookmobiles embodied a broad coincidence of
public culture and consumer capitalism, a coincidence that illuminated and exacerbated
tendencies latent in the dream of common consciousness. Those tendencies—which often
confused buying power with citizenship and commercial goods with the common good—
ultimately mapped values of consumer capitalism onto spaces of public culture. As this chapter
will show, this mapping had two primary consequences: first, a collapse of the library’s public
role (as partial and problematic as it had been), and second, the decay of the cultural and physical
infrastructures necessary for equal participation, especially by the urban poor, in public life.
There is, as Rachel Bowlby points out, a long and “peculiar history of the relations
between book-selling and food-selling.”616 And Bowlby has insightfully tracked some of the
ways in which reading and supermarkets collided in the twentieth century.617 But in missing the
strange coincidence of the supermarket as what she calls “a public space” and the public library,
she misses an opportunity to think through not simply consumer capitalism’s effects on the book
but its effects on that quality of the book that the inventors of the traveling library held so dear:
its theoretical ability to embody and call forth a common consciousness.618 Some scholars have
argued persuasively that postwar print retained its ability to reflect and produce affective
communities, particularly among white, middle-class Americans.619 But, at the same time, the
rise of twentieth-century consumer culture transformed the ways it was possible to think about
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

615

Melani McAlister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East since 1945 (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2005 [2001]), 7.
616
Rachel Bowlby, Carried Away: The Invention of Modern Shopping (New York: Columbia University Press,
2002), 194. Bookstores, for example, actually pioneered the open-shelf, self-serve retail model that distinguished
supermarkets.
617
Bowlby, Carried Away, 187-210.
618
Bowlby, Carried Away, 188.
619
See, for example, Joan Shelley Rubin, The Making of Middlebrow Culture (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1992); Janice A. Radway, A Feeling for Books: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary Taste, and
Middle-Class Desire (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997); Travis, “What We Talk About When
We Talk About The New Yorker.”

240
	  

belonging to something larger than oneself, to think about being public.620 Stores, sociologist
Sharon Zukin claims, “are social spaces where people enact community and build a public
culture” based on “internalized rituals” and “modern values.” But because this particular way of
being public is “not a civic culture based on mutual obligation,” its version of community offers
a sharp and intriguing contrast to the thick mesh of social democracy.621 Indeed, libraries—
public institutions moving public culture through public space—present a particularly fruitful
opportunity to investigate how traditional conceptions of “public” and new forms of “culture”
diverged in the postwar period, and the consequences of that divergence for the shape of
belonging in the United States.
If in the postwar era, as Lizabeth Cohen has argued, “[f]aith in a mass consumption
postwar economy…stood for an elaborate, integrated ideal of economic abundance and
democratic political freedom,” then librarians worked hard to latch themselves to this “national
civil religion” that dominated the culture even as it failed to distribute freedom as efficiently as it
did material goods.622 Considering the booketeria alongside the bookmobile, this chapter argues
that the coincidence of libraries and supermarkets—like the bookmobile’s combination of
libraries and motors—emerged out of a seed left by the flowering and withering of
progressivism. This seed, a deep optimism about what it might mean to treat knowledge as
material and to design communities around infrastructures for the distribution of (textual)
objects, sprouted into a set of compromises with some profound and unexpected effects. In the
end, this is a story of the myriad consequences of latching libraries to consumer culture.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

620

See Warner, Publics and Counterpublics, 159-186.
Sharon Zukin, “The Social Space of Shopping: Mobilizing Dreams for Public Culture,” in Public Culture:
Diversity, Democracy, and Community in the United States, ed. Marguerite S. Shaffer (Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2008), 201.
622
Cohen, A Consumer’s Republic, 127.
621

241
	  

“Salvation in a Supermarket”: Origins
Long before the booketeria, some bookmobiles and traveling libraries had occasionally
put “library stations” in general stores in crossroads towns. But the booketeria surfaced in the
postwar years—amidst a significant boom in car ownership—as an extreme crystallization, of
sorts, of the ideologies of print mobility that birthed the traveling library and the bookmobile.623
The bookmobile had, after all, pioneered the strange reversal, the attempted use of a space or
object supposedly opposed to culture to actually promote it, as a tool of librarianship. As we saw
in Chapter One, the bookmobile emerged out of a movement obsessed with developing
infrastructures of feeling, a movement with a powerful faith that a new form of mobility could
change the landscape—and the people who called it home—for the better. “The bookmobile that
carries library books out into the corners of the wide open spaces,” the Los Angeles Times
crowed in 1931, “is disproving the yap that cars kill culture.”624 Developing infrastructures that
let you fill those “wide open spaces” with books, the thinking went, would help people come
together and form communities. As Chapter Three demonstrated, that assumption depended on
the image of untamed frontiers incorporated into a national whole—an image that prevented,
with its memories of violence and its passion for control, the actual realization of common
consciousness. It also, as this chapter argues, encouraged librarians and others to think about

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

623

Although St. Louis put a library branch in a downtown department store in the 1930s, the supermarket booketeria
did not take off in earnest until the late 1940s, when Nashville and Lincoln each first proposed building their own.
That period was also one of intensified car-ownership. Automobility had most thoroughly expanded in the interwar
years, when as many as 55.7% of families in the United States owned cars. But after strict restrictions on production
and use (especially rubber and gasoline rations) during World War II, another boom occurred in the 1950s. See, for
example, James J. Flink, The Automobile Age (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990 [1988]), 132, 277-293. On the St. Louis
project, see Andrew Linn Bostwick, “A Branch Library in a Department Store,” Library Journal 63 (1938): 420.
624
“Bookmobile,” Los Angeles Times, July 21, 1931.

242
	  

community as largely an effect of things on the move. And nothing in American society at
midcentury moved objects with quite the same efficiency and spectacle as the supermarket.
From the late 1940s, a new city tried out a booketeria every few years, with the version
in Troy, Ohio, getting the most attention—a wire story that was printed in numerous papers—and
amply illustrating the hopes and the threats embodied in the booketeria. “Who would dream of
placing Ernest Hemingway between crackers and limburger cheese?” asked Gaylord Binder in
that wire story, oddly echoing Ginsberg’s poem.625 The answer: Stanley Beacock, “a librarian
who has found his salvation in a supermarket.” Confronted with the need for more library space,
but lacking the money for branches or bookmobiles, Beacock “turned to a second idea…[and
f]ollowing an investigation, Fullmer’s Supermarket agreed to allow installation of a six-shelf, 8foot high rack near the crackers and cheese department.” The experiment was a success, Binder
joyfully announced. Six months in, circulation statistics were good (765 books circulating 5,279
times), and—causing Binder almost as much bemusement as the placement of Hemingway next
to the cheese and crackers—patrons paid most of their fines, even though the self-service branch
ran on an honor system.626 Beacock and the library’s board “committed their trust to the people
of Troy,” Binder wrote, and it had worked out.
The article closes with the librarian’s mostly cheerful summary: “The Booketeria cannot
take the place of a properly staffed branch if the population warrants it… However, it is the
estimate of this library that it is a good outlet in the particular location. So far its good points far
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

625

Gaylord Binder, “Hemingway Amidst Cheese and Crackers,” Baltimore Sun,	  April 30, 1961.
The honor system approach to booketeria service is striking in the postwar context, where credit undergirded so
much of the “economic miracle” in the U.S. and Western Europe (though there were, of course, cultural differences
in the way credit was perceived in different national contexts). See Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 123-124; Lendol
Calder, Financing the American Dream: A Cultural History of Consumer Credit (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1999); Jan Longemann, “Different Paths to Mass Consumption: Consumer Credit in the United States and
West Germany during the 1950s and ‘60s,” Journal of Social History 41 (2008): 525-559.

626

243
	  

outweigh any serious objections yet heard.” Indeed, this was a moment of odd hope among
librarians treating information as a commodity—as an object of consumption—meant that
libraries could gain (or retain, depending on who was doing the hoping) a central role in
American life. And as we can see in Beacock’s optimistic but somehow still plaintive and
defensive “so far,” it was a moment of hope that tethering the library to institutions of consumer
capitalism would not have deleterious effects. As it turns out, finding the library’s “salvation in a
supermarket”—and putting Hemingway in with the cheese and crackers—could cause problems.
Specifically, putting the library in a grocery store, like putting it on the road, meant buying into
(so to speak) a series of values seemingly at odds with the goal of building a common
consciousness: atomization, an obsession with speed, the privileging of pleasure, and a cult of
the new. And each of these values brought with it a fundamental confusion—of independence for
freedom, of efficiency for value, of pleasurable for useful, of new for important—that warped
earlier ideas about the goals of public culture and spelled trouble for the fate of common
consciousness in a consumers’ republic.

“Brutality and Solipsism”: Atomization
In the postwar period, the white middle class took an American tradition—of confusing
independence and freedom—and adapted and intensified it in new ways. As Frederick Jackson
Turner had both described and reinforced in his 1893 Frontier Thesis, the United States had for
more than a century constructed its understanding of political liberty in close relation to the “flux
and freedom and novelty and vast spaces” of the frontier.627 Freedom had, in other words, been
predicated on the movement of white people through geographic and psychic space, on
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
627

Turner, The Frontier in American History, 356.

244
	  

maintaining distance between people as a way of maintaining liberty.628 Progressives like
Addams and Gladden had called for an alternative, for an interdependent crowdedness (a thick
mesh, not a wide grid) as the basis for social democracy, but their voices had been drowned out
by midcentury. And so, after World War II—with the acceleration of suburbanization through
federally guaranteed mortgages, the G.I. Bill, and the sprouting of Levittowns and their imitators
across the country, and with the spread of supermarkets and sprawl of the interstate—this
confusion intensified and changed in two interrelated ways.629 First, the scale on which it
happened seemed to shift, to get smaller even as the scope of participation expanded. This longterm tendency in American political and social life was now practiced in a rather local way:
rather than moving thousands of miles west, many of those struck by a desire for geographic
independence, for space to move around, traveled just a few miles away, to the suburbs.
Secondly, and perhaps ironically, distance was produced through a proliferation of things. The
more objects that clotted suburban space, the more distance there could be between people, and
the freer those people would be.
These shifts had significant effects. Eric Avila argues that Disneyland “encapsulated the
values built into the design of postwar suburban communities.”630 Its “meticulous organization of
space,” he writes, “kept at bay that monstrous entity that dominated the landscape of the turn-ofthe-twentieth-century metropolis: the crowd.”631 But the crowd—threatening as it could seem—
could also be an encapsulation of democracy and belonging, of the public in all its beauty and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

628

And as we saw in Chapter Two, opponents of library desegregation had argued that maintaining distance between
black and white Americans was central, not antithetical, to freedom.
629
See, for example, Kenneth T. Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1985), 234-238; Barbara M. Kelley, Expanding the American Dream: Building and
Rebuilding Levittown (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993), 59-88.
630
Eric Avila, Popular Culture in the Age of White Flight: Fear and Fantasy in Suburban Los Angeles (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2004), 107.
631
Avila, Popular Culture, 123.

245
	  

difficulty. As Jane Addams had declared at the beginning of the century, it was on the “thronged
and common road” that a new social ethics would emerge. This conviction—like progressivism
as a whole—had been attenuated in the ensuing decades. As we saw in Chapter Three, a certain
faith in common consciousness had survived in parts of the New Deal. But programs like the
Taos County Project tended to preserve the centralizing impulses of progressive communitybuilding (in managed democracy, for example) at the expense of its more messy and
unpredictable possibilities. And in the postwar period, this shift reached its logical conclusion in
the transformation of public culture in the suburbs. As an attempt to spatially and culturally
engineer respectability, the suburbs were characterized, as Avila puts it in the case of Disneyland,
by “virtues…that emphasized a retreat from the public culture of New Deal liberalism.”632 This
was privacy as privatization, and a carefully designed and managed distance from others came to
supplant the hopes of Addams and the dreams of Curious Missie, hopes and dreams of less
corporate or consumerist kinds of belonging.
As incredibly potent embodiments of the values of consumer capitalism, and as both
motors and products of suburbanization, the car and the supermarket were key players in the
process of making independence seem like freedom, in inviting the supplanting of grounded
community by what William Leach calls “placelessness.”633 This section, like the ones that
follow, tracks how contemporary observers imagined and responded to these shifts. Here, we will
see how the automobile and the supermarket were understood to create atomized individuals by
insulating their users with objects and by making individual consumer choices seem like political
liberty.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
632

Avila, Popular Culture, 107.
William Leach, Country of Exiles: The Destruction of Place in American Life (New York: Vintage, 1999), 9.
Leach puts many of the most destructive transformations in Americans’ relationship to place and community
squarely on the shoulders of the kinds of mobility the automobile ushered in.

633

246
	  

Cars, even more than the trains and subways that first allowed the growth of suburbs,
facilitated the rapid decentralization of metropolitan areas. But as experienced at the time, this
did not have merely geographic effects, David Riesman explained in 1959. “[T]he Mixmaster of
the auto has scattered people in every direction,” he wrote, “with the result that there are no
easily marked roads to friendship and relatedness.”634 As it turned out, gridding the nation with
roads could, in the end, just lead to more isolation. Far from connection or belonging, Riesman
insisted that drivers exhibited a striking “brutality and solipsism,” a result of the fact that (as in
so many other suburban contexts) relations between people were replaced by relations between
people and objects. “The driver of a car is completely surrounded by a nonsocial object,” he
wrote, “isolated from physical contact with others and yet completely dependent on and related
to them.”635 In this way, the automobile mimicked the broader social system of the atomized
suburbs.636
As Riesman had argued earlier in his seminal The Lonely Crowd (1950), middle-class
suburbia was marked by a turn from older bourgeois models of selfhood he called “innerdirected” to the primacy of an “outer-directed” personality. The outer-directed person, Riesman
argued, was deeply social, depending on approval or disapproval from others to determine

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

634

Riesman, Abundance for What?, 265.
Riesman, Abundance for What?, 289. Daniel Boorstin, later the Librarian of Congress, seconded Riesman’s
analysis in 1961: “The automobile itself has been one of the chief insulating agencies. And the insulation has
become more effective as we have improved body design from the old open touring car to the new moving ‘picture
window’ through which we can look out from air-conditioned comfort while we hear our familiar radio programme.”
Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream (New York: Penguin, 1961), 118-119.
Ironically, Boorstin’s retirement from the Library of Congress was covered on the same page in American Libraries
as an article, discussed below, announcing the opening of a new booketeria in Wichita.
636
In the contemporary legal context, Don Mitchell has described something similar as a “right to be left alone” is
codified as restrictions on protesting. This creates, Mitchell argues, “a model of citizenship that matches the cars we
drive,” specifically the “high and sovereign” experiences of sport utility vehicle driving. This atomization promoted
by this “false security” clearly has an even longer history, of which the bookmobile and booketeria are a part. Don
Mitchell, “The S.U.V. Model of Citizenship: Floating Bubbles, Buffer Zones, and the Rise of the ‘Purely Atomic’
Individual,” Political Geography 24 (2005): 95.
635

247
	  

behaviors: “their contemporaries are the source of direction for the individual.”637 But that
person could also be, in a powerful way, deeply isolated by such constant contact. “While all
people want and need to be liked by some of the people some of the time,” Riesman wrote, “it is
only the modern other-directed types who make this their chief source of direction and chief area
of sensitivity.”638 Drawing on Riesman a decade later, Dwight Macdonald expanded on this,
explaining that members of the crowd “are not related to each other at all but only to some
impersonal, abstract, crystallizing factor.” He contrasted these “solitary atom[s]” with true
community, in which “a group of individuals [is] linked to each other by concrete interests.”639
The postwar American was, in these critics’ estimation, surrounded and yet unmoored—and
entirely unable to recognize it. In this “context of no context,” George W.S. Trow insisted as he
surveyed the world around him in 1980 and pondered its origins, “mirages of pseudo-intimacy”
convinced people there was no distance between them while, in fact, only increasing it.640 The
automobile, like the single-family home, embodied and materialized this odd sort of insulated
sociability, where intense effort is expended on display—of income, of normality, of happiness—
for others in order to reinforce a privacy that could ultimately inhibit mutual exchange and a
vibrant, textured social life.
It also more concretely undermined the sorts of transportation infrastructures that
allowed, or even required, people to come together in less predictable, managed ways. Both
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

637

David Riesman, The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1961 [1950]), 21.
638
Riesman, The Lonely Crowd, 22.
639
Dwight Macdonald, Masscult and Midcult: Essays Against the American Grain (New York: New York Review
Books, 2011), 8.
640
George W.S. Trow, Within the Context of No Context (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1981), 57. This was
what Lynn Spigel calls an “illusion of presence,” which managed to both fuel consumption and preserve privacy.
With a television, viewers “could remain alone in the living room, but at the same time sustain an illusion of being
in the company of others.” Lynn Spigel, “Installing the Television Set: Popular Discourses on Television and
Domestic Space, 1948-1955,” Camera Obscura 6 (1988): 32.

248
	  

bookmobiles and booketerias tied library extension to an icon of America’s burgeoning consumer
culture (automobiles and supermarkets, respectively) and also allied library use with the
independence and autonomy associated with it. But such autonomy has often been a mirage. As
John Urry points out, the rise of the automobile and the concomitant decline of public
transportation have granted car-owners immense flexibility—but it is always “coerced
flexibility.”641 The fantasy that we can go anywhere, at any time, has crushed many alternatives,
and that has often meant the decay of urban centers and the infrastructures of the “walking city.”
In the absence of alternatives to automobility, Urry insists, people are “force[d]…to orchestrate
in complex and heterogeneous ways their mobilities and socialities across very significant
distance” in ways that require a car.642 Ever more roads and highways replaced or preempted
other possible transportation methods in many cities and suburbs, and those highways—often
either destroying or circumventing urban communities—encouraged suburbanization and
drastically reduced urban populations.643 (One study found, for example, that each additional
freeway passing through an urban center reduced its population by an average of 18 percent.644)
This system of coerced flexibility reinforces racial, geographic, economic, and other
inequities by allowing the expanded mobility of some at the expense of others’ immobility.645
This odd relationship of mobility to immobility—which characterized suburbia’s growth and
reinforced white flight—helped fuel the central confusion at issue here. The irony of a rigidly
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

641

John Urry, “The ‘System’ of Automobility,” Theory, Culture & Society 21 (2004): 36.
Urry, “The ‘System’,” 28.
643
Largely poor and/or black and brown neighborhoods were destroyed by expressways constructed in the Bronx,
Baltimore, Milwaukee, Indianapolis, and St. Paul, among others. See Raymond A. Mohl, “The Interstates and the
Cities: The U.S. Department of Transportation and the Freeway Revolt, 1966-1973,” Journal of Policy History 20
(2008): 193-226.
644
Nathaniel Baum-Snow, “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2007):
775-805.
645
See, for example, Langdon Winner, “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” in The Whale and the Reactor (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1988), 19-39.

642

249
	  

unequal transportation network, Celeste Langan argues, is that it “guarantees that mobility will
be felt as freedom.”646 The ability to move seemingly unfettered through space, offered so
explicitly and viscerally by the automobile, slowly but surely replaced the thronged road and
other possible ways of thinking about freedom and belonging—and many of the physical, public
infrastructures that would make those thoughts material.
The bookmobile was in some instances meant to address these inequities, by bringing
books to those who could not travel themselves, but the booketeria was another story. The
relationship between the two forms is revealing here. The emergence of supermarkets, which
tend to assume automobility in their location and architecture, was closely related to the
centrifugal force of suburbanization that was accelerated by the automobile. (Indeed, suggesting
just how intimately the new retail environment was related to car culture, a 1958 guide to
selecting store locations explained that “[n]inety-five per cent of all the retail stores built in the
United States since the end of World War II have included some provision for off-street
parking.”647) Supermarkets provided a key outlet for the “abundance psychology” that Riesman
identified with the outer-directed residents of suburbia, “capable of ‘wasteful’ luxury
consumption of leisure and of the surplus product.”648 A 1962 article in Ladies’ Home Journal
informed readers that “one of the biggest revolutions going is in the neighborhood grocery. Its
shelves are bursting with excitement. You’ll discover delicacies once reserved for kings’
feasts.”649 This captures some of the effects of the supermarket on landscapes both physical and
psychic in the new consumer capitalism: the emergence of new locations for shopping, the image
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

646

Celeste Langan, “Mobility Disability,” Public Culture 13 (2001): 463. On the experience of a “parallel city”
offered by riding the bus in Los Angeles, see Sikivu Hutchinson, “Waiting for the Bus,” Social Text 18 (2000): 107120.
647
Richard L. Nelson, The Selection of Retail Locations (New York: F.W. Dodge Corporation, 1958), 249.
648
Riesman, The Lonely Crowd, 18.
649
Quoted in Tracey Deutsch, Building a Housewife’s Paradise: Gender, Politics, and American Grocery Stores in
the Twentieth Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010), 183.

250
	  

of the home as a castle, the domestication of political “revolution” through consumption, and so
on. Architectural historian Robert Fishman asserts that suburbs “embodied a new ideal of family
life, an ideal so emotionally charged that it made the home more sacred to the bourgeoisie than
any place of worship.”650 The supermarket played a key role in this new spiritual economy,
providing extensive provisions for the family and, perhaps more importantly, acting as an altar
for a new set of rituals that reinforced the individual and the family as the preeminent social units
of the suburbs. “This place recharges us spiritually,” a character in Don DeLillo’s White Noise
(1985) says of a supermarket, “it prepares us, it’s a gateway or pathway.”651 The supermarket
thus offered itself as a site that would link objects, emotion, and mobility in transformative
ways—in ways that threatened the project begun with the traveling library.
Indeed, the supermarket supported the atomization of the suburbs by, ironically, seeming
to encourage social interaction. Urban planner Ann Satterwaite argues that a “casualty of this
new scale and pace of shopping has been its sociability.”652 Planning and zoning, inspired by an
emphasis on keeping residential and commercial spaces separate in the new suburbs, increased
the prominence of shopping centers but also increased the shallowness of the social bonds they
allowed. Nevertheless, there was a pervasive awareness, sometimes verging on concern, that
supermarket shopping could come to stand in for shared experience and thus make individual
consumer behavior seem like community-building. This was by no means entirely new—Gordon
Selfridge declared in 1909 that his London department store “is not a shop, it’s a community
centre”—but there did seem to be something about the conglomeration of the supermarket and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

650

Robert Fishman, Bourgeois Utopia: The Rise and Fall of Suburbia (New York: Basic Books, 1987), 4.
Don DeLillo, White Noise (New York: Penguin, 1985), 37.
652
Ann Satterwaite, Going Shopping: Consumer Choices and Community Consequences (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2001), 100.

651

251
	  

the separation of the suburb that brought this to a new pitch.653 “The supermarket may be said to
give half the people of America the most regular, satisfying, ennobling and masterful experience
that they can confidently look forward to in a given week,” David Cort wrote in The Nation, in
1958.654
A year later, a New York Times report on the “Super Business of Supermarkets” brought
this home.655 Drawing on observation, on information from marketers, and on David Riesman
himself, the article offered a conflicted picture of what the larger effects of supermarkets might
be. Were they good for families or bad for them? Liberatory for women or not? But one thing
was rather certain: the supermarket had transformed the social landscape of the suburbs,
encouraging the “other-directed” society Riesman described and creating a world in which
“[m]ore people are exposed to supermarkets than to schools, churches, movies or any other
influence except newspapers and TV.” Indeed, the entire community structure could be changed.
A sidebar within the article described the opening of the Nashville booketeria and noted that
“[i]n many towns the supermarket has become a center of social life, sponsoring barbecues and
square dances...sponsor[ing] exhibitions by local artists, hanging the paintings right in with the
mounds of cold cuts and prepared patties.”656 Paintings in with the cold cuts, like Garcia Lorca
among the watermelons, seemed to offer an image of people coming together in the aisles around
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

653

Selfridge quoted in Satterwaite, Going Shopping, 64.
“In great cities,” he continued, “many women regard the local supermarket as the only stable social force in the
environment.” David Cort, “All Alone in the Supermarket,” The Nation, November 22, 1958, 380.
655
Sidney Margolius, “Super Business of Supermarkets,” New York Times, March 29, 1959.
656
Nine years earlier, another New York Times report used the sudden appearance “among the tomatoes, potatoes
and cabbages” of “a group of fifty oil paintings which [customers] were encouraged to buy” in Caldwell, New
Jersey, as an anchor for an analysis of supermarkets’ new merchandising techniques. And five years later, Wesley
Marx, in The Nation, raised a rhetorical eyebrow at “Artists and actors...being drafted to glorify food-buying.” He
noted, specifically, a Southern California arts festival in which “Housewives in search of ground chuck and pink
quail eggs dodged between 300 paintings displayed on the parking lot, while the Orange Street Players staged
Checkhov a stone’s throw from the fresh cabbage.” Rebecca Franklin, “From Soup to Nuts to Art...,” New York
Times, September 24, 1950; Wesley Marx, “The Heavenly Supermarket,” The Nation, April 13, 1964, 372.
654

252
	  

culture, not just commerce—but it was a vision which frequently fell short.
The cartoon [FIGURE 31] accompanying the article, by Carl Rose, made this amusingly,
devastatingly clear. The tall, narrow image shows, from an angled birds-eye view, aisle after aisle
of a grocery store, packed with people. Each customer has an overflowing cart, and the gridlock
of all these people with all these vehicles with all these objects calls to mind the likely snarl of
the parking lot outside and, further out, of the busy streets of the busy commercial district of a
busy suburb. (With a library, childcare, education, an art gallery, psychiatry, cobbling, and dental
care, the supermarket itself seems like a microcosmic, mutant suburb, offering a community’s
worth of infrastructure under a single roof dedicated to commerce.) And the snarled customers
with their laden carts seem, like Riesman’s driver in traffic, to be similarly insulated by the
mobility and the fierce independence of their commercial behavior. Some few people talk to one
another—several waiting in line, the librarian with a customer, and so on—but for the most part
their interactions are wordless, and sometimes fraught. Most customers do not look at one
another, absorbed by the riot of objects before them. Near the center of the image, in front of the
“FROZEN FOOD FESTIVAL,” two carts filled with goods collide. Just above that, two nearlyidentical women (their carts blocking the passage of yet another woman) bend over and, much to
their apparent surprise, bump backsides, shocked and unsettled by the sudden contact.657 Most
strikingly, at the very bottom of the image, a man with an empty cart looks over his shoulder
with a look of almost palpable confusion and inadequacy at a man and a woman struggling to
maneuver a cart filled with a tower of paper bags, each overflowing with a mass of newlyacquired things. This was not the “thronged and common road” of Addams’ imagination; this
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

657

This might suggest a submerged potential for sensual, bodily, and near-sexual contact in the supermarket, which
Adam Mack has identified in advertising for the markets. Adam Mack, “‘Speaking of Tomatoes’: Supermarkets, the
Senses, and Sexual Fantasy in Modern America,” Journal of Social History 43 (2010): 815-842.

253
	  

was something else entirely. It is not, in the end, surprising that the smaller illustration on the
second page of the article [FIGURE 32] shows five shopper-less carts crowded together,
rendered near-immobile in their collective, empty mobility. In the first image, to some degree,
the carts might as well not have people at all. As with the suburban automobile, it is the object
driving these encounters, cocooning their users from one another and propelling them through
ostensibly shared space without requiring interaction, mutual regard, or the work of communityformation. “[S]teered...imperiously down the aisle,” as Cort put it, the shopping cart—like other
new forms of mobility—encouraged the atomization of the lonely crowd by making
consumption, and even movement, seem like ends in themselves.
This turn to abundance, and to private consumption as a primary social activity, had
effects beyond supermarkets, and observers and critics continued to use their image to make
arguments about this new situation. In describing the odd role of the suburb in both expanding
and limiting choices, Riesman stated that “the suburbs have been one vast supermarket,
abundantly and conveniently stocked with approved yet often variegated choices.”658 A vast
frontier had given way to a vast supermarket, but the impulse to confuse large spaces for sites of
freedom remained constant, or perhaps even accelerated. In popular thought and political fact,
the independence—financial, geographic, social—necessary for making consumer choices
increasingly replaced the kinds of freedom required to reimagine social life as something mutual,
something not bought but shared. Cutting (in her characteristically acerbic way) to the heart of
the matter, social critic Marya Mannes lamented in 1964 that “[t]he citizen has become the
consumer, the individual the instrument, not of a super-state but of the super-market.”659 Mannes
gets here to the strange way in which the supermarket—as a place but also as an idea—was tied
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

658

659

Riesman, Abundance for What?, 235.
Marya Mannes, But Will It Sell? (Philadelphia: J.P. Lippincott, 1964), 16.

254
	  

up in a troubling and convoluted relationship between consumption, individualism, and politics.
The supermarket not only materially supported the suburbs—those “barren stencils,” as she put
it, where these various strands most densely knotted—it also stood in the consumers’ republic as
an epitome of individual freedoms: to browse, to choose, to buy.660
Robert Fishman has traced the origins of suburbia to the eighteenth century, which is—
importantly—the same period in which scholars like Roger Chartier have described an integral
and productive relationship between print and privacy. In a classic example of the simultaneous
and mutual production of exterior and interior spaces, land was increasingly carved out to allow
sub-urban domestic privacy at the same time that reading found more and more of a place in
private, domestic, and individual interiors.661 Perhaps it should come as no surprise, then, that
even the library—that most seemingly communal literary institution—would find itself
incorporated into the atomized sociability of consumer culture. Nonetheless, both the
bookmobile and the booketeria were, in their way, attempts to manage this turn to privacy, to
make it work for the goals and needs of libraries. That attempt had decidedly mixed results.
Drawing on a long history of library extension as a tool for fostering democracy and
community, both bookmobiles and branch libraries were frequently used to bring books to the
people in order to increase library use. But in doing so, they took a risk that emerged from a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

660

Mannes, But Will It Sell?, 16.
Fishman, Bourgeois Utopias, 18-38. Chartier argues that between the sixteenth and the eighteenth centuries,
“man’s altered relation to the written word helped to create a new private sphere into which the individual could
retreat, seeking refuge from the community.” This did not, of course, mean that all public reading ceased, or that
private reading meant a total rejection of the world. But it was the case, Chartier insists, that “silent, secret, private
reading paved the way for previously unthinkable audacities.” Roger Chartier, “The Practical Impact of Writing,” in
A History of Private Life, vol. III: Passions of the Renaissance, ed. Roger Chartier, trans. Arthur Goldhammer
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 111, 125. This process only solidified during the nineteenth century,
according to James Smith Allen. In France, he argues, “individuals increasingly sought the meaning of more freely
available texts in deeply personal, isolated acts” made possible by “the development of private interpretive practices”
freed from older, more intense interference by church and state. James Smith Allen, In the Public Eye: A History of
Reading in Modern France, 1800-1940 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991), 5.
661

255
	  

strange relationship of mobility to immobility in midcentury American culture: moving things
could, at times, keep people in place. The dream represented by the traveling library, that moving
books might move people to find one another, backfired. It could turn out that bringing the
library to the people (and proliferating the number of libraries) could mean that the people no
longer had to move or come together in a common place. Putting the library in “the Mixmaster”
(in Riesman’s vivid phrase), scattering small libraries across the landscape, also meant fewer
truly central public institutions where different people could come together to share a collective
experience of culture. The very convenience and efficiency of bookmobiles and booketerias, to
be discussed more below, meant fewer trips, at shorter distances. This could potentially reinforce
neighborhood-feeling, of course, and it could invite more people into the library’s sphere of
influence, but it also threatened to keep those neighborhoods, and those people, from linking
together to form a larger community. In this way, bookmobiles and booketerias could in effect
amplify the centrifugal tendencies of suburbanization and the proliferating consumer culture,
abdicating a responsibility to tie people together. This did not have to be the case—certainly
bookmobiles could be used to express and construct a clear vision of community space—but
more bookmobiles, branches, booketerias, and other extension devices always threatened
fragmentation as much as they promised cohesion.
And it certainly did not help that they also frequently tended to reinforce the equation of
privacy with independence with freedom. Margolis, in that New York Times report, identified the
“privacy of selection” as one of “the devices the supermarkets use to get us to go miles to buy
groceries, [and] serve as our own shelf boys.” Relatively new to both merchandising and
librarianship in the twentieth century, the open-shelf design discussed in Chapter Three
encouraged, perhaps ironically, an isolated and insulated approach to grocery stores—and to

256
	  

libraries as well, with booketerias and bookmobiles at the forefront.662 Not only open-shelved,
most booketerias were entirely self-service, with patrons selecting books, filling out cards, noting
due dates, and paying fines for late returns. In 1958, Herbert Goldhor, a librarian in Evansville,
Indiana, reported an odd (and likely unexpected) reason for his booketeria’s success: “From the
comments received, it’s clear that the shoppers like the service...in part because they are free to
browse without anyone trying to help them.”663 Quite an endorsement of librarians, that. In part
perhaps a healthy suspicion of librarians as ultimate and total arbiters of culture, this appreciation
for booketerias’ privacy (like for the bookmobile’s similar practice of turning the library inside
out) also points to a series of possibly troubling fissures. Those gaps—between librarians and
patrons, between patrons and libraries as major civic institutions, and between patrons and
patrons—increased physical, social, and cultural space around people, and could thus quite easily
be mistaken for freedom: freedom from supervision, from authority, from enclosure, but also,
potentially, from mutual regard and shared experience.

“Social Physics”: Efficiency
Reflecting in 1960 on the consequences of engineering and Taylorism in work life in the
first half of the twentieth century, sociologist Daniel Bell wrote that one of the engineer’s most
profound assumptions—with effects on work in the factory and on the American landscape writ
large—was “that concentration is technologically efficient.”664 This was the logic that led to the
dominance of the assembly line within factories and also, especially as the century wore on, to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

662

On the effects of open shelf, self-service shopping—including the “confirmation” of gender roles and the
“forgetting” of class identity—see Kim Humphery, Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the Changing Cultures of
Consumption (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 66-68.
663
Herbert Goldhor, “Library-Booketeria,” Library Journal 83 (1958): 3074.
664
Daniel Bell, The End of Ideology: On the Exhaustion of Political Ideas in the Fifties (New York: Free Press, 1962
[1960]), 230.

257
	  

the “coerced flexibility” of the automobile. Concentrating industrial, commercial, and residential
systems separately, Bell argues, this zest for conglomeration made more and more travel
necessary to live out a full experience of human life. (He worried quite a lot about the separation
of work from other aspects of everyday life, with the sacrifice of wholeness to the “cult of
efficiency” an unhappy result.665)
Business scholar Richard D. White, Jr., argues that after World War II, efficiency—which
had become an “ultimate goal” of social, political, and intellectual life—fell “quickly from
intellectual grace.”666 But the effects of that obsession with efficiency lingered on, and they
moved even more thoroughly from one shop floor to another: from factory to store, from work to
consumption. Automobiles, packaged foods, household appliances, and other objects made
efficiency a watchword for home life, made the fast seem like the good. These new
developments did not always actually make life easier, and women bore the brunt of the
expansion of tasks made supposedly more “efficient.”667 But when the vice president of the
United States and the Soviet premier met in Moscow to debate the relative efficiency of
housework and the concomitant glories of consumption (or lack thereof) in their respective
countries, it became almost absurdly clear that speed, everyday life, and consumer culture were
powerfully intertwined.
The flowering of the public library movement—and especially the traveling library
movement—at the turn of the twentieth century had grown out of what Marion Casey calls “the

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
665

See Daniel Bell, Work and Its Discontents: The Cult of Efficiency in America (Boston: Beacon Press, 1956).
Richard D. White, Jr., “More Than an Analytical Tool: Examining the Ideological Role of Efficiency,” Public
Productivity & Management Review 23 (1999): 8.
667
Ruth Schwartz Cowan, More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technologies from the Open Hearth to
the Microwave (New York: Basic Books, 1983).

666

258
	  

frenzy...to order society efficiently” that marked the Progressive Era.668 “Wasting time is worse
than wasting money,” declared the author of Some Principles of Business-Like Conduct in
Libraries in 1920.669 And none other than Melvil Dewey salivated at the idea of efficient library
service, using the prominence of decimals in engineering to defend his new categorization
system in the 1880s.670 While these extreme enthusiasms were questioned at the time by some
librarians, and were tempered during the half-century between the 1890s and the 1940s,
efficiency—like marketing and advertising—had fundamentally transformed librarianship,
making speed and productivity key measures of value.671 And this was never more the case than
in the bookmobile and (especially) the booketeria, which crystallized librarians’ embrace of
efficiency and its application to education, consumption, and leisure.
Indeed, efficiency—both for libraries, which could increase their presence with only
minimal outlay, and for patrons, who could combine errands—was the most widely cited reason
for booketeria service. Lincoln, Nebraska, librarian Bernice Kauffman, writing in American
Speech in 1947 to announce her library’s new and “unique service,” wrote that it had two main
“advantages.” The first was that “library users wishing to borrow books…do not have to make a
special trip to the library” and could now “select or return their books at the same time” as their
grocery shopping, thereby “saving…time and transportation.” Second, she wrote, is its
“economy of operation” for the library, which could run a branch without the “expense of heat,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

668

Marion Casey, “Efficiency, Taylorism, and Libraries in Progressive America,” Journal of Library History 16
(1981): 265.
669
Arthur E. Bostwick, Some Principles of Business-Like Conduct in Libraries (Chicago: American Library
Association, 1920), 16. Bostwick was president of the American Library Association in 1907-1908, and had worked
in public libraries in New York and Missouri. For more on Bostwick and efficiency, see Casey, “Efficiency,” 269270.
670
Casey, “Efficiency,” 268.
671
The University of Chicago’s Graduate Library School, for example, pushed hard on quantitative and statistical
analyses of efficiency and productivity in the late 1920s and early 1930s.

259
	  

light, water and personnel.”672 Martin Sloane, the syndicated “Supermarket Shopper” columnist,
asked his readers in 1986 whether a booketeria would be appealing to them, and the response
was overwhelmingly positive—and overwhelmingly focused on convenience. “What a timesaver
it would be,” wrote F. Spedaliere of Virginia. From Cynthia Barrette of Humble, Texas: “[W]hen
making my shopping plans I always have ‘Visit Library’ on my Saturday things-to-do list. But
when I finally finish at the supermarket and other stores, I am usually too tired. Then on Sunday,
I always feel bad about it.”673 Like traveling libraries and bookmobiles, booketerias thus tried to
organize emotion—desire and regret, in this case—and doing so here had unexpected
consequences. Just as engineers were certain that consolidating different aspects of production
under one roof was efficient, librarians and patrons alike took to the idea of combining different
acts of consumption together, for the sake of efficiency.674 “By a strategy of putting new branch
libraries in shopping centers,” the Dallas Morning News had reported in 1960, “library officials
hope to make a trip to the library as natural as a visit to the supermarket.”675 Putting books next
to cheese made it easier for patrons (or customers, as they would eventually be known in some
corners of librarianship) to take both home, but it could also threaten to make the former seem
uncontroversially (“natural[ly]”) like the latter. Visiting the library and going to the grocery store
became the same task, and a book and a box of cereal could seem newly equivalent.
Even before the end of the war, bookmobiles were marketed as a way of fitting books
into the cracks in one’s day. A 1941 WPA poster, for example, declared the Chicago Public
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

672

Bernice Kauffman, “‘Booketeria’,” American Speech 22 (1947): 306.
Martin Sloane, “Readers favor in-store library,” Mobile Press Register, October 12, 1986.
674
A similar set of preferences—for combining trips, for automobility, and so on—also influenced the
popularization of drive-up book-drops in the postwar period. “[P]atrons are pleased with the new convenience,”
Illinois Libraries reported, “and indicate a decrease in overdue books.” Focus on Indiana Libraries reported,
similarly, that “[t]he drive-up returns enable patrons to bring back books at any time, combining a stop at the library
with other errands.” [No title,] Illinois Libraries 35 (1951): 236; “Richmond Installs New Book Return,” Focus on
Indiana Libraries 6 (1952): 3.
675
“The Library: A Lot More Than Books,” Dallas Morning News, October 2, 1960.

673

260
	  

Library’s bookmobile service to be “Convenient,” “FREE,” and “Time-Saving” [FIGURE 33].
And in their 1971 ad campaign, major bookmobile manufacturer Gerstenslager took the
efficiency of the bookmobile even further and—in what should be by now a familiar
combination of food, mobility, and libraries—hinted at the somewhat disturbing ways that
bookmobiles helped organize and order leisure, consumption, and education. “A Gerstenslager
bookmobile will delight you in design,” one ad [FIGURE 34] published in American Libraries
declares, and “complement your library’s efficiency in service and cost.”676 Their “name it. we’ll
put it on wheels!” campaign aimed at humorously highlighting the “customobility” that a
Gerstenslager vehicle could provide. But the image that accompanied this particular version of
the ad showed the darker side of efficiency. Demonstrating their willingness to work with
customers—and their assurances not to “fudge when it comes to finishing touches”—the image
depicts what is essentially an ice cream sundae on wheels. A giant, open truck serves as a bowl,
filled with ice cream and a large spoon, and the assembly of the sundae is performed by children.
In matching coats, hats, and earmuffs, the children take on different roles in the production of the
sundae: one drives, one wields a large caulking gun to apply chocolate or whipped cream, one
cracks nuts, one operates a large crane carefully lowering cherries, one climbs a ladder to deliver
more raw materials. All wear large smiles, pleased with the work of making pleasure.
This idealized vision of efficient production on the bookmobile is apparent in some actual
experiences of it as well. In 1952, a seventh grader in Marathon County, Wisconsin, penned a
poem describing the procedure followed during a bookmobile’s visit to her school:
We hardly can wait to get inside,
Until we get in, we frown
But then Mrs. Biwer comes in,
And smiles to let us know,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
676

See American Libraries 2 (1971): 688.

261
	  

When the lower grades find their books,
The higher grades may go.
We hand our books to the driver,
Who puts them on the shelf,
Wouldn’t you rather have him put them there,
Than to put them their [sic] yourself?677
This is not just library use made into work, as in the Gerstenslager ad; it is library use made into
shift work. Landscape writer J.B. Jackson commented that the highway’s dominance of the
landscape “has spawned a whole breed or roadlike spaces—railroad lines, pipelines, power lines,
flight lines, assembly lines.”678 As particularly the last in his list suggests, these networks could
be less a mesh to tie a community together than simply a way to get from point A to point B as
quickly as possible. And bookmobiles, inspired by roads and built as automobiles, could repeat
this problem. The particular kind of regimentation the middle-school poet describes, with shifts
divided by age moving through the bookmobile separately in order to keep things running
smoothly, recurs again and again in representations of bookmobiles and children. Not only did
the bookmobile supposedly allow libraries to make more efficient use of their resources, it also
invited a broader application of an economic logic—of scientific management and, more
precisely, the scientific management of consumption—to libraries’ relationship to their patrons,
and those patrons’ relationship to books and to one another.
And this “social physics” of efficiency, as Bell put it, had far-reaching consequences.679
Historian T.J. Jackson Lears has argued that in the twentieth century, “personal efficiency”
became a new way of thinking about the worth of individuals and institutions, and that this
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

677

“Bookmobile Poem by Kay Umland, 1952” (WI.400374.bib), Libraries and Schools in Marathon and Lincoln
Counties, State of Wisconsin Collection,
digital.library.wisc.edu/1711.dl/SSRecIDSearch?repl1=WI&repl2=WI.400374.bib (accessed December 8, 2009).
678
Jackson, A Sense of Place, 190. It is worth noting that Jackson was, overall, quite optimistic about the new
landscapes and situations offered by twentieth-century highway culture.
679
Bell, End of Ideology, 233.

262
	  

“preoccupation with an empty pursuit of efficiency…impoverishes personal as well as public
life.”680 And libraries, buying into that logic, helped replace deliberation with speed as
organizing principles of social and cultural life: “We don’t claim that this is ‘library service,’”
wrote an Evansville, Indiana, librarian upon the introduction of a booketeria there, “but it is an
economical and efficient way to distribute books.”681 Sacrificed at the altar of speed, “library
service”—careful assistance, discerning selection, and dedicated common space—in this
rendering became secondary to the economics of efficiency, which newly guided the library’s
choices.
Poet and critic Randall Jarrell, in “Children Selecting Books in a Library” (1955),
understood patron browsing alongside and through food-procurement—much like the librarians
behind bookmobiles and booketerias—but with a key twist. Perhaps we could call it a return:
With beasts and gods, above, the wall is bright.
The child’s head, bent to the book-colored shelves,
Is slow and sidelong and food-gathering,
Moving in blind grace…682
This is not a present of neon and packages and advertising and rushed distribution. It is not a
present of internal combustion and interstates and rush hour commutes.683 Here, while using a
library is like getting food, it is like getting food in what to Jarrell felt like a too-distant past, a
past of deliberateness and care and intellectual nourishment. This offers, then, a rendering of a
key bargain that the booketeria, like the bookmobile, made. In exchange for “blind grace,” for
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

680

T.J. Jackson Lears, Fables of Abundance: A Cultural History of Advertising in America (New York: Basic Books,
1994), 138, 11.
681
Goldhor, “Library-Booketeria,” 3074.
682
Randall Jarrell, “Children Selecting Books in a Library,” in Reading Rooms, ed. Susan Allen Toth and John
Coughlan (New York: Doubleday, 1991).
683
The “Yellow Book” of maps depicting plans for the national interstate system was made public by the Bureau of
Public Roads the same year Jarrell and Ginsberg wrote their poems. U.S. Bureau of Public Roads, General Location
of National System of Interstate Highways, Including All Additional Routes at Urban Areas (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1955).

263
	  

the “slow and sidelong” and full engagement with books, librarians helped usher in a moment in
which books could be checked out alongside (and would move around like) boxes of cereal but,
as Jarrell would put it less than a decade later, “[m]ost of our mental and moral food is quickfrozen, pre-digested, spoon-fed.”684 Booketerias and bookmobiles often imagined books to be
objects—or, more precisely, only objects—like corn or soup or watermelons or limburger, that
needed to get into consumers’ hands as quickly and smoothly as possible.685 (Or, as one patron
put it in 1966: “Bookmobile is instant books.”686)
In so doing, booketerias and bookmobiles treated libraries as answers to the problem of
efficient distribution—a problem supermarkets, particularly with the help of automobiles, were
particularly good at solving—rather than as a way of building infrastructures that are material
and cultural to tie communities together.687 This new obsession with efficiency could have
immediate effects on local communities. Caught up in an efficiency-at-all-costs logic,
booketerias and bookmobiles could both be used to replace or prevent branch libraries. A 1948
article, for example, described a bookmobile as a “streamlined branch library” that made it
possible to “supplant[ ] seven small branch libraries,” thus providing patrons with books without
providing them with a permanent cultural and civic center.688 But, as we will see later on,
mistaking efficient for good could have even broader cultural effects, as well. Michael Sorkin
has described an obsession in urban planning with smooth and efficient “flow,” which grew

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

684

Jarrell, Sad Heart, 28.
It is important to remember that the ideas that circulate through society take material form (in print, in disks, in
chips, in bodily performance, and so on); my purpose here is not to deny that, but rather to suggest that to treat ideas
as only material may be as insufficient as ignoring their materiality entirely.
686
Robert Wagner, “Bookmobile Gives Service With True Personal Touch,” Springfield Union, August 17, 1966.
687
On some of the cultural effects of distribution efficiency in chain stores and supermarkets, see, for example, De
Grazia, Irresistible Empire, 130-183, 376-415.
688
“‘Bookmobile’ Replaces Seven Small Branches,” Los Angeles Times, September 28, 1948.
685

264
	  

alongside and outlasted the sometimes coercive architectural modernism of Le Corbusier.689
“Flow,” Sorkin explains, “seeks to increase speed (and save time) by prioritizing the faster means
of movement” and avoiding “the potential for danger, confusion and slow-down resulting from
the undisciplined mix.” But this acceleration and efficiency get in the way of what he calls
“giving ground,” “a primal rite” and “concrete...exemplum of...deference to one’s neighbors.”690
This dream of smooth, frictionless, efficiency—embodied in the highway and the supermarket,
and visible in the bookmobile and booketeria—was a perversion of, and ultimately at odds with,
the liberal fantasy of a frictional, tingling, and productive efficiency that had inspired the
traveling library.

“A Cult of Effortlessness”: Pleasure
Related to efficiency was an identification of pleasure (and of easy pleasure, more
precisely) as a fundamental measure of cultural value. William Leach has argued that beginning
at the close of the nineteenth century, Americans began to mistake amusement for freedom. This
moment was marked by the emergence of a “highly individual conception of democracy [which]
emphasized pleasure and self-fulfillment over community or civic well-being.”691 Especially
from the advent of radio in the 1920s, particularly thanks to a progressive commitment to handson and experiential education, librarians (like teachers) worked very hard to make claims for
civic importance based on a connection to new and pleasurable modes of information-diffusion.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

689

On attempts by Le Corbusier and his colleagues to design total and totalizing urban spaces, and their pitfalls, see
James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1998), 103-146.
690
Michael Sorkin, "Introduction: Traffic in Democracy," in Giving Ground: The Politics of Propinquity, ed. Joan
Copjec and Michael Sorkin (New York: Verso, 1999), 1-2. More formally and legally, an investment in flow had in
an earlier period been used to justify restrictions on public protest. See Don Mitchell, The Right to the City: Social
Justice and the Fight for Public Space (New York: Guilford Press, 2003), 56.
691
William Leach, Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture (New York: Vintage,
1999), 6.

265
	  

Indeed, rather than predictably lamenting radio’s negative effects, the forefront of the educational
professions sought to coopt it to their own ends. In 1932, the president of the National Council of
Teachers of English declared radio “a twentieth-century miracle” and “an agent of social
progress,” and librarians were right behind her.692 “Let us be grateful, then,” a Rochester, New
York, librarian announced in 1938, “for this new means of reaching children that is offered to us
at a time when reading has more competitors than ever before.”693 It was a compromise librarians
were very good at making, even as they did not seem to comprehend its risks as well as they did
its rewards.
In addition to being an epitome of convenient, efficient, and private library service,
booketerias and bookmobiles presented a model of librarianship often defined by entertained
pleasure over intellectual effort. Booketerias from their invention and bookmobiles especially
after the 1920s, tended to carry far more fiction than anything else. Using the Kansas state
system of traveling libraries as a barometer, the Topeka State Journal declared in late 1923 that
“Kansas, during the year now closing, preferred fiction to other reading.” (In 1904, the Traveling
Library Commission had very few requests for fiction, and later librarians blamed a wartime
desire for escape for this fundamental and permanent shift.694) Indeed, bookmobiles charted the
rise and booketerias the triumph of a broader shift—away from print and toward other forms of

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
692

Stella S. Center, “The Responsibility of Teachers of English in Contemporary American Life,” English Journal
22, no. 2 (1933): 99.
693
Quoted in Cindy Welch, “Librarians of the Airwaves: Reading in the Ether,” in Radio Cultures: The Sound
Medium in American Life, ed. Michael C. Keith (New York: Peter Lang, 2008), 296. A number of guides to
exploiting “this new means” were published in this period. See, for example, Faith Holmes Hyers, The Library and
the Radio (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938); Julia L. Sauer, ed., Radio Roads to Reading; Library Book
Talks Broadcast to Girls and Boys (New York: H.W. Wilson Company, 1939). See also Cindy C. Welch,
“Children’s Stories through the Air: Librarian-Broadcasters, 1922-1941,” Library Quarterly 82 (2012): 141-159.
694
“The Traveling Public Library in Kansas: Free Books for all the State,” Kansas City Star, September 11, 1904;
“Fiction is First,” Topeka State Journal, December 8, 1923.

266
	  

entertainment, with education and enlightenment as secondary or even tertiary goals—in
twentieth-century libraries and librarianship.
In 1931, the Los Angeles Times had seemed optimistic that the bookmobile could
“disprov[e] the yap that cars kill culture,” but in hindsight that prediction was perhaps premature.
While “killing” may overstate and oversimplify, something was indeed happening at the
coincidence of cars and culture. In 1965, teacher and education scholar Charles Spiegler
published an instructive article, titled “If Only Dickens Had Written about Hot Rods.” In it, he
sets out an agenda for “heal[ing] that breach” between students raised in “intellectual ghetto[s]”
and their teachers who “left our Ivied Halls clutching that precious B.A.” but with no idea how to
reach working-class students.695 These students—whom he intriguingly calls his “customers”—
do not want Shakespeare or Eliot or Dickens, Spiegler insists, and so teachers should not require
them.696 Confronted with a student who delivers the titular lament—why couldn’t Dickens write
about hot rods?—Spiegler is stymied. But then “Miss Bookmobile,” the librarian who “comes to
my school at regular intervals with a bagful of books meant to move the most immobile
reluctant,” delivers a solution.697 She “weaves such a web of silent awe that books can say such
wondrous things: of D-Day and Shark, for those whose tastes runs to blood; of Body Building
and Weight Lifting, for those to whom the body in bloom is a thing of beauty...; of hot rods and
drag races for those who...live for speed.”698 For the Dickens-phobic car enthusiast, A Tale of
Two Cities is replaced by H. Gregor Felsen’s Hot Rod and Mexican Road Race, and suddenly the
student is “searching the stacks all over the city for ‘anything by Mr. Felsen’.”699 Bookmobiles
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

695

Charles G. Spiegler, “If Only Dickens Had Written About Hot Rods,” English Journal 54 (1965): 275.
Spiegler, “If Only,” 275.
697
Spiegler, “If Only,” 277.
698
Spiegler, “If Only,” 278.
699
Spiegler, “If Only,” 278.

696

267
	  

lead to the library here—but the whole thing is built on a foundation of what seem to be some
rather unstable equivalences and some rather significant assumptions about class and culture.
Two years later, in June 1967, a new library opened in a popular supermarket in Portland,
Oregon. But the ability to “combine trips to the library with shopping trips” was not the only
thing that made the library “unusual,” as the Oregonian put it.700 “Besides the books, pamphlets
and magazines one expects to find in a library,” a reporter noted, “the Albina Branch provides
Viewmasters, games, records, and films.” These unusual materials not only teach children (who
are “also eager users of the library’s educational games,” the reporters are careful to point out),
they change the very content and identity of the library space itself.701 Records “attract[ ]
teenagers and adults who take the records home to enjoy or listen to them at the library,” with
some “enjoy[ing] listening so much that they sing along, serenading the library staff.” Not only,
then, is the library in a supermarket, the library is also a karaoke bar. And a movie theater:
“Every Saturday afternoon at 2p.m., the library transforms its meeting rooms into a theater and
free movies are shown.” As you might imagine in a society defined by what Riesman called a
“cult of effortlessness,” this is a very popular development.702 “The steady crowd seems to have
only one complaint,” the reporter notes: “the movies are only once a week!”
The problem is not, I am eager to emphasize, necessarily that “Miss Bookmobile” or the
Albina Branch embraced the new spaces and materials of the consumer society. If we understand
libraries not just in terms of the mechanics of print distribution, but rather as infrastructures that
aim to produce civic connection, then a mild ambivalence to print as a privileged method of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
700

Linda M. Wood, “Albina Library Unit Has Unique Features,” Sunday Oregonian, August 6, 1967.
An emphasis on educational toys and games was a common one in postwar American society, when the baby
boom, the Cold War, and new research on the psychology of creativity combined to make them more popular than
ever. See Amy F. Ogata, “Creative Playthings: Educational Toys and Postwar American Culture,” Winterthur
Portfolio 39 (2004): 129-156.
702
Riesman, The Lonely Crowd, 146. See also, Riesman, Abundance for What?, 284.
701

268
	  

cultural transmission is not the end of the world. Shared experiences of films and music offer a
powerful potential for inculcating civic identity and crafting belonging.703 But it is a chancy
bargain, and one that often leads to a series of misunderstandings. The individualistic conception
of democracy that Leach argues emerged at the turn of the twentieth century was characterized at
a basic level by a confusion between access to things and access to citizenship and freedom.704
As Randall Jarrell argued in 1962, this misunderstanding—as well as the common practice of
mistaking agreeable for good—had serious risks, risks he linked (illustratively, for our purposes)
to changes in supermarket options:
There has been not one revolution, an industrial and technical revolution, there have been
two…. People have learned to process words too…. [W]e manufacture entertainment and
consolation as efficiently as we manufacture anything else. One sees in stores ordinary
old-fashioned oatmeal; and, side by side with it, another kind called Instant Cocoa,
Instant Oats. Most of our literature…is Instant Literature: the words are short, easy,
instantly recognizable words, the thoughts are easy, familiar, instantly recognizable
thoughts, the attitudes are familiar, already-agreed-upon, instantly acceptable attitudes.705
Jarrell thus argues that with a proliferation of options, and a proliferation of pleasure, it becomes
too easy to use what he sees as the wrong metric—ease, and easy pleasure—for judging worth
and making selections.
Back in Portland, these linked ambiguities took the form of an odd confusion. Amidst the
report on the “unusual library materials,” which the librarians found “exciting and challenging”
to work with, a shadow of possibilities unrealized takes shape: “The library’s small but useful
collection of films on Negro history, health, consumer information, and job hunting is heavily
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

703

Michael Billig, for example, has argued that nationalism takes form not only through the circulation of print (as
Benedict Anderson has shown), but also in everyday banalities, from flags to sports to speech. Billig, Banal
Nationalism.
704
Progressive reformer Herbert Cody, for example, declared that the “promise of American life” is a “promise of
comfort and prosperity for an ever-increasing majority of good Americans.” Leach, Land of Desire, 6. Lizabeth
Cohen argues that this mistake intensified after World War II, when the rise of the “Consumers’ Republic”
encouraged people to view their consumption in civic terms. See Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 113.
705
Jarrell, Sad Heart, 25-26. For a reading of this passage in the context of the rise of instant food, see Bowlby,
Carried Away, 175.

269
	  

used by groups in the neighborhood.” Works that promote African American freedom are thus—
because they take a material form associated with pleasure—equated with Viewmaster reels and
pop music recordings. The turn embodied by the booketeria seemed to make it difficult not only
to distinguish between books and things, as we saw earlier, but between different kinds of
information used for different kinds of purposes—between political film and cartoons, between
Dickens and Hot Rod. With pleasure as the governing principle, other kinds of distinction tended
to fail.
This was a failure that horrified a number of midcentury cultural critics, like Dwight
Macdonald, who complained that Americans increasingly failed to distinguish between the good
and the bad, the right and the wrong, the valuable and the useless.706 Macdonald specifically
identified a shift in “Masscult” (so-called because it hardly deserved to be called culture at all),
which was “bad in a new way” in twentieth-century America.707 It offered “its customers neither
an emotional catharsis nor an aesthetic experience,” he complained in 1960, “for these demand
effort.”708 And it did not even really offer entertainment (which “implies life and hence effort”),
providing instead a “distract[ing]…stimulating or narcotic” pleasure that is, above all, easy.
Drawing on Frankfurt School theorists who saw this obsession with ease as central to the rise of
fascism and the failure of political culture, Macdonald described an atomized and distracted
American public, cowed by its own culture and unable to exercise judgment upon it.709

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

706

For an elegant evaluation of MacDonald’s body of work and his influence, see Louis Menand, “Browbeaten:
Dwight Macdonald’s War on Midcult,” The New Yorker, September 5, 2011, 72-78. (This is an expansion of his
introduction to a 2011 edition of Macdonald’s criticism, cited above.) For a history of the sort of print Macdonald
deplored, see Rubin, The Making of Middlebrow Culture.
707
Macdonald, Masscult and Midcult, 3-4.
708
Macdonald, Masscult and Midcult, 4-5.
709
He quotes Theodor Adorno specifically in “Masscult and Midcult”: “Distraction is bound to the present mode of
production, to the rationalized and mechanized process of labor to which…the masses are subject…. People want to
have fun. A fully concentrated and conscious experience of art is only possible to those whose lives do not put such

270
	  

We can, and should, resist the elitism and exclusion often at the heart of Macdonald’s
fight (his claim, for instance, that “Masscult is a parody of High Culture” seems to miss the
point). But at the same time it seems undeniable that something had shifted in the way
Americans approached their own culture. It may be, as Louis Menand has argued in various
permutations since the 1980s, that new art that emerged in the 1960s (and much criticism of it)
ceased to be interested in the distinction between high culture and commercial culture.710 But the
shift had begun much earlier, born out of two competing but often complementary impulses: to
democratize culture and to monetize access to it. (The traveling library was birthed alongside the
department store and the Sears-Roebuck catalog for a reason.) And contrary to the hopes of the
traveling library’s founders, or the predictions of many critics who came after Macdonald—as
more and more mechanisms (from the Book-of-the-Month Club to booketerias) emerged to make
that culture more accessible—a broadly educated, sophisticated, discerning public largely failed
to take shape. Instead, rather than continuing to chafe under cultural prescription from on high,
ordinary Americans, in a fit of ecstatic, capitalized democracy, increasingly rejected the authority
on which those prescriptions had been based. Ease and pleasure became central to the process of
evaluating and consuming culture, and it became clearer and clearer that a much of the
fragmented American public had little interest imagining a common consciousness, at least not
when they sat down to be entertained.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
a strain on them that in their spare time they want relief from both boredom and effort simultaneously. The whole
sphere of cheap commercial entertainment reflects this dual desire.” Macdonald, Masscult and Midcult, 5.
710
In 1982, Menand also charted the origins of this shift—whereby it was possible for Susan Sontag to “equat[e] a
Rauschenberg painting with a Supremes song”—to the demystification of high culture and the romanticization of
popular culture in the 1960s. In 2011, he argued that the 1960s saw the emergence of work that “ignored the
distinction between art and commerce that had grounded the high-low system,” effectively leaving “Macdonald’s
system of critical judgment…left stranded on the far shore. Louis Menand, “Glad Hearts at the Supermarket,” The
Nation, May 15 1982, 595; Menand, “Browbeaten,” 78.

271
	  

“The Black Waters of Lethe”: Fashion
In 1934, English teacher Beulah Jo Wickard published a poem lamenting the absence of
the past in her mechanical present. Her eulogy describes a playful, lively, and living literary
heritage brought low by a forever forward-rushing, efficiently-timed, and carefully managed
industrial society:
...By what blue-veiled streams
Is now proclaimed the depth of love’s desire
While mortal youth must kiss and spend his fire
To tune of steel that never knew a dream?
Great Pan is dead, nor shall we evermore
Hearken to his mad piping in the glen,
For men are lost, and Pan is lost to men.
The factory whistle shrills; the pistons shove
And robots all, we clasp a robot love.711
With the past gone, and a future regimented by the factory whistle, people become machines
themselves and find love only as robots. This is a poem about industrialization, but the past-less,
scheduled future it imagines only became more real—if perhaps differently real—in the decades
after, with the rise of a powerful postwar consumer culture, of the supermarket and the “supermarket.” There is a reason, after all, that Ira Levin ends his Stepford Wives (1972) with the
housewives’ robot replacements “shopp[ing] languidly” through a supermarket, “[e]ven filling
their carts just so!”712 The “robot love” became the endless, insatiable clasping for the new, the
exciting, the object of desire.
Indeed, in addition to ease, time (or, more specifically, timeliness) became a key way of
determining value. If distinctions based on quality or content or purpose become less and less
useful, then an object’s relationship to the passage of time can serve as an easy surrogate. In
some ways, all of postwar America—and not just Charon’s boat in Ginsberg’s poem—
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
711

712

Beulah Jo Wickard, “Robot Love,” English Journal 23 (1934): 133.
Ira Levin, The Stepford Wives (New York: HarperCollins, 2002 [1972]), 120. Emphasis original.

272
	  

“disappear[ed] on the black waters of Lethe,” as a sort of cultural amnesia took hold.713 Leach
argues that “the cult of the new” was a “cardinal feature[ ]” of the new consumer culture, and this
was only more true after World War II, when reconstruction, “reconversion,” and a cascade of
new technologies began an even more intense obsession with the transformative potential of the
new.714 Indeed, a taste for newness could be a way to try and wrest control of one’s life away
from proscriptive tradition, to imagine a different tomorrow. But not everyone agreed that this
was a good idea, and some worried that these new rhythms bode ill. Writing from “far off at the
obsolescent rear of things” in A Sad Heart at the Supermarket, Randall Jarrell bemoaned this
shift.715 “Our culture is essentially periodical,” he wrote, “we believe that all that is deserves to
perish and have something else put in its place.”716 Living on a constantly advancing “frontier of
necessity” (why, we certainly need a new car this year, don’t we?), Jarrell argued, we are left
with “mere timeliness” as “the value to which all other values are reducible.”717 And while Jarrell
was particularly cantankerous on this point, he was not alone. Specifically exploring the strange
new world of the yearly model change in automotive marketing, David Riesman, too, worried
about a cultural turn toward “periodicity,” with an attendant “bureaucratiz[ation] of whim,”
which regiments, institutionalizes, and enforces “the cyclic variations of fashion.”718
Librarians, perhaps even more than many others, were susceptible to this turn as they
struggled to define and assert their role in a changing society. After efficiency, the chief argument
for new methods of library service—like bookmobiles and booketerias—tended to be their newness itself. No press or professional report on booketerias mentions more than one predecessor,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
713

Ginsberg, “Supermarket,” 30.
Leach, Land of Desire, 3. On the effects of “reconversion,” see Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 112-165.
715
Jarrell, Sad Heart, 64.
716
Jarrell, Sad Heart, 72.
717
Jarrell, Sad Heart, 72.
718
Riesman, Abundance for What?, 278.

714

273
	  

with most not mentioning earlier experiments in other cities at all.719 Indeed, “unique” is a
popular adjective in booketeria reports, regardless of how pathbreaking a particular instance
might be.720 Even American Libraries, the magazine of the American Library Association, got in
on the institutional-amnesia act. In a story headlined “First library-supermarket mix pleases
grocery shoppers,” an unnamed writer attributes to Gary Hime, assistant director of the Wichita
Public Library, the idea that “the Comotara [Branch, in a Kroger’s grocery store] is the first
public library branch to be opened within such a store.”721 The branch was opened in 1986, and
the story was published in 1987. That was, of course, a full forty years after a booketeria was
opened in Lincoln, Nebraska, a mere 275 miles away. And it was closer to eighty years after St.
Louis opened a branch library in a department store there, less than 450 miles away. This
librarians’ obsession with being new was, ironically, far from new in the booketeria context. The
first bookmobile, the first reading room, the first in-house movie showings, the first dedicated
children’s section: librarians love to claim (and argue over) first-ness. Libraries thus promote
themselves with reference to their adherence to the latest fashions, and to their supposedly
unique offerings.
In an institution like a public library, this can be a troubling tendency. Libraries are
constantly, and necessarily, grappling with the profound tension between two purposes:
preservation and dissemination. To keep something safe and to provide as many people as
possible with access to it are not, on the whole, very easily reconciled goals. The obsession with
newness, however, threatens to sacrifice the former for the latter, and—importantly—to ignore a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

719

The Troy article discussed above mentions a precursor in Evansville, which is among the only references to an
earlier model found.
720
See, for example, Kauffman, “‘Booketerias’;” Wood, “Albina Library Unit;” and “‘Booketeria’ Opened in
Sherwood Manor” (from the circular file in the Troy-Miami County Local History Library). “Unusual” was also a
common adjective.
721
“First Library-Supermarket Mix Pleases Grocery Shoppers,” American Libraries 18 (1987): 8, 10.

274
	  

key place where they meet. The periodical culture, Jarrell insisted, “is, at bottom, the opposite of
the world of arts.”722 In that world, “the present is no more than the last ring on the trunk,
understandable and valuable only in terms of all the earlier rings.”723 One fundamental goal of
librarianship has been the transmission of culture and ideas across time as well as space, tying
generation to generation and building a culture in layers. When libraries abdicated that way of
reconciling the two goals of librarianship, in favor of newness and fashion and periodicity, they
risked sacrificing a claim to institutional purpose and civic value. The editors of Library Journal
complained in 1974 about how library promotions have “the same look, sound, and tone of all
the slick stuff that convinces us we can’t shave with one razor blade, or can’t succeed if the
knees of our pantyhose sag.” The proliferation of this “commercial pap,” and its application to
public libraries, they argued, “overlooks the basic justification for all public services—that
people need them.”724 Like the other misrecognitions at play when libraries meet supermarkets
and automobiles—mistaking independence for freedom, speed for value, ease for quality—this
confusion of desires for needs, of the new for the important, was a result of a series of
compromises public libraries made in the postwar years.

“An Offer Like That”: Consequences
Such compromises have consequences. The coincidence—the collision—of libraries and
supermarkets, of books and cars, of ideas and objects, of public culture and the values of
consumer capitalism, had two mutually constituting effects. The first was the subjugation of the
library’s public role to market principles. The second was the decay of the material and cultural
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
722

Jarrell, Sad Heart, 73.
Jarrell, Sad Heart, 74.
724
John Berry III, Shirley Havens, and Karl Nyren, “The Selling of the Library,” Library Journal 99, no. 2 (1974):
85.

723

275
	  

infrastructures of public space that could facilitate shared access to resources, especially by the
urban poor increasingly left out of the supermarket society.
To begin to illustrate that first point, I want to walk through a series of moments in the
midcentury coincidence of libraries and consumer culture. In 1956, in Augusta, Georgia (where a
booketeria had been installed) a librarian explained what a new library building would look like,
if voters played along: “A library needs to be at ground level and built at sidewalk edge similar to
a modern department store. Window shopping attracts buyers to a department store and readers
to a library.”725 A year earlier, a report about the Grand Rapids, Michigan, library went out on the
Associated Press wire. Headlined “Supermarket Library” in the Seattle Times, the short blurb
noted that the Grand Rapids library had “adopted shopping bags and shopping carts” to keep
clutter to a minimum.726 That same year, James Meeks, director of the Dallas Public Library, told
the Dallas Morning News that, in the reporter’s words, a new library building “will be like a
modern department store.” It would, for example, have departments—popular fiction, children’s,
history, family, cooking, crafts—allowing patrons to efficiently find what they want. And such
division would “get away from the deadening effect of long lines of tables and row after row of
stacks.”727 Five years later, a teen etiquette columnist offered readers a striking bargain:
“Absolutely free—no limit. Offer good, day and evening hours, the year around…. Who’d make
an offer like that? A drug store? Supermarket? Wrong—it’s your library.”728 With accelerating
force, in short, libraries began to adopt the language and structure of consumer culture
institutions like supermarkets and department stores. Indeed, by 1987, this had gone so far that
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
725

Lloyd Parker, “$954,000 Library Bond Issue Slated for Vote Here Nov. 6,” Augusta Chronicle-Herald, August
26, 1956.
726
“Supermarket Library,” Seattle Times, September 30, 1955.
727
Wayne Gard, “Library Emulates Department Store,” Dallas Morning News, April 28, 1955.
728
Kitte Turmell, “The Library Habit,” Springfield (Mass.) Sunday Republican, January 10, 1960.

276
	  

the Wichita, Kansas, booketeria was not even the library’s idea. The librarians there, American
Libraries explained, “had hoped to open a new branch near northeast Wichita’s fastest growing
subdivisions,” but supermarket chain Dillon’s—in the words of the library’s assistant director—
“offered us a deal we couldn’t refuse.” The supermarket proposed 850 rent-free, utilities-paid
square feet in the hopes of “open[ing] new horizons in the marketing concept of ‘one-stop
shopping.’”729 By 1987, in other words, the marketing of the library could fold back on itself,
turning the library into just one more gimmick used to advertise breakfast cereal and frozen corn.
Beginning in the 1970s and accelerating through the early 1990s, a new way of thinking
about libraries emerged: the “information supermarket.” After decades spent putting books next
to cheese and crackers, decades spent finding new ways to transport and promote information as
an object of consumption, librarians were suddenly confronted with the stark reality of what it
would mean to treat knowledge as a commodity. As Newsweek explained in a dour 1975 report
on the future of libraries (titled “On Borrowed Time”), the new “information supermarket”
version of the library would come “complete with membership fees, parking-meter rates for time
in the reading room and softly ringing cash registers to tot up royalties for information
producers.”730 The idea—deceptively simple—was that, if patrons wanted information, they
should pay for it. After all, they pay for cereal when they want that, don’t they? In April 1973, for
example, the chairman of the board of the Information Industry Association declared that “userbased charges must inevitably prevail,” and a month later, in the pages of Library Journal,
librarian Louis Vagianos argued that a “fair market price” should be charged for library services,
in order to correct a problem: “The information consumer has never really had to pay for his
information and as a result has no conception of its cost, and therefore of its value to him as a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

729

730

“First Library-Supermarket Mix,” 8.
Kenneth L. Woodward with Ted Slate, “On Borrowed Time,” Newsweek, February 24, 1975, 85.

277
	  

product or service.”731 In Vagianos’s vision, the only way for a library patron to understand
worth is to become a library customer and understand it in terms of money.732 Joy, a new skill,
knowledge, a beautiful phrase, a helpful idea, or an enchanting story: these are not, in the
information supermarket, valuable in themselves. They are products that sit on shelves and have
value only in exchange.733
As this idea emerged, it was challenged by some who decried its mangling of the legacies
of librarianship. Fay Blake, a scholar of library science, and Edith Perlmutter, an economist,
wrote one of the most incisive critiques of the “information supermarket,” arguing that this focus
on market value fails to understand the ways that libraries are not sites of private economic
transactions. They are, instead, public institutions and spaces in which different—less private,
less directional, less commercial—kinds of reciprocity and exchange can emerge. “The
individual who makes use of the library’s product is not engaged in a private transaction which
benefits and concerns only himself,” they insisted.734 Noting that patrons—while “free riders” in
the sense that they do not pay directly for services—use the library in ways that have the
potential to benefit the larger social whole: “Our carrying of the free rider is, in effect, our
investment in human capital.”735 It is also a claim for a public role for libraries as institutions
enmeshed in aspects of human social life that exceed or escape the logic of consumer capitalism.
(That they spoke of “investment” and “capital” in making that claim suggests just how far gone
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

731

Quoted in Fay Blake and Edith Perlmutter, “Libraries in the Marketplace: Information Emporium or People’s
University?” Library Journal 99, no. 2 (1974): 108.
732
William Leach argues that among the key features of consumer society is “money value as the predominant
measure of all value in society.” Leach, Land of Desire, 3.
733
This is not dissimilar to the way publishers approached bookselling in the twentieth century, as described by Ted
Striphas. E-books, he argues, are only the most recent way in which publishers sought to limit the surplus value of
books (which can, after all, be passed from hand to hand without the publisher receiving payment from each
additional user). See Striphas, The Late Age of Print, 19-46.
734
Blake and Perlmutter, “Libraries in the Marketplace,” 109.
735
Blake and Perlmutter, “Libraries in the Marketplace,” 110.

278
	  

the rhetoric was in a context where Jarrell’s sad hearts had become, as Louis Menand put it in
1982, “Glad Hearts at the Supermarket.”736)
There is value, Blake and Perlmutter insisted, in “[f]ree and public libraries…which
accept their responsibility for serving everyone with the full range of information they need.”737
Public and free: these are legacies of progressive librarianship that the “information
supermarket” misrecognizes, distrusts, and rejects. “[A] library is not a supermarket,” the editors
of Library Journal wrote in 1974. But it was, perhaps, too late. After decades of compromise,
changing course would prove difficult. Today, while the “information supermarket” never fully
took hold, we are left with few ways of thinking about libraries—and other public institutions—
that are not deformed or impoverished by a cultural obsession with privatization, with the
disentanglement of public and private, that took hold even as Blake, Perlmutter, and the Library
Journal editors warned against it.738 As Tony Judt recently worried, “the pursuit of material selfinterest…now constitutes whatever remains of our sense of collective purpose.”739 We struggle to
articulate and enact a belief in something, anything, outside the self. And so we have trouble
imagining what combination, collectivity, or common consciousness might mean. “We know
what things cost,” Judt wrote, “but have no idea what they are worth.”740

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

736

Menand, “Glad Hearts.”
Blake and Perlmutter, “Libraries in the Marketplace,” 111.
738
According to John Donahue, the first hints of this obsession emerged in the early 1970s, and “privatization, as
today’s fiscally ambitious, ideologically charged phenomenon” fully took hold in the U.S. after being imported from
Thatcherite Britain beginning in 1979. John Donahue, The Privatization Decision: Public Ends, Private Means
(New York: Basic Books, 1989), 4. On the effects on librarianship, specifically, see John Buschman, Dismantling
the Public Sphere: Situating and Sustaining Librarianship in the Age of the New Public Philosophy (Westport,
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2003), 57-84. On the interpenetration of public and private in the initial postwar decades,
see Cohen, Consumers’ Republic, 119. This shift away from public investment had far-reaching, and indeed global,
effects. See, for just one example, Andrew Harrison Schwartz, The Politics of Greed: How Privatization Structured
Politics in Central and Eastern Europe (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006).
739
Tony Judt, Ill Fares the Land (New York: Penguin, 2010), 1.
740
Judt, Ill Fares, 1.
737

279
	  

That obsession with privatization and self-interest had spatial effects as well as cultural
ones, as the second large-scale consequence of these coincidences makes clear. One
characteristic of the new consumer culture that emerged after World War II, noted by many of its
contemporary observers, was its erasure of those unable to participate in it. Michael Harrington,
in his influential The Other America (1962), described “a new kind of blindness about poverty”
that caused the poor—residents of an “invisible land”—to “increasingly slip[ ] out of the very
experience and consciousness of the nation.”741 Jarrell, unsurprisingly, noted a similar dynamic
at work: “No matter how many millions of such exceptions to the general rule [of prosperity]
there are, they do not really exist, but have a kind of anomalous, statistical subsistence.”742 Those
without buying power, Harrington and Riesman and Jarrell noticed, seemed to have no power at
all in the new society. Intriguingly, both Riesman and Jarrell understood this elision in terms both
spatial and institutional. Riesman describes mental hospitals as one of the locations where “we
have hidden the people who belie the youthful, smiling, radiant, and glamorous faces in our
advertisements that purport to show what an American ought to look like,” and Jarrell similarly
writes that “our moral and imaginative view of the world is no more affected by [the poor] than
by the occupants of some home for the mentally deficient a little farther along the road.”743 This
is not a happenstance; the transformations and reorientations wrought by the rise of the
consumers’ republic were profoundly geographic. Suburbanization, the advent of highways,
white flight, car culture and its endless parking lots in front of endless stores were all part of the
consumer revolution and changed the landscape of the United States in ways that would make a

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

741

Harrington, The Other America, 11.
Jarrell, Sad Heart, 76. “The considerable minority of Americans who are still poor have tended to drop out of the
political and cultural spotlight,” Riesman added in 1964. Riesman, Abundance for What?, 105.
743
Riesman, Abundance for What?, 106n1; Jarrell, Sad Heart, 76.

742

280
	  

common consciousness more and more difficult to imagine.744 And booketerias, like
bookmobiles, were implicated in all of them.
As Chapter Two made clear, mobile print could at times abet racial segregation, thereby
helping to make and keep division a core American value. This was the case here, as well, in the
accelerating separation of those with the capital (social and economic) to participate in consumer
culture and those without. Along with the “coerced flexibility” that accompanied automobility,
and the broader cultural fetish for privacy discussed above, came a more general hollowing out
of urban centers and of collective life. The flight not just of whites but of public and private
investment in the transportation and civic infrastructures of inner cities meant fewer and fewer
opportunities to hold experiences and spaces in common. Already, in 1962, Harrington described
an “American city...transformed” by the automobile, the suburb, and the supermarket.
“Occasionally,” he explained of the recent past, “almost everyone passed through the Negro
ghetto or the blocks of tenements, if only to get downtown to work or to entertainment.”745 But,
with the white and the (even moderately) wealthy increasingly off in the suburbs, “[t]he poor still
inhabit the miserable housing in the central area, but they are increasingly isolated from contact
with, or sight of, anybody else.”746 This infrastructurally and materially enforced blindness had,
Harrington insisted, contributed to an inability to confront the inequities of the supposedly
abundant consumer society by “remov[ing] poverty from the living, emotional experience of
millions upon millions of middle-class Americans.”747 In the absence of shared space and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

744

See Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier; Richard Longstreth, The Drive-In, the Supermarket, and the Transformation of
Commercial Space in Los Angeles, 1914-1941 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000); Avila, Popular Culture in the Age of
White Flight.
745
Harrington, The Other America, 11.
746
Harrington, The Other America, 12.
747
Harrington, The Other America, 12.

281
	  

common cause grew a welter of personal things and private places (at least on the side of the
“affluent society”) that inhibited the development of a public philosophy.
One material consequence of this invisibility, abetted by the rise of automobiles and
supermarkets, has been the food desert. With corporations putting profits first and with carownership assumed and then built into the environment of our cities, people who are not
profitable, and who cannot easily travel, get left out. The car and the assumption of its ownership
had a lot to do with this. As Brett Williams describes in the context of postwar Washington, D.C.,
white flight and the slapdash transportation networks Harrington decried as they happened
produced cities that were “difficult to negotiate and skewered by commuter traffic,” making it
difficult for urban residents to reach supermarkets and unprofitable for supermarket companies to
serve them. “Thus,” Williams writes, “urban renewal and suburban development left behind food
deserts for the poor.”748 There are, unsurprisingly, also what we might call information deserts,
areas where people with limited resources and circumscribed mobility cannot easily access
information and communications resources.749 In the midst of these changes, John Marshall has
described “the virtual abandonment of the American inner city, insofar as library development
was concerned.” Under the impression that inner-city libraries “would be little used, while the
readers (white, middle class) were moving out of the suburbs,” librarians let inner city libraries
“decay” and planned suburban libraries on a principle of “access by motor car.”750 More and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
748

Brett Williams, “Deadly Inequalities: Race, Illness, and Poverty in Washington, D.C., since 1945,” in African
American Urban History Since World War II, ed. Kenneth L. Kusmer and Joe W. Trotter (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2009), 148.
749
See, for example, Andrew Gillespie and Kevin Robins, “Geographical Inequalities: The Spatial Bias of the New
Communications Technologies,” Journal of Communication 39 (1989): 7-18. This is, in a way, a de facto reprisal—
on racialized socioeconomic terms—of earlier de jure racial restrictions on library access discussed in chapter 2.
750
Marshall describes, as well, just how horribly this went over when applied to the Canadian context. John
Marshall, “Stress and Strain: The Price of Organizational Change,” in Citizen Participation in Library DecisionMaking: The Toronto Experience, ed. John Marshall (Halifax, NS: Dalhousie University School of Library Service,
1984), 117.

282
	  

more, too, downtown public libraries have been beset by conflicts between traditions of open
access and the demands of gentrification and redevelopment, inspiring strict regulations to keep
homeless people out that thereby extend the tradition of limiting contact by limiting access.751
There are, in other words, some places where some people can find neither crackers nor
Hemingway, Garcia Lorca nor watermelons.
And beyond that basic (and devastating) inaccessibility of either good food or
information, this dislocation and reorientation around objects has produced another important
lack. “A major casualty of America’s drive-in culture,” writes Kenneth T. Jackson, “is the
weakened ‘sense of community’ which prevails in most metropolitan areas.”752 And even more
broadly, Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris and Tridib Banerjee have argued that the “centrifugal
tendencies” of postwar American life “have resulted in alienation from public experience” and
“the substitution of private spaces for public ones.”753 Commercial spaces replace community
spaces—as demonstrated, almost cruelly, by the proliferation of shopping centers called
“Commons”—substituting a “community” constituted through consumption for what Lynn
Staeheli and Don Mitchell have called “a democratic, inclusive form of publicity.”754 In spite of
the intimations of later scholars and critics, the turn to a mass culture had not, in fact, called any
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

751

See, for example, Joseph Sjostrom, “Library Adopts Homeless Policy: Arlington Heights facility bans ‘Prolonged
or Chronic Sleeping,” Chicago Tribune, March 30, 1995; Eggert, “Popular with homeless.” On homelessness and
restrictions on access to public space, see Mitchell, Right to the City, esp. 161-226; Staeheli and Mitchell, The
People’s Property, 47-71; Smith, “Contours of a Spatialized Politics.”
752
Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier, 272.
753
Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris and Tridib Banerjee, Urban Design Downtown: Poetics and Politics of Form
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 179.
754
A cursory search shows such “Commons” in Federal Way, Washington; Raleigh, North Carolina; Fremont,
California; Martinsburg, West Virginia; Cincinnati, Ohio; Wayne County, Michigan; Fenton, Missouri; and many,
many more. “Town[e] Centers,” another popular commercial appellation, can be found in—as just a few examples
among many—Leawood, Kansas; Clackamas, Oregon; El Dorado Hills, California; and Reston, Virginia. The
substitution of private commercial space for truly public space (and thus the assertion of private property rights over
these new commons) has, Staeheli and Mitchell argue, been “used to justify the regulation of space such that only
certain members of the public under certain conditions are allowed into the new town square.” Staeheli and Mitchell,
People’s Property?, 92, 74. See also Margaret Kohn, Brave New Neighborhoods: The Privatization of Public Space
(New York: Routledge, 2004).

283
	  

coherent, organic, and collective mass into being.755 Despite being drawn at times from workingclass communities, and sold quite aggressively back to them, mass culture had not—as
Harrington pointed out so devastatingly—brought the poor or working class in a real and lasting
way into public life. It had, instead, made a seemingly, a marketably, “public” life available but
predicated on distance, speed, shallow pleasure, newness, exclusion, and separation. Libraries,
which have typically asserted an ability to produce connections across both time and space, have
been a key casualty here. As consumer capitalism has made it seem that that which connects us is
only that which we buy—those goods that move through our atomized world efficiently,
pleasurably, and fashionably—libraries have struggled to make a case for connection, and for
public culture, in midst of the consumerist centrifuge.

“Virtual Supermarket”: Coda
Queer theorist Karen Tongson, in her attempt to “forge a reparative, queer relationship to
the suburbs,” argues that those spaces are no longer the province only of the straight, white, and
affluent. “[T]he predictable routes of transit meant to keep the white middle classes at a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
755

This has been the general position taken by those reacting against the interpretations of the Frankfurt school by
deploying versions of Cultural Studies since the 1980s. These studies tend to fetishize and perhaps overestimate the
power of “resistance” in the face of overwhelming hegenomic forces. John Fiske, for example, repeatedly finds
resistance at work when television “act[s] as an agency for defamiliarization” (in the words of Fiske and John
Hartley), in direct opposition to Theodor Adorno’s insistence two decades earlier that that medium (like the rest of
the “culture industry”) aimed “at producing or at least reproducing the very smugness, intellectual passivity, and
gullibility that seems to fit in with totalitarian creeds.” The truth may likely be somewhere in the messy middle
between these positions, but as Raymond Williams reminds us, hegemony is incredibly adept at what he calls
“incorporation,” the folding of “emergent” and potentially subversive class cultures into acceptable and mainstream
forms of “‘popular’ journalism, advertising, and commercial entertainment.” John Fiske and John Hartley, Reading
Television (New York: Routledge, 2003 [1978]), 6; Theodor Adorno, “How to Look at Television,” Quarterly of
Film, Radio, and Television 8 (1954): 222; Williams, Marxism and Literature, 124. For a sophisticated but still,
perhaps, too optimistic reading of class, consumption, and resistance, see Nan Enstad, Ladies of Labor, Girls of
Adventure: Working Women, Popular Culture, and Labor Politics at the Turn of the Twentieth Century (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1999). For a more skeptical view, see Allan M. Brandt, “Engineering Consumer
Confidence in the Twentieth Century,” in Smoke: A Global History of Smoking, ed. Sander L. Gilman and Zhou Xun
(London: Reaktion, 2004), 332-343.

284
	  

reassuring remove from nonnormative subjects,” she writes, “have been dramatically rerouted.”
The carefully designed and painstakingly managed spaces of suburban America have found
themselves overrun; they have, in Tongson’s words, been “marred by strange and wild things
growing where they shouldn’t.”756 It seems that perhaps the coincidences that suburbia
occasioned are also ripe for rerouting, for a sprouting and profusion of “strange and wild things”
that might reimagine the role of things in the landscape. The booketeria, like the bookmobile,
was an attempt at using a reversal—using an object or institution that seemed opposed to public
culture in order to, in fact, support it—as a tool of librarianship, but it was an attempt that often,
as we have seen, faltered. Recently, some libraries have struggled to solve some of the problems
such faltering presents, in a curious sort of reversal of that reversal. Beginning in March 2010,
for example, the health department in Baltimore began a program they call the Virtual
Supermarket Project:
[T]he VSP enables neighborhood residents to place grocery orders at their local library
branch or school once a week and receive their groceries the following day at the same
place for no delivery cost. The VSP increases their access to high quality affordable
groceries in the very neighborhood that they live in, allowing them to bypass the
difficulty and expense of catching multiple bus rides or taxi cabs in order to reach
healthier food options.757
Librarian Diama Norris, of the Tulsa Initiative, has similarly proposed “a potential fusion of
the...green cart concept, the traveling taco stand, and the bookmobile” as a way to create
“moveable oases” for her city’s food deserts.758 The Virtual Supermarket Project and proposals
like it actually are more moments in a surprisingly long and textured history of the coincidence
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
756

Karen Tongson, Relocations: Queer Suburban Imaginaries (New York: New York University Press, 2011), 2-3,

5.

757

“Baltimarket: The Virtual Supermarket Project,” Baltimore City Health Department, available at
http://www.baltimorehealth.org/virtualsupermarket.html, accessed 28 February 2011. See also, Donna Marie Owens,
“Check It Out: Get Your Groceries at the Library,” NPR, available at
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=126282239&sc=emaf, accessed 1 May 2010.
758
“Moveable Oases for the Food Desert,” The Tulsa Initiative Blog, available at
http://tulsainitiative.wordpress.com/2009/07/17/moveable-oases-for-the-food-desert/, accessed 25 June 2011.

285
	  

this chapter has sought to explore. But unlike the “information supermarket,” they offer a canny
reversal of the dynamics described above, using the expansive public-ness of the public library to
try to alleviate the pain of living in the gaps and fissures of capitalist circulation and
consumption. They are thus a reassertion of libraries’ role in supporting public landscapes in the
face of capitalist indifference and what Raymond Williams called “mobile privatisation.”759 They
are also, in their ways, challenges to the possibility of total digitization in librarianship—that
new challenge to the future of physical library infrastructures—and therefore are claims for the
continued physical presence of public libraries in American communities.
But these new ideas come at a moment when that physical presence continues to be under
siege. First, market logic and what one designer calls “retail feeling” continue to make funding
and building public libraries, full of public culture, difficult.760 And even more powerfully, the
last several decades have brought another seeming threat to the physical spaces and physical
books of the library: digital technology. In the next chapter, we will see how those technologies
facilitated a reemergence and reimagining of the dream of a common consciousness wrought by
the movement of text. We will see, in other words, how—out of the separation, expansion, and
consumerism that both characterized and unraveled the progressives’ fantasy—old ways of
thinking about books on the move found new life on the Web and in the world.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

759

760

Raymond Williams, Television: Technology and Cultural Form (New York: Routledge, 2003 [1974]), 19.
Deanne Erpelding, quoted in Susan S. Szenasy, “Site Visits,” Metropolis, March 2011, 16.

286
	  

Figures

Figure 29: A Nashville, Tennessee, booketeria (ca. 1953)
From Nashville Public Library Photo Collection

287
	  

Figure 30: A booketeria in Evansville, Indiana (1958)
From Herbert Goldhor, “Library-Booketeria,” Library Journal 83 (1958): 3074

288
	  

Figure 31: Cartoon by Carl Rose (1959)
From Sidney Margolis, “The Super Business of Supermarkets,” New York
Times (March 29, 1959)

289
	  

Figure 32: Cartoon by
Carl Rose
From Margolis, “The Super
Business of Supermarkets”

Figure 33: WPA Poster (1941)
From Library of Congress, “By the
People, For the People: Posters from the
WPA, 1936-1943”

290
	  

Figure 34: Gerstenslager ad (1971)
From American Libraries 2 (1971)

291
	  

CHAPTER FIVE

“Universal Access to All Knowledge”:

Digital Books, Physical Spaces and the Reinvention of Common
Consciousness
“Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked, real,
Ever the old inexplicable query, ever that thorn'd thumb,
that breath of itches and thirsts”
–Walt Whitman (1855)761
“But their very physicality makes books inaccessible to the multi-terabyte databases of modern
Alexandrian projects. Books take time to transport…. Even as the Internet has revived hope of a
universal library…books have remained a dark region in the universe of information.”
–Gary Wolf (2003)762
“[T]he internet is not something you just dump something on. It's not a truck. It's a series of
tubes.”
–Sen. Ted Stevens (2006)763
In July 2006, the government of Mountain View, California, revealed a shiny new
bookmobile. The announcement didn’t happen at the main library building, or at the seat of the
town’s government. Instead, the bookmobile was unveiled at the global headquarters of Google,
Inc., which considers Mountain View its “hometown” and which had provided $200,000 to build
the machine.764 If we bought the standard narratives of the digital age—narratives of
disembodied information, universal access, of the triumph of the global over the local—this
might seem more than a little bizarre. A local bookmobile, of all things, funded by one of the
most influential digital-technology corporations in the world? Press coverage of the event did its
best to paper (or perhaps more precisely unpaper) over the strangeness, working to emphasize
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

761

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 111.
Gary Wolf, “The Great Library of Amazonia,” Wired, December 2003,
http://www.wired.com/techbiz/media/news/2003/10/60948?currentPage=all.
763
Cory Doctorow, “Sen. Stevens’ hilariously awful explanation of the Internet,” Boing Boing, July 2, 2006,
http://boingboing.net/2006/07/02/sen-stevens-hilariou.html.
764
Google, “Welcome to free WiFi access for Mountain View,” http://wifi.google.com/.

762

292
	  

how Google-appropriate, and new, the vehicle was. This is “[n]ot your grandmother’s
bookmobile,” the local newspaper headline insisted, and the article beneath it claimed that the
bookmobile’s new features (a wireless internet hub, a self-checkout station, and two laptops)
“even awed the high-tech gurus of Google.”765 And according to the article, the bookmobile’s
most amazing attribute is its ability to act as an internet access point, “so the Web can be brought
to places.”766 Casting a bookmobile’s ability to bring information “to places” as unprecedented
required, of course, the curious elision of a century of bookmobile history and, for that matter, a
half-millennium of print culture. The article fails to mention even once the bookmobile’s most
prominent, voluminous feature (its books), and when a Google project manager did mention an
older technology to try to explain the new contraption, it certainly wasn’t an earlier bookmobile:
“It's like the ice cream man, but instead of ice cream it's the Internet.”767 The internet, in this
view, has more in common with ice cream than it does with physical, paper books—and Google
funded the bookmobile because of the Web, not all that silly paper. But Google’s funding of a
bookmobile stocked with both wifi and books actually made sense, because the relationship
between the two is by no means actually clear-cut or oppositional. As we will see in this chapter,
books and bytes, like flesh and fiber optics, are far more imbricated, more mutually constitutive,
more interwoven, than we tend to think.
By the 1970s, as we have seen in the previous chapters, the dream of common
consciousness via the bookmobile had started to sour (for those it hadn’t excluded from the start,
of course). In 1976, artist Nam June Paik rejected older transportation technologies and, for that
matter, the very idea of information traveling the earth: “The effort to bring black and white
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

765

Daniel DeBolt, “Not your grandmother’s bookmobile,” Mountain View Voice, July 21, 2006, http://www.mvvoice.com/story.php?story_id=1792.
766
DeBolt, “Not your grandmother’s bookmobile.”
767
DeBolt, “Not your grandmother’s bookmobile.”

293
	  

children together by means of school busing is going awry,” he wrote. “Desegregation strategies
have become questionable. But television power can help achieve integration and understanding,
and it has the added advantage that it happens over the air, unhampered by our polluted and
complicated earth.”768 Buses failed. What we need is the transportation without the friction, the
signal without the noise. Twenty years later, Paik’s peculiar vision would no longer seem
unusual, as the turn of the twenty-first century, like the turn of the twentieth, saw the emergence
of new technologies (personal computing, in this case) and new networks (here, the World Wide
Web) that transformed the way people thought about information, community, and belonging.
Once again, infrastructure became the frame on which a fantasy of universal belonging was built.
This new fantasy was not entirely new; it was common consciousness reemerged and reimagined
as both immediate and incorporeal. “This is like a groupmind!” Howard Rheingold declared of
an early virtual community. And “[t]he sensation of personally participating in an ongoing
process of group problem-solving…electrified” him as he realized that computers were allowing
people “to rediscover the power of cooperation.”769 But despite the “re-“ in rediscovery,
Rheingold saw a distinction between old forms of cooperation and community and the new,
virtual ones:
People in virtual communities use words on screens to exchange pleasantries and argue,
engage in intellectual discourse, conduct commerce, exchange knowledge, share
emotional support, make plans, brainstorm, gossip, feud, fall in love, find friends and lose
them, play games, flirt, create a little high art and a lot of idle talk. People in virtual
communities do just about everything people do in real life, but we leave our bodies
behind. You can’t kiss anybody and nobody can punch you in the nose, but a lot can
happen within those boundaries.770
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

768

Nam June Paik, “Media Planning for the Postindustrial Society – The 21st Century is now only 26 years away,”
Media Art Net, http://www.medienkunstnetz.de/source-text/33/.
769
Howard Rheingold, The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier (Cambridge: MIT Press
2000 [1993]), 109.
770
Rheingold, Virtual Community, xvii.

294
	  

Rheingold may be a bit wistful about this difference—no kissing, alas—but he shared with his
contemporaries a radical, almost violent optimism. This new virtual world, they believed,
divorced from flesh and earth and steel, from the archaic politics of race and nation and gender,
would offer an opportunity for truly common consciousness, for real universal connection and
belonging.771
This new digital dream was a fantasy of a placeless, universal everywhere—and as such
did not alleviate so much as exacerbate the blind spots and limits of common consciousness.
Fred Turner has argued that this “digital utopianism” emerged out of the New Communalist
movement of the 1960s and 1970s, which generally “left questions of race unaddressed.”772 The
new world the New Communalists would build, in Turner’s words, “would be masculine,
entrepreneurial, well-educated, and white.”773 It is not a coincidence that this also describes the
world of the early Web, of Silicon Valley, of the ground for these supposedly inclusive,
supposedly incorporeal new spaces and communities. Beth Kolko, Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert
Rodman have argued that the switch for race online is usually “‘off’ (i.e., race is an invisible
concept because it’s simultaneously unmarked and undiscussed).”774 But not talking about race is
not the same as not being shaped by it, and, indeed, silence is a key marker of privilege. Richard
Dyer has influentially argued that “whiteness…is in but not of the body,” that it exercises power
by remaining unmarked, unnoticed, universal.775 Sally Robinson agrees, asserting that “white
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

771

In more recent years, this fantasy has lost some of its domestic luster, but its foreign policy dimensions—the
assumption that the Web and, in particular, the social and participatory media of Web 2.0 are necessarily and
directly democratizing—is flourishing, to rather depressing effect, as Evgeny Morozov has shown. See Evgeny
Morozov, The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom (New York: PublicAffairs, 2010).
772
Fred Turner, From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Steward Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of
Digital Utopianism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), 97
773
Turner, From Counterculture, 97.
774
Beth E. Kolko, Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert B. Rodman, “Race in Cyberspace: An Introduction,” in Race in
Cyberspace, ed. Beth E. Kolko, Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert B. Rodman (New York: Routledge, 2000), 1.
775
Richard Dyer, White (New York: Routledge, 1997), 14.

295
	  

male power has benefited enormously from keeping whiteness and masculinity in the dark”
because “[w]hat is invisible…evades the cultural marking that distances the subject from
universalizing constructions of identity and narratives of experience.”776 The successful
deployment of digital utopianism required, “leav[ing] our bodies behind,” separating the mind
from the racially and sexually marked body, supposedly freeing it from the weight of such
fleshly limitations to access the ethereal space of true belonging. But, as Michael Warner has
asserted, such an “ability to abstract oneself…has always been an unequally available
resource.”777 You cannot snap your fingers and wish the race and gender away, and so the dream
of a common consciousness in a digital age assumes the freedom and weightlessness of white
masculinity. And thus the disembodied virtuality so central to the new fantasy was less a solution
for than a continuation of the assumptions (of universal whiteness, of shared middle-class
identity) that hobbled common consciousness to begin with.
Alongside this constitutive (and deeply flawed) opposition of mind and flesh lies another
influential binary: between bits and bytes on the one hand, and paper and ink on the other. So
much commentary about books over the past several decades has been about this opposition, and
about the seemingly undeniable, inevitable supremacy of the digital. Paper rots, ink fades, and
you can’t even press Ctrl-F on a book and find what you want in an instant. Not to mention you
have to actually carry a book—in a bookmobile, perhaps—to get it from one place to another.
The horror. But we are, the story goes, moving swiftly and cleanly from this sad, papered-over
world to a new, instantaneous, rot-free, touch-screen, shiny-smooth digital universe. But the real
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

776

Sally Robinson, Marked Men: White Masculinity in Crisis (New York: Columbia University Press, 2000), 1.
Robinson also warns that the scholarly marking of white male bodies has more in common with the politics it seeks
to refute than those scholars would likely want to admit. In post-1960s America, Robinson argues, white men have
increasingly drawn on narratives of being made visible as white men (being torn out of the space of the universal) as
ways of articulating opposition to feminism, affirmative action, and other progressive socio-political transformations.
It is necessary, then, to not assume that marking whiteness or masculinity is enough to constitute a progressive act.
777
Warner, Publics and Counterpublics, 160.

296
	  

story, perhaps unsurprisingly, is so much messier than that. Transitions between information
forms are never clean or easy or straightforward. Manuscripts, for example, coexisted with
printed books for centuries after the invention of the printing press; the latter’s supposed triumph
was slow, uneven, and always incomplete.778 This is certainly true today. As Siva Vaidhyanathan
puts it, “[w]e are dazzled and distracted by the new methods of transmitting and using this
knowledge, but most of the best expressions of deep human thinking still rest on paper, bound
with glue, nestled and protected by cloth covers, on the shelves of libraries around the world.”779
But I want to go a further than this claim that books continue to matter because not all
information is digital. What I will suggest here is that books continue to matter even after the
information they contain is “freed” from the page, just as flesh still matters in the ether.780
As this chapter will show, both of these digital utopian hopes—the belief that bodies
don’t shape online communication and the conviction that paper no longer matters—depend,
fundamentally, on misapprehensions of space and its politics. Physical bodies, physical books,
and physical spaces remain central, I argue, to the construction of communities in the twentyfirst century. To do so, this chapter focuses on the Internet Archive, which was founded in 1996
to preserve the Web and is now focused on digitizing and archiving, well, everything ever. The
Internet Archive is an institution both confidently and awkwardly bestride the divisions at stake
here: between ethereal environments and physical places, between physical bodies and
incorporeal ideas, between printed pages and digital information. Unlike Google, which expands
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

778

See David McKitterick, Print, Manuscript, and the Search for Order, 1450-1830 (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2005).
779
Siva Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry) (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2012 [2011]), 150.
780
I draw here, in part, on Bonnie Mak’s claim that “[e]very digital page has a specific materiality and therefore
matters in its own way. Suffused with individual circumstances of production, circulation, and transmission, each
page is witness to and participates in its own social history, even in the digital present.” Bonnie Mak, How the Page
Matters (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011), 71.

297
	  

information access in order to monetize it, the Internet Archive works in the long tradition this
dissertation has thus far explored. The digital-age heir (for better and for worse) to Melvil Dewey,
to Kathryn Johnston, to Henry Legler, the Internet Archive is an institution dedicated to
“Universal access to all knowledge.” It is a born-digital archive the logo of which borrows its
iconography from physical library spaces. And, most strikingly, the Internet Archive had a
bookmobile. After first examining the politics and problems of the digital utopians’ approach to
paper, the chapter will turn to the Internet Archive’s practices of production and distribution. We
will look at how central bodies and spaces are to the process of digitization, as well as how it
creates a legacy for the paper page in the digital archive. We will then examine the Internet
Archive’s bizarre but illustrative bookmobile, which turned digital files back into paper books.
The chapter will close by looking at what happened when an Internet Archive-affiliated
bookmobile stopped at Walden Pond, in order to argue that the regulation of space (not just of
ideas) matters for creating actual, functioning communities more than a century after the Kansas
Traveling Library began.
In 2007, Brewster Kahle, founder of the Internet Archive, assured an audience that
“books are within our grasp.”781 But despite his utopian confidence, what a “book” is—not to
mention what “grasp” means or who “our” refers to—was very much up in the air. What this
uncertainty meant, and how it affected the rethinking of common consciousness in the twentyfirst century, is the subject of this chapter.

“Some Better Way to Distribute Information”: Digital Utopianism and the Friction of Print

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

781

“Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library,” TED video, 20:02, December 2007,
http://www.ted.com/talks/brewster_kahle_builds_a_free_digital_library.html.

298
	  

In 1984, Stewart Brand organized a gathering of hackers north of San Francisco. In the
course of conversations that weekend, which included Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, Brand
spoke some of the most famous words ever uttered in the history of computing:
On the one hand information wants to be expensive, because it’s so valuable. The right
information in the right place just changes your life. On the other hand, information
wants to be free, because the cost of getting it out is getting lower and lower all the time.
So you have these two fighting against each other.782
But only one part of this statement really gets remembered: information wants to be free. An
adaptation of earlier statements of hacker ethics, the phrase played a significant role in the early
years of digital communications. Wired editor-in-chief Chris Anderson, focusing primarily on
the economic dimensions, claimed that this selective remembering was a matter of rejecting the
“paradoxical and tautological” tension at work in the longer passage.783 But more important, it
seems, is that, when the phrase is unmoored from Brand’s longer argument, the semantic
ambiguity of the word free comes out to play. Particularly with the anthropomorphic twist Brand
gave it, wherein information wants, the object of that desire seems less likely to be the state of
being unpriced than that of being unencumbered. It was not so much a question of economy as it
was one of liberty (which is not to say that liberty has nothing to do with economics). That this
distinction mattered, and that the second meaning was key to the phrase’s popularity, makes
sense, because early ideas about digital information were largely fantasies of frictionlesness. The
dream of digital distribution was, in other words, a fantasy of unfettered flow.
The founders of the traveling library had dreamed of moving books faster and further, of
creating infrastructures that would take knowledge off of shelves and out of buildings. But the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

782

For a genealogy of this passage, see Chris Anderson, Free: The Future of a Radical Price (New York: Hyperion,
2009), 94-100.
783
Anderson, Free, 97. Brand himself told Anderson that he was trying to highlight a paradox between expensive
and free, one of the “[p]aradoxes [that] drive the thigns we care about.” Anderson Free, 99.

299
	  

purpose of the traveling library, like the bookmobile, was not merely to transport information,
and those other purposes depended on friction. There was F.A. Hutchins, the secretary of the
Wisconsin Free Library Commission, who wrote of “[e]nthusiasm…that seemed to kindle at the
touch,” remember, and Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s image of common consciousness as that
which “lifts and lights and enlarges the human soul of kindling majesty.”784 The physical
transportation of books through space, and amongst people, was meant to bring people together
as much as move data from one place to another. But if, as the digital utopians imagined, you
could move that data without running into any obstacles and without rubbing up against any
people along the way, how would common consciousness come into being? Indeed, while the
larger culture of the early internet often centered on questions of community and (disembodied)
interaction, we will see in this section that when they focused on print, their fantasies were more
interested in efficiency and flow than they were in contact and belonging.
In 1972 the Advanced Research Projects Agency, the government office largely
responsible for the birth of the internet, released a film about networks and flow. Computer
Networks: Heralds of Resource Sharing (1972) aims to tell the then-recent history of networked
computing, and all the big names are there.785 A young Bob Kahn—co-inventor, with Vinton
Cerf, of the Transmission Control Protocol and the Internet Protocol—is on hand, standing in
front of a blackboard, explaining the structure of a computer network linked by IMPs (Interface
Message Processors). That structure is a result of technical limitations, but despite elisions and
erasures in the film, it is clear that those limitations were shaped by and themselves shaped some
very human senses of grace and efficiency. When you try to connect every computer in a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

784

Hutchins, Traveling Libraries, 6; Gilman, Human Work, 889.
“Computer Networks: Heralds of Resource Sharing (Arpanet, 1972),” Internet Archive video, 30:22, 1972,
http://archive.org/details/ComputerNetworks_TheHeraldsOfResourceSharing.
785

300
	  

network to every other computer, Kahn explains at his blackboard, “the extension of the network
is just not a graceful thing.” Ultimately, it’s much more efficient, ironically, to take the long way
around.
Picking up from Kahn, Lawrence Roberts—who used packet-switching to develop the
ARPANET, the precursor to the internet—explains, in rather grand terms why such graceful,
efficient networks matter:
The problem is much like small civilizations or small cities trying to develop separately
and not having any way of sharing what they learn with other groups. And if that
continues to happen, you don’t have a civilization, so that the necessity was to provide a
mechanism so that what was learned one place could be transferred effectively and
directly to other places without redoing it all and learning it all over again in each place.
The strange thing about this little speech is that it plays as the camera pans across an engraving
[FIGURE 35] that depicts the making of William Penn’s treaty with the Delaware in the late
seventeenth century. Strange but not entirely inexplicable. After all, one of the foundational
myths of American life—the myth that gave us Thanksgiving—is that a nation born out of force
and displacement really had its origins in the friendly exchange of information.786 In this deeply
amnesiac telling, moving data (agricultural techniques, Christianity, treaty terms) back and forth
first saved the colonists and then civilized the natives, ultimately creating the United States in the
process. Refashioned for an age of digital technology, this story makes empire shorthand for
connection but promises even more efficiently fruitful contact zones, ones made not of soil and
flesh but ones and zeroes.787

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

786

It seems likely that the engraving was chosen to depict a generic encounter between European colonists and
Native Americans and not for any reason having specifically to do with Penn.
787
Twenty-eight years later, sociologist Raymond Eve made an oddly similar parallel, declaring that “[t]he birth of
the World Wide Web was much akin to the situation of the first European who found himself standing upon
Plymouth Rock.” Quoted in Helen McLure, “The Wild, Wild Web: The Mythic American West and the Electronic
Frontier,” Western Historical Quarterly 31 (2000): 475.

301
	  

Those zeroes and ones are a much better option, the film assures its viewers. “The
computer technology has been moving in a way,” the film’s biggest name—J.C.R. Licklider,
whose work influenced most aspects of digital computing in the late twentieth century—explains
early on, “that nothing else that people have ever known has moved.” And we should be quite
thankful, he suggests, as previous sorts of mobility fell a bit short:
It’s been hard to, well, share information for years. The printing press, of course, was the
great step into sharing information, but the printing press didn’t essentially handle the
problem of distributing it. It handled the problem of copying it. And we have been
needing for a long time some better way to distribute information than to carry it about.
The print on paper form is embarrassing, because in order to distribute information,
you’ve got to move the paper around. And lots of paper gets to be bulky and heavy and
expensive to move about.788
Combining understatement (“for years,” meaning half a millennium) with hyperbole
(“embarrassing”)—and mixing a dream for a glorious future with a shuddering disregard for the
past—this is a perfect encapsulation of the techno-utopian approach to information and its
histories. All that stuff that came before Babbage? Possibly important, we suppose, but also
rather dirty and difficult and only interesting insofar as it led to the dawn of computing. “I tend
to believe that things are going to be considerably better for a lot of people when and if we ever
get changed over to an essentially electronic base,” Licklider continues. “It’s just fundamental
that if one wants to deal with information, you ought to deal with the information and not with
the paper it’s written on.” The weight of paper, the feel of it against skin, its passage through
space, was irrelevant at best and a hindrance at worst.
Licklider was certain, in the way of digital utopians (then and now), that information can
and should be separated from the form it takes, that it can and should be encountered directly and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

788

One wonders if Licklider would look back at the pile of violated treaties between colonists or the U.S.
government and native tribes—the violated treaties the video tries to ignore—and decide that the real problem was
the paper they were printed on.

302
	  

without friction or interference, that it can and should be free. The point of networking
information, according to Licklider and his fellows, was to take it out of the hands of people, and
off the paths they traveled. Users could connect with information, and even with one another, on
demand, without any messy stuff getting in the way. With computer networking, Licklider
promised, information need not “be copied and sent all over the country,” as it “come[s] out of
the database and appear on everybody’s scope, and the correlation, the coordination, of the
activity is essentially right there in the computer network itself.” Of course, Licklider knew well
the technical and infrastructural requirements of that appearance (and the film itself goes on at
rather excruciating length about them). But Licklider sees speed defeat distance—a
“geographically distributed” team can be constantly “in touch” with one another and their data—
and his oracular voice does not allow such particulars to impede. Information simply appears,
and thank God for it.
This was a long way from the Kansas Traveling Library, which required May Pressley to
“make a circuit” of her neighbors before she even touched a printed book, or even from the
booketerias that, however they fetishized efficiency, encouraged undeniably embodied
encounters with physical books alongside encounters with cereal and canned soup. On a
computer network, according to Licklider, interactions with and around information are precisely
targeted and oh-so-smooth. Users identify what they want to see, or who they want to
communicate with, and it happens. This is a vision without couriers, without librarians, without
the accidental or frustrating or serendipitous or strange. It is a dream of a world without
friction.789 “And this is obviously going to make a tremendous difference,” Licklider assures the

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

789

More recently, but along strikingly similar lines, a tech writer wrote that we usually think about “digital
communities” by visualizing how “internet gatherings can bridge massive distances at miniscule cost while

303
	  

viewer in his characteristically grand and dismissive way, “in how we plan, organize, and
execute almost everything of any intellectual consequence.”
That included libraries, or at least the functions libraries served. In the 1972 film, over
images of library stacks and bookshelves [FIGURE 36], Licklider had presciently fantasized
about the way personal computing might kill paper and change the shape of book culture: “if
everyone had a display console in his home and in his office, he could be reading from
electronically-stored information instead of from a book, and the difference is he could have
access to anything he wanted to read instead of just what was within reach.” Licklider’s fantasies
of reading at a distance, and his concomitant faith in electronic impulses over pulped wood, had
a long shelf-life. Twenty years later, for example, Robert Coover wrote in the New York Times
that “out in the humming digitalized precincts” of hackers and computer networks, “the very
proliferation of books and other print-based media, so prevalent in this forest-harvesting, paperwasting age, is held to be a sign of its feverish moribundity, the last futile gasp of a once vital
form before it finally passes away forever, dead as God.”790 (Licklider’s flair for the dramatic, as
you can see, also continued apace.)
And a year after that, the inaugural issue of Wired magazine—periodical scripture for
Web-era digital evangelism—included an article that updated Licklider’s dream. “The world’s
great libraries share a great vision,” John Browning wrote in the 1993 article: “Books once
hoarded in subterranean stacks will be scanned into computers and made available to anyone,
anywhere, almost instantly.”791 This image of stacks unfolded out into the world was a familiar
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
dispensing with all those sticky real-world inconveniences.” Bill Wasik, “Planet TEDx,” Wired, December 2012,
198.
790
Robert Coover, “The End of Books,” New York Times, June 21, 1992.
791
John Browning, “Libraries Without Walls for Books Without Pages,” Wired, March/April 1993,
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/1.01/libraries.html.

304
	  

one by 1993. Thanks to digital technology, according to the fantasies of instantaneous and total
connection it occasioned, libraries could enact the open shelving so central to the Cold War
bookmobiles we saw in Chapter Three on a total scale. From this straightforward, if a bit febrile,
description of stacks opening up, Browning’s metaphors proliferate around images of digital
flow and papery blockage. If libraries can scan, scan, scan, then they will “break[ ] down the
walls that separate libraries from each other and their users” and become—as the article title puts
it—“Libraries Without Walls for Books Without Pages.” Linking the falling of walls to the
absence of pages, Browning presents paper as a sort of prison. It is not merely inconvenient or
embarrassing but limiting and restricting. Information is trapped by paper which is, in turn,
trapped by walls. Proposing a jailbreak of sorts, Browning predicts that large-scale scanning will
mean that “[i]nstead of fortresses of knowledge, there will be an ocean of information.”792 The
progressives who dreamed up the traveling library and then the bookmobile were no fans of
walls. As we saw in Chapter One, Melvil Dewey warned against “allow[ing] even the smallest
obstacle to remain between any citizens and the desire for…information” and, like Browning, he
turned to a bit of liquid imagery, called for knowledge to be “as free as…water.”793 But what
Dewey seemed to have in mind was the frictional, disruptive flow of a river, with its
unpredictable currents and changing scenery, and not the smooth and even placidity of a wide,
wide ocean.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

792

While utopian in many of the same ways as Licklider, Browning is a bit more grounded when it comes to
considering the potential consequences of digitization and open access, predicting a showdown (or, more
optimistically, a “compromise”) between libraries and publishers. He also acknowledges that technical limitations
would frustrate the immediate realization of his proposal: “The electronic image of a book is still a few gigabytes
worth of information, and a gigabyte is a helluva lot of data—several times more than what fits into most of today’s
computers or flows conveniently through computer networks. Browning, “Libraries Without Walls.”
793
Dewey, “Traveling Libraries,” 5.

305
	  

The dream of a library without walls was in no way new.794 (It had been part of the
traveling library movement from the beginning.) But the image did have particular salience at
this moment when the free flow of information was celebrated by both hackers and federal
bureaucrats alike.795 Librarians themselves were excited, but also more than a bit nervous, about
what they knew would be the very real consequences of a library without walls.
Less than six months before Browning’s article saw print, American Libraries (the house
publication of the American Library Association) published a very different column with a rather
similar name: “Libraries without walls; or, Librarians without a profession.” The column’s
author, Bruce Park, acknowledged that his title is “perhaps a little melodramatic,” but he argued
that the profession of librarianship is, indeed, disappearing “through a process called
marginalization.”796 Park was specifically worried that library automation, which was taking
over many of the “more tedious tasks” of librarianship, would leave so little work left that it
could be done by volunteers, and the profession would be “pushed off to the side or to the
margins.” Park offered a rather reasonable call to action for librarians to “change or redefine our
relationship to this changing new environment.”797 But the cartoon that accompanies the column,
by Jim Flynn, illustrated more basic, deeper fears about the prospect of a library without walls,
or books without pages. In the cartoon [FIGURE 37], a librarian clings desperately to the edge of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
794

Around the same time Browning’s article was printed, Roger Chartier published an article in Representations
titled “Libraries Without Walls” that encyclopedically surveyed the early modern dream of a universal library.
Roger Chartier, “Libraries Without Walls,” Representations 42 (1993): 38-52.
795
Plans for a National Information Infrastructure (also known as the “information superhighway”), for example,
was institutionalized and popularized after the passage of the High Performance Computing Act of 1991. According
to Donald A.B. Lindberg, who directed the National Coordination Office for High Performance Computing and
Communications, the NII was “envisioned as a seamless web of communications networks, computers, databases,
and consumer electronics that will make unprecedented amounts of information available to U.S. citizens from all
walks of life.” Donald A.B. Lindberg, “HPCC and the National Information Infrastructure: an overview,” Bulletin of
the Medical Library Association 83 (1995): 29.
796
Bruce Park, “Libraries without walls; or, Librarians without a profession,” American Libraries 23 (1992): 746.
797
For analysis of an earlier project that similarly combined excitement about technology with concern about its
implications for labor and the profession echoes earlier, see Downey, “The Librarian and the Univac,” 37-52.

306
	  

a desk made of pages, which is balanced precariously at the edge of an open book as an Apple IIlike computer, having sprouted arms and legs, uses the eraser end of a pencil to push the desk,
and the librarian, over the edge. Several books have already fallen off of the desk and are
tumbling through the blank space beyond the page. The librarian seems shortly to follow. A
depiction, as if in a fever dream, of the challenges libraries and libraries faced in the last decade
of the twentieth century, the cartoon captures the suspicion, and sense of palpable menace, with
which librarians could sometimes view digital technologies.798
The funny thing is that Park’s worries about the encroachment of digital technology, and
Flynn’s visualization of them, are structured by reference to the page. Marginalization is a pageborne image, and Flynn’s cartoon has computers and librarians battling it out for a territory that
takes the form of page 86 of some unnamed book. Given Licklider’s antipathy toward paper, and
Browning’s dismissal of it, you might think this a bit antiquated, even in 1992, and wonder what
an en-limbed Apple II would even want with some silly, useless page. But it turns out, as we will
see the next section, that pages (along with the messy inconvenience of human bodies) would be
ironically central to actually achieving Licklider’s and Browning’s dream.

“Within Our Grasp”: Bodies, Pages, and the Space of Digitization
In December 2007, Brewster Kahle walked out onto the stage at a TED conference in Los
Angeles, California, and began to talk about the inscription—“Free to All”—carved above the
doors of the Boston Public Library.799 Kahle, a computer engineer and (after the 1990s sale of
several companies to AOL and Amazon) a very wealthy man, had founded the Internet Archive
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

798

Which is not to say, at all, that the profession did not embrace computing and put it to innovative, if not always
entirely successful, ends throughout the latter part of the century.
799
“Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library.”

307
	  

in 1996 to maintain a record of the internet. But by the time Kahle walked onto that stage in 2007,
the Internet Archive’s ambitions had expanded to include pretty much everything. Kahle wanted
to take the Boston library’s motto and make it happen on a massive scale. “[U]niversal access to
all knowledge is within our grasp,” he declared before talking about the Internet Archive’s goal
of digitizing all of the published (and much of the unpublished) media in existence and making
them available, for free, to all (or, at least, to anyone with internet access). Sixteen months earlier,
Kahle had addressed the Society of American Archivists in Washington, D.C., rhapsodizing
about “the dream of having it all.” He proposed, in that speech, ideas he said could put “the goal
of universal access to all within our grasp.”800
This was, and remains, a rather radical and impractical dream. Kahle’s signature
phrase—“universal access to all knowledge”—contains not just one but two universalizing,
totalizing gestures: access should not only be universal, but it should be to everything. And
following on Licklider’s heels, it might be easy to think that the shift from paper to pixels is a
matter of snapping one’s fingers, of a rapid and clean shift from dead trees to electrical impulses.
Paper is over, in other words, so let’s get on with it. But transitions are never so smooth, perhaps
especially when it comes to books. Another of Kahle’s favored images, that of the grasp,
highlights the more physical and contingent dimensions of his utopian dream. A grasp is finite
and bodily—it is a profoundly un-digital image. (It was, after all, the prospect of having access
to only that information that was “within reach” that Licklider so disdained.) For Kahle,
achieving this universal connection means we must reach, stretch, grasp; we must close our
collective fingers around collective knowledge and squeeze. Indeed, while Kahle begins and
ends his speeches with grand proclamations about the importance of universal access, and while
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
800

Brewster Kahle, “Universal Access to All Knowledge,” The American Archivist 70 (2007): 24.

308
	  

he tends to gloss over obstacles with evangelical confidence, he nevertheless spends a lot of time
on the nitty-gritty economic and physical necessities of his dream. The Library of Congress
contains about 26 million books, he told the Society of American Archivists:
If a book is about a megabyte, 26 million books is 26 million megabytes…so it would
take 26 terabytes to store all the words in the Library of Congress. In current terms, that’s
a computer that’s about the size of this podium and costs about $60,000. So for $60,000
you could buy a computer system that could store all the words in all the books of the
Library of Congress. Pretty Cool.801
Pretty cool, indeed. And surprisingly specific.
Adrian Johns has argued that digitization is a self-consciously revolutionary act, part of
efforts by the information revolution’s “protagonists to articulate, get to grips with, and redirect
the historical trajectories in which they were living.”802 True, Kahle is constantly lining up those
trajectories, reaching back to “the dream of the Library of Alexandria” and forward to a beautiful,
digital future.803 But in Kahle’s case, this work of grappling with the past—this effort to “seize
upon history in order to reshape it”—is not merely symbolic or rhetorical.804 While it is true that
more and more books are “born digital,” dreams like Kahle’s rely on not just offering access to
all knowledge created from now on; they must offer a way to make all knowledge retrospectively
digital. They must, then, take hold of the past’s physical traces and quite literally reshape it for a
digital future.805
Indeed, if we think about not just the digital but the digitized, then a whole process opens
up before us, a process that depends, intimately, on physical bodies, physical pages, and physical
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

801

Kahle, “Universal Access,” 24.
Adrian Johns, “Gutenberg and the Samurai: Or, The Information Revolution is History,” Anthropological
Quarterly 85 (2012): 860.
803
Kahle, “Universal Access,” 24.
804
Johns, “Gutenberg and the Samurai,” 861.
805
Importantly, of course, Kahle can only hope to provide “universal access” to knowledge that has attained
physical form. Oral tradition that is never recorded in text, audio, or video, for example, is never going to be a part
of “all knowledge” made available through the Internet Archive.
802

309
	  

spaces. Speaking before the Society of American Archivists, Kahle explained that the Internet
Archive had established sites to scan books inside libraries. (It was cheaper to ship books to
India for scanning, he said, but libraries were wary of letting their materials go quite that far.)
They had tried out some robotic scanners, but “they weren’t reliable.”806 So instead, they went
back to “a simpler system—manual page-turning.”807 That supposedly “simpler” system? An
assemblage of metal, glass, silicon, and flesh. In the system the Internet Archive settled on, a
person sits before an apparatus that includes a cradle with a glass plate that lifts up and down to
flatten the book for clarity, powerful lighting to create an even image, two high-resolution
cameras (one for verso, one for recto), and a computer [FIGURE 38]. The scanner (who is a
human worker, not the machine that usually takes that name) uses a pedal to raise and lower the
glass plate, turning the pages as she photographs them and verifies their quality.808 The scanner’s
body echoes a constellation of older forms of labor. She uses a pedal to power a machine, like
generations of garment workers; she raises and lifts a plate, like a printer; she sits, carefully
reproducing pages, like a monk in a scriptorium. (It is not a coincidence that the apparatus the
Internet Archive designed is called the Scribe.)
This physicality could surprise those steeped in the dream of digital disembodiment. In
2008, Wired magazine warned its readers that “those picturing an efficient, automated process
involving robotic arms and high-tech scanners” might be disappointed by the “primitive” set-up
and by the “monastic diligence” required to “manually turn pages all day.”809 Perhaps to keep
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

806

You can see one of the robots in action (sort of) here: http://archive.org/details/scanning_robot
Kahle, “Universal Access,” 25.
808
This, of course, echoes the political and etymological life of the word “computer,” which as Jennifer Light
describes used to refer to women who—by performing computations necessary for ballistics calculations—played a
fundamental but now-forgotten role in the early history of computing. Jennifer S. Light, “When Computers Were
Women,” Technology & Culture 40 (1999): 455-483.
809
Dave Bullock, “The Internet Archive Keeps Book-Scanning Free,” Wired.com, March 19, 2008,
http://www.wired.com/entertainment/theweb/multimedia/2008/03/gallery_internet_archive.
807

310
	  

Wired readers’ virtue intact, the article’s accompanying slide show largely trims out the lived
reality of the scanning center at the University of California’s Northern Regional Library Facility.
Two thirds of the photographs include no humans at all, reveling instead in gadgets like cameras,
print-on-demand machines, and servers. Most of the images are close up, cutting out the
environment in which these technologies and the human scanner both work. But the last photo—
of Robert Miller, the Internet Archive’s Director of Books—breaks this pattern somewhat,
showing a shelving unit with plastic boxes overflowing, and what appears to be a canister of
cleaning wipes wedged, sideways, between the top shelf and the ceiling. The obligation to show
a particular, important person, opened up Wired to depicting the actual, cluttered, and very
human environment in which digital technology usually operates.
An undated tour of a Toronto scanning center, posted by the Internet Archive to show
how its facilities work, is less shy about the messy, embodied humanity at the heart of this digital
utopia.810 The needs of the body are present: one scanner’s water bottle sits beside her left foot,
and the camera passes by chair after chair draped with scanners’ coats and sweatshirts while the
cameraperson sidesteps a fan, likely necessary for humans working amidst bright lights and
whirring servers [FIGURE 39]. The consequences of so many old books and so many human
bodies—all that brittle cellulose and sloughing skin—are also visible, as the camera lingers on a
disused book truck [FIGURE 40] holding a half-empty roll of paper towels and a Swiffer duster.
For all the claims of those who, like medievalist Michael Camille, decry the distance between the
sensual page and the surface-skimming screen, the body—sweating, thirsty, grasping, grimy—is
in fact central to the production of digitized text.811
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

810

“Internet Archive- tour,” Internet Archive video, 1:13, n.d. http://archive.org/details/InternetArchive-Tour.
“While a computer image can only convey the optical surface information from the original object,” Camille
writes, “the manuscript itself is a locus of all five senses there depicted.” Michael Camille, “Sensations of the Page:
811

311
	  

And far from simply freeing information from a paper prison, digitization in many ways
actually highlights and extends the original, physical form of the book. Bonnie Mak has,
following Roger Chartier, argued that while the digital page “may imitate the look and behaviour
of counterparts in parchment and paper, it has its own distinct materiality.”812 This is
undoubtedly true: marked up in XML and stored on mirrored servers, books preserved by the
Internet Archive take new form that affects both meaning and use. But I want to suggest here that
the old form remains crucial, if perhaps inadvertently so, to the life and meaning of the digitized
text. Take, for example, Emerging Communities: Integrating Networked Information into
Library Services. In early April, 1993, a group of librarians and technologists gathered at the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign. They were there to discuss the place of computer networks in libraries, especially
the ways that they were increasingly “allowing librarians to develop new electronic communities
with their colleagues and patrons.”813 Out of that meeting emerged a collection of essays (from
which I’ve just quoted), edited by Ann Bishop and published by GSLIS. One copy of the
resulting book sat on a University of Illinois Library shelf until sometime in early 2007, when it
found its way to the second floor of the University Library’s off-site, high-density library storage
building, where two Internet Archive Scribe stations sit in a small, high-ceilinged room. There,
according to the metadata for the book’s entry in the Internet Archive catalog, it was scanned by
someone named Tricia Leonard (or, rather, “scanner-tricia-leonard”).814 Flipping page after page,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Imaging Technologies and Medieval Illuminated Manuscripts,” in The Iconic Page in Manuscript, Print, and Digital
Culture, ed. George Bornstein and Theresa Tinkle (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998), 37.
812
Mak, How the Page Matters, 62.
813
Ann P. Bishop, “Introduction,” in Emerging Communities: Integrating Networked Information into Library
Services, ed. Ann P. Bishop (Urbana: Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1994), 1.
814
“Emerging communities: integrating networked information into library services (1994), Internet Archive,
http://archive.org/details/emergingcommunit94clin.

312
	  

scanner-tricia-leonard took 324 pictures of the book, and the information the book contained is
now available free of charge to anyone with internet access.
But what scanner-tricia-leonard recorded, and what is now available through the Internet
Archive, is not the disembodied content of Emerging Communities, nor an unspecific, Platonic
ideal of it. When you open it in PDF (which presents the book as a linear series of pages) or in
“Read Online” format (which mimics the layout of a codex with what Kahle calls a “page-turny
interface[ ]”), you see the images recorded by scanner-tricia-leonard’s cameras.815 And in those
images, you see more than just ideas. You see, because the Internet Archive has made it visible
and widely accessible, the particular history of a particular copy of Emerging Communities. I
want to walk through just the first few pages of the file, to show how this works and its larger
implications. The file’s second page—after the somewhat awkwardly-reproduced image of the
gold-embossed cover—is a page that appears blank except for a stamp, unevenly inked and
pressed a bit off center. The stamp, “UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANACHAMPAIGN LIB. SCIENCE,” indicates that this copy of Emerging Communities initially
found its home on the shelves of the Library and Information Science departmental library before
likely being transferred to off-site storage and then to the Internet Archive scanning center.
The following image tells us even more about this physical book’s physical history. The
Internet Archive’s habit of scanning every last page, as-is, has reproduced a bright yellow duedate slip [FIGURE 41]. The slip is a story of the book’s past. It reminds us again that the book
lived, for a while at least, in the Library and Information Science library. A hand-written notation
tells us when the book was processed—that a library worker took the slip, slid it along a gluedispensing wheel, and pasted it into this copy of Emerging Communities on July 5, 1994. It also
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

815

“Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library.”

313
	  

tells us that this copy of the book (the University Library currently holds three copies) was, while
not hugely popular, checked out seven times in the 1990s, and then seven times between 2001
and 2007. We can see that on October 27, 1994, the due-date stamp failed, or that it was dialed to
the wrong date, or that the library worker found a pen handier than the stamp. We can see very
visible, very physical evidence that the slip’s careful, prescriptive design—in particular its
vertical columns—made no difference at the hustle and bustle of the circulation desk. Only nine
of the dates are anything approaching horizontal, and none of them fit neatly between the lines.
The messiness of human bodies and human minds once again intercedes in the realm of digital
information.816
The next page, the verso of the front flyleaf, appears blank: no text, no stamps, no slips.
But it is not, in fact, blank. The image is not an absence but rather a record of a certain sort of
presence. It is, after all, not an empty file but a high-resolution photograph of a piece of paper,
paper that had been pulped from trees, cut to size and bound into this particular copy of
Emerging Communities. The image has the slightly yellowed tone of aging paper, and it sits in
the file as presently, as fully, as the page it depicts sat in the original copy of the book. Moving
past it requires physical work—the click of an arrow key or the swipe of a mouse, in place of a
grip and a flip—and you cannot help but see it. Thus, on this page, the visual politics of
digitization at work on all the pages becomes most clear. According to the figures Kahle
presented to the Society for American Archivists in 2006, the cost of scanning a single page of a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
816

Intriguingly, when something like the slip is put through optical character recognition, which allows for full-text
searching and display, the results are delightfully, peculiarly uneven. The bits of printed legalese at the top of the
slip, about replacement costs and the like, reproduce just fine. “NOTICE: return or renew all Library Materials! The
Minimum Fee for each Lost Book is $50,000,” the beginning of the full-text version of this page reads. The italics
don’t translate, but the text is clear. Immediately following that sentence, though, is the OCR rendering of a
handwritten date: “*–n C^ CjtJ.” Despite these glaring imperfections, though, it is still resolutely present, though its
presence is rather more occult than in the formats that simply reproduce the visual page. “Full text of ‘Emerging
communities: integrating networked information into library services,” Internet Archive,
http://archive.org/stream/emergingcommunit94clin/emergingcommunit94clin_djvu.txt.

314
	  

book in an Internet Archive scanning center, using a Scribe machine and a human scanner, was
ten cents.817 Not too much really, but if we take Kahle’s goal of digitizing the entire contents of
the Library of Congress (about 26 million at the time of his speech) seriously, then the cost of
reproducing the verso of the front flyleaves would be 260 million cents, or $2.6 million. Quite an
investment if the goal was merely to make a book’s content available online. In books digitized
in service of Brewster Kahle’s dream of universal access to all knowledge, what is reproduced
and made widely accessible is not the knowledge itself but rather images of one way that
knowledge was expressed physically in the world. If the purpose and effect were just the freeing
of information from its paper confines, then this page, even more than the previous two, would
be wildly beside the point.
But the logic of reproducing the cover and every single page, including images of blank
sheets of paper, becomes clearer when we take into account the full shape of Kahle’s peculiar
dream. According to Kahle, one of the chief benefits of digitization is, surprisingly enough, “the
ability to deliver paper remotely.”818 In his speech, he walked the archivists through the process
he had in mind: “Take the archives’ and the libraries’ stuff, digitize it and put it on the Net, and
then turn it back into paper.”819 He acknowledged to the archivists that the idea was, perhaps, “a
little old-fashioned,” and he admitted in his TED talk that the idea might be “a little retro,” but he
still believed in it.820 “I like the physical book,” he told the TED audience.821 “The idea of
actually delivering books to people is, I think, a good thing,” he admitted to the archivists.822
And how would we do it? How would he go from paper to code to paper again, “delivering
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

817

Kahle, “Universal Access,” 25.
Kahle, “Universal Access,” 24.
819
Kahle, “Universal Access,” 24-25.
820
Kahle, “Universal Access,” 25; “Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library.”
821
“Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library.”
822
Kahle, “Universal Access,” 25.
818

315
	  

books to people” who were scattered and bookless? Well, like generations before him, Kahle
turned to the bookmobile. In doing so, he invested not only in the physical form of the book but
also in the communities he thought it could build in physical space.

“A Van on a Mission”: The Internet Archive Bookmobile
Early in 2002, Brewster Kahle traveled to Alexandria, Egypt, to present a copy of the
Internet Archive to the Egyptian Government. “Ms. Mubarak was grateful for the donation of
100 terabytes of web, 3,000 hours of Egyptian and U.S. government television, 1,000 movies,
and a book-scanning facility,” Kahle explained later that year. “Then she said, ‘But I love my
books.’” This encounter with a dictator’s wife led, he claimed in 2002 (by the time the TED talk
rolled around, Suzanne Mubarak had been scrubbed from the story), to a flash of insight about
freedom and access: “At that moment, I realized, if I wanted to build a digital library, the Web
would not be enough. We need to do books. You can’t build a library without books.”823 By the
end of September of that year, Kahle had turned this epiphany into a plan—and, more
importantly, into a van.
Specifically, into a 1992 Ford Aerostar minivan sprouting a satellite dish and stuffed with
a printer, paper cutter, and bookbinding machine and plastered with a decal that promised
“1,000,000 Books Inside (soon)” [FIGURE 42]. On September 30, 2002, the Internet Archive
Bookmobile (sometimes known as the Internet Bookmobile) set off on a cross-country trip,
stopping at schools, at libraries, at the International Inventors Museum, at the Great American
Bookmobile Conference, and at the U.S. Supreme Court (more on that later). This bookmobile
did not carry any books; it carried, instead, the potential for books. A “van on a mission,” as
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

823

Richard Koman, “Riding along with the Internet Bookmobile,” Salon, October 9, 2002,
http://www.salon.com/2002/10/09/bookmobile/.

316
	  

passenger Richard Koman put it, the bookmobile was intended to promote both the public
domain and print-on-demand technology.824 In doing so, the bookmobile would also make (or at
least try to make) Kahle’s dream of remote paper a reality. “This technology,” Kahle crowed to
the TED audience, “may end up actually putting books back in people’s hands again.” This was,
of course, characteristically utopian and unrealistically ambitious.
But, to a surprising degree, it also wasn’t entirely wrong. Sure, a single Aerostar was not
going to utterly transform American society. But on the ground—at the Belle Haven School in
East Palo Alto, California, at the Newman School in Salt Lake City, at the Carnegie Library in
Pittsburgh—and in the moment, the bookmobile did change the reach and grasp of American
book culture. Perhaps ironically, by digitizing books and putting them on the road, Kahle
managed to make them even more physical. At each stop, the staff (Kahle and several friends for
the first trip) helped attendees use the bookmobile’s technology to print, cut, and bind a publicdomain, Internet Archive text into a book. In this context, then, books are not objects
mysteriously made and transported from afar. They are the product of the reader’s bodily
interaction with data, paper, and machines [FIGURE 43]. And, too, the books are products of
interaction between “librarian” and user [FIGURE 44]. Indeed, like the Taos County Project’s
bookmobile, a primary purpose of the Internet Archive Bookmobile was to occasion particular,
pedagogical encounters. But where the Taos encounters were to be determined in advance by
bureaucrats, the Internet Archive Bookmobile represented a very different sort of dream, one that
combined the radical openness of hacker culture with the physicality and anti-corporate ethos of
the DIY movement.825 The idea was to teach people how to make books, using the public domain
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

824

Koman, “Riding along.”
On another complex intersection of these two movements, see Katrien Jacobs, Netporn: DIY Web Culture and
Sexual Politics (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007).
825

317
	  

and resources like the Internet Archive to free themselves from the tyranny of media
corporations and revel in their own power to create. The bookmobile embodied a vision of
“insta-book freedom.”826
And it was not just books that would be transformed and transforming but also the spaces
they inhabit. When the bookmobile stopped in Salt Lake City, one teacher declared it “the
coolest thing ever,” continuing: “Where I taught in Chicago, the school library has hardly any
space, hardly any shelves, and what shelves they do have, have hardly any books. You walk in
the library and there’s no there there.” A print-on-demand setup, he explains, “could completely
change kids’ lives. … This would be such a great thing for them.”827 The unstated and unstable
irony here is that with such a set-up, the shelves would still be empty, perhaps emptier, and the
“there” might be even less visibly “there,” hidden away in hard drives and cables. One also
wonders where a school district without the funds to buy books for an existing library would find
the tens of thousands of dollars necessary to print them on demand.828 But it is important and
illustrative that the fantasy here is not entirely digital or entirely analog, but a meeting of the two.
The introduction of digital books to the school library—and, too, the technology to take those
bits and bytes and render them in paper and ink—connects local space to distant repositories,
one’s fingers to the ether. Indeed, it aims to create a fishing pier, of sorts, over what Browning
called the “ocean of information” that digitization would create, making it possible to reach into
that sea of data and pluck out a personal, physical encounter.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

826

Koman, “Riding Along.”
Koman, “Riding Along.”
828
The Internet Archive tended to talk very optimistically about the capital investment necessary for a print-ondemand system. A table on one bookmobile-related webpage lays out the cost of each component, concluding that it
cost them $14,000 to build the bookmobile (thanks to discounts from Hewlett-Packard totaling over $12,500). “As
long as we have the Internet and a printer,” a school principal told Koman, “we can create these books for students
and the library.” But, of course, internet access and hardware are not cheap and are not equally distributed. Koman,
“Riding Along.”

827

318
	  

Kahle also explicitly imagined (though, it appears, did not entirely think through) his
bookmobile causing a fundamental and troubling shift in the moral economy of books and
libraries. In his speech to the archivists, he explained that a book printed on demand cost only a
single dollar:
[F]or a buck a book you can afford to give away books. Which is kind of nice in the sense
that you don’t have to give out the only copy that you have. I think of the librarian’s
dilemma, wondering every time somebody walks out the door with a book, “Is it going to
come back?” If we have the ability to print on demand, we can get around that particular
problem.829
But that “particular problem” is, in fact, at the heart of the model and the very idea of the public
library. A public library holds not just a common cultural patrimony but a literally shared culture,
in the form of books owned by an institution funded by taxes collected by an elected government
and made available to anyone in its jurisdiction. The risk—“the librarian’s dilemma,” in Kahle’s
words—that such availability occasions is, in many ways, precisely the point. The library card is
a sort of social contract, and, while not always successful, this has for over a century been
absolutely fundamental to the way that libraries work, practically and ideologically, for better
and for worse. We saw in Chapter One, for example, May Pressly argue for her library club’s
suitability by proclaiming what good care they would take of the books. And in Chapter Two, we
saw a local magistrate’s horror at the idea of borrowing books alongside what he thought were
diseased and unhygienic African Americans. In pursuit of “universal access,” Kahle proposes
sharing on a very different set of terms. The traditional bookmobile had typically reworked, on a
different and mechanical scale, the principle of circulation—taking books out of the library, out
into a community, before eventually bringing them back—that characterized individual patrons’
engagement with library books. The Internet Archive Bookmobile, on the other hand, imagined
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
829

Kahle, “Universal Access,” 25.

319
	  

replacing the circle with the trajectory, sending books out without expecting, or even wanting,
their return. Almost despite himself—despite all his, and Suzanne Mubarak’s, love of them—
Kahle partly approaches paper books as absolutely delightful but decidedly secondary effects of
endlessly transmittable, reproducible digital data. The Internet Archive Bookmobile, is “a printon-demand-mobile,” Richard Koman wrote shortly after that first cross-country trip, and it
“changes the notion that books are a limited resource.”830 (You can imagine environmentalists
rather cringing at just about every aspect of the bookmobile.)
Given the way American fantasies about freedom tend to work, we might have
anticipated that the project had global ambitions, as well. Indeed, where the Internet Archive
Bookmobile was (at least in the 2002 telling) born in Africa, in an encounter with the first lady
of Egypt, another African country would provide its ultimate test. As “sort of from the Silicon
Valley sort of utopian,” Kahle told the TED audience, “we thought, ‘If we can make this
technology work in rural Uganda, we might have something.’”831 And so Richard Koman, with
Brad deGraf and funding from the World Bank, founded Anywhere Books and gave it a shot.832
Koman arrived with the zeal of generations of missionaries before him but with the form of the
book, not its contents, as his gospel:
I embarked on this project with a generalized notion of doing some good in the world, of
applying the public domain and the cool bookmobile idea, and making books for Uganda
seemed as good a place as any to try it. Now, having made these personal connections,
helping, listening, and talking to these Gulu kids who endure so much, living in the
clutches of an insane evil, I am starting to understand the enormity of a book. You can
see it in the smiles, in the jostling for control of the cutter. A book, her only book, made
herself, with computers, a paper cutter, and these strange Mzungus [white people].833
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

830

Koman, “Riding Along.”
“Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library.”
832
On the Million Books Project, in which Kahle was a partner, and its efforts at book scanning and printing in India,
See Gloriana St. Clair, “Knowledge from a Million Books and Palm Leaves,” portal 3 (2003): vii-ix.
833
Richard Koman, “The Uganda Digital Bookmobile,” O’Reilly, February 26, 2004,
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/network/2004/02/25/uganda.html.

831

320
	  

The problem was that, to a significant degree echoing the problems the Amerika Hauser faced in
West Germany, the project was less a response to concrete local desires than a product of a very
American (and unsuccessfully hegemonic) fantasy of global connection. Koman writes, for
example, of “trying to put myself in the kids’ heads” as the bookmobile arrived at a school
outside Kampala. “Did they see this as simply a wonderful and fun day? Or was this like a
Bookmobile from Mars?” But, he declares, “[i]t didn’t really matter.” The kids were “thrilled to
take part” in something so foreign “in a culture where passing annual exams is far more
important than the joy of reading.”834 Promoting joy in place of rote utility (like open shelves in
place of closed ones) initially masks and ultimately comes to stand in for any substantive,
effective project of either local assistance or global connection.
Remembering the Uganda project five and a half years later, Koman seemed rather more
sedate, suggesting that book-scanning and print-on-demand, while “swell,” are really “a very
first-world approach to a third-world application.” More specifically, as he looked back, his
“regret with the Uganda bookmobile is that we didn’t adequately hook up with a nonprofit on the
ground who could identify and distribute really relevant books for a population, say subsistence
farmers or refugees.”835 This was a curious reversal of the German case, where patrons who
wanted fiction were instead largely sent dry, technical materials. But in both cases, it was
ideological commitments that blinded American staffers to local needs. In Germany, it was the
larger system of Cold War technical assistance and diplomacy. In Uganda, it was public domain
evangelism. (Despite the likelihood that the real intellectual property problem faced by people in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

834

Koman, “Uganda Digital Bookmobile.”
Richard Koman, “Before Google Books, we took on-demand publishing to the streets,” ZDNet, September 18,
2009, http://www.zdnet.com/blog/government/before-google-books-we-took-on-demand-publishing-to-thestreets/5445.

835

321
	  

rural Uganda was biotechnology and agribusiness patents, not copyright.) Consequently, while
Koman and his fellows did approach the program at the juncture of digital and paper, they failed
to effectively link the local and the global. They did not adequately consider space and scale.
They plopped down in Uganda, with global-bureaucracy money and dreams of a new world, and
expected everything to go smoothly. Of a piece with the larger commitment to lines over
circles—to distribution over circulation—the Uganda project had failed to actually or effectively
embed itself in the existing thick mesh of Ugandan life and politics. This could be the darker side
of efforts, like the Internet Archive Bookmobile’s, to turn paper into data and back into paper: a
consuming, total ambition on an unselfconscious and unworkable scale. As much as Kahle and
Koman seemed to thumb their noses at the standard digital utopian disdain for paper—Licklider
would likely have been rather baffled by the enterprise—the dream of “universal access to all
knowledge” necessarily universalizes, requiring technocratic, one-size solutions to complex
problems and diverse communities. Powered by new technologies, these bookmobiles tried to
skip the “little neighborhoods” of traveling libraries past in favor of the impractical dream of a
total, global neighborhood. But, as we will see in the next section, more decidedly local projects
could run into their share of problems, as well.

“A Still Fresher Soil”: The Internet Archive Bookmobile Visits Walden Pond
The final destination on the Internet Archive Bookmobile’s initial cross-country trip, in
the autumn of 2002, was the steps of the U.S. Supreme Court. Neither the timing nor the location
were coincidental, as the trip’s last hurrah was to take place just outside the Court as the justices
inside heard arguments in Eldred v. Ashcroft, a lawsuit with significant implications for Brewster
Kahle’s public domain dreams [FIGURE 45]. Initiated by Eric Eldred and joined by other

322
	  

publishers of public domain texts, the lawsuit challenged the constitutionality of the Sonny Bono
Copyright Term Extension Act (1998), which had prevented many works (including Disney’s
Steamboat Willie, most famously) from entering the public domain. There were important
conflicts being played out in the court—between profits and patrimony, between property and
public culture—and Kahle wanted to use the bookmobile to come firmly down on the side of the
public domain. And he did, though ultimately the justices did not. In a 7-2 decision, the Court
upheld the law, determining that “[t]ext, history, and precedent” confirmed the constitutionality
of copyright extension.836
Before and even after Eldred, the story of the Internet Archive Bookmobile might appear
to be a story, primarily, of intellectual property, of the public domain and the question of
copyright. Much early coverage, including Koman’s, of the bookmobile focused on these topics.
And when, in April 2004, Eric Eldred himself initiated an East Coast branch of the Internet
Archive Bookmobile, he did so by printing copies of Free Culture: How Big Media Uses
Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity (2004), by Lawrence
Lessig, an internet evangelist and law professor who had argued Eldred’s case before the
Supreme Court.837 (“Larry was pleased,” Eldred wrote to a listserv the next day.838) But tellingly,
the most attention-grabbing, influential event that took place around Eldred’s bookmobile had
really nothing to do with intellectual property. The book Eldred printed and distributed was

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

836

Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186 (2003), 199. “I don’t think we lost anything,” Eldred later told one sociologist.
“In fact, I think we gained a lot, I think there was a lot of thinking going on that changed the minds of law
professors … I think that it was very important that we did the process of standing up and showing people who
wrong the Congress was.” Marc Garcelon, “An information commons?: Creative Commons and public access to
cultural creations,” New Media & Society 11 (2009): 1312-1313
837
Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and
Control Creativity (New York: Penguin, 2004).
838
Eric Eldred “‘Free Culture’ and new bookmobile,” April 14, 2004,
http://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/webbin/bparchive?year=2004&post=2004-04-14,5 .

323
	  

unquestionably in the public domain but, as we will see, where he chose to print it meant that a
different regulatory regime—one of public space, not the public domain—reigned.
Unlike the original Internet Archive Bookmobile, which traveled across the country, or
Anywhere Books, which traveled around the world, Eldred’s bookmobile (though sponsored by
both organizations) was a much more local affair. It, like Eldred himself, was a creature of the
Northeast, and particularly of New England. Eldred v. Ashcroft began when the Copyright Term
Extension Act meant Eldred could not post selections of poems by that quintessential poet of
New England, Robert Frost.839 And his bookmobile primarily stopped at colleges and
universities from Philadelphia to New Hampshire. The bookmobile’s most famous, perhaps
infamous stop, was at a very particular place, closely associated with New England and with,
more precisely, a particular idea of local space and place: Walden Pond.
On July 8, 2004, the hundred-and-fiftieth anniversary of the publication of Henry David
Thoreau’s Walden, Eric Eldred took his bookmobile to a parking lot adjacent to the pond and a
short hike from the site of Thoreau’s famous cabin. There, for an hour under a hand-lettered sign
that read “Free Walden,” he helped visitors print and bind their own copies of Walden.840 But
then, as he related the next day on the Internet Archive’s online forum, “I was asked by the
Walden Pond Reservation police to pack up and leave and threatened with arrest. I left.”841 The
police and a park administrator told Eldred he needed a permit to “pass out free literature,” a
permit he would not be receiving.842 The problem was not with the text itself. (It had been
decades since Walden had been subject to copyright protections.) And it was not even
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
839

Amy Harmon, “Debate to Intensify on Copyright Extension Law,” New York Times, October 7, 2002.
Kathleen Burge, “Fighting to Be Free: Thoreau Lover Denied Bid to Give Out Book at Walden,” Boston Globe,
July 19, 2004.
841
Eric Eldred, “Free Walden,” Internet Archive Forums, July 9, 2004, http://archive.org/post/18126/free-walden.
842
Eldred, “Free Walden.”

840

324
	  

necessarily with the place in which Eldred chose to operate his bookmobile. (Had he been
printing, say, Whitman’s Leaves of Grass on the shores of Walden Pond, he likely would have
run into less trouble.) It was the concert of book and place—that combination on which the idea
of common consciousness rests—that caused all the fuss. “If you’re going to give away books
for free,” as a park administrator explained to the Boston Globe later, “it might take away
business” from the Thoreau Society’s shop, which sells copies of Walden alongside coffee mugs
and t-shirts.843
As you might imagine, Eldred was not amused. “Evidently members of the Thoreau
Society, charged with his legacy, are now in the business of making money off him,” he wrote on
the Internet Archive forum, “and are using their political power to suppress the free culture of
which he would be proud.”844 He rages at the irony of “a state-enforced monopoly on ‘Walden’,”
at the evident ideological distance between Thoreau and the Thoreau Society.845 Understandably
obsessed with the ways in which political power is used against the many to promote the
economic gain of the few—that was, after all, what Eldred v. Ashcroft was ultimately about—
Eldred ends up missing the point. In his post, he refers to the park administration as “[t]he
government trustees of the land,” but he fails to recognize how important that land is to what
happened to him. There are, in particular, two lessons we can take from Eldred’s rather bumpy
trip to Walden Pond, lessons about the fate of print and of common consciousness in a digital age.
The first is that place still matters, and the second is that that fact has consequences which
constrain the digital reinvention of common consciousness.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
843

Burge, “Fighting to be Free.”
Eldred, “Free Walden.”
845
Eldred, “Free Walden.”
844

325
	  

Place matters. To celebrate its sesquicentennial, Eldred did not just post Walden to his
website or email it to a listserv. That would have distributed the text, and probably even reached
more people. In other words, since one of his goals, as he wrote on the forum, was to “promote[ ]
the sharing ethos of the Internet,” why go offline at all?846 The simple answer is that there
remained, and remains, a special power to a particular, printed book in a particular place. The
more complicated answer, rich and strange, is that there remained something even more
powerful about using a bookmobile to print this particular book in this particular place. Eldred
believed that computers had the capacity to, as he told me, allow people “to communicate and
share ideas more freely” based on “local rather than central control.”847 As Eldred seems to see it,
his bookmobile sat (like the Internet Archive bookmobile before it) at the intersection of hacker
culture and the DIY movement:
It is true that purely digital books can have many advantages (or just differences, maybe)
in effective communication over old-fashioned printed works. But the Internet Archive
Bookmobile technology was similar to the personal computer in that it required learning
new skills to do it yourself instead of relying on the IBM priesthood at the computer
server. By starting from the bottom up, we could teach people to change practices without
having to reply on a top-down change in the copyright law….848
This set of emphases—on the local over the central, the bottom over the top, the self-made over
the ready-made—was not new to Walden Pond in 2004. They had made a home there, in “an airy
and unplastered cabin,” more than a century and a half before.849 Thoreau’s Walden is many
things: a celebration of nature, a rejection of mid-nineteenth-century social mores, an economic
experiment, a domestic tale. But more than anything else, really, it is a how-to manual of a
peculiar and sideways sort; it is a philosophical, lyrical, and often baffling paean to the aesthetics
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

846

Eldred, “Free Walden.”
Eric Eldred, e-mail message to author, June 17, 2012.
848
Eric Eldred, e-mail message to author, June 17, 2012.
849
Henry David Thoreau, Walden (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell & Co., 1910 [1854]), 110.

847

326
	  

and practices of, well, doing it yourself. Thoreau opens by explaining, for example, that the
pages the reader is about to encounter were written while “I lived alone…in a house which I had
built myself…and earned my living by the labor of my hands only.”850 Purposefully or not,
Eldred was recapitulating, reimagining for a (sort of) digital age, Thoreau’s philosophy and, in
particular, his peculiar relation to two objects: books and beans.851
In Walden, books appear out of nowhere and, ideally, take effort to read. Thoreau opens
in his third chapter, for example, boasting that while his cabin was “beyond the range of the
ordinary circulating library, I had more than ever come within the influence of those books
which circulate around the world.”852 But while he explains that he “kept Homer’s Iliad on my
table through the summer,” he does not explain how it came to sit on that table. The book
emerges from out of nowhere, fully formed, above the banks of Walden Pond. And while
Thoreau admits that he did not often read Homer thanks to the demands of “[i]ncessant labor
with my hands,” he later collapses the distinction between proper reading and proper labor.853
Indeed, the former must involve the latter, he argues. A true and meaningful encounter with
books should be effortful, in contrast to the kinds of reading practiced by “a race of tit-men”
constantly “sucking the pap” of easy books and family newspapers.854
While perhaps not reviving its troubled gender politics, Eldred’s bookmobile embodied,
to a remarkable extent and not far from where Thoreau’s Iliad had sat, a twenty-first century
version of Thoreau’s bookish philosophy. In a very concrete way (a way that did not require
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
850

Thoreau, Walden, 1.
Eldred seems to have been interested in the relationship between his project and Thoreau’s general principles. “I
asked myself what Thoreau would have done,” he told the Boston Globe before deciding to fight the park
administration. And the idea of the Thoreau Society colluding to “suppress the free culture of which he would be
proud.” But he does not specifically connect his project with Thoreau’s antebellum DIY culture. Burge, “Fighting to
Be Free.” Eldred, “Free Walden.”
852
Thoreau Walden, 130-131.
853
Thoreau, Walden, 131.
854
Thoreau, Walden, 141, 144.
851

327
	  

Thoreau’s frequent elision), the books that Eldred distributed did not exist before that day on that
shore. They did not come out of nowhere, of course—they came out of hard drives and printers,
out of ink and paper and glue on the bookmobile—but before Eldred arrived at Walden Pond, the
books that would be, and that would mean, did not exist. “This internet bookmobile was…not
just a way to disseminate to [the] most distant home books that had already been printed
centrally, as the old fashioned bookmobile was,” Eldred told me. “It is or was a way to reverse
the process and start from the home to broadcast and share ideas…to others.”855 This ambition,
to “start from the home to broadcast and share ideas,” is deeply Thoreauvian. Likely no one (at
least since the medieval anchorites) has had more faith in the ability to change the world while
staying close to home than Henry David Thoreau. Eldred’s digital dreams were, like Thoreau’s
more analog ones, bound and indebted to place in ways we often fail to consider when we think
about text in the twenty-first century.
Eldred’s bookmobile also required work—“readers actually learn how to make the books
themselves,” Eldred reported with satisfaction—the sort of effortful engagement Thoreau so
prized.856 The books were made, by hand, on the site where Thoreau built his cabin, his furniture,
and his enduringly American philosophy. But despite the easy correlation between Thoreau’s
books and Eldred’s bookmobile, it is the former’s bean-fields that offer, in fact, an even more
vivid and meaningful connection. Thoreau fancies himself, throughout Walden, tied to the land
in all its wildness—he “kept neither dog, cat, cow, pig, nor hens,” hearing rather “only squirrels
on the roof and under the floor, a whip-poor-will on the ridge-pole, a blue jay screaming beneath
the window.”857 But what really seems to tie him to the soil on which he lives, what makes him
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

855

Eric Eldred, e-mail message to author, June 17, 2012.
Eldred, “Free Walden.”
857
Thoreau, Walden, 168.
856

328
	  

part of the place and which allows him to remake that place, is cultivation by his own hands, of a
field of beans:
Meanwhile my beans, the length of whose rows, added together, was seven miles already
planted, were impatient to be hoed…. What was the meaning of this so steady and selfrespecting, this small Herculean labor, I knew not. I came to love my rows, my beans….
They attached me to the earth, and so I got strength like Antaeus. But why should I raise
them? Only Heaven knows. This was my curious labor all summer—to make this portion
of the earth's surface, which had yielded only cinquefoil, blackberries, johnswort, and the
like, before, sweet wild fruits and pleasant flowers, produce instead this pulse. What shall
I learn of beans or beans of me?858
The relationship between person and produce (a relation we may recall from the preceding
chapter) here is created and understood, as much as it can be—“Only Heaven knows,” after all—
through laborious, creative, physical encounter with the earth in this place. This “curious labor”
of making an old land produce something new, was recapitulated and reimagined by Eldred’s
bookmobile. When Thoreau went to tend his beans, he opened before him an earth teeming with
the past. “As I drew a still fresher soil about the rows with my hoe,” he wrote, “I disturbed the
ashes of unchronicled nations who in primeval years lived under these heavens, and their small
implements of war and hunting were brought to the light of this modern day.”859 Like Thoreau
before him, Eldred drove a tool for cultivation into the soil around Walden Pond and came up
with a deep history of place. Laptops and cables and hard drives and printers dig up into the air a
hundred-and-fifty-year-old idea, “an instant and immeasurable crop” of useful past.860
But such pasts, in such places, have consequences. It being so mobile, so digital, Eldred
could have driven his bookmobile anywhere and printed copies of Walden. He might have gone
to Philadelphia or to Punxsutawney, to Boston or to Brooklyn, but he didn’t. To have the effect
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

858

Thoreau, Walden, 204.
Thoreau, Walden, 209. Once again, as in Computer Networks, a remembrance of Native Americans, now
conveniently absent, offers a pivot between old and new.
860
Thoreau, Walden, 209.

859

329
	  

he wanted, Eldred needed to be where Thoreau was, to draw on the past of the place and not just
that of the text. As a consequence it was control over public space—over public property, not
intellectual property—that constrained the way he could make books and make meaning. In
Chapter Two, we saw how central questions of property and control have been to the history of
libraries, and in Chapter Four, we watched as parking lots took on a strange power in the
circulation and experience of public culture. Here, at Walden Pond, in 2004, those two strands
met: “There is no place to park at Walden Pond except in the state parking lot,” Eldred reported
on July 9, “for which I paid $5” and from which he was nevertheless ejected.861 The state
maintained control of this space and, thus, of the possibilities for making new books and new
communities within it. For all of Eldred’s arguments in favor of the public domain, for all his
dedication to distributing a shared culture, his plan did not come to fruition. “The bookmobile
was a concrete experiment that worked…it was only politics that defeated me at Walden Pond,”
Eldred explained to me.862 But that isn’t quite right. It was not “politics”—as some vague realm
impeding the perfect efficiency of the technical world—but a particular politics of physical space
for which Eldred’s digital utopianism had not adequately prepared him.

“You Weary Giants of Flesh and Steel”: Coda
In 1996, John Perry Barlow—co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, writer for
the Grateful Dead, poet, activist—composed what he called “A Declaration of the Independence
of Cyberspace.” Perhaps better than any other single document, it captured the political and
cultural fantasy occasioned by the internet. “Governments of the Industrial World, you weary
giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind,” he declared. “On
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

861
862

Eldred, “Free Walden.”
Eric Eldred, e-mail message to author, June 17, 2012.

330
	  

behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome among us. You
have no sovereignty where we gather.”863 The old needed to make way for the new because this
new realm was not made of “flesh and steel” but rather
of transactions, relationships, and thought itself. Ours is a world that is both everywhere
and nowhere, but it is not where bodies live.
We are creating a world that all may enter without privilege or prejudice accorded
by race, economic power, military force, or station of birth.
We are creating a world where anyone, anywhere may express his or her beliefs,
no matter how singular, without fear of being coerced into silence or conformity.
Your legal concepts of property, expression, identity, movement, and context do
not apply to us. They are all based on matter, and there is no matter here.864
Beautiful, right? But, of course, also wrong. The internet is a matter of matter; it is a series of
tubes, a physical infrastructure bound to physical space and limited by political geography.865 As
this chapter has shown, even a repository as self-consciously digital as the Internet Archive is
found in a series of rooms filled with metal and glass and flesh and paper, is found in server
farms stacked with physical memory, is found—most strangely but fittingly of all—on the road,
in a bookmobile. Far from making a radical break with the past, the Internet Archive reached
back and brought forward the dream of a common consciousness—as well as its awkward
universalizing gestures, its zest for both friction and distance, its imperial ambitions, its blind
spots and missteps. It did not abandon paper or flesh, just as it could not in the end manage to
abandon control and restriction. The question of who could share, and what shape that sharing
might take, remained—and remains—an open one.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
863

John Perry Barlow, “A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace,” February 8, 1996,
https://projects.eff.org/~barlow/Declaration-Final.html.
864
Barlow, “A Declaration.”
865
See Andrew Blum, Tubes: A Journey to the Center of the Internet (New York: Ecco, 2012); Jack Goldsmith and
Tim Wu, Who Controls the Internet?: Illusions of a Borderless World (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008).

331
	  
	  

	  

Figures

Figure 35: William Penn making a treaty
From “Computer Networks: Heralds of Resource Sharing (Arpanet, 1972)”

332
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure 36: Hand pulling book from library shelf
From “Computer Networks: Heralds of Resource Sharing (Arpanet, 1972)”

333
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure 37: Cartoon by Jim Flynn
From American Libraries (October 1992)

Figure 38: Book scanning at the Internet Archive
From Wikimedia Commons

334
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure 39: The human requirements of book scanning
From “Internet Archive- tour”

Figure 40: Confronting griminess of digitization
From “Internet Archive- tour”

335
	  
	  

	  

Figure 41: Due date slip
From the Internet Archive version of Emerging
Communities

336
	  
	  

	  

Figure 42: The Internet Archive Bookmobile
From “The Bookmobile Rides Again!” Internet Archive, Fall 2005,
http://archive.org/texts/bookmobile-photos.php

337
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure 43: Binding a Book printed on the Internet Archive Bookmobile setup
From “How to Make a Book,” Internet Archive video, 4:30, 2003, http://archive.org/details/HowToMakeABookmov

338
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure 44: Brewster Kahle’s son, Caslon, teaching students to make books
From From “The Bookmobile Rides Again!”

339
	  
	  

Figure 45:The Bookmobile at the Supreme Court, the night before oral arguments in Eldred
From “The Bookmobile Rides Again!”

340
	  

CONCLUSION

There Went the Bookmobile?
“Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,
Missing me one place search another,
I stop somewhere waiting for you.”
–Walt Whitman (1855) 866
This dissertation began with two stories. In one, librarians in Catawba County, North
Carolina, made a map that captured how a bookmobile was meant to fill the space of the county,
to connect its people with books. In the other, Chicano nationalists in El Paso, Texas, painted a
bookmobile with symbols designed to connect Chicanos across the Southwest. Between those
two small stories—between government maps and activist dreams, between political and racial
geography, between lofty ideals and the weight of the earth—lay the heart of this project: the
messy, unpredictable, wide-ranging, and surprisingly contentious role that bookmobiles have
played in building “common consciousness” in America over the past century. In telling the
larger story that lies between those two smaller ones, the story of the bookmobile and its
America, this dissertation has made three primary interventions in how we can and should think
about community, culture, and nationalism.
First, by emphasizing questions of circulation and space, this project has insisted that the
ties that bind a nation together—the “thick mesh” of democracy—are never simply metaphorical.
Communities are created and maintained, in large part, thanks to the movement of cultural
artifacts, by means both technological and political. How those objects move, when they move,
and most crucially, where they move (or don’t) maps the shape of belonging in communities. We
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

866

Whitman, “Song of Myself,” 124.

341
	  

saw this at work in every chapter. When May Pressly “made a circuit of [her] district” to create a
library club, she was turning the space and people around her into an institution that could
receive and transmit culture from the capital. When the Audubon Regional Library sent out its
color-coded bookmobiles, it was charting a shape for its community, one where culture was (sort
of) shared but only across space that was rigidly and racially policed. When the U.S. government
sent bookmobiles to West Germany, packed with books about American life, it was extending a
hand—a hand to greet but also to squeeze and shape. When librarians put books on the road, or
on supermarket shelves, they were creating new paths for library materials that helped change
what libraries were and how they worked. And when Eric Eldred parked his print-on-demand
bookmobile on the banks of Walden Pond, he was (perhaps without even knowing it) making an
argument about how the relationship of particular books to particular places still matters in an era
of digital technology. Understanding the bookmobile, then, has required understanding that
circulation happens in physical space and that it happens thanks to particular technological,
political, and social prerequisites. And this isn’t just true of bookmobiles. Scholars talk
frequently about ideas “circulating” through societies, but they talk more rarely and more
vaguely about the how and the where of that circulation. But as this dissertation has made clear,
those are the crucial questions. It is not enough to say that ideas circulate, because the
technologies and ideologies that enable that circulation have significant, inescapable effects on
how and where those ideas can move—and on what influence they can have when they get there.
Communities are formed by the circulation of culture, and the ground over which culture travels
is always messy and often uneven.
Second, conflicts over “common consciousness” are, at heart, arguments about how it
will be shaped and who gets to shape it. Insofar as it ever really exists, common consciousness is

342
	  

a contingent, uncertain product of debates about what, exactly, it means to have something in
common. Indeed, communities don’t just exist, don’t pop fully formed from some powerful brow.
They are, rather, made—in the lofty realm of ideas, yes, but also in the oil-slicked, potholed
street. We saw throughout this dissertation the uneasy but fantastically productive ways in which
the imagined and the real clashed and combined, when the idea of common consciousness in
some cases drove into roadblocks, many of its own making, and in other cases detoured off the
map its originators had imagined. In particular, on the bookmobile, this progressive ideal took a
longer, stranger path than a narrow history of progressivism would indicate. In the hands of
librarians, out on the road, progressive principles like common consciousness were put into
practice at times and in ways that both exposed their inborn problems and, at the same time, their
possibilities for appropriation and reuse by marginalized people. The Kansas Traveling Library
established strict rules, many of which were bent (or broken) out on the prairie. Jim Crow
governments used bookmobiles to enforce segregation while African Americans used them to
challenge it. The U.S. government sent bookmobiles to West Germany to Americanize its people,
most of whom declined to participate at all. In other words, once it was sent out into the world,
the bookmobile—like common consciousness more broadly—was not solely defined by the
powerful. Over and over, administrators declared and users responded in unpredictable,
uncontrollable ways. What bookmobiles meant, and even how they worked, wasn’t clear until
plans met people out on the road. The history of the bookmobile this dissertation has told hasn’t,
as a consequence, been one solely of ideas or exclusively from below. It’s been neither wholly a
matter of oppression nor entirely a tale of resistance. What the bookmobile illuminates, and what
is necessarily generalizable from the bookmobile’s specific case, is that the content and the

343
	  

consequences of ideas are to be found in the doing, in messy battles about what ideas mean in
practice.
Finally, this project has argued for the importance of considering “public culture” as a
constitutive part of American life and history. Since at least the eighteenth century, the idea of
the “public” has gestured at commonality—the community of rational human subjects, say—
while it has in practice been bounded by, among other factors, race and gender.867 The
bookmobile as an agency of public culture in the twentieth century reveals another, related
tension between the “public” and the common: that between the state’s money and the people’s
culture. This dissertation has made two moves in order to highlight and examine this tension.
First, the emphasis on public culture has worked to correct an over-emphasis, in theoretical and
historical scholarship, on capitalism as the motor of belonging in America. Indeed, a relentless
focus on consumer culture in American Studies (and on “print capitalism” in book history) has
obscured many of the non-commercial avenues by which culture has moved through American
life.868 The public library movement, as a signal example, flourished in the late nineteenth
century and well into the twentieth, simultaneously with the consumer culture that has garnered
so much more scholarly attention.869 Consideration of the long afterlife of progressivism, and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

867

See Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of
Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991); Fraser, “Rethinking the Public Sphere;”
Warner, Publics and Counterpublics.
868
The post-war volume of the “History of the Book in America” series, for example, contains only one essay
dealing explicitly with libraries. Bookmobiles appear nowhere in the volumes 632 pages. The 1880-1940 volume
has two library-centered essays, but despite being subtitled “Print in Motion,” the bookmobile is only mentioned
once in passing. David Paul Nord, Joan Shelley Rubin, and Michael Schudson, eds., The History of the Book in
America, Vol. 5: The Enduring Book: Print Culture in Postwar America (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2009); Carl Kaestle and Janice Radway, eds., A History of the Book in America, Vol. 4: Print in Motion: The
Expansion of Publishing and Reading in the United States, 1880-1940 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 2009).
869
In her incredibly influential study of the emergence of middlebrow culture in the U.S., for example, Joan Shelley
Rubin examines an enormous breadth of genres and venues. But libraries are almost absent, treated where they are
present alongside bookstores as yet another path between publishers and readers. Libraries are even more lacking in
other books that transformed the study of twentieth-century America in the 1990s and 2000s. See Rubin, The

344
	  

particularly to its interwoven commitments to state power and association, makes clear how
necessary it is to take public culture seriously, as well as to explore and understand its
interactions with the flashier realms of commercial exchange.870 The former task has been a
primary goal of this project, and in every chapter we saw and interpreted the questions raised by
the idea of sharing culture in both figurative and literal senses. The latter task was undertaken
most directly in Chapter Four, where we saw libraries make themselves a home in—and be
transformed by—the American supermarket.
This project’s emphasis on public culture has, secondly, illustrated that the emotions of
nationalism are inextricable from the bureaucracy of state-building. To understand the
bookmobile, as to understand the country as a whole, we must attend to the material prerequisites
for national identity. Public culture—that which is held in common for general use and the
consumption of which is part of the experience of nationalism—demands not just a spirit of
togetherness but the nuts and bolts of governance to acquire, maintain, and distribute it. Taxes,
which are used to purchase and preserve public culture, literalize the mutual obligations of
citizenship, and infrastructure, which enables distribution, makes a community’s connections
material. As we saw in Chapter Three, when the Taos County Project sent a bookmobile around
the New Mexico countryside, it was working to encourage a sense of belonging to the nation and,
at the same time, to bring the machinery of the state into the lives of the people who lived there.
The feeling of belonging to a nation, the political form of the town meeting, and the
infrastructure of the irrigation ditch were inextricably part of the same project. These arguments
that proceed from the study of public culture—that public culture matters, and that it links
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Making of Middlebrow Culture; Cohen, Consumer’s Republic; Leach, Land of Desire; Lears, Fables of Abundance;
Enstad, Ladies of Labor.
870
On association and state power, see McGerr, Fierce Discontent, especially 66-68.

345
	  

nationalism and state-building—have potentially broad application to cultural and political
history, allowing us to see connections and interactions where we might not have noticed them
before.
This dissertation has brought these three insights—that circulation is necessary for
cultural life (and its study), that community is a process, and that public culture is distinct and
important—to bear, largely, on three aspects of twentieth-century American life: racial
segregation, imperial expansion, and economic inequality. But race, empire, and class were not
the only factors that influenced the answers that bookmobiles and libraries offered to the
twentieth century’s enduring questions. Gender, for example, played a major—though by no
means unitary—role in determining the shape of belonging. At the turn of the century, as we saw
in Chapter One, domesticity was a tool for the exercise of political and cultural power by women,
and for the expansion of library service across the country. But in the middle of the century, as
Chapter Four illustrated, new icons of domestic modernity—supermarkets above all—served
more to limit both women’s power and libraries’ growth. So, too, with order enforced by a
centralized political power. In the Jim Crow South, as we saw in Chapter Two, governments
rigidly organized the library landscape in order to limit access to common consciousness. In
Chapter Three, though, we saw how a centralized government could operate with an opposite
goal in mind, a goal of bringing people into the library’s orbit. And technology was a consistent,
though unpredictable throughline in the history of the bookmobile: it scared some people,
seemed a savior to others, but always both shaped and was shaped by the ways communities saw
themselves. Other factors more narrowly influenced this history: religion was central to
progressivism, sexuality fueled racist fears, climate affected where bookmobiles could travel,
and more. As we have seen again and again, all of these factors, major or minor, interacted with

346
	  

and influenced the three major dynamics this dissertation has tracked: racial segregation,
imperial expansion, and economic inequality. The history of the bookmobile is, in a way both
narrow and sweeping, a history of identity, culture, and belonging in the United States.
Indeed, this project has been a history of the bookmobile as a history of modern America,
using a peculiar machine to illustrate and illuminate much bigger questions about what it meant
to be an American in the twentieth century. But I want to close with a somewhat narrower
question, a question I am asked almost every time I discuss this project: Where are bookmobiles
headed, if anywhere? Most people I talk to assume that bookmobiles are dead or dying in the
wake of the Web. But the story of the bookmobile’s future, like that of its history, is not so
simple, after all.

“Here We Come Up in a Bookmobile”: The End?
In the early 1990s, the punk band Green Day joined the Lollapalooza tour in a rather
unusual vehicle. “I think there’s something like thirty buses or something that’s gonna be on
Lollapalooza,” vocalist/guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong told MTV at the time, and “here we come
up in a bookmobile.”871 (“They’ll all be standing in line with their library cards,” Mike Dirnt
added, laughing.) Found abandoned in Phoenix and refurbished into a tour bus by a band
member’s father, the bookmobile retained the exterior marks of its former role (the MTV
interview is cut repeatedly with dynamic shots of “BOOKMOBILE” painted on the side). But,
really, everything had changed. Years later, Tre Cool recalled stopping the bookmobile in
Oregon to “buy a bag of weed off some guy,” and a “woman pulls open the door, and goes,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
871

“Green Day – Bookmobile interview ‘94,” YouTube video, 2:17, January 23, 2010,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVa5XXg3i9g.

347
	  

‘Woah! This isn’t a bookmobile! Sure smells good in here, though.”872 Or, as Armstrong put it in
that MTV interview, “A lot of people come up to the bookmobile, and they’re like, ‘Do you have
books for sale in there?’ And it’s like, [laugh] we don’t even read.”
According to the American Library Association, there were almost twice as many
bookmobiles in service in the U.S. in the early 1990s than there had been in 1950.873 But
something had shifted, captured with grinning confidence by the young men of Green Day. By
the 1990s, after decades of expansion and contraction, filled with boundless faith and drained by
unreasonable expectations, the bookmobile’s iconic status had finally and largely been emptied
out, leaving the bookmobile hollow and ready to carry not books but a band. “Here we come up
in a bookmobile.” But, of course, it wasn’t just irreverent punk rockers at work here. Almost a
century on, the assumptions that had accompanied the bookmobile on its travels weighed heavily
on a nation struggling with the consequences of the world—still marked by separation,
expansion, and inequality—that those assumptions had built.
And still more weighed, and weighed more literally. Increasingly, the materiality of the
bookmobile and of the culture it carries has seemed less a benefit, as it had for a century, and
more a liability. Outside the eccentric precincts of the Internet Archive, the techno-utopian faith
in exclusively digital networks is widespread. If libraries themselves are seen—ridiculously, but
frequently—as unnecessary in the age of the internet, then bookmobiles, which use decades-old
infrastructures to move centuries-old media, are even more baffling to internet partisans. (This,
of course, is despite the fact that internet access remains unevenly distributed by race, geography,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

872

David Fricke, “Tre Cool on Growing Up Punk and Finding Green Day’s Groove,” Rolling Stone, May 15, 2009,
http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/tre-cool-on-growing-up-punk-and-finding-green-days-groove20090515#ixzz2QvYJR6rW.
873
These numbers include only public library bookmobiles, with 603 in 1950 and, for example, 1,035 in 1993.
“Bookmobiles in the U.S.,” American Library Association,
http://www.ala.org/research/librarystats/public/bookmobiles/bookmobilesu.

348
	  

and income.)874 And, more so, amidst the decay in public funding we saw begin in Chapter Four,
the very physicality of the bookmobile is difficult to maintain. Fuel, rubber, metal. Training,
maintenance. All of these cost money, money that is no longer so easy to find or claim on behalf
of public culture. That which powered the bookmobile now sees it grinding almost to a halt.
Almost, but not quite; the bookmobile isn’t dead yet. Cities like Worcester,
Massachusetts, continue to launch new mobile programs, and large-scale programs in some
states continue apace.875 And even more surprisingly, and hearteningly, the bookmobile still
seems a useful form to some who, like Lorenzo Greene and Kathryn Johnson in the 1920s and
1930s, work to build communities that don’t quite match those imagined by state institutions. In
2010, for example, queer artists Irina Contreras and Kelly Besser launched the Miracle
Bookmobile. Responding in part to threats to public funding for libraries, and explicitly inspired
by Mary Titcomb (founder of the first bookmobile, in Washington County, Maryland), Contreras
and Besser drove up and down the California coast, distributing “queer materials, science fiction,
radical political publications, zines, pulp, smut, local West Coast history, memoirs, books en
español and anything you love reading and wanna share” to people along the way.876 “Our hope
for The Miracle,” they told an interviewer, “is to create new reading spaces altogether,” spaces
built—like Johnson’s two-foot shelf or Greene’s black history texts—around “access to hidden
histories which may otherwise be forgotten, rewritten, or destroyed.”877 And a year later, the
People’s Library at Occupy Wall Street adapted the form of the bookmobile as a way to regroup
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
874

See Dharma Dailey, et al., Broadband Adoption in Low-Income Communities (New York: Social Science
Research Council, 2010).
875
The new Worcester bookmobile, launched in 2012, is, intriguingly enough, a return of the bookmobile to the
city, which had scrapped the original program in the 1990s after fifty years of service. Matthew Robert, “The Magic
Bus,” Worcester Mag, June 20, 2012, http://www.worcestermag.com/city-desk/top-news/The-Magic-Bus159726345.html.
876
Chris Vargas, “The Miracle,” Original Plumbing, February 6, 2011,
http://www.originalplumbing.com/2011/02/06/chrisblog-the-miracle/.
877
Vargas, “The Miracle.”

349
	  

after the original library was destroyed in a police raid.878 Bookmobiles still play crucial
supporting roles in efforts to fight out and work through what it means to be a public, what it
might take to hold a culture in common.
It may be that—in a world where so much of politics seems to happen behind glowing
screens, in smartphone apps and Facebook likes—there is something appealingly radical, once
again, in driving up in a truck packed with books. Bookmobiles make literal in the present, as
they make clear in historical retrospect, how central physical infrastructures and human bodies
are to the sharing of culture. Eager to confront and transform the unsustainable injustices of
contemporary life, activists and designers and radical librarians seem to be looking selfconsciously to the past as they work to figure out how to, in the words of sci-fi author/design
writer Bruce Sterling, “enjoy some futurity.”879 Unlike too many involved in bookmobiles over
the years—who were so focused on “thrilling new visions,” as librarian Hazel Webster Byrnes
put it, that they failed to see how weighted down by an unequal, unjust past the bookmobile
actually was—these new participants seem both more cautious and more creative as they adapt to
new contexts in a new century.
The bookmobile, in other words, might just come again.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

878

Xeni Jardin, “Wanted: your books in Brooklyn, today, to rebuild a new ‘People's Library’,” Boing Boing,
November 19, 2011, http://boingboing.net/2011/11/19/wanted-your-books-in-brooklyn.html.
879
Bruce Sterling, Shaping Things (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), 142. See also John Thackara, In the Bubble:
Designing in a Complex World (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005).

350
	  

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Archival Collections
Anne M. Smith Collection. Fray Angélico Chávez History Library. Museum of New Mexico.
Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Bookmobile Statistical Reports, 1940-. Utah State Archives. Salt Lake City, Utah.
Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary. General Records of
the Department of State, Record Group 59. National Archives and Records
Administration. College Park, Maryland.
Kathryn M. Johnson Papers. Schlessinger Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Lend a Hand Society Records, 1843-1982. Massachusetts Historical Society. Boston,
Massachusetts.
Library for the Blind, Mobile Services, Bookmobile Records. Seattle Public Library. Seattle,
Washington.
Library Programs Division. Special Collections Branch, Oversize Scrapbooks, 1947-1958.
Records of the United States Information Agency, Records Group 306. National Archives
and Records Administration. College Park, Maryland.
Lucy (Browne) Johnston Papers, 1846-1937. Kansas Historical Society. Topeka, Kansas.
Margaret Stephenson Roberts Papers, 1896-1956. Schlessinger Library. Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Photographic Prints Documenting Programs and Activities of the Bureau of Agricultural
Economics and Predecessor Agencies, Record Group 83. National Archives. College
Park, Maryland.
State Library Commission – Miscellaneous Files (Series 1064). North Dakota Historical Society.
Fargo, North Dakota.
Virginia Eggersten Sorensen Papers. Children’s Literature Research Collections, University of
Minnesota. Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Published

351
	  

Acheson, Dean. “Truth and Freedom.” Information Bulletin (July 1952): 11-12.
Addams, Jane. Democracy and Social Ethics. 1902. Reprint. Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
2002.
Addams, Jane. Twenty Years at Hull-House. 1910. Reprint. Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1990.
Adderley v. Florida, 385 U.S. 39 (1966).
“Albany, Ga., Public Library Reopens on ‘Vertical Integration’ Basis.” Library Journal 88, no. 8
(1963): 1638.
“Amerika Haus.” Information Bulletin 148 (November 1948): 19-20.
Anderson, Chris. Free: The Future of a Radical Price. New York: Hyperion, 2009.
“Army Libraries’ Short Story Contest Winners Are Named,” Recruiting Journal (June 1950).
Arnold, Matthew. Culture and Anarchy: An Essay in Political and Social Criticism. London:
Smith, Elder and Co., 1869.
Atchison Topeka & Santa Fe Railway v. Gee (1905).
Beal, Pauline. “Here Comes the Bookmobile!” New Hampshire Public Libraries 34-39 (1940):
1-2.
Behrens, Robert. “Democracy Stalks the Library.” Information Bulletin (February 1951): 35.
Bell, Daniel. The End of Ideology: On the Exhaustion of Political Ideas in the Fifties. 1960.
Reprint. New York: Free Press, 1962.
Bell, Daniel. Work and Its Discontents: The Cult of Efficiency in America. Boston: Beacon Press,
1956.
Berelson, Bernard. The Library’s Public: A Report of the Public Library Inquiry of the Social
Science Research Council. New York: Columbia University Press, 1949.
Berry III, John, Shirley Havens, and Karl Nyren. “The Selling of the Library.” Library Journal
99, no. 2 (1974): 85.
Bishop, Ann P. “Introduction.” In Emerging Communities: Integrating Networked Information
into Library Services, edited by Ann P. Bishop. Urbana: Graduate School of Library and
Information Science, 1994.

352
	  

Blake, Fay, and Edith Perlmutter. “Libraries in the Marketplace: Information Emporium or
People’s University?” Library Journal 99, no. 2 (1974): 108-111.
Blei, Norbert. “Three-Day Run on a Navajo, New Mexican Spirit Trail,” American Libraries 6,
no. 2 (1975): 96-104.
Bontemps, Arna. Story of the Negro. New York: Knopf, 1948.
Boorstin, Daniel J. The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream. New York: Penguin,
1961.
Bostwick, Andrew Linn. “A Branch Library in a Department Store,” Library Journal 63 (1938):
420.
Bostwick, Arthur E. Some Principles of Business-Like Conduct in Libraries. Chicago: American
Library Association, 1920.
Bradt, Jane. “The ‘Library Ladies’ in Bernalillo County.” New Mexico Library Bulletin 18
(1949): 6.
“Brewster Kahle builds a free digital library.” TED video, 20:02. Posted December 2007.
http://www.ted.com/talks/brewster_kahle_builds_a_free_digital_library.html.
Brown v. Louisiana, 383 U.S. 131 (1966).
Campbell, Rosemae Wells. Books and Beaux. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1958.
Center, Stella S. “The Responsibility of Teachers of English in Contemporary American Life,”
English Journal 22, no. 2 (1933): 97-108.
Cherry Hills Newsflash. Champaign: Cherry Hills Homeowners Association, May/June 2008.
“Computer Networks: Heralds of Resource Sharing (Arpanet, 1972).” Internet Archive video,
30:22. http://archive.org/details/ComputerNetworks_TheHeraldsOfResourceSharing.
Cook, Jack. “The Bookmobile Comes to Speck.” Clinton County News. n.d.
http://clintonnews.net/pages/?p=2847.
Cooper, James Fenimore. The Prairie: A Tale. 1827. Reprint. New York: Hurd and Houghton,
1871.
Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536 (1965).
Crèvecoeur, John de. Letters from an American Farmer; and Sketches of Eighteenth-Century

353
	  

America, edited by Albert E. Stone. New York: Penguin, 1983.
Croly, Herbert David. The Promise of American Life. 1909. Reprint. Minneapolis: Filiquarian
Publishing, 2007.
Danton, Emily Miller. “Victory Begins at Home.” ALA Bulletin 36 (1942): 535-546.
“The Danville, Virginia Public Library.” Wilson Library Bulletin 36, no. 10 (1962): 798.
Davis, David. Librarian’s Night Before Christmas. Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing, 2007.
de Leeuw, Adele. With a High Heart. New York: Macmillan, 1945.
DeLillo, Don. White Noise. New York: Penguin, 1985.
Dewey, John. Democracy and Education. New York: MacMillan Company, 1916.
Dewey, Melvil. “Traveling Libraries: Field and Future of Traveling Libraries.” University of the
State of New York Home Education Department Bulletin 40 (1901).
Annie L. Diggs, et al., First Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission,
1900-1901 (Topeka: W.Y. Morgan, 1901
Dizard, Jr., Wilson P. Inventing Public Diplomacy: The Story of the U.S. Information Agency.
Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 2004.
Doyle, Dorothy. “Washington.” Pacific Northwest Library Association Quarterly 32 (1968): 38.
Dred Scott v. Sanford, 60 U.S. 393 (1857).
Du Bois, W.E.B. “A Negro Schoolmaster in the New South.” The Atlantic Monthly (January
1899): 99-105.
Du Bois, W. E. Burghardt. The Souls of Black Folks: Essays and Sketches. Chicago: A.C.
McClurg & Co., 1903.
Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186 (2003).
Ely, Richard T. The Social Law of Service. New York: Eaton & Mains, 1896.
Enerson, Laura. Our Library Lives in a Bus. Grayland, WA: Cove Publishing, 1977.
Escontrías, Manny A. Interview with Abelardo Delgado and Ricardo Sánchez, 1972. Institute of
Oral History, University of Texas at El Paso.
http://digitalcommons.utep.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1097&context=interviews.

354
	  

Film Centre. The Use of Mobile Cinema and Radio Vans in Fundamental Education. Paris:
UNESCO, 1949.
“First Library-Supermarket Mix Pleases Grocery Shoppers.” American Libraries 18, no. 1
(1987): 8, 10.
Fortas, Abe. Concerning Dissent and Civil Disobedience. New York: World Publishing
Company, 1968.
Foster, Edith L. Yonder She Comes: A Once Told Li’bry Tale. Bremen, Ga.: Gateway Printing
Co., 1985.
Franklin, Benjamin. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. Philadelphia: Henry Altemus,
1895.
Frazer, Charles R. “The Richard B. Harrison Library: A Community Asset.” The Pamphleteer 1
(1963).
French, Zelia. The Traveling Library Story. Topeka, KS: Kansas Traveling Libraries
Commission, 1961.
“Frontiers of the Future” (1937), Audio Productions, Inc., and National Industrial Council.
Prelinger Archive video, Internet Archive. http://archive.org/details/Frontier1937.
Garner v. Louisiana, 368 U.S. 157 (1961).
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins. Human Work. New York: McClur, Phillips, & Co., 1904.
Ginsberg, Allen. Howl and Other Poems. 1956. Reprint. San Francisco: City Lights Books, 2006.
Gladden, Washington. Rights and Duties. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Board of Regents,
1902.
Goldbeck, Liselotte “Library on Wheels.” Information Bulletin (April 1952): 3-5.
Golden, Harry. Only in America. Cleveland, OH: World Publishing Company, 1958.
Goldhor, Herbert. “Library-Booketeria.” Library Journal 83, no. 19 (1958): 3074.
“Green Day – Bookmobile interview ’94.” YouTube video, 2:17. January 23, 2010.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVa5XXg3i9g.
Greene, Lorenzo J. Selling Black Pride for Carter G. Woodson: A Diary, 1930-1933, edited
Arvarh E. Strickland. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1996.

355
	  

Gringhuis, Dirk. Here Comes the Bookmobile. Chicago: Albert Whitman & Company, 1952.
Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 508 (1965).
Hale, Edward Everett. Kanzas and Nebraska: The History, Geographical and Physical
Characteristics, and Political Position of These Territories. Boston: Phillips, Sampson
and Company, 1854.
Hale, Edward E. The Ten Times One is Ten and Lend a Hand Clubs; How to Begin. Boston: J.
Stilman Smith & Co., 1888.
Harrington, Michael. The Other America: Poverty in the United States. 1962. Reprint. Baltimore:
Penguin, 1968.
“Here Comes the Library.” California Librarian 13 (1952): 151.
“Here Comes the Bookmobile.” Idaho Librarian 15-16 (1963).
“Here comes the Bookmobile!” Mississippi Library News 21 (March 1957): 18-19.
Herontin, Ellen. Introduction. In The History of the Woman’s Club Movement in America, by
Jennie June Cunningham Croly. New York: Henry G. Allen & Co., 1898.
Hill, Lee Sullivan. Libraries Take Us Far. Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group, 1998.
“Homes for Better Living,” Information Bulletin (September 1951): 49-52.
Hunton Addie W., and Kathryn M. Johnson. Two Colored Women with the American
Expeditionary Forces. Brooklyn: Brooklyn Eagle Press, 1920.
Hutchins, F. A. Traveling Libraries. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1900.
Hyers, Faith Holmes. The Library and the Radio. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938.
“Internet Archive- tour.” Internet Archive video, 1:13. http://archive.org/details/InternetArchiveTour.
Interviews with Robert Williams. Mapping Local Knowledge.
http://www.vcdh.virginia.edu/cslk/danville/bio_williams.html.
Jacobs, J. J. “Here Comes the Bookmobile!” Today’s Education 40 (1931): 635.
Janzow, Laura M., ed. The Library Without the Walls. New York: H.W. Wilson, 1927.

356
	  

Jarrell, Randall. “Children Selecting Books in a Library.” In Reading Rooms, edited by Susan
Allen Toth and John Coughlan. New York: Doubleday, 1991.
Jarrell, Randall. A Sad Heart at the Supermarket. New York: Atheneum, 1962.
Johnson, Enid. Nancy Runs the Bookmobile. New York: Messner, 1956.
Johnson, Kathryn. “Educating Nordics.” The Messenger (May 1927).
Jones, Wyman H. “The Role of the Branch Library in the Program of Metropolitan Library
Service.” Library Trends 14, no. 4 (1966): 401-406.
Kahle, Brewster. “Universal Access to All Knowledge.” The American Archivist 70, no. 1 (2007):
139-158.
Kauffman, Bernice. “‘Booketeria’.” American Speech 22, no. 4 (1947): 306.
King, James L., et al. Fourth Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission.
Topeka: State Printing Office, 1907.
King, James L., et al. Second Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission
1901-1902. Topeka: W.Y. Morgan, 1902.
King, James L., et al. Seventh Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission,
1910-’12. Topeka: State Printing Office, n.d.
King, James L., et al. Tenth Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission,
1916-’18. Topeka: Kansas State Printing Plant, 1918.
King, James L., et al. Third Biennial Report of the Kansas Traveling Libraries Commission
1902-’04. Topeka: Geo. A. Clark, 1905.
King, Jr., Martin Luther. “The Ethical Demands for Integration.” In A Testament of Hope: The
Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King. Jr., edited James Melvin
Washington. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Kinnaird, Jean. “Information Uncensored.” Information Bulletin (December 1951): 12-17.
Knox, Clair K., and Jane C. Cotner. “Here Comes the Bookmobile.” In Up the Hemline: Being a
True Account of One Hundred Years of Classroom Experiences in Colorado, edited by
Margaret Lehrer. Colorado Springs: William and Field, 1975.
Kouwenhoven, John A. The Beer Can by the Highway: Essays on What’s “American” about
America. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1961.

357
	  

Legler, Henry E. Books for the People. Milwaukee, WI: Kessinger, 1908.
Legler, Henry E. Library Ideals. Chicago: Open Court, 1918.
Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down
Culture and Control Creativity. New York: Penguin, 2004.
Levin, Ira. The Stepford Wives. 1972. Reprint. New York: HarperCollins, 2002.
Lewis, Grace, and Robert Dierlam. “School for Japanese Evacuees.” The Clearing House 17, no.
5 (1943): 280.
Lindberg, Donald A.B. “HPCC and the National Information Infrastructure: an overview,”
Bulletin of the Medical Library Association 83, no. 1 (1995): 29-31.
Lingenfelter, Mary Rebecca. Books on Wheels. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1938.
Long, Harriet C. Why Not? Chicago: American Library Association Committee on Library
Extension, 1929
Loomis, Charles P. “A Cooperative Health Association in Spanish Speaking Villages.” American
Sociological Review 10, no. 2 (1945): 149-157.
Loomis, Charles P., and Jesse Taylor [Reid]. “The Taos County Project of New Mexico—An
Experiment in Local Cooperation Among Bureaus, Private Agencies, and Rural People.”
Human Organization 3, no. 2 (1944): 21-33.
Macdonald, Dwight. Masscult and Midcult: Essays Against the American Grain. New York:
New York Review Books, 2011.
MacDonald, Dwight. “A Theory of Mass Culture.” In Mass Culture: The Popular Arts in
America, edited by Bernard Rosenberg and David Manning White. Glencoe, IL: The Free
Press, 1958.
Mahoney, Haynes R. “Windows to the West.” Information Bulletin (August 1950): 3-6.
Management and Budget Division and Office of Public Affairs. The America Houses: A Study of
the U.S. Information Center in Germany. Office of the U.S. High Commissioner for
Germany, 1953.
Mannes, Marya. But Will It Sell? Philadelphia: J.P. Lippincott, 1964.
McDougal, Eula. “Here Comes the Bookmobile.” Arkansas Libraries (1957): 23-26.
McLuhan, Marshall, and Quentin Fiore. The Medium is the Massage: An Inventory of Effects,

358
	  

produced by Jerome Agel. 1967. Reprint. Madera, CA: Gingko Press, 2001.
Mills, C. Wright. The Sociological Imagination. 1959. Reprint. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Morrow v. Hardwell, 768 F.2d 619 (1985).
Mutschler, Herbert. “King County Library.” Hawaii Library Association Journal 12 (1966).
Neiswender, Rosemary. “Danville and Russia.” Wilson Library Bulletin 36 (1961): 218.
Nelson, Richard L. The Selection of Retail Locations. New York: F.W. Dodge Corporation, 1958.
Niles, Hezekiah. Principles and Acts of the Revolution in America. Baltimore: William Ogden
Niles, 1822.
O’Sullivan, John L. “The Great Nation of Futurity.” The United States Democratic Review 6, no.
23 (1839): 426-430.
Park, Bruce. “Libraries without walls; or, Librarians without a profession.” American Libraries
23, no. 9 (1992): 746-747.
Phillips, Ulrich B. “The Central Theme of Southern History.” American Historical Review 34, no.
1 (1928): 30-43.
Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896).
Public Libraries, Volume 1. Chicago: Library Bureau, 1896.
Ratcliff, Linda. “Intimate Details in the Life of a Library on Wheels.” California Librarian 39
(1978): 41-44.
Reid, J.T. It Happened in Taos. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1956.
Remley, A.L. “An American Bookmobile in Moscow.” ALA Bulletin 53, no. 9 (1959): 766-767.
Research Staff. The Amerika-Haus Bookmobile Program, Part I: Who Are the Bookmobile Users?
American Embassy, Germany: United States Information Service, 1957.
Rheingold, Howard. The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. 1993.
Reprint. Cambridge: MIT Press 2000.
Richard B. Harrison Public Library, Tenth Anniversary, 1935-1945. Raleigh, North Carolina:
1945. http://digital.ncdcr.gov/cdm/ref/collection/p249901coll36/id/1562.

359
	  

“Richmond Installs New Book Return.” Focus on Indiana Libraries 6 (1952): 3.
Riesman, David. Abundance for What? Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1964.
Riesman, David. The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character. 1950.
Reprint. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1961.
Riis, Jacob. How the Other Half Lives: Studies Among the Tenements of New York. New York:
Charles Scribner and Sons, 1890.
Roger Ramjet. Episode 8. First broadcast September 12, 1965. Directed by Fred Crippen and
written by Gene Moss and Jim Thurman.
Roosevelt, Theodore. The New Nationalism. New York: The Outlook Company, 1910.
Royce, Josiah. Studies of Good and Evil: A Series of Essays Upon Problems of Philosophy and
of Life. New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1898.
Sauer, Julia L. ed., Radio Roads to Reading; Library Book Talks Broadcast to Girls and Boys.
New York: H.W. Wilson Company, 1939.
Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47 (1919).
Sloane, Eric. Return to Taos: A Sketchbook of Roadside Americana. New York: Wilfred Funk,
1960.
Sorensen, Virginia. Curious Missie. New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1953.
Spiegler, Charles G. “If Only Dickens Had Written About Hot Rods.” English Journal 54, no. 4
(1965): 275-279.
Strong, Josiah. Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis. New York: Baker &
Taylor, 1891.
Strong, Josiah. The Twentieth Century City. New York: Baker & Taylor, 1898.
Summers, Mary C. On the March. Catawba County, N.C.: Catawba County Public Library, 1959.
Survey of Education in Utah, vol. 18. Washington, D.C.: United States Department of the
Interior, 1926.
“Symbolic Conduct.” Columbia Law Review 68, no. 6 (1968): 1091-1126.
Taft, Lorado. “Daniel Chester French, Sculptor.” Brush and Pencil 5, no. 4 (1900): 43-49.

360
	  

Taylor v. Louisiana, 370 U.S. 154 (1962).
Tetley, Gerard. “Danville reopens with a difference.” Wilson Library Bulletin 34 (1960): 224.
Tetley, Gerard. “A Library Closes in Danville.” Wilson Library Bulletin 35 (1960): 52.
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. 1854. Reprint. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell & Co., 1910.
Thoreau, Henry David. “Walking.” In Atlantic Monthly Vol. XI. Boston: Ticknor and Fields,
1862.
Trow, George W.S. Within the Context of No Context. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1981.
Turner, Frederick Jackson. The Frontier in American History. New York: Henry Holt and
Company, 1920.
U.S. Bureau of Public Roads. General Location of National System of Interstate Highways,
Including All Additional Routes at Urban Areas. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1955.
Whitcomb, Jessie Wright. “A Prairie Sod House and the Kansas Traveling Library.” The
Craftsman (July 1914): 452-454.
Whitman, Walt. “Song of Myself.” In The Complete Poems. New York: Penguin, 2005.
Wickard, Beulah Jo. “Robot Love.” English Journal 23, no. 2 (1934): 133.
Williams, William Appleman. “The Frontier Thesis and American Foreign Policy.” In The
William Appleman Williams Reader, edited by Henry W. Berger. Chicago: I.R. Dee, 1992.
Secondary Sources
Aalbers, Manuel B. Place, Exclusion, and Mortgage Markets. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell,
2011.
Abel, Elizabeth. Signs of the Times: The Visual Politics of Jim Crow. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2010.
Abu-Lughod, Janet L. Race, Space, and Riots in Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Acland, Charles R., and Haidee Wasson. Useful Cinema. Durham: Duke University Press, 2011.
Allen, James Smith. In the Public Eye: A History of Reading in Modern France, 1800-1940.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991.

361
	  

Anderson, Warwick. Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical Medicine, Race, and Hygiene in
the Philippines. Durham: Duke University Press, 2006.
Arsenault, Raymond. Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2011.
Avila, Eric. Popular Culture in the Age of White Flight: Fear and Fantasy in Suburban Los
Angeles. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004.
Ballantyne, Tony. “Mr. Peal’s Archive: Mobility and Exchange in Histories of Empire.” In
Archive Stories: Facts, Fictions, and the Writing of History, edited by Antoinette Burton.
Durham: Duke University Press, 2005.
Ballantyne, Tony. Orientalism and Race: Aryanism in the British Empire. New York: Palgrave,
2002.
Barker, Nettie Garmer. Kansas Women in Literature. Kansas City, KS: S.I. Meseraull & Son,
1915.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122, no. 2 (2007): 775-805.
Becker, Patti Clayton. Books and Libraries in American Society during World War II. New York:
Routledge, 2005.
Beckles, Colin Anthony. PanAfrican Sites of Resistance: Black Bookstores and the Struggle to
Re-Present Black Identity. PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1995.
Bederman, Gail. Manliness & Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the United
States, 1880-1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Bentley, Amy. Eating for Victory: Food Rationing and the Politics of Domesticity. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press, 1998.
Black Farmers in America, 1865-2000: The Pursuit of Independent Farming and the Role of
Cooperatives. Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture, 2002.
Blair, Amy L. Reading Up: Middle-Class Readers and the Culture of Success in the Early
Twentieth-Century United States. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2011.
Blomley, Nicholas. Unsettling the City: Urban Land and the Politics of Property. New York:
Routledge, 2004.
Blum, Andrew. Tubes: A Journey to the Center of the Internet. New York: Ecco, 2012.

362
	  

Borstelmann, Thomas. The Cold War and the Color Line: American Race Relations in the
Global Arena. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003.
Bowlby, Rachel. Carried Away: The Invention of Modern Shopping. New York: Columbia
University Press, 2002.
Boyd, Donald C. “The Book Women of Kentucky: The WPA Pack Horse Library Project, 19361943.” Libraries & the Cultural Record 42, no. 2 (2007): 111-128.
Brandt, Allan M. “Engineering Consumer Confidence in the Twentieth Century.” In Smoke: A
Global History of Smoking, edited by Sander L. Gilman and Zhou Xun. London:
Reaktion, 2004.
Brown, Eleanor. Bookmobiles and Bookmobile Service. Metuchen, NY: Scarecrow Press, 1967.
Bullard, Robert D. “The Anatomy of Transportation Racism.” In Highway Robbery :
Transportation Racism & Routes to Equity, edited by Robert D. Bullard, Glenn S.
Johnson, and Angel O. Torres. Cambridge: South End Press, 2004.
Buschman, John. Dismantling the Public Sphere: Situating and Sustaining Librarianship in the
Age of the New Public Philosophy. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2003.
Buschman, John E., and Gloria J. Leckie, eds. The Library as Place: History, Community and
Culture. Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited, 2006.
Calder, Lendol. Financing the American Dream: A Cultural History of Consumer Credit.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Camp, Stephanie H.M. Closer to Freedom: Enslaved Women and Everyday Resistance in the
Plantation South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004.
Carmichael, Jr., James V. “Southern Librarianship and the Culture of Resentment.” Libraries &
Culture 40, no. 3 (2005): 324-352.
Casey, Marion. “Charles McCarthy’s ‘Idea’: A Library to Change Government.” Library
Quarterly 44, no. 1 (1974): 29-41.
Casey, Marion. “Efficiency, Taylorism, and Libraries in Progressive America.” Journal of
Library History 16, no. 2 (1981): 265-279.
Chaplin, Tamara. Turning On the Mind: French Philosophers on Television. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2007.

363
	  

Chartier, Roger. “Libraries Without Walls.” Representations 42 (1993): 38-52.
Chartier, Roger. “The Practical Impact of Writing.” In A History of Private Life, vol. III:
Passions of the Renaissance, edited by Roger Chartier, translated by Arthur Goldhammer.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Cheape, Charles W. Moving the Masses: Urban Public Transit in New York, Boston, and
Philadelphia, 1880-1912. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980.
Cohen, Benjamin B. “Networks of Sociability: Women’s Clubs in Colonial and Postcolonial
India.” Frontiers: A Journal of Women’s Studies 30, no. 3 (2009): 169-195.
Cohen, Lizabeth. A Consumer’s Republic: The Politics of Mass Consumption in Postwar
America. New York: Vintage, 2003.
Cornelius, Janet Duitsman. “When I Can Read My Title Clear”: Literacy, Slavery, and Religion
in the Antebellum South. Charleston: University of South Carolina Press, 1991.
Cowan, Ruth Schwartz. More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technologies from the
Open Hearth to the Microwave. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
Cresswell, Stephen. “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern Libraries.” Libraries & Culture 31,
no. 3/4 (1996): 557-573.
Cuff, Dana. “Enduring Proximity: The Figure of the Neighbor in Suburban America.”
Postmodern Culture 15, no. 2 (2005).
Cummings, Jennifer. “‘How Can We Fail?’: The Texas State Library’s Traveling Libraries and
Bookmobiles, 1916-1966.” Libraries & the Cultural Record 44, no. 3 (2009): 299-325
Dagbovie, Pero Gaglo. The Early Black History Movement, Carter G. Woodson, and Lorenzo
Johnston Greene. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007.
Dailey, Dharma, et al. Broadband Adoption in Low-Income Communities. New York: Social
Science Research Council, 2010.
Davey, Elizabeth. “Building a Black Audience in the 1930s: Langston Hughes, Poetry Readings,
and the Golden Stair Press.” In Print Culture in a Diverse America, edited by James
Danky and Wayne Wiegand. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1998.
Davis, Natalie Zemon, Society and Culture in Early Modern France: Eight Essays. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1975.
Davis, Timothy. “Looking Down the Road: J.B. Jackson and the American Highway Landscape.”

364
	  

In Everyday America: Cultural Landscape Studies After J.B. Jackson, edited by Chris
Wilson and Paul Groth. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
De Grazia, Victoria. Irresistible Empire: America’s Advance Through Twentieth Century Europe.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005.
Deichmann Edwards, Wendy J., and Carolyn De Swarte Gifford, eds. Gender and the Social
Gospel. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2003.
Deutsch, Tracey. Building a Housewife’s Paradise: Gender, Politics, and American Grocery
Stores in the Twentieth Century. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010.
Donahue, John. The Privatization Decision: Public Ends, Private Means. New York: Basic
Books, 1989.
Downey, Greg. “The Librarian and the Univac: Automation and Labor at the 1962 Seattle
World’s Fair.” In Knowledge Workers in the Information Society, edited by C.
McKercher and V. Mosco. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2007.
Dudziak, Mary. Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2002.
Dunne, Gerald T. Hugo Black and the Judicial Revolution. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1977.
Drury, James W. The Kansas Traveling Library Commission: An Administrative History.
Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Governmental Research Center, 1965.
Dyer, Richard. White. New York: Routledge, 1997.
Engerman, David C. Know Your Enemy: The Rise and Fall of America’s Soviet Experts. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Enstad, Nan. Ladies of Labor, Girls of Adventure: Working Women, Popular Culture, and Labor
Politics at the Turn of the Twentieth Century. New York: Columbia University Press,
1999.
Faulkner, Carol. Women’s Radical Reconstruction: The Freedmen’s Aid Movement. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007.
Fishman, Robert. Bourgeois Utopia: The Rise and Fall of Suburbia. New York: Basic Books,
1987.
Fishwick, Marshall W. “The Cowboy: America’s Contribution to the World’s Mythology.”
Western Folklore 11, no. 2 (1952): 77-92

365
	  

Flink, James J. The Automobile Age. 1988. Reprint. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990.
Ford, Richard Thompson. “The Boundaries of Race: Political Geography in Legal Analysis.”
Harvard Law Review 107, no. 8 (1994): 1841-1921.
Formisano, Ronald F. Boston Against Busing: Race, Class, and Ethnicity in the 1960s and 1970s.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004.
Forrest, Suzanne. The Preservation of the Village: New Mexico’s Hispanics and the New Deal.
1989. Reprint. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1998.
Franz, Kathleen. “‘The Open Road’: Automobility and Racial Uplift in the Interwar Years.” In
Technology and the African-American Experience: Needs and Opportunities for Study,
edited by Bruce Sinclair. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004.
Freund, David M.P. Colored Property: State Policy and White Racial Politics in Suburban
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Fryer, Heather. Perimeters of Democracy: Inverse Utopias and the Wartime Social Landscape in
the American West. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2010.
Fultz, Michael. “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation.”
Libraries & the Cultural Record 41, no. 3 (2006): 337-359.
Fumerton, Patricia. Unsettled: The Culture of Mobility and the Working Poor in Early Modern
England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Gaines, Kevin. Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the Twentieth
Century. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Gainsborough, Juliet F. Fenced Off: The Suburbanization of American Politics. Washington,
D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2001.
Garcelon, Marc. “An information commons?: Creative Commons and public access to cultural
creations.” New Media & Society 11, no. 8 (2009): 1307-1326.
Gendzel, Glen. “What the Progressives Had in Common.” Journal of the Gilded Age and
Progressive Era 10, no. 3 (2011): 331-339.
Gillespie, Andrew, and Kevin Robins. “Geographical Inequalities: The Spatial Bias of the New
Communications Technologies.” Journal of Communication 39, no. 3 (1989): 7-18.
Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth. Gender & Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in
North Carolina, 1896-1920. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.

366
	  

Gleason, Eliza Atkins. The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study of the Government
and Administration of Public Library Service to Negroes in the South. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1941.
Goldsmith, Jack, and Tim Wu. Who Controls the Internet?: Illusions of a Borderless World.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Gudis, Catherine. Buyways: Billboards, Automobiles, and the American Landscape. New York:
Routledge, 2004.
Gullett, Gayle. Becoming Citizens: The Emergence and Development of the California Women’s
Movement, 1880-1911. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000.
Hale, Grace Elizabeth. Making Whiteness: The Culture of Segregation in the South, 1890-1940.
1998. Reprint. New York: Vintage, 1999.
Hammonds, Evelynn. “Black (W)holes and the Geometry of Black Female Sexuality.” In
Feminism Meets Queer Theory, edited by Elizabeth Weed and Naomi Schor.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
Harris, Steven R. “Civil Rights and the Louisiana Library Association: Stumbling toward
Integration.” Libraries & Culture 38, no.4 (2003): 332-350.
Hayashi, Brian Masaru. Democratizing the Enemy: The Japanese American Internment.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Hayden, Dolores. The Grand Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist Designs for American
Homes, Neighborhoods and Cities. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1982.
Hayes, Brian Infrastructure: A Field Guide to the Industrial Landscape. New York: Norton,
2005.
Heineman, Elizabeth. What Difference Does a Husband Make?: Women and Marital Status in
Nazi and Postwar Germany. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Henkin, David M. City Reading: Written Words and Public Space in Antebellum New York. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1998.
Herzog, Dagmar. Sex After Fascism: Memory and Morality in Twentieth-Century Germany.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Hofstadter, Richard. Social Darwinism in American Thought. 1944. Reprint. Boston: Beacon
Press, 1992.
Hollick, Julian Crandall .“The American West in the European Imagination.” Montana: The

367
	  

Magazine of Western History 42, no. 2 (1992): 17-21.
Hoxie, Frederick E. A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians, 1880-1920. 1984.
Reprint. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2001.
Hubbard, Jr., Bill. American Boundaries: The Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
Humphery, Kim. Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the Changing Cultures of Consumption.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Hutchinson, William H. “The Cowboy and the Class Struggle (Or, Never Put Marx in the
Saddle).” Arizona and the West 14, no. 4 (1972): 321-330.
Indiana, Gary. Andy Warhol and the Can that Sold the World. New York: Basic Books, 2010.
Jackson, J.B. A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996.
Jackson, Kenneth T. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1985.
Jacobs, Katrien. Netporn: DIY Web Culture and Sexual Politics. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield, 2007.
Jacobson, Matthew Frye. Whiteness of a Different Color: European Immigrants and the Alchemy
of Race. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998.
James, Thomas. Exile Within: The Schooling of Japanese Americans, 1942-1945. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1987.
Johns, Adrian. “Gutenberg and the Samurai: Or, The Information Revolution is History.”
Anthropological Quarterly 85, no. 3 (2012): 859-883.
Johns, Adrian. The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1998.
Joseph, Peniel E. “Introduction: Toward a Historiography of the Black Power Movement.” In
The Black Power Movement: Rethinking the Civil Rights Black Power Era, edited by
Peniel E. Joseph. New York: Routledge, 2006.
Kaestle, Carl, and Janice Radway, eds. A History of the Book in America, Vol. 4: Print in Motion:
The Expansion of Publishing and Reading in the United States, 1880-1940. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2009.
Kalmbach, James Robert. The Computer and the Page: Publishing, Technology & the

368
	  

Classroom . New York: Greenwood, 1996.
Kaplan, Amy. The Anarchy of Empire in the Making of U.S. Culture. 2002. Reprint. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2005.
Kelley, Barbara M. Expanding the American Dream: Building and Rebuilding Levittown. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1993.
Kelley, Robin D.G. Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class. New York:
Free Press, 1994.
Koepnick, Lutz P. “Unsettling America: German Westerns and Modernity.”
Modernism/Modernity 2, no. 3 (1995): 1-22.
Kohn, Margaret. Brave New Neighborhoods: The Privatization of Public Space. New York:
Routledge, 2004.
Kolko, Beth E., Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert B. Rodman. “Race in Cyberspace: An Introduction.”
In Race in Cyberspace, edited by Beth E. Kolko, Lisa Nakamura, and Gilbert B. Rodman.
New York: Routledge, 2000.
Koschnik, Albrecht. “Let a Common Interest Bind Us Together”: Associations, Partisanship,
and Culture in Philadelphia, 1775-1840. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia
Press, 2007.
Kramer, Paul. The Blood of Government: Race, Empire, the United States, & the Philippines.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
La Forte, Robert S. “Roosevelt’s Osawatomie Speech.” Kansas Historical Quarterly 32, no. 2
(1966): 187-200.
Leach, William. Country of Exiles: The Destruction of Place in American Life. New York:
Vintage, 1999.
Leach, William. Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture.
New York: Vintage, 1999.
Lear, Bernadette A. “Were Tom and Huck On-Shelf? Public Libraries, Mark Twain, and the
Formation of Accessible Canons, 1869-1910.” Nineteenth-Century Literature 64, no. 2
(2009): 189-224.
Lears, T.J. Jackson. Fables of Abundance: A Cultural History of Advertising in America. New
York: Basic Books, 1994.
Lee, Dan R. “Faith Cabin Libraries: A Study of an Alternative Library Service in the Segregated

369
	  

South, 1932-1960.” Libraries & Culture 26, no. 1 (1991): 169-182.
Lieberman, Jennifer. “Power Lines: Electric Networks and the American Literary Imagination,
1870-1916.” PhD diss., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2011.
Light, Jennifer S. “When Computers Were Women.” Technology & Culture 40, no. 3 (1999):
455-483.
Loewen, James W. Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism. New York: New
Press, 2005.
Longemann, Jan. “Different Paths to Mass Consumption: Consumer Credit in the United States
and West Germany during the 1950s and ‘60s.” Journal of Social History 41, no. 3
(2008): 525-559.
Longstreth, Richard. The Drive-In, the Supermarket, and the Transformation of Commercial
Space in Los Angeles, 1914-1941. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000.
Loss, Christopher P. “Reading Between Enemy Lines: Armed Services Editions and World War
II.” Journal of Military History 67, no. 3 (2003): 811-834.
Loughran, Trish. The Republic in Print: Print Culture in the Age of U.S. Nation-Building, 17701870. New York: Columbia University Press, 2007.
Loukaitou-Sideris, Anastasia, and Tridib Banerjee. Urban Design Downtown: Poetics and
Politics of Form. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
Mack, Adam. “‘Speaking of Tomatoes’: Supermarkets, the Senses, and Sexual Fantasy in
Modern America.” Journal of Social History 43, no. 4 (2010): 815-842.
Mak, Bonnie. How the Page Matters. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011.
Marshall, John. “Stress and Strain: The Price of Organizational Change.” In Citizen
Participation in Library Decision-Making: The Toronto Experience, edited by John
Marshall. Halifax, NS: Dalhousie University School of Library Service, 1984.
Martin, Lowell A. Enrichment: A History of the Public Library in the United States in the
Twentieth Century. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 1998.
Martin, Theodora Penny. The Sound of Our Own Voices: Women’s Study Clubs 1860-1910.
Boston: Beacon, 1987.
Masey, Jack, and Conway Lloyd Morgan. Cold War Confrontations: US Exhibitions and Their
Role in the Cultural Cold War. Zürich: Lars Müller Publishers, 2008.

370
	  

May, Elaine Tyler. Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era. 1998. Rev. ed.
New York: Basic Books, 2008.
McAlister, Melani. Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East since
1945. 2001. Rev. ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
McGerr, Michael. A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the Progressive Movement in
America, 1870-1920. New York: Free Press, 2003.
McKenzie, D.F. Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. 1986. Reprint. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1999.
McKitterick, David A. A History of Cambridge University Press: New Worlds for Learning,
1873-1972. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
McKitterick, David. Print, Manuscript, and the Search for Order, 1450-1830. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
McLure, Helen. “The Wild, Wild Web: The Mythic American West and the Electronic Frontier.”
Western Historical Quarterly 31, no. 4 (2000): 457-476.
Meriwether, James Hunter. Proudly We Can Be Africans: Black Americans and Africa, 19351961. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Miller, James A. Remembering Scottsboro: The Legacy of an Infamous Trial. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2009.
Miller, Laura J. Reluctant Capitalists: Bookselling and the Culture of Consumption. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Mitchell, Don. The Right to the City: Social Justice and the Fight for Public Space. New York:
Guilford Press, 2003.
Mitchell, Don. “The S.U.V. Model of Citizenship: Floating Bubbles, Buffer Zones, and the Rise
of the ‘Purely Atomic’ Individual.” Political Geography 24, no. 1 (2005): 77-100.
Moeller, Robert G. Protecting Motherhood: Women and the Family in the Politics of Postwar
West Germany. Berkeley: University of California, 1993.
Mohl, Raymond A. “The Interstates and the Cities: The U.S. Department of Transportation and
the Freeway Revolt, 1966-1973.” Journal of Policy History 20, no. 2 (2008): 193-226.
Molina, Natalia. Fit to be Citizens?: Public Health and Race in Los Angeles, 1879-1939.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.

371
	  

Morozov, Evgeny. The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom. New York:
PublicAffairs, 2010.
Morrisey, Will. The Dilemma of Progressivism: How Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson Reshaped the
American Regime of Self-Government. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009.
Musmann, Klaus. “The Ugly Side of Librarianship: Segregation in Library Services from 19001950.” In Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, edited by
John Mark Tucker. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and
Information Science, 1998.
Nelson, Cynthia Skove. Lynching to Belong: Claiming Whiteness through Racial Violence.
College Station, TX: Texas A&M Consortium Press, 2007.
Nord, David Paul, Joan Shelley Rubin, and Michael Schudson, eds. The History of the Book in
America, Vol. 5: The Enduring Book: Print Culture in Postwar America. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2009.
Noriko, Suzuki. “Japanese Democratization and the Little House Books: The Relation between
General Head Quarters and The Long Winter in Japan after World War II.” Children’s
Literature Association Quarterly 31, no. 1 (2006): 65-86.
Novick, Peter. That Noble Dream: The ‘Objectivity Question’ and the American Historical
Profession. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Oberdeck, Kathryn J. “Class, Place, and Gender: Contested Industrial and Domestic Space in
Kohler, Wisconsin, USA, 1920-1960.” Gender & History 13, no. 1 (2001): 97-137.
Ogata, Amy F. “Creative Playthings: Educational Toys and Postwar American Culture.”
Winterthur Portfolio 39 , no. 2/3 (2004): 129-156.
Oldenziel, Ruth, and Karin Zachmann, eds. Cold War Kitchen: Americanization, Technology,
and European Users. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2009.
Otfinoski, Steven. Outsider Fiction. New York: Chelsea House, 2009.
Pawley, Christine. “Advocate for Access: Lutie Stearns and the Traveling Libraries of the
Wisconsin Free Library Commission, 1895-1914.” Libraries & Culture 35, no. 3 (2000):
434-458.
Pawley, Christine. Reading Places: Literacy, Democracy, and the Public Library in Cold War
America. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2010.
Poiger, Uta G. Jazz, Rock, and Rebels: Cold War Politics and American Culture in a Divided
Germany. Berkeley: University of California, 2000.

372
	  

Price, Patricia L. Dry Place: Landscapes of Belonging and Exclusion. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 2004.
Radway, Janice A. A Feeling for Books: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary Taste, and
Middle-Class Desire. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
Radway, Janice. “The Library as Place, Collection, or Service: Promoting Book Circulation in
Durham, North Carolina, and at the Book-of-the-Month Club, 1925-1945.” In Institutions
of Reading: The Social Life of Libraries in the United States, edited by Thomas Augst
and Kenneth Carpenter. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2007.
Reid, Susan E. “Who Will Beat Whom?: Soviet Popular Reception of the American National
Exhibition in Moscow, 1959.” Kritika 9, no. 4 (2008): 855-904.
Renda, Mary. Taking Haiti: Military Occupation and the Culture of U.S. Imperialism, 19151940. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2001.
Richter, Amy. Home on the Rails: Women, the Railroad, and the Rise of Public Domesticity.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Rieser, Andrew Chamberlin. The Chautauqua Moment: Protestants, Progressives, and the
Culture of Modern Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press, 2003.
Ritter, Gretchen. The Constitution as Social Design: Gender and Civic Membership in the
American Constitutional Order. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006.
Robinson, Sally. Marked Men: White Masculinity in Crisis. New York: Columbia University
Press, 2000.
Rodgers, Daniel T. Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a Progressive Age. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1998.
Rubin, Joan Shelley. The Making of Middlebrow Culture. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1992.
Salvatore, Ricardo D. “Imperial Mechanics: South America’s Hemispheric Integration in the
Machine Age.” American Quarterly 58, no. 3 (2006): 662-691.
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the
19th Century. 1977. Reprint. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986.
Schwartz, Andrew Harrison. The Politics of Greed: How Privatization Structured Politics in
Central and Eastern Europe. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006.

373
	  

Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition
Have Failed. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.
Seely, Bruce. “A Republic Bound Together.” Wilson Quarterly 17 (1993): 19-39.
Shah, Nayan. Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s Chinatown. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2001.
Sheriff, Carol. The Artificial River: The Erie Canal and the Paradox of Progress, 1817-1862.
New York: Hill and Wang, 1996.
Singer, Joseph William. Entitlement: The Paradoxes of Property. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2000.
Smith, Jason Scott. Building New Deal Liberalism: The Political Economy of Public Works,
1933-1956. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Smith-Rosenberg, Caroll. Disorderly Conduct: Visions of Gender in Victorian America. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
Sorkin, Michael. "Introduction: Traffic in Democracy." In Giving Ground: The Politics of
Propinquity, edited by Joan Copjec and Michael Sorkin. New York: Verso, 1999.
Staeheli, Lynn A., and Don Mitchell. The People’s Property?: Power, Politics, and the Public.
New York: Routledge, 2008.
Starn, Orin. “Engineering Internment: Anthropologists and the War Relocation Authority.”
American Ethnologist 13, no. 4 (1986): 700-720.
Stauffer, Suzanne M. “‘She speaks as one having authority’: Mary E. Downey’s Use of Libraries
as a Means to Public Power.” Libraries & Culture 40, no. 1 (2005): 38-62.
Stoler, Ann Laura. Carnal Knowledge and Imperial: Race and the Intimate in Colonial Rule.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
Strasser, Susan. Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash. New York: Henry Holt, 1999.
Streeby, Shelley. American Sensations: Class, Empire, and the Production of Popular Culture.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
Striphas, Ted. The Late Age of Print: Everyday Book Culture from Consumerism to Control.
New York: Columbia University Press, 2009.
Stromquist, Shelton. Reinventing “The People”: The Progressive Movement, the Class Problem,
and the Origins of Modern Liberalism. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2006.

374
	  

Tongson, Karen. Relocations: Queer Suburban Imaginaries. New York: New York University
Press, 2011.
Travis, Trysh. “What We Talk About When We Talk About The New Yorker.” Book History 3
(2000): 253-28.
Tsai, Robert L.Eloquence and Reason: Creating a First Amendment Culture. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2008.
Tripp, Aili Mari. “Gender, Political Participation and the Transformation of Associational Life in
Uganda and Tanzania.” African Studies Review 37, no. 1 (1994): 107-131.
Underwood, June O. “Civilizing Kansas: Women’s Organizations, 1880-1920.” Kansas History
(Winter 1984-85): 291-306.
Satterwaite, Ann. Going Shopping: Consumer Choices and Community Consequences. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2001.
Schneider, Tassilo. “Finding a New Heimat in the Wild West: Karl May and the German
Western of the 1960s.” Journal of Film and Video 47, no. 1/3 (1995): 50-66.
Turner, Fred. From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Steward Brand, the Whole Earth Network,
and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry). 2011.
Reprint. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2012.
Van Slyck, Abigail. Free to All: Carnegie Libraries & American Culture, 1890-1920. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Spigel, Lynn. “Installing the Television Set: Popular Discourses on Television and Domestic
Space, 1948-1955.” Camera Obscura 6, no. 16 (1988): 9-46.
Von Eschen, Penny. Race Against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 1937-1960.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996.
Wagnleitner, Reinhold. Coca-Colonization and the Cold War: The Cultural Mission of the
United States in Austria after the Second World War. University of North Carolina Press,
1994.
Warren, Louis S. “Buffalo Bill Meets Dracula: William F. Cody, Bram Stoker, and the Frontiers
of Racial Decay.” American Historical review 107, no. 4 (2002): 1124-1157.
Welch, Cindy C. “Children’s Stories through the Air: Librarian-Broadcasters, 1922-1941.”

375
	  

Library Quarterly 82, no. 2 (2012): 141-159.
Welch, Cindy. “Librarians of the Airwaves: Reading in the Ether.” In Radio Cultures: The Sound
Medium in American Life, edited by Michael C. Keith. New York: Peter Lang, 2008.
Wertheimer, Andrew B. “Japanese American Community Libraries in America’s Concentration
Camps, 1942-1946.” PhD diss., University of Wisconsin, 2004.
Wexler, Laura. Tender Violence: Domestic Visions in an Age of U.S. Imperialism. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2000.
Where We Need to Go: A Civil Rights Roadmap for Transportation Equity. Washington, D.C.:
The Leadership Conference Education Fund, 2011.
White, Jr., Richard D. “More Than an Analytical Tool: Examining the Ideological Role of
Efficiency.” Public Productivity & Management Review 23, no. 1 (1999): 8-23.
Whitfield, Stephen J. “The ‘Golden’ Era of Civil Rights: Consequences of The Carolina
Israelite.” Southern Cultures 14, no. 3 (2008): 26-51.
Wiebe, Robert H. The Search for Order, 1877-1920. New York: Hill and Wang, 1967.
Williams, Brett. “Deadly Inequalities: Race, Illness, and Poverty in Washington, D.C., since
1945.” In African American Urban History Since World War II, edited by Kenneth L.
Kusmer and Joe W. Trotter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
Williams, Rhys H. “Visions of the Good Society and the Religious Roots of American Political
Culture.” Sociology of Religion 60, no. 1 (1999): 1-34.
Woodward, C. Vann. The Strange Career of Jim Crow. 1955. Reprint. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2002.
Zaeske, Susan. Signatures of Citizenship: Petitioning, Antislavery & Women’s Political Identity.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.
Zukin, Sharon. “The Social Space of Shopping: Mobilizing Dreams for Public Culture.” In
Public Culture: Diversity, Democracy, and Community in the United States, edited by
Marguerite Shaffer. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
Theoretical/Conceptual Sources
Adorno, Theodor. “How to Look at Television.” Quarterly of Film, Radio, and Television 8, no.
3 (1954): 213-235.

376
	  

Ahmed, Sara. Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham: Duke University
Press, 2006.
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
Nationalism. New York: Verso, 1983.
Appadurai, Arjun. “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy.” Public Culture
7, no. 2 (1990): 295-310.
Appadurai, Arjun. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1996.
Billig, Michael. Banal Nationalism. London: Sage, 1995.
Breuilly, John. “Nationalism and the State.” In Nations and Nationalism: A Reader, edited by
Philip Spencer and Howard Wollman. New Brunswick: Rutgers University, 2005.
Camille, Michael. “Sensations of the Page: Imaging Technologies and Medieval Illuminated
Manuscripts.” In The Iconic Page in Manuscript, Print, and Digital Culture, edited by
George Bornstein and Theresa Tinkle. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998.
Darnton, Robert. “What is the History of Books?” Daedalus 111, no. 3 (1982): 65-83.
Darnton, Robert. “What is the History of Books? Revisited.” Modern Intellectual History 4, no.
3 (2007): 495-508.
Fiske, John, and John Hartley. Reading Television. 1978. Reprint. New York: Routledge, 2003.
Fraser, Nancy. “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually
Existing Democracy.” In Habermas and the Public Sphere, edited by Craig Calhoun.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992.
Gellner, Ernest. Nations and Nationalism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983.
Habermas, Jürgen. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a
Category of Bourgeois Society. Translated by Thomas Burger. Cambridge: MIT Press,
1991.
Hobsbawm, Eric J. Nations and Nationalism since 1789: Programme, Myth, Reality. Cambridge
University, 1992.
Hutchinson, Sikivu. “Waiting for the Bus.” Social Text 18, no. 2 (2000): 107-120.
Judt, Tony. Ill Fares the Land. New York: Penguin, 2010.

377
	  

Kaplan, Amy “‘Left Alone with America’: The Absence of Empire in the Study of American
Culture.” In Cultures of American Imperialism, edited by Amy Kaplan and Donald E.
Pease. Durham: Duke University Press, 1993.
Kymlicka, Will, and Wayne Norman. “The Return of the Citizen: A Survey of Recent Work on
Citizenship Theory.” Ethics 104, no. 2 (1994): 352-381.
Langan, Celeste. “Mobility Disability.” Public Culture 13, no. 3 (2001): 459-484.
Massey, Doreen. Space, Place & Gender. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994.
Miller, Toby. “The Reception Deception.” In New Directions in American Reception Study,
edited by Philip Goldstein and James L. Machor. New York: Oxford University Press,
2008.
Radway, Janice. “What's the Matter with Reception Study? Some Thoughts on the Disciplinary
Origins, Conceptual Constraints, and Persistent Viability of a Paradigm.” In New
Directions in American Reception Study, edited by Philip Goldstein and James L. Machor.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Riley, Denise. Am I That Name?: Feminism and the Category of Women in History. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2003.
Sewell, William. Logics of History: Social Theory and Social Transformation. University of
Chicago Press, 2005.
Smith, Neil. “Contours of a Spatialized Politics: Homeless Vehicles and the Production of
Geographic Scale.” Social Text 33 (1992): 54-81.
Sterling, Bruce. Shaping Things. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
Thackara, John. In the Bubble: Designing in a Complex World. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005).
Urry, John. “The ‘System’ of Automobility.” Theory, Culture & Society 21, no. 4-5 (2004): 2539.
Warner, Michael. Publics and Counterpublics. New York: Zone Books, 2002.
Williams, Raymond. Marxism and Literature. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977.
Williams, Raymond. Television: Technology and Cultural Form. 1974. Reprint. New York:
Routledge, 2003.
Winner, Langdon. The Whale and the Reactor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.

378
	  

Wyatt, Sally. “Non-Users Also Matter: The Construction of Users and Non-Users of the Internet.”
In How Users Matter: The Co-Construction of Users and Technology, edited by Nelly
Oudshoorn and Trevor Pinch. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.
Zerilli, Linda Maria-Gelsomina. Feminism and the Abyss of Freedom. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2005.

