Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Project Background
The purpose of this research was to investigate how the knowledge of digitisation
practices can be transferred from a large organisation to a small one. This was done
by applying the recognised digitisation expertise of the National Library of Wales
(NLW) to a smaller sample collection in the Ceramic Collection & Archive (CCA) at
Aberystwyth University. The transfer was completed through both technical and
theoretical training.

The person specification in the advert for this research project indicated that the
supervisors were looking for someone who had interest or experience in art,
ceramics, archiving or website design. After graduating from Aberystwyth University
with a BA (Hons) in Art History the researcher had work experience with the CCA and
undertook archival and website tasks.

1.1.1 KESS
The research was funded under the Knowledge Economy Skills Scholarship (KESS)
programme that funds Research Masters (MPhil) and Doctoral (PhD) work. KESS, in
turn, is part-funded by the European Social Fund through the European Union’s
Convergence Programme. The Convergence Programme attempts to develop areas
of the economy in certain locations, in this case the Digital Economy of Ceredigion,
Wales. The KESS programme runs from 2009 until 2014 and provides over 400 PhD
and Masters places.

As part of the scholarship, students must study postgraduate skills courses and
undergo a period of work experience in a partner institution. The partner institution
can be any type of business but a continuing benefit to the community from the

1

work must be shown. The partner institution and the relevant University both
contribute financially to the scheme.

The funding provided by KESS on this MPhil project, which took place from October
2012 to December 2013, is highlighted in Table 1. An explanation of how the KESS
budget was spent on this project is provided in Chapter 6: Discussion.

A student stipend

Approx. £9,800

Travel/conference costs

£1,000

Equipment costs

£1,000

Consumables costs

£2,000

Academic travel costs

£200

Skills development and training costs

£500

Table 1. KESS funding budgets for this research

1.2 Reasons for Research
As of 2012, the European Social Fund has indicated the county of Ceredigion in
Wales as a “convergence region” in need of economic development. The Welsh
Government has specified four priority sectors of the economy for development,
one of which is the Digital Economy, for which this MPhil project is intended.

The Ceramic Collection & Archive (CCA) undertakes limited digitisation activities but
it hopes to engage further in digitisation in response to the need to preserve
materials, widen access to the collection and keep up with rapid developments in
technology within the museum sector.

In particular, the CCA holds a vast amount of material related to the International
Ceramics Festival (ICF). This biennial festival has been held in Aberystwyth,
Ceredigion, since 1987 and there has been increasing amounts of recording over the

2

years. Recording began primarily with photography but video was increasingly used
as home video equipment became more available. In addition, audio lectures from
the festival have been digitised. In the early 2000s festival material began to be
recorded in a born-digital format, for example, through the use of digital cameras.

By acquiring digitisation knowledge from the National Library of Wales and applying
it to the CCA it is hoped the CCA will be able to use the ever expanding collection of
digital and analogue ICF material and to undertake long-term digitisation work for
preservation and access to its materials, as well as to promote the ICF as an event,
which in turn will develop the Digital Economy of Ceredigion.

1.3 Aim
The aim of this research was to understand how the different features of the
digitisation process could be transferred from a large institution, the National Library
of Wales, to a smaller institution, the Ceramic Collection & Archive at Aberystwyth
University. The various observations and techniques learned at the NLW were
applied to a smaller special collection in the CCA. This included digitising and writing
metadata for material from the International Ceramics Festival collection and
producing guideline documents for use in digitisation and metadata work.

1.4 Objectives
The main steps completed to achieve the results in this research were as follows.


Acquire the practical knowledge of how to carry out a digitisation project,
including metadata writing, by digitising materials from two collections at
National Library of Wales (NLW): the Welsh Experience of World War One
(WEWW1) collection and the Merched y Wawr Llanfarian (MyWL) collection
to be included in the People’s Collection of Wales. The two collections
demonstrate different approaches to digitisation.

3



Acquire practical knowledge on digitisation and metadata by attending and
assisting in digitisation/metadata workshops run by staff from People’s
Collection Wales (PCW) for members of the public.



Acquire practical and theoretical knowledge of digitisation work by talking to
staff at NLW about aspects of digitisation, such as workflows, benchmarking,
scanning, preservation and licensing.



Acquire practical and theoretical knowledge of digitisation work by using the
KESS budget to attend informative events.



Acquire theoretical knowledge of digitisation work by researching relevant
literature, including an audited module run at Aberystwyth University by
supervisor Lucy Tedd, entitled, “Digital Information: Discovery to Delivery.”



Acquire theoretical and practical knowledge on website design by attending a
short course in web design.



Transfer the acquired knowledge to the Ceramic Collection & Archive (CCA)
using material from the International Ceramics Festival (ICF) collection.
Achieve this by:
o Developing digitisation guidelines, metadata guidelines and a
metadata spread sheet for use in digitisation work.
o Developing a Project Outline document for the digitisation of approx.
260 pages from programmes from the 1993-2011 ICF collection.
o Managing and instructing undergraduate students in the digitisation
and metadata writing of approx. 260 pages from programmes from
the ICF collection 1993-2011 in order to test and to learn from
usability and facilities.
o Selecting one digitised programme as a prototype, converting it to a
PDF file and show examples of how it could be used on the CCA
website.
o Writing metadata in a metadata spread sheet for approx. 86 borndigital videos from the 2011 ICF collection.
o Developing a Digitisation Strategy document for the CCA.

4

o Instructing the CCA Curator, Professor Moira Vincentelli, and other
CCA staff by holding meetings, presentations and workshops and by
consulting on current and future digitisation work, including a grant
application for digitisation work.


Keep a blog on Culture Colony (www.culturecolony.com) updating the
progress of the MPhil in order to permeate the knowledge to the wider
community in Wales (see section 2.4 for more information)

1.5 Scope of Research
In the time available it was decided the focus would be on the 2011 ICF, as well as
the festival programmes from 1993 to 2011, as this was where the material was
readily available. The demonstration videos from the 2011 ICF and the programmes
would receive the knowledge from NLW through metadata writing and digitisation.
Furthermore, this sample of work was considered appropriate and achievable within
the time constraints.

This research had limitations placed upon it by:


The time allowed for the project (October 2012-December 2013),



The budget available,



The boundaries of the subject area,



The availability of technology,



The CCA being part of a larger institution, Aberystwyth University,



What digitisation activities could be done within the allowed time in
consideration of student availability, and



Compliance with Aberystwyth University’s guidelines for conducting and
submitting MPhil work.

It was recognised when the scholarship was granted that there would be gaps in
background knowledge in one or more project areas of the chosen candidate. This
was addressed by undertaking work experience at NLW, attending digitisation

5

workshops run by PCW, attending relevant conferences and by reading relevant
literature. The KESS scholarship specified that the successful applicant would be a
resident in Ceredigion, Wales and he or she would not hold a Masters degree and
would be educated up to a Bachelor’s degree.

1.6 Methodology of Research
The methodology of the research is highlighted in order to explain how digitisation
and metadata knowledge was transferred from NLW to CCA. The research project
was implemented in four key stages.

1.6.1 Stage One: Learn
Knowledge on digitisation work was acquired primarily from work experience at
NLW by tracking the digitisation process from beginning to end using two
collections: the Welsh Experience of World War One (WEWW1) collection and the
Merched y Wawr Llanfarian (MyWL) collection. These two collections had been
selected prior to the beginning of the work experience using the digitisation policy of
NLW and the NLW received the right to have copyright of the materials within the
time available for the research.

For the WEWW1 collection the researcher worked with the Digitisation Unit at NLW.
A manuscript of approx. 100 pages was paginated by hand with pencil and then
scanned using the allocated scanner in the Digitisation Unit. The scanned pages were
then adjusted and re-sized to make the digital images suitable for displaying on a
website. Following this, approx. 200 photographs from the WEWW1 collection were
used to create and input metadata on a computer.

For the MyWL collection of photographs the researcher worked with the People’s
Collection Wales (PCW) team at NLW. Five meetings were held with MyWL group to
go through approx. 280 photographs in order to obtain knowledge for metadata,

6

such as dates and locations. Between these meetings, the researcher used the
scanner in the PCW office to scan the photographs and input the metadata in a
spread sheet. Approx. 14 of the 280 photographs were uploaded to PCW website as
prototypes due limitations with the PCW website (outlined in section 4.1.4.3).

As well as the practical work undertaken at NLW, knowledge was gained through
observing and discussing digitisation work with different staff at NLW. This was
typically done by attending scheduled informal meetings and writing notes as well as
receiving informative documents on NLW’s digitisation and metadata work. The
researcher also sat in on one project management meeting for the WEWW1 project
and observed PCW run three digitisation workshops for members of the public.

Knowledge on digitisation work was also acquired from sources other than NLW.
Theoretical knowledge on digitisation work was gained through literature research
and by attending conferences and other events funded with the KESS budget. The
researcher audited a module run at Aberystwyth University by supervisor Lucy Tedd,
entitled, “Digital Information: Discovery to Delivery.” To help understand how a
website is created and how digital material can be publically accessed, the
researcher attended a Web Design with Dreamweaver course, run by Aberystwyth
University Lifelong Learning department, which lasted one week in July 2013. These
sources for the acquisition of knowledge on digitisation and metadata were
considered the most appropriate within the scope of the research.

Research training was provided through two workshops run by Aberystwyth
University and a 2-day workshop run by KESS in order to advise the researcher in
how to write and manage the project.

7

1.6.2 Stage Two: Develop
The main principles of digitisation work were largely acquired from NLW, however
this work required adapting before it could be appropriately implemented in CCA
and, in particular, implemented on the ICF collection.

Prior to the start of the project, the researcher undertook 3-months of work
experience at CCA. This experience, as well as the continued interaction with staff at
CCA, provided the researcher with an insight into the operations, history and
capability of the CCA. This also allowed the researcher to become more familiar with
the equipment available at CCA. In addition, attending the most recent International
Ceramics Festival 2013 (28th-30th July 2013) allowed the researcher to observe how
material on the festival is recorded and used, as well as perceive the potential users
of ICF digital material.

From the work experience at NLW, the workshops run by PCW, the literature
research and from conversations with CCA staff it became clear that written guides
to digitisation work would be a valuable tool for the CCA. These would be written so
that a range of individuals with different learning styles could understand them. One
of the main points that came out of the work experience was how the NLW and PCW
operate digitisation on different scales and that the PCW’s smaller scale was more
akin to the capabilities of the CCA. Furthermore, as the CCA is part of Aberystwyth
University and is closely connected to the School of Art Gallery & Museum (SAGM),
the policies and procedures of these two organisations had to be taken into account.

For digitisation work at CCA, a digitisation guideline was required. This was written
under the influence of the work experience with PCW while taking into consideration
the equipment available at the CCA.

For metadata work at CCA, a metadata guideline and a template metadata
spreadsheet was required. These two documents would accompany one another,

8

with the template spread sheet relevant for use in all digitisation projects and the
guidelines instructing the user in how to complete the spreadsheet.

As stated previously, the PCW’s digitisation workflow was deemed more applicable
to the CCA, particularly in terms of capabilities. However, the digitisation work of the
main Digitisation Unit at NLW also proved to be applicable to CCA. The NLW
produces a Project Outline document and a Digitisation Strategy document. The
Project Outline is a preparatory document produced before embarking on a
digitisation project and it clearly sets out the rules and plans of the project. It is
intended for use by project supervisors more than the project workers. The
Digitisation Strategy is something of a mission statement about the NLW’s
dedication to digitisation work as whole institution. After a discussion with staff at
CCA it was agreed these two documents would be developed to offer clarification on
the CCA’s digitisation work and that the Project Outline template can be re-used for
future projects.

These developments were considered most relevant for digitisation work at CCA
based primarily on work experience at NLW and because they could be developed
within the scope of the research.

1.6.3 Stage Three: Apply
Once the digitisation knowledge had been acquired and developed, it was ready to
be applied to CCA. Due to time constraints not every item in the ICF collection could
receive digitisation work. Therefore, approx. 260 pages of festival programmes from
ICF years 1993-2011 were digitised and received metadata. Approx. 86 born-digital
videos of demonstrations from ICF 2011 received metadata. These were selected
due to their easy availability and the ICF 2011 videos were also selected because
they were a complete collection with no gaps and therefore all types of material
were available for potential use: born-digital video demonstrations, lectures, and so
on.

9

During the development stage it became clear through discussions with CCA staff
that more equipment would be useful. This was because the CCA lacks high-quality
hardware and software and because it is located within the SAGM and therefore
must share the use of equipment with staff and students. The KESS budget allocated
money for equipment, all of which would remain with the CCA at the end of the
project, and a Macbook Pro was purchased.

The researcher independently tested the digitisation and metadata guidelines on the
festival programme from ICF 2011 using the Macbook Pro and an Epson flatbed
scanner. The digital images were stored and had metadata recorded for them in a
spreadsheet. This was a thorough test of the guidelines as this was the guide aimed
at the users.

Professor Moira Vincentelli, a supervisor to this MPhil, ran a module entitled
Ceramics & Collection Interpretation for undergraduate students at the School of
Art. As part of assessment for the module, students had to complete a project that
involved digitisation and the ICF. After observing the PCW staff run digitisation
workshops for members of the public, the researcher acquired useful skills in how to
teach digitisation. It was agreed the researcher would give a presentation on
digitisation and metadata for the students and CCA staff in order to directly transfer
digitisation knowledge. Following this the researcher ran workshops with the
students instructing them in digitising festival programmes from the 1993-2011 ICF.
In this way the digitisation knowledge was transferred to CCA staff as well as
students and the CCA would benefit through receiving digitisation and metadata
work on the ICF collection. Students used the guidelines developed by the
researcher to digitise the festival programmes and fill in a metadata spreadsheet and
the researcher stored their work. The researcher also completed a Project Outline
document that was developed in Stage Two. This document outlined the students’
project and was entitled: “Digitisation of ICF Programmes 1993-2011.” The
researcher used the document to monitor the progress of the digitisation and
metadata work undertaken by the students.
10

The researcher independently worked on completing a metadata spreadsheet for
demonstration videos from the 2011 ICF, using the metadata guidelines that were
developed. The videos were already in born-digital format. The researcher watched
86 demonstration videos at 9-minutes long each and created relevant metadata for
each one (see Appendix H for the metadata spreadsheet).

The digital scans and metadata spreadsheets produced through the researcher’s
work could be applied to the CCA website as a further output for the project. Users
of the website could use the metadata when searching for particular terms or
phrases and they could view the scanned images and digital videos.

The documents developed in stage two were applied to work in the CCA. This
included instructing undergraduate students in undertaking digitisation and
metadata work on programmes from the ICF, independently writing metadata for
demonstration videos from the 2011 ICF and instructing staff from CCA on
digitisation and metadata. These applications of the knowledge were considered
most appropriate within the scope of the research.

In addition to these applications of the documents developed, the researcher
frequently met with CCA staff to discuss the progress of the work and in doing so
transferred knowledge directly. The researcher worked with CCA staff at the ICF
2013 to film and conduct interviews with potters at the festival. Prior to the festival,
the CCA established a need for a recording device to conduct interviews that could
subsequently receive metadata and be published online. The researcher invited
Professor Vincentelli to one of the PCW’s digitisation workshops during which the
PCW staff demonstrated the use of a handheld recording device for interviews. After
receiving positive feedback on the devices from PCW staff the remainder of the KESS
equipment budget was used to purchase a handheld video and image recorder that
was used at the ICF 2013 to conduct interviews.

11

1.6.4 Stage Four: Review
At this final stage, the acquisition and application of digitisation knowledge was
discussed and evaluated. The key links between the acquisition of knowledge, the
application of knowledge and the literature research was emphasised. It was
important to ensure those other than the researcher could understand the written
guides to digitisation and metadata. Therefore, the guides were tested on the
students during their digitisation project and the success of the guides was
measured against the quality and accuracy of the students’ work. The students were
asked to complete a self-evaluative questionnaire on their knowledge of digitisation
work before and after their project. The questionnaire developed out of a discussion
with supervisor Professor Lorna Hughes who suggested receiving some feedback and
a pilot questionnaire was not necessary because the sample was small. The guides
were also given to the CCA staff to read and offer feedback. The success of the
Project Outline document for the “Digitisation of ICF Programmes” project was
judged on whether or not the goals set out in the Project Outline were met. The
Digitisation Strategy document was given to CCA staff to read and offer feedback.
Recommendations for future digitisation work at CCA will be made.

1.7 Management of Project
For this project the primary academic supervisor was Professor Moira Vincentelli,
Curator of the Ceramic Collection & Archive and Professor in the School of Art,
Aberystwyth University. The secondary academic supervisor was Lucy Tedd, formerly
a lecturer in the Department of Information Studies, Aberystwyth University. The
company supervisor from the National Library of Wales (the KESS industry partner
on this project) was Professor Lorna Hughes, University of Wales Chair in Digital
Collections.

12

The researcher met with Moira Vincentelli on a weekly basis to discuss the progress
of the work. Every three months the researcher met with all three of the supervisors
to discuss the progress of work, future plans for work and to produce a quarterly
report document. Between these meetings, timesheets were required from
everybody involved.

The 30 credit Postgraduate Skills Development Award for the KESS MPhil was
achieved by completing the events highlighted in Table 2.
Event

Provider/Location

Duration

Date(s)

Graduate workshop
research training

Aberystwyth University

4-days

October 2012
and June 2013

Work experience
placement

National Library of Wales

November
2012 – January
2013

Digitisation training
workshops

With People’s Collection
Wales in Cardigan,
Llangrannog and
Aberystwyth
National Library of Wales

3-months
with ongoing work
upon
completion
3-days

1-day

Conference on “Linked
Data”
Conference on “Digital
Preservation: what I wish I
knew before I start”
KESS Graduate School
Conference on “bwFLA – a
Functional Approach to
Digital Preservation…”
Communicating with
Confidence workshop
Short course: “Web Design
with Dreamweaver”
International Ceramics
Festival 2013
Attended undergraduate
module “Ceramics and
Collection Interpretation”
and ran workshops

November –
December
2012

With the Digital
Preservation Coalition at
University College London
Gregynog Hall, Powys

1-day

November
2012
January 2013

2-days

March 2013

National Library of Wales

1-day

March 2013

Aberystwyth University

1-day

June 2013

Lifelong Learning,
Aberystwyth University
Aberystwyth Arts Centre,
Ceramic Archive &
Collection
School of Art,
Aberystwyth University

7-days

July 2013

3-days

July 2013

4-months

February –
May 2013

Table 2. Events completed for Postgraduate Skills Development Award

13

1.8 Structure of Thesis
An introduction to the nature of the project is provided in Chapter 1. An explanation
of the background to the partner organisations involved in this project is offered in
Chapter 2. A review of relevant literature is given in Chapter 3. An explanation of
how the researched digitisation knowledge was acquired is provided in Chapter 4.
The applications of the acquired knowledge are shown in Chapter 5. A discussion of
the acquisition and application of knowledge is given in Chapter 6 and the
conclusions drawn from them are given in Chapter 7. Following the chapters there is
a bibliography and appendices. The page numbers progress uninterrupted
throughout the thesis and chapters and sections are numbered sequentially. All
chapters are written in third-person with the exception of Chapter 4, which is
written in first-person. This was a conscious decision by the researcher so as to best
describe the experiences of acquiring knowledge.

1.9 Chapter Summary
This thesis is structured in 7 chapters with a bibliography and appendices. This KESSfunded MPhil aimed to understand how the different features of the digitisation
process could be transferred from the National Library of Wales to the Ceramic
Collection & Archive.

The research was implemented in four stages: (1) learn, (2) develop, (3) apply and (4)
review. For stage 1, practical and theoretical knowledge was acquired through work
experience at NLW and research. For stage 2, the knowledge led to the development
of instructive guidelines and useful documents on digitisation work. For stage 3, the
knowledge was then applied to the CCA by using the developed documents to
undertake digitisation work on a special collection. For stage 4, the transfer of the
knowledge was discussed and evaluated.

14

The researcher had frequent contact with the CCA in order to achieve a direct
transfer of digitisation knowledge. The researcher used the KESS budget to purchase
equipment and attend events so as to acquire and apply digitisation knowledge. The
research has understandable limitations but project management was ensured
through regular meetings and the production of timesheets.

15

Chapter 2: Background to Project Organisations

This chapter provides an overview to the different organisations involved directly or
indirectly with this MPhil project. Particular emphasis is given to a report of the
Ceramic Collection & Archive in order to understand the capabilities, operations and
potential of the small organisation as the recipient of the digitisation knowledge.
Section 2.1.10 overviews the material that was used in the project.

2.1 Ceramic Collection & Archive (CCA)

2.1.1 Introduction
For this project, the CCA is the recipient of the acquired knowledge from the
National Library of Wales. It is also the owner of the special collection that will
receive digitisation work, the International Ceramics Festival (ICF) collection, and as
such it is the provider of research material in this KESS MPhil project. The CCA has
collected, and continues to collect, diverse material on the ICF that requires a range
of digitisation work to be done.

This section (2.1 in Chapter 2) is a current report of the CCA that was produced at
the beginning of this MPhil so as to offer the researcher clarity of purpose and
understanding, as well as for future internal use for the CCA. This section could be
viewed as a timeline that indicates where the CCA is coming from and where it is
currently at in order to understand the future potential of digitisation work.

2.1.2 History
This section on the history of the CCA has been split into two paragraphs detailing
the separate histories of the Collection and the Archive, respectively.

16

2.1.2.1 Collection
The main collection of ceramics was formed during the period 1920-1936, although
the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth had acquired ceramics since its
foundation in 1872. This had been done through the scientific/archaeological
activities of university staff as well as George Powell’s bequest1 of his personal art
collection to the College. The ceramics in the bequest included contemporary
Japanese Satsuma and Imari ware as well as examples of continental figurines and
individual pieces of Islamic and pre-nineteenth century European wares. In 1915
Lady Williams, wife of College President Sir John Williams, bequeathed a fine
collection of Swansea porcelain (Vincentelli, 1993: 4).

In 1926 Sidney Greenslade and Dan Jones, the joint curators of the University Arts
and Crafts Museum at Aberystwyth, hoped for a future expansion of the College on
the Penglais site, envisaging an arts and crafts museum as an important aspect of the
new developments. Gwendoline and Margaret Davies of Llandinam, granddaughters
of leading Welsh industrialist and entrepreneur David Davies, had provided the
funding for the museum. Over a period of sixteen years, Greenslade bought pottery,
glass, prints, metalwork, folk crafts and ethnographic material for the collection. In
1936 the Davies sisters redirected their funding in pursuit of other ventures at the
university and this, as well as the Second World War, curtailed the activities of the
museum.

The College’s Visual Art Department gained independent status in 1970 and the
ceramic collection was recognised as having considerable significance. The collection
began to develop once more through the support of the Craft Committee of the
Welsh Arts Council, the establishment of a College collections committee and
acquisitions of objects and funding.

1

George Ernest John Powell (1842-1882) was a local landed gentry at Nanteos Estate.

17

In the early 1970s the Arts Centre in Aberystwyth was opened on the Penglais
campus. Initially there was a theatre, great hall and an art gallery but extensions
were added throughout the years. Ceramics were stored in cases in the gallery for a
time. The first room of the Ceramic Gallery was opened in the Arts Centre in 1986
with endowment funding from the Catherine Lewis Fund.2 The gallery was expanded
in the 1990s with a second exhibition space with display storage and eventually in
2004 with a further storage area behind the gallery. In 2009 the Ceramic Collection,
along with the School of Art Collections, successfully applied for Museum
Registration. Also in 2009, the National Centre for Ceramics in Wales was established
in alliance with University of Wales Institute Cardiff (now Cardiff Metropolitan
University) and other ceramic departments in Wales with a view to organising
exhibitions and conferences and working together on research projects. In 2012 the
gallery was awarded a visitor attraction recognition from Visit Wales, a Welsh
Government project to encourage tourism in Wales.3

Over the years certain parts of the university collections have been given or
deposited on long-term loan to other museums, including some ceramics. For
example, the Jericho Collection to Birmingham Museum and the Ancient Egyptian
collection to the Egypt Centre in Swansea. These were deemed collections that
would be more appropriately based in specialist museums. To date, the School of Art
collection comprises over 18,000 examples of fine and decorative art: prints,
photographs, drawings, watercolours, ceramics, paintings and sculpture as well as
artefacts from the University’s former Art and Crafts Museum such as archaeological
material, ethnographic artefacts, glass, coins and antique furniture (AUSAGM, 2013).

For a comprehensive history of the Ceramic Collection consult Vincentelli’s The
Ceramics Collection Aberystwyth, 1993, and for a history of the School of Art’s
collection consult Meyrick and Holland’s To Instruct and Inspire, 1997.

2

Elvet Lewis, a former university student, left a generous bequest, in memory of his wife, Catherine,
for the development of art at the university in 1982.
3
http://www.visitwales.com

18

2.1.2.2 Archive
The Craft Potters Association (CPA) was registered as a Provident Society in 1958 as
a co-operative to sell the work of its members and to increase public awareness of
contemporary studio pottery. In the early 1970s, CPA member Robert Fournier
established the archive of the CPA so as to collect documents that would maintain a
record of the origins, organisation, activities and development of the CPA. By 1988,
the CPA archive had grown into a substantial body of material that urgently needed
a more permanent and larger location, as Fournier was about to move into smaller
premises. The Craft Study Centre (CSC), at the time based in Bath but now based in
University of the Arts, Farnham, was considered as the new home for the material
however the CSC was unable to accept due to a lack of space.

The CPA holdings were offered and accepted by Aberystwyth University Ceramic
Archive, based at the School of Art, Aberystwyth. The Archive had been developed
by Professor Moira Vincentelli in 1988 in order to support the Ceramics Collection of
Aberystwyth University. The main paper documents of the CPA were initially
catalogued in a 3-month project with an archivist and were deposited in the National
Library of Wales in 1997. However, any information relating directly to the makers in
the Ceramic Collection was retained at the Ceramic Archive in the School of Art. The
CPA have not continued to send material or meeting minutes to the Archive but the
Ceramic Review journal continues to pass ephemera material to the Archive such as
books and catalogues. Although Aberystwyth University does not teach ceramics,
the Archive was developed in a department where there was a ceramic collection.

19

2.1.3 Objectives

2.1.3.1 Collection
Compared to the collection of the NLW, the CCA is a fairly small collection with
limited staff dedicated to the appreciation of ceramics. In 2008, the main purpose of
the Collection was stated thus: “to collect, document and preserve non-industrial
ceramics as evidence of the highest achievements of contemporary British and
International Ceramics since the early 20th century” (the Ceramic Collection &
Gallery, 2008). Acquisitions are chiefly done by Professor Moira Vincentelli, who
acquires objects after consultation with the Head of the School of Art and Keeper of
the Collections.

The strategic aims of the Collection are stated as follows:
1. The development of the collections
2. The increase of visitor numbers and access to the collection
3. Learning
4. The enhancement of service (e.g. visitor facilities)
5. Attract external funding (The Ceramic Collection & Gallery, Aberystwyth
University, 2008).

2.1.3.2 Archive
The objective of the Archive is to be a research resource to support the Ceramic
Collection. It collects paper documentation, audio recordings of interviews and
lectures, video material and visual material (photographs). Some of these relate to
specific research projects, such as the recorded interview projects Potters In Wales
and For Love or Money: Women Potters in Wales, which are currently being digitised
in Aberystwyth University’s Language Resource Centre. Other material relates to
events such as the International Ceramics Festival. The archive is accessible to

20

students and to the public by appointment but is also accessible through email
enquiries. The archive does not offer valuations of ceramics and enquiries of that
nature are encouraged to seek information at auction houses or dealers.

2.1.4 Content
2.1.4.1 Collection
The Collection contains mainly British studio pottery since 1920, as well as
contemporary European, American, and Japanese studio pottery, 18th & 19th
century Welsh and English slip ware, Swansea and Nantgarw porcelain, Art Pottery
and Oriental ceramics. There are approximately 1700 pots in the collection.
According to its official website, the Ceramic Collection asserts that its strength is
“undoubtedly its internationally renowned collection of early 20th century British
pioneer studio pottery” (CAUSAGM, 2013) such as Martin Brothers, Bernard Leach,
Shoji Hamada, Michael Cardew, and others.

The collection in Aberystwyth contains work by all the well-known names in studio
ceramics in the inter-war years. Like many collections it also bears witness to the
existence of work that has not been so recognised – work that was popular in its
own period but which quickly went out of fashion (Vincentelli, 1993: 15). Greenslade
purchased factory produced ceramics, including Royal Lancastrian, Doulton and
Poole Pottery; which produced pottery emulating the experimental approach of the
studio potter or giving the appearance of freehand decoration (Vincentelli, 1993:
19).

2.1.4.2 Archive
The Archive holds a range of different informative materials on ceramics. The
Archive keeps individual files on all the makers in the collection, which contain
published information such as articles, exhibition catalogues, press cuttings and
21

reviews. There are back catalogues of ceramic exhibitions and auctions that have
been held in the UK and worldwide, including Aberystwyth Arts Centre, Christie’s,
Sotheby’s and Bonham’s. The Archive has a number of reference books, magazines,
national and regional newsletters as well as an extensive range of British and foreign
journals (Ceramic Review) but not all are complete runs. There is a large collection of
audio and video material relating to ceramics and studio pottery, including cassette
tapes, VHS and born-digital material, and interviews are emphasised on Welsh
potters and women potters. The Ceramic Series contains almost one hundred 4-page
articles relating to one-person shows by significant British makers between 1982 and
2003. These were published by Aberystwyth Arts Centre in English and Welsh and
are available online on the CCA website. This was the first example of digitisation
work at the CCA. The Archive has documents, recordings and photographs relating to
the organisations such as the Craft Potters Association and the International
Ceramics Festival since 1987. The CCA has a significant collection of oral history, with
approximately 350 cassette tapes of interviews. There are documents relating to the
touring exhibitions of the Ceramic Collection as well as documents relating to
educational courses and modules in the study of ceramics (including Aberystwyth
University). Finally, the Archive keeps its own administrative documents (Ceramic
Collection & Archive, 2013). Table 3 outlines the number of materials in the Archive.

Ceramic Archive holdings 2013
International journals
UK Auction Catalogues
UK Exhibition catalogues and events
Makers in the collection
Books
Tapes
UK Journals
Other archive material
Total

Cubic Feet
103.3
40.44
15.11
13.72
12.86
3
8.8
4
201.23

Table 3. Ceramic Archive holdings 2013

22

2.1.5 Physical Location
Ceramic Archive, Aberystwyth School of Art
The Ceramic Archive office is located in a single room in the School of Art along with
a separate storage cupboard. Books and catalogues are stored on open shelves and
files in 4 filing cabinets. There is an increasing shortage of space in the office as
archival and collection material grows. Boxes of touring exhibition content are
stacked atop one another, however it is necessary to keep them in boxes for
convenience. This demonstrates the need for more storage space as the poor
content to space ratio can make it difficult to find things. The archive is not designed
for public access on a general basis, although individuals are welcomed by
appointment.

Ceramic Gallery, Aberystwyth Arts Centre
The gallery is open 7 days a week with free entry. It is unattended and therefore
everything is displayed in secure glass cases. It is a fairly compact rectangular space
filled with glass storage cabinets. The cupboards below the cabinets in the back
room are used to store objects and there is a further store behind the gallery with
display storage.

Language Resource Centre, Aberystwyth
The Language Resource Centre (LRC) is situated on Penglais Campus, Aberystwyth
University. Approximately 350 cassette tapes are in the process of being digitised in
order to duplicate and store copies of lectures and interviews with women and
Welsh potters. This material requires cataloguing work to be done and it is backedup on a secure server. The Archive pays a small annual amount for this service.

National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth
The National Library of Wales houses the deposit of the original documents of the
CPA as well as other more unique material.

23

2.1.6 Storage
The Ceramic Archive in the School of Art holds paper documents in metal filing
cabinets and boxes, as well as cassette tapes. Neil Holland, Curator of Collections at
the School of Art, keeps records of original invoices of material. Most of the unique
documents of the Archive are on deposit in the NLW. The ceramics themselves are
protectively stored in both the School of Art and the Ceramics Gallery in the Arts
Centre. Despite materials being stored in various locations, they are all in
Aberystwyth and so are easily accessible and transferrable.

2.1.7 Staffing
There are 4 paid members of staff who work on a part-time basis: Professor Moira
Vincentelli, Curator of the Ceramic Collection; Louise Chennell, Archive Assistant;
Kathy Talbot, Archive Assistant (Accounts); and Neil Holland, the Curator of
Collections at the School of Art Museums & Gallery who also works with the
Ceramics Collection. Jill Piercy undertakes occasional education and conservation
work. The Archive accepts voluntary work from students in the School of Art.

The CCA reports to the Collections Committee administered by the School of Art on
behalf of Aberystwyth University. The Keeper of the collections is Robert Meyrick
and the principal outside advisors are Dr. Timothy Wilson from the Ashmolean
Museum, Oxford, and Dr Anne Sumner from the Barber Institute, Birmingham.

2.1.8 Finances
2.1.8.1 Collection
For the Ceramic Collection funding comes from the School of Art Collections Fund
with no specific budget allocation. Money is normally made available for

24

acquisitions, exhibition hire and display work as required. The Ceramic Collection has
received funding support for particular projects (see 2.1.9.6 Education Work) from
CyMAL (Museums, Archives and Libraries Wales), a branch of the Welsh government
that aims “to promote and protect the culture and heritage of Wales by supporting
museums, archives and libraries” (CyMAL, 2013). The collection has been supported
by loans of work from the Crafts Council, which was established in 1971 to “make
the UK the best place to make, see, collect and learn about contemporary craft”
(Crafts Council, 2013). The collection has also been supported by acquisition grant
funding from the Victoria and Albert Purchase Grant Fund, which “supports the
purchase of a wide range material for the permanent collections of non-nationally
funded organisations in England and Wales” (V&A, 2013), and, for larger pieces over
£600, the Art Fund who describe their mission as: “for over a hundred years, we've
been raising money to help museums acquire great works of art […] for everyone to
enjoy” (Art Fund, 2013).

2.1.8.2 Archive
Since 1993 the Ceramic Archive has received annual funding from Arts Council
Wales. This was originally as revenue funding on a 3 year rolling basis but in 2008
this was changed to project funding through the lottery funding. Funding also comes
from Aberystwyth University as well as exhibition hire fees and catalogue sales. This
has continued on an annual basis but there is no guarantee of funding year to year.

In 2013 the CCA was awarded a £5,000 grant for audience marketing and
development which led to a redesign of its website. As of 2013, the funding received
from Arts Council Wales over recent years is as follows:
2012

-

£13,500

2011

-

£14,000

2010

-

£13,500

2009

-

£13,200

25

2.1.9 Activities
This section covers the main tasks and events the CCA does in its day-to-day and
long-term work.

2.1.9.1 Acquisitions
The Collection has an active acquisitions policy mainly through purchase supported
by funding from the School of Art’s Collections and grant funding mentioned
previously. The Collection also receives bequests and gifts from time to time. The
primary stimulus usually comes from works exhibited in the gallery through
exhibitions and especially the International Ceramics Festival, held biennially at
Aberystwyth.

2.1.9.2 Exhibitions
The principal parts of the collection are permanently on display in display-storage in
the back of the Ceramics Gallery in the Arts Centre, while the front of the gallery is
used for changing displays and exhibitions from the permanent collection and
touring exhibitions.

As of 2013, recent exhibitions that have been generated by the Curator include:


“Ceramic Conversations” Gerard Mermoz project - Summer 2013



“Parallel Lives” - Spring 2013



Michael Cardew Legacy - Autumn 2012



“An Indian Odyssey: Jane Perryman” - Summer 2012



“Delicate Features” - Spring 2012



“We Spirited Creatures” - Autumn 2011

26

In 2005 it was decided that small touring displays with handling collections would be
developed with the intention that they would be used by education officers for
schools, libraries and galleries. Laminated posters, information packs, and education
packs for teachers accompanied the exhibitions and were also available on the web.
In 2008 there was designated funding to tour three shows to three venues in Wales
over a period of 1 year. Since then these displays have continued to be available and
now have a hire fee. They are: Taking Tea, Sensational Ceramics and Animal
Fantasies, the latter of which has proven to be the most popular.

Over the period, the price of petrol has risen so transportation is relatively costly.
Usually one-way transport is paid as the exhibition moves around. Condition checks
are difficult to control when exhibitions go from one venue to the next. The Touring
Exhibitions Group follows guidelines for touring exhibitions that the CCA adheres to.
Handling Collections were lent to four venues in 2011-2012: “Nature and Art” in
Gloucester, Bangor, Livingston and Lancashire. These were small touring shows with
handling sessions.

2.1.9.3 Outputs
The term output refers to material, events and other activities produced by the CCA
for its users. All publications are produced in both English and Welsh, as per the
policy of Aberystwyth University. The Ceramic Archive Bulletin is published biennially
in both physical and electronic format. Exhibition leaflets are published to
accompany new exhibitions in the Ceramics Gallery. The CCA website is updated by
staff with recent news and new information. The CCA is a research facility for
students, researchers and members of the public and so its documents are available
for research and reference. The CCA runs education sessions for local schools and
has an active family-learning programme (see 2.1.9.6). The CCA holds symposia and
ceramic study days, such as with the National Centre for Ceramics in Wales; the most
recent event for this was held in October 2012.

27

2.1.9.4 Website
In 2011 the website received an average of 800 unique visitors per month. As of
2012 there has been a significant increase of two million hits since 2011 (see Table
4). Since the website was redesigned in 2008 (see Figure 1), telephone queries alone
have increased. The website often makes the first page of popular Google search
engine results when key words such as “ceramics,” “archive,” “collection” and
“Wales” are entered in combination (Figure 2). The website is only available through
the medium of English however Internet providers such as Google Chrome provide a
translation tool. The CCA employs an outside web designer whom staff meet with
regularly to manage the website and offer input. As of October 2013 the current
website is being re-evaluated by staff to ensure the needs of users are being met
amidst rapid technological advancements, in particular, the use of mobile phone
web browsing.

Fig 1. A screenshot of the CCA website home page as of October 2013

28

Website hits
2008-2009:

673,384 hits

2009-2010:

1,559,616 hits

2010-2011:

4,316,025 hits
Table 4. CCA website hits per year

Fig 2. A screenshot showing the CCA as the 2nd result in a Google search of “ceramic wales”

Visitors to the website can read historical and administrative information on the
CCA, the latest news about the CCA and its exhibitions and information on
educational work and outreach programmes. Users can make use of a variety of
facilities including requests for copies of publications or other documents, such as
the Ceramic Archive Bulletin, an alphabetical database on the makers in the
collection with photographs of their work (see Figure 3), a glossary of terms in
ceramics and links to other websites of interest.

29

Fig 3. A screenshot of the CCA website makers database

2.1.9.5 Research
The CCA is a designated research centre at Aberystwyth University. It is used as a
foundation for developing research in ceramics and has generated undergraduate
dissertations, postgraduate MA projects and dissertations and MPhil/PhD theses.
The CCA is a founding member of the Interpreting Ceramics Research Collaboration,
which publishes the refereed electronic journal Interpreting Ceramics since 2001.
Through the National Centre for Ceramics in Wales, the CCA has close research links
with other universities in Wales that study ceramics. The CCA continually explores
ways of identifying new and existing gallery visitor base as well as identifying areas
of the National Curriculum and Foundation phase that can be best matched with
collection resources. In 2013 the CCA achieved a marketing grant worth £5000 to
adapt the current website for mobile phone web browsing.

30

2.1.9.6 Education Work
The CCA recognises the importance of reaching out to new audiences in order to
widen access to the material. This is also an important duty for the CCA because
active engagement in communities is an attractive prospect to organisations offering
grant funding.

The CCA’s Schools Programme involves running workshops with primary schools
with each new exhibition. These usually take the form of one session in the Ceramic
Gallery after which the children have a hands-on session in the Ceramic Workshop of
the Arts Centre.

The Family Learning project was developed in 2007 in order to expand outreach to a
demographic that would not normally be in the gallery. Initially funded by an
Inspiring Learning Grant from CyMAL, the programme has been very rewarding and
has brought new people in to the gallery, forming a closer bond between the
collection and the local community. A family learning toolkit and a foundation phase
toolkit is made available in electronic form via the website. A bilingual family activity
book is also available in the gallery.

2.1.9.7 Outreach
Local Community
Situated in the School of Art, the Arts Centre and the National Library of Wales, the
collection is associated with the cultural pillars of Ceredigion. The Arts Centre and
the NLW are popular tourist attractions and the School of Art has a close-knit
community of students, artists and art lovers.
The Family Learning project is popular amongst local families and is often in demand.
In 2012 the Ceramic Gallery received a visitor attraction recognition from Visit
Wales.

31

Wider Community
The National Centre for Ceramics in Wales was established in 2009 as an alliance
with other institutions that teach ceramics, in particular Cardiff Metropolitan,
Carmarthen School of Creative Arts and the University of Glamorgan. Students and
staff from other institutions share in the use of the material in the CCA.
The CCA has close links with other galleries in Wales including Llantarnam Grange,
Swansea Museum, Oriel Davies, Ruthin Crafts Centre and others. CCA Curator Moira
Vincentelli occasionally attends and speaks at international conferences on ceramics.

Academic Community
The CCA has strong links with studies at the School of Art. Students utilise the
material for essays, object reports and collection management studies. The material
is also available to the wider university community. Several students have
undertaken voluntary work experience in the CCA assisting with administrative and
curatorial tasks.

2.1.10 Equipment Available in CCA at Beginning of Research
At the start of the research the CCA office had two desktop computers, however
these were for administrative work and so had minimal capabilities for digitisation
work. The CCA had access to an Epson flat bed scanner attached to an iMac and this
hardware was located in the Mac Suite in the School of Art for use by students and
staff for work. The iMac had plenty of useful software such as Adobe Bridge, Adobe
Photoshop and Final Cut Pro for photo and video editing. It was expected that this
equipment could be used as a starting point for the work. The equipment had
limitations in that, despite the iMac being available for use most of the time, as a
shared piece of equipment it was not entirely reliable for work. This limitation
eventually led to the purchase of a Macbook, with the KESS budget, in order to
provide the CCA with a dedicated and reliable piece of equipment (see 1.6.3 and
5.10 for more information on the KESS equipment).

32

2.1.11 Collection from the CCA Involved in Research
As stated in the aims and objectives, this project was primarily concerned with CCA’s
collection of material on the International Ceramics Festival (ICF). The festival has
been held biennially in Aberystwyth since 1987 and therefore the CCA has acquired a
wide variety of materials over time. The entire collection contains both analogue and
digital material and therefore requires both digitisation and post-digitisation (editing
and metadata writing) work. The video material from the collection has never been
archived.

Due to the large size of the collection and the time limitations of the MPhil, not all of
the material was to be worked on and only a selection was to be used as a prototype
(see table 5). The selection to be worked on was: (1) the digitisation, editing and
metadata of approx. 260 ICF festival programmes 1993-2011 and (2) writing
metadata for approx. 86 born-digital demonstration videos from the 2011 ICF. After
consultation with CCA staff, these selections were chosen based on their easy
availability to the researcher.

Appendix A overviews all the material in the ICF collection, the digitisation work
required and the time required for the digitisation work. The table is organised by
the three main steps of digitisation work: (1) digitisation of physical/analogue
material, (2) editing of digital material (including born-digital), and (3) writing
metadata. Table 5 overviews the specific ICF material selected for this MPhil project.
An explanation of the terms used in Appendix A and Table 5 is provided in Appendix
A (A.2).

33

Selection of ICF material
for MPhil digitisation work

Format

Approx. no. of items*

Approx. work
time per
item

Approx. total
time required

4-minutes

1040-minutes
(17-hours)

1. DIGITISATION OF PHYSICAL/ANALOGUE MATERIAL:
Festival Programmes
1993-2011

Paper

Digitisation total:

260 (at 26 pages per
yearly programme 19932011 = 10 festival years)

17-hours

260

2. EDITING OF DIGITAL MATERIAL:
Festival Programmes
1993-2011

.tiff

Editing total:

260 (at 26 pages per
yearly programme 19932011 = 10 festival years)

2-minutes

520-minutes (9hours)

9-hours

260

3. WRITING METADATA FOR DIGITAL MATERIAL:
Festival Programmes
1993-2011

.xml

260 (at 26 pages per
yearly programme 19932011 = 10 festival years)

4-minutes

1040-minutes
(17-hours)

Demonstration Videos
2011

.xml

86 (14 demonstrations
each split into approx. 6
separate .avi video files
at approx. 9 minutes in
length)

6-minutes

516-minutes (9hours)

Metadata total:

346

26-hours

TOTAL:

866

52

* 1 item = 1 page, 1 photograph, 1 .mp3 file, 1 .avi file, etc.
Table 5. Assessment of digitisation work required for this research

34

2.2 National Library of Wales (NLW)
2.2.1 NLW
In this project, the NLW is the provider of knowledge to be transferred to the CCA.
As far back as the eighteenth century there was a call for a national library in Wales
and a committee had been formed by 1873. After this time a ‘Welsh Library’ began
to take shape in collaboration with University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. It was
not until 1904 that the British Government granted Wales its right to national
institutions. After much competition between Cardiff and Aberystwyth the NLW was
founded by Royal Charter in Aberystwyth in 1907, while Cardiff received the National
Museum of Wales.

The NLW collects, preserves and provides access to recorded knowledge with special
emphasis on Wales. Not all the material, which is housed in the library, is written in
Welsh or has a connection with Wales; a variety of other languages, topics and
cultures are reflected. NLW has a large staff responsible for preserving, managing
and sustaining access to the collections. As of 2013 the NLW has three main units:
(1) Collection Services for the selection, collection, listing, preservation and
digitisation of material, (2) Public Services for services to readers and visitors and (3)
Corporate Services for human resources, IT, security, etc. The NLW houses the Welsh
National Archive and is also a national legal deposit library, which means the library
has a legal right to receive a copy of everything that is published in Britain and
Ireland. As a result approx. 4,000 new items arrive to be catalogued every week.

As of 2013 the NLW’s collection presently holds approximately:


Four and a half million books



Sixty thousand works of art



Forty thousand manuscripts



A million maps and charts

35



Thousands of unique items, including portrait busts, antique chairs, a piece of
ancient Egyptian papyrus c.113 A.D. and a lock of hair belonging to 18th
century hymn writer William Williams of Pantycelyn (NLW, 2013b: 1).

Digitisation was first discussed at NLW in 1990s and activities increased over the
following two decades (Tedd, 2011: 336). The library recognised the potential of
utilising multi-media collections, such as films, sound archives, maps and pictures, to
increase the number of library users. Andrew Green, Librarian at NLW from 1998 to
2013, observed that the library’s primary audience has for many years been
researchers and students, but “there have also been other users: visitors, media
companies, cultural tourists and genealogists, to name only a few” (Green, 2002: 3).
The library sought to attract new users, especially learners, by creating a centre for
visitors within the building and by developing digital, online services through its
website. In 2000 the library established a staff group dedicated to digitisation work
and in 2001 the library’s website was “reviewed, reorganised and updated, and the
library’s new visual identity applied systematically to the site” (ibid: 6).

“Until 1999 the library had digitised little more than a small number of its exhibitions. Within
little more than a year, an initial, exploratory digitisation programme had been started, the
kernel of a Digitisation Unit created, and a digitisation strategy agreed” – Andrew Green
(ibid).

The first digitisation strategy was formed in 2001, as well as a digital preservation
strategy in 2003, as digitisation became more mainstream (Jones, 2008). Green
writes that the “main thrust” of the strategy was to begin to offer collection items
themselves on the internet; whether this be digitised or born-digital materials (2002:
6). A new digitisation strategy was written in 2011 to complement its general
strategy of the period 2011-2014. The new strategy built on its previous digitisation
strategies and learned from the experience of similar institutions that worked in the
field. In this strategy digitisation was defined “simply as the conversion of analogue
resources into a digital format” with the justification that this would “widen and
enhance access to those resources, to preserve the intellectual content of those

36

resources for the future, and also as a means […] to generate income” (NLW, 2011:
2). The digitisation strategy is a useful document that outlines the NLW’s:


Intentions with digitisation,



Digitisation programme,



Principles for digitisation,



Ways of measuring success,



Selection and prioritisation of resources for digitisation,



Position on access and reuse of the digitised resources



Intentions for collaboration and partnership with other groups/

Green noted the main issues that arose as digitisation developed in NLW: “the most
critical was the question of the intended audience or level of use of the digitised
material” (2002: 6). The library debated whether to build a reservoir of material for
users to fish within or to select items carefully and embed them with specially
written contextual commentary. Green suggested that, more and more, the library
favours the latter as it could be done with educational uses in mind. Another issue
Green raised with digitisation was how it was “really an amalgam of several different
activities and skill sets” (ibid: 7) and so a range of staff were utilised with broad
specialisms in: curating, preservation, digital capture, metadata and website
presentation. Finally, Green pointed out the issue that NLW’s early digitisation work
used material that had immediate visual attraction and avoided material with
uncertain copyright status, but these practices would not necessarily continue in the
future (ibid).

The NLW’s ‘Digital Mirror’ project aimed to be a digital reflection of the library’s
resources online. Hundreds of items related to Wales and Welsh ancestry have been
made available on the NLW website in the form of maps, manuscripts, pictures,
photographs, exhibitions and sound and video. It is hoped that this online material
will be accessed internationally be people who cannot visit the library physically.
Since 2000 over 5 million digital still images of resources have been produced by
NLW. Some of the collections that have been digitised include: approx. 4,000 Welsh

37

ballads, 2 million pages from pre-1911 Welsh newspapers and 15,000 portraits from
the NLW’s collection (Tedd, 2011: 333). Screenshot examples of the Digital Mirror
are provided in Figures 4 -7.

Fig 4. A screenshot of the NLW’s Digital Mirror website homepage

Fig 5. A screenshot of the NLW’s Digital Mirror > Manuscripts > Modern Period > Criminals

38

Fig 6. Screenshot of “Cardiganshire Constabulary register of criminals” online
manuscript, Digital Mirror, NLW

Fig 7. Screenshot of “Cardiganshire Constabulary register of criminals” front cover,
online manuscript, Digital Mirror, NLW

One example of a recent digitisation project at the NLW is the JISC-funded Welsh
Journals Online (WJO) project, which involved the digitisation of 50 journals from
the 19th-, 20th- and 21st-century relating to Wales. The digitised pages were put on a
website with “an innovative and dynamic web delivery interface” that allows users
to browse and keyword-search a selection of “the most significant journal and
periodical titles – a resource estimated to contain 400,000 pages of text in both
Welsh and English” (WJO, 2013). Figures 8-11 show examples of viewing a digitised
manuscript on WJO.

39

Fig 8. Screenshot of WJO – “browse by journal”

Fig 9. Screenshot of WJO – “Yr Arloeswr” manuscript

Fig 10. Screenshot of WJO – “Yr Arloeswr – Rhif 1 (Haf 1957)” manuscript

40

Fig 11. Screenshot of WJO – “Yr Arloeswr – Rhif 1 (Haf 1957) Arlunio: baban bach ein celfyddyd ”
manuscript

41

In its operational plan of 2013-14, the NLW stated the implementation of some of its
digitisation projects. The NLW hopes to establish a process that will allow users to
express their views on the selection of items for digitisation (NLW, 2013a). The
‘DigiDo’ (Digitisation for Business) project aims to assist 35 enterprises and 8
individuals through digitisation work. The NLW will continue with the internally
financed digitisation programme, which includes components of the ‘Theatre of
Memory’ (Welsh print heritage) project. The NLW will continue its involvement in
the national commemoration of World War One in Wales with its project “the Welsh
Experience of World War One” (WEWW1). The project developed as a collaborative
initiative led by NLW, in partnership with the Archives and Special Collections of
Wales (these partners are Aberystwyth University; Bangor University, Cardiff
University; Swansea University; the University of Wales Trinity St David; BBC Cymru
Wales, PCW, and archives and local records offices that are part of ARCW: the
Archives and Records Council of Wales). JISC is the main partner on the project and
contributed the bulk of funding (£500,000) as well as knowledge support. The
project will make available a coherent, amalgamated digital collection revealing the
history of World War One as it impacted aspects of Welsh life, language and culture.
According to the official project website, “these source materials are presently
fragmented and frequently inaccessible, yet they collectively form a unique resource
of vital interest to researchers, students, and the public in Wales and beyond”
(WEWW1, 2013).

2.2.2 People’s Collection of Wales (PCW)
In 2007, after the political coalition between the Labour Party and Plaid Cymru, the
One Wales programme was launched for 2008-2011 as part of a government
initiative to improve the quality of life for people in Wales. One aspect of the
programme was to establish a collection of people’s history of Wales to raise
awareness of Welsh cultural identity and history. This was overseen by staff at
CyMAL (Museums, Archives and Libraries Wales), a policy division of the Welsh
Assembly Government, that was established in 2004 and is located in Aberystwyth

42

with a staff of about 25, most of whom are specialists. (Tedd, 2011: 334). In 2008
CyMAL began to work with key cultural groups within Wales to progress the project.
One such group was NLW and another was Culturenet Cymru; a not-for-profit
private company funded initially by the Welsh Assembly Government to promote
and increase knowledge of the history and culture of Wales in an online setting
(Tedd, 2011: 335). Culturenet Cymru has been involved in projects such as ‘Books
from the Past’ which involved creating e-books from out-of-print books in
collaboration with the Welsh Books Council and Gathering the Jewels (GTJ). Tedd
notes that the GTJ project was a forerunner of PCW: “[GTJ] was set up in 2004 to
digitise the ‘jewels’ from approximately 190 libraries, museums and archives all over
Wales and to present them on the internet by means of a searchable database
(2011:335). An Advisory Group4 was established in 2008 to provide guidance and
advice to CyMAL and to ensure all collaborative groups worked well towards
developing PCW. Carys Morgan, Project Officer at PCW, described some of the
projects the team had worked on, which included, “Media and Memory in Wales
1950-2000” (collecting and archiving oral testimony relating to age of television in
Wales), “Books from the Past” (creating e-books from out-of-print titles) and
“Gathering the Jewels” (presenting key objects from libraries, museums and archives
across Wales online).

In 2009 the technical platform for PCW was developed. Accessibility to a wide range
of users was a key concern and the guidelines formed by the World Wide Web
Consortium were followed. After an alpha version of the PCW website was launched
in 2009, the PCW website was publically launched in August 2010 for individuals and
organisations to upload their material related to Wales. The website can be read in
Welsh or English and material is monitored for approval by staff at PCW. The website
allows users to create their own account so they can upload a collection of their own
material related to Wales, as well as view and ‘favourite’ material others have

4

“The Advisory Group contains representatives from NLW, NMW, RCAHMW, Llafur, the BBC, as well
as the Department of Information Studies at Aberystwyth University where the Programme Manager
was based between 2008 and early 2011. The Advisory Group meets six times a year” (Tedd, 2011:
333).

43

uploaded (Figure 13). As well as individuals, organisations and groups can create
their own account, such as Ancient Trees of Wales, Castles of Wales and Merched y
Wawr. Users can create ‘stories’ by using video, audio and image items to create a
brand new video with title slides and captions. A timeline tool is available for users
to search content by its relevance in history. The ‘maps and trails’ facility (Figure 14)
allows users to interact with a satellite map that links to the uploaded material,
therefore users can learn while they physically go on a trail by foot or transport. For
example, a user could view Aberystwyth on the map and interact with audio,
photographs, videos and text relevant to Aberystwyth as they walk around the town.
The ‘learning’ facility allows users to learn through activities that employ uploaded
material. Help and guideline tools are provided to direct users in uploading material
and using the website. As of 2013, the website was undergoing plans for a redesign
in order to keep up with new technologies, however Figure 12 shows its current
look. The PCW website currently has 46,980 uploaded items, 1,205 collections, 293
stories and 3,441 contributors.

Fig 12. Screenshot of PCW homepage, October 2013.

44

Fig 13. Screenshot of PCW “collections”

Fig 14. Screenshot of PCW “maps & trails”

45

The PCW office is located within the NLW as of 2013 but staff hold regular
workshops around Wales teaching individuals and organisations how to scan and
upload their materials to the website. Staff also introduce metadata writing and
copyright issues in the workshops.

2.2.3 Collections from NLW and PCW Involved in Research
During the work experience placement with NLW and PCW, different collections
were worked with in order to gain knowledge of digitisation and metadata work.
When working with the Digitisation Unit at NLW the researcher worked with two
different materials based around the “Welsh Experience of World War One”
(WEWW1) project.5 The project is funded by the JISC e-content programme 2011-13,
through the mass digitization strand, and by partner contributions especially from
the NLW, where the project is based. The partners are: Bangor University; Cardiff
University; Aberystwyth University; Swansea University; University of Wales Trinity
Saint David’s; the PCW; Archives and Records Council, Wales and BBC Cymru Wales.
The project “will digitize primary sources relating to World War One from the
Libraries, Special Collections and Archives of Wales, producing a coherent,
consolidated digital collection revealing the often hidden history of World War One
as it impacted all aspects of Welsh life, language and culture” (Hughes, 2012b). The
digital collection will be available online and PCW, a project partner, “is inviting the
public to become a part of the project by bringing their materials along to one of a
series of events where staff will be on hand to scan letters, photographs, certificates,
postcards, diaries and any other documents or memorabilia” (Morgan, 2013).

Staff at NLW provided the researcher with the following tasks and materials based
on their relevance and easy availability.

5



Pagination of a 100-page manuscript



Digitisation (scanning) of a 100-page manuscript



Metadata (spread sheet) for a box of 200 military photographs

http://cymruww1.llgc.org.uk

46

When working with the PCW the researcher worked with a collection of photographs
owned by the Merched y Wawr from Llanfarian, Ceredigion. The Merched y Wawr
(translation: Daughters of the Dawn) is a voluntary organisation for women in Wales,
similar to the Women’s Institute. Staff at PCW provided the researcher with the
following tasks and materials based on their relevance and easy availability.


Digitisation (scanning) of 280 photographs



Metadata (spread sheet) for 280 photographs



Upload 20 of the photographs to PCW website

2.3 Aberystwyth University School of Art Gallery & Museum
(SAGM)
The SAGM is not directly involved in this project, however it is closely connected to
the CCA and the main academic department on this project, the School of Art.
According to its mission statement the SAGM “collects, documents, preserves and
interprets objects of educational and cultural value that are useful in teaching and
research…” (School of Art Gallery & Museum, 2013). The SAGM houses over 20,000
different examples of fine and decorative art with significant emphasis on post-15th
century European prints, contemporary British printmaking and post-1945 Welsh art
and photography. It also holds artefacts from the University’s former Art and Crafts
Museum. The SAGM has frequent exhibitions in its gallery spaces. Its funding largely
comes from trust funds and benefactors. In recent years reproduction fees for
photographic images have been introduced.6

2.3.1 Digitisation at the SAGM

As of September 2013, the SAGM has no official strategy for the digitisation of its
collection. The gallery has a set of guidelines written by members of staff that offer
step-by-step instructions on how to digitise objects in the collection. The gallery also
6

Available to view online: http://www.aber.ac.uk/en/art/gallery-museum/collections/reproduction/

47

produces a yearly document detailing the plans for the gallery over a forthcoming
year, however this document is not specific to digitisation. In January 2013 the
gallery employed a 1-year Curatorial Intern whose main task involved digitisation.
Whilst there is an interest in and a desire to undertake digitisation at the gallery it is
not one of the main operational priorities, possibly due to a shortage of staff and/or
funds. As a major working collaborator with the CCA, the School of Art Gallery &
Museum could benefit from a digitisation strategy in order to set short-term and
long-term goals for digitisation and to increase access to the collection.

2.4 Culture Colony
Culture Colony describes itself as “a new cultural experience celebrating the diversity
of expression and a space for sharing and developing creative ideas” as well as “a
professional tool for individuals and businesses… as an alternative to television for
anyone to access cultural content” (Culture Colony, 2013). The website (Figure 15)
was set up by filmmaker Pete Telfer who frequently records interviews and events.
Culture Colony is supported financially through private and public funding initiatives:
Chance to Create (Powys County Council), Pixel Foundry Artists Archive, Powys Arts
Forum, the European Union and the Welsh Assembly Government.

Fig 15. Screenshot of Culture Colony homepage “noticeboard”

48

In this project, Culture Colony is used as a means of mutual publicity. By keeping a
blog (Figure 16) detailing the progress of the project the researcher both publicised
the project and promoted Culture Colony as a blogging platform for culture in Wales.
As a provider of cultural content in audiovisual formats, Culture Colony was an
example of how digitised material can be made available and therefore was another
source of knowledge to be transferred to the CCA.

Fig 16. Screenshot of researcher’s blog on Culture Colony

2.5 The International Ceramics Festival (ICF)
The International Ceramics Festival is not directly involved in this project, however,
the digitisation work to be undertaken utilises the CCA’s material from the ICF.
Professor Moira Vincentelli has served on the organising committee of the ICF since
its earliest years and so the CCA and the ICF have a long-standing history together.
The ICF 2013 occurred during the course of this project.

49

The ICF occurs biennially at Aberystwyth Arts Centre, with the first festival held in
1987, and regularly attracts 1000 international visitors. It is an opportunity for
ceramic artists, collectors, potters, amateurs, teachers and students to network and
study. Visitors can “attend lectures, watch practical demonstrations and visit special
exhibitions” (Arts Council of Wales, 2012). The ICF is a charitable company formed by
North Wales Potters, South Wales Potters and Aberystwyth Arts Centre and the
executive committee is contains 6 directors, with two from each organisation.

2.6 Chapter Summary
The two main organisations involved in this project are the Ceramic Collection &
Archive (CCA) and the National Library of Wales (NLW)/People’s Collection Wales
(PCW). Material from the NLW and PCW underwent digitisation work for practice in
order to gain knowledge. This knowledge was then transferred to material from the
CCA that underwent digitisation work. Culture Colony, the School of Art Gallery &
Museum and the International Ceramics Festival all offered opportunities for
learning and experience but had minor involvement in this project.

50

Chapter 3: Literature Review
This chapter begins by introducing how knowledge was acquired from a variety of
sources before discussing key finds in topics relevant to this research on the transfer
of digitisation knowledge from the NLW to the CCA. This chapter fulfills the objective
of acquiring theoretical knowledge on digitisation work through researching
literature and by extension it fulfills the objective of transferring this knowledge to
the CCA. The chapter ends with an overview of useful websites for the MPhil and a
summary of the main points gathered from the chapter.

3.1 How the Literature Review was Written and Researched
This literature review is a collection of research findings from both paper and webbased media. The purpose of this literature review is to present an insight into the
contemporary situation of digitisation work, as well as to provide a methodology
overview.

The central themes to the proposed research study are digitisation, metadata and
ceramic-themed material, and therefore the key academic disciplines covered are:
art (history), library and museum studies and information studies. In order to include
sub-themes, a ‘mind map’ of the key words in the research area was created in order
to generate words that would be used for a literature search. This enabled me to see
key themes within the topic, and inter-related issues. The terms I identified are
shown in Figure 17.

51

Digitisation
Guides

Scanning

Metadata

Key words

Internet

Libraries,
Archives,
Museums
(LAMs)

Collections
Art
(Ceramics)

Fig 17. Mind map of key terms identified in research

The mind map was further restructured into a more organised flow chart of key
words with sub-categories, which aided in methodology (Figure 18). Digitisation,
Metadata, Ceramics and LAMs were deemed the four most relevant key words while
Collections, Scanning and Guides were made sub-sections. It became clear most of
the key words were interrelated in some way or another by research, projects or
other activities. The following were deemed relatable with all four main key terms
and their sub-sections: the use of internet on the terms, the theory of the terms, the
users of the terms and copyright issues with the terms.

52

MPhil
Digitisation
History

Guides

Metadata

Projects

Preservation

Technology
Hardware
(scanners)

Workflow

Terminology

LAMs

Collections

Archiving

Websites

Oral history

Spreadsheets

Software

Internet

Ceramics

Digitisation/ 3D
scanning

Theory
Users

Copyright

Fig 18. Restructured flow chart of key terms in research

These keywords formed the basis of the literature search, which began with
conducting a search for literature using the computer catalogues of Aberystwyth
University (Primo) and the National Library of Wales (Aquabrowser). The keywords
identified above were used in searches, pairing them in different combinations such
as digitisation projects, ceramics and metadata, archives. This enabled the
researcher to find sources that discussed multiple key variables. As the research
topic is studied and practised internationally the researcher was aware of issues such
as variant spelling and grammar, particularly with digitisation and digitization, and so
using both spellings became habitual. Often, broad search terms, such as art,
technology, brought up too many results (most of which were irrelevant) and so
other variables were introduced to narrow the search. This search term
methodology was also utilised in Google search engine queries and Google was
chosen for its wide coverage.

53

3.2 Sources Used in the Literature Review
From the search terms identified in Figures 17 and 18, the material that was found
included printed books, journals and articles as well as online journals and web
publications.1 Following references cited within other sources, such as bibliographies
and suggested further reading, lead to the discovery of other sources. These sources
provided publications written from different perspectives but, if reviewed together,
cover the topic area thoroughly from a technical point of view.

Some sources proved to be too advanced or simply unnecessary for this thesis, such
as the mechanics of scanning technology. Despite finding some irrelevant
information there were several useful finds and, again, these cited other sources in a
snowballing effect. By using the internet it was possible to ‘bookmark’ or ‘favourite’
items for future reference and browsing for sources online also gave a sense of the
subject of digitisation work itself. For example, by viewing e-books and other
scanned images and documents, the researcher acquired a sense of how digitised
material can be used in different ways.

The initial research involved looking at the websites of CCA, NLW, PCW and ICF to
gain a familiarity with the organisations involved in the project. This led to visiting
websites relevant to digitisation, such as JISC, DCC (Digital Curation Centre) and DPC
(Digital Preservation Coalition), as well as websites with digitised collections, such as
VADS and the V&A (Victoria & Albert Museum). This was followed by keyword
searches within online catalogues of Aberystwyth University (Primo) and the
National Library of Wales (Aquabrowser), which offered media in the form of books,
journals, articles, films, audio and images. Most books, journals and articles
suggested websites and other printed publications that could be of relevance to the
reader. Another source included presentations and papers from conferences
attended by the researcher.

1

A list of frequently used websites is provided in section 3.9

54

Over time, the area of investigation shifted from theory-based information to
include more operational tools and methods of practice that could be encountered
during a digitisation project. Digitisation guidelines were discovered that became
useful and informative and this led to the value of creating digitisation guidelines for
this project.

3.3 Digitisation

3.3.1 History of Digitisation
According to Ooghe & Moreels, the growth in analogue production in the early 20thcentury forced memory institutions such as LAMs to consider how material should
be stored, preserved, controlled and protected (2009). With rapid developments in
technology toward the end of the 20th century, digitisation emerged as a new area of
study and practice. Hemsley et al say that, in the UK, the use of information and
communications technologies in the cultural sector can be traced back to the 1970s
and before, particularly “its application for museum collections documentation”
(2005: 4). Williams claims that in the 1960s museums began to be recognised and
appreciated as repositories of heritage and they were pressured to increase their
activities and make full use of resources. Museums were increasingly expected “to
be able to locate objects in a moderate amount of time and to maintain adequate
records on the methods by which items in their collections were acquired” (2010:
16). However, Williams argues that most initial information systems in museums
were inadequate. Referred to as “mainframes,” the early computers used in
museums were “very large and costly and required the services of highly trained
data-processing operators, programmers, and systems analysts” (ibid).

Rosedale observes that the earliest occurrences of the term “digital library” date to
the mid-1980s in the electronics and electrical engineering literature and that
“during this period before the popularization of the World Wide Web (1991-1993),

55

digital library was used in this fairly generic context to refer to the future of
electronic library collections” (2002: 137). In the 1980s/1990s people thought that
digitisation would save millions of hours of teaching time and increase academic
productivity but there are hidden costs and pitfalls to developing and using digital
content. However, over this time there has been extensive trial and error,
experimentation and testing and much development (Hughes & Green, 2003: 7).
CHArt (Computers and the History of Art) was developed in the mid-1980s by “art
and design historians who happened also to be computer enthusiasts” (CHArt,
2013). It looked at the application of digital technology to visual culture, particularly
in relation to the study of the history of art and the work of LAMs, and ran
conferences on the subject.

Hughes & Green note that the “expansion of global computer networks/high-speed
internet access led to the proliferation of digital content, delivered to increasing
numbers of computer users worldwide” (2003: 4). This led to a growing demand for
access that was immediate, easy to use and up-to-date. Bülow & Ahmon echo this,
saying: “the dramatic growth in digitization since the late 1990s is a direct response
to the rapid development of the internet and corresponding changes in user
expectations” (2011: 1). The JSTOR (Journal STORage) shared digital library was
created in 1995 to aid academic libraries in digitisation in order to free space on
shelves, save costs and provide greater levels of access to content.

The United Kingdom has experienced large digitisation activity in the 21st-century.
JISC note “the combination of government, lottery, education and research funding,
plus well established programmes of activity, means that this is a relatively mature
process” (JISC, 2013b). There has been a considerable investment in digitisation
projects in the culture, heritage and education sector dating back to the 1990’s with
the eLib (electronic libraries) programme. The eLib programme (1996-1999) covered
several projects and was funded by JISC with the aim to “engage the HE [Higher
Education] community in developing and shaping the implementation of the
electronic library” (Kirriemuir, 1998). One project, the Digitisation in Art and Design
(DIAD) aimed to make a record of core journals through digitised content that would
56

be delivered on the internet or CD-ROM (UKOLN, 1996). Between 2004 and 2006,
the UK JISC funded 11 projects within its Digital Preservation and Asset Management
(DPAM) programme to explore issues supporting digital preservation and asset
management in institutions. These projects intended to establish a basis for further
development of institutional strategies and policies for long-term preservation and
asset management. JISC, the DPAM programme, and the 11 projects funded within
it, acknowledged that digital preservation and effective management of digital assets
requires significant work and JISC continues to funds preservation work (Pennock,
2008: 1).

One estimate by JISC suggests £130 million of public money has been spent on the
creation of digital content since the mid-1990s (2013b). Significantly, the New
Opportunities Fund (NOF-digitise) invested £50 million of this total in programmes
that are coming to completion in 2013. The NOF-digitise was launched in 1999 with a
budget of £50 million and was an active Lottery Distributor until 2004 (Digitised
Communities Online, 2009). The money was split up between 150 national and local
bodies with the aim of developing lifelong learning resources in the three areas of:
re-skilling the nation; citizenship in a modern state; and cultural enrichment. Among
the first projects to receive money were in the subject areas of archaeology and
science and nature, with varying formats being digitised (NOF-Digitise, 2009).

The development of digitisation is very much still underway. In 1999 Elkington
commented, “photograph collections, printed works and manuscripts are the focus
on thousands of imaging projects in libraries throughout the US and the UK” (1999:
245). Despite this however, Youngs notes in 2012 “so far there are no British
standards or equivalent for digitisation” (2012: 5).

57

3.3.2 Definitions of Digitisation
Youngs defines digitisation as “the conversion of analogue materials into a digital
format for use in computer based applications” and further adds “conversion or
image capture is usually done with a scanner or a digital camera to provide images of
the materials” (2012: 4). Hughes & Green offer a similar definition to Youngs, stating:
“digitisation is the process by which analogue content2 is converted into a sequence
of 1s and 0s and put into binary code to be readable by a computer” (2003: 4). Both
definitions suggest that digital content requires computer hardware for access. This
is important as it draws emphasis on the fact that analogue content does not require
any intermediary tools for access, except perhaps a magnifying glass or torch in
certain cases.

The Digital Preservation Coalition (DPC) provide a list of relevant definitions and
concepts on their website3 and digitisation is defined as:
“The process of creating digital files by scanning or otherwise converting analogue materials.
The resulting digital copy, or digital surrogate, would then be classed as digital material and
then subject to the same broad challenges involved in preserving access to it, as "born
digital" materials” (DPC, 2012c).

This definition by the DPC suggests that once analogue materials have been digitised
they essentially receive the same definition as born-digital materials. Digitised
material and born-digital material are both in a digital format and are subject to the
same behaviour and treatment regardless of their source. Cundiff defines a digital
library object as having “a one-to-one correspondence with a typical library item
(e.g. a book, a photograph, a sound recording, a map, and so on)” (2004: 53).

Youngs highlights the common misconception that digitisation and digitisation
projects are the same, commenting that: “a digitisation project is not just about
digitisation; it involves many other issues and activities” (2012: 6). These activities
can include the selection and preparation of materials, copyright clearance and
2

Hughes offers some examples of analogue content, including: paper (variants), papyrus, vellum,
birch bark, wood, canvas, negative glass plates, microfilm and sound/moving image (2003: 3).
3
http://www.dpconline.org/ advice/preservationhandbook/introduction/definitions-and-concepts

58

creation of metadata. Youngs further comments on the non-linear nature of a
digitisation project: “the production line aspect of the process is linear, but many
other processes will need to be considered in a holistic way” (ibid: 15). Youngs’ point
is relevant for this research in that it is a digitisation project and not just digitisation
because other processes such as metadata are researched. The Council on Library
and Information Resources (CLIR) emphasise that “a successful project must have
clear definitions of purpose, mission, and audience” (CLIR, 2001: 14) and this justifies
the creation of documents such as a digitisation strategy and a project outline.

When thinking about defining the differences between digital content and analogue
content, one could consider the definitions of different libraries as holders of the
content. In order to define a digital library, one can also look at the definition of a
physical library. In 1931, Indian librarian Shiyali Ramamrita Ranganathan proposed
five laws of library science:
1.

Books are for use

2.

Every book has its reader

3.

Every reader his book

4.

Save the time of the reader

5.

A library is a growing organism (Jones et al, 2006: 3)

These rules still apply to digital surrogates, such as a collection of digitised ceramics.
The surrogates are still “for use,” every surrogate has its reader or “user,” every user
has his/her surrogate, timesaving is still of importance and, lastly, a collection of
ceramic surrogates continues to grow due to rapidly advancing technology.

3.3.3 Why Digitisation is Undertaken
There are many different reasons why an individual, group or institution would
undertake digitisation. Williams observes that growth of a museum collection puts a
strain on routine museum functions because the collection continues to grow while
the museum searches for a cure to its ailments, therefore a backlog of poorly
documented objects and unorganized records accumulates. Traditional paper-based
practices are frequently overwhelmed and so the need for thorough documentation

59

and efficient record keeping becomes “painfully apparent” (2010: 15). Digitisation
can be a cure to this problem as documents are stored on a single piece of hardware.
Hemsley et al suggest that utilising digital technology is not an option but a reality
for European cultural institutions and that “many archives, libraries and museums
have turned into hybrid institutions that take care of both analogue and digital
cultural collections” (2005: 18). It would appear, in this sense, that over the past
decades, the definition of a cultural institution has changed to include digital
material due to its prominent use. Hughes & Green also note that computer-based
systems are now considered essential for many operational aspects of “Memory
Institutions” such as museums, archives and libraries (2003: 5). Research suggests
that digitisation benefits these Memory Institutions; with DigiCULT stating
digitisation contributes:
“to the conservation and preservation of heritage and scientific resources; it creates new
educational opportunities; it can be used to encourage tourism; and it provides ways of
improving access by the citizen to their patrimony” (DigiCULT, 2003).

Ooghe & Moreels argue “digital collections make documents more easily accessible;
they allow new links to be created or new interactions with the audience to be
maintained” and “end-users are also starting to perceive the digital documents as
the primary access-point to collections, regardless of the institutional setting within
which their analogue counterparts are housed” (2009). Parry notes that 20 years
after the invention of the World Wide Web, museums increasingly recognise their
online visitors as equal in importance as those visitors physically on site. Parry
highlights four key roles of a museum as being an organisation, an attraction, a
communicator and a collector and claims that for each role there is “an abundance
of evidence […] to illustrate almost a half-century of development enabled by digital
technology” (2010: 1-2).

Cameron argues that technology can “liberate” standardized linear documentation
to incorporate “diverse media and create 3-D objects, visualizations, and
simulations” and these have major implications for the “types of interpretive
evidence gathered, recorded, digitized and created around museum collections”
(2010:83). She goes on to say that these data visualization models can be used with

60

navigation/searching tools to show relationships between objects, subjects and
themes using various media forms (images, sound, video, 3-D objects). Taking recent
evidence from institutions around the world, Bülow & Ahmon demonstrate how
digitisation and new technology has expanded the visions of many institutions. The
Smithsonian Institution in the USA imagines “access to all known information… with
one touch of the screen” as part of its strategic plan of 2010-2015 (2011:3). In the
British Library’s 2008-2011 strategy, five out of the seven strategic priorities aim to
either advance the Library’s digital infrastructure or use digitally available content of
the Library. The National Archives of Australia states in its corporate plan of 20092012 that it will “continue to explore ways in which technological developments can
enhance access to our collections” (ibid). In Norway, the Working Group on
Digitisation was established in 2004 in order to analyse the need for digitisation of
the resources in LAMs and to suggest appropriate action. The Working Group coordinated a national initiative to create access to sources of knowledge and culture
managed by ALM. For the initiative the following five points were taken into
consideration: (1) the need for digitisation, (2) general principles and criteria for
selection, (3) Know-how, infrastructure and long-term preservation, (4) access and
further processing of the materials and (5) division of tasks and co-ordination
(Working Group on Digitisation, 2006: 13-17)

Elkington suggests that “the decision to embark on an imaging project is instigated
by the availability of external funding” (1999: 245). Internal funding is an option if it
is available, however with external funding, project managers must consider the
wishes of the external funder(s). Elkington further comments that the decision to
digitise should be the result of an analysis of four fundamental influences:


Collection content



Preservation need



Access imperatives



Financial drivers (1999: 247)

In relation to the CCA, these four fundamentals apply as follows. Collection content:
the CCA has thousands of items of rare and unique quality and value and the
organisation is prominent in the field of ceramics in Wales and the UK. Preservation

61

need: the CCA has many items in analogue format that have yet to be digitised to
ensure longevity of content. Access imperatives: items in the CCA are not made as
available as they could be due to limitations that can be overcome through
digitisation and Aberystwyth is geographically isolated. Financial drivers: the CCA has
potential to receive funding from Arts Council of Wales, Aberystwyth University, and
other organisations but it recognises that funding is a major issue.

Hughes & Green comment that digital information has common characteristics and
qualities regardless of where it is stored and therefore it can be linked to other
materials to create multimedia not dependent upon spatial/temporal barriers or
hierarchies. Digital information can be stored and delivered in a variety of ways, can
be copied limitless times without degradation of the original and can be compressed
for storage (2003: 4). This is not the case for analogue information, which has
inconsistent characteristics. For example, a newspaper and a framed oil painting are
different in size, weight and material, only the newspaper could be rolled-up and the
painting may need to be stored in a cool, dark location. A newspaper or painting
would need to be manually searched for within a storage box or room, whilst a
digital copy can be searched and browsed for easily on a database and can be linked
to other content via the internet. Hughes argues the value of digital collections is
particularly difficult to assess, stating: “value is subjective, changes over time and
has different meanings that are contingent on external factors” and that the value of
digital resources is not evident until research is widely shared, cited and popularised
(Hughes, 2012: 6).

According to Note, digital surrogates “allow for deeper study than do their analogue
originals, enabling scholars to view details that the photographer may have never
seen” (2011: 45). Digital surrogates can be magnified to better see details that are
missed by the naked eye and the surrogates can be altered with digital effects.
However, as stated previously, this would require relevant computer software and
hardware. Youngs also names analysis and research as a reason for undertaking
digitisation, as well as for: prestige, access, preservation and conservation, policies
(such as government funding) and technology (2012: 6) In relation to the CCA, the
62

most applicable points from Youngs’ list are access and preservation and
conservation. The CCA is seeking to widen access to its collection by providing
digitised content to users and in doing so the material is preserved. While the CCA is
less concerned with digitisation as a means of analysing materials, it recognises that
2-dimensional photographs of ceramics can limit the sense of scale and shape and
that 3-dimensional scans could better represent ceramic objects.

3.3.4 How Digitisation is Undertaken
Digitisation is still a comparatively new field of study and practice and, as has been
discussed already, there are still issues with uniformity. There are many different
items that can be digitised but not all of them can be or should be digitised in the
same way. There are many factors to consider prior to and during the digitisation
process. Before deciding how to digitise, one must select what is to be digitised.
Hadžić observes that some institutions, such as the National Gallery in London,
create an electronic image of every item in their collection and place in on its
website. Other institutions, such as the Metropolitan Museum of Arts in New York,
collect electronic images based around exhibition themes, or to make educational
modules (2004:74). Ooghe & Moreels argue that an “all-selective” approach to
digitisation, in which everything in a collection is digitised, is impractical and would
only be suitable for “small and precious collections, collections that would lose
coherence unless digitised in their entirety and institutions with sufficient means to
both digitise their entire collection over a short term and to carry the burden of longterm preservation” (2009). Hughes & Green note that it is not possible or practical to
digitise everything in a collection and that “generally, there will be only one
opportunity [to digitise], as such projects are expensive and require significant
capital investment to start up” (2003: 32). They go on to say the main criteria for
digitisation should be the informational content of original materials, the demand
for materials and the condition of originals (ibid: 37). Youngs offers a list of selection
criteria when choosing material for digitisation:

63



Intellectual justification



Demand



Relevance to funders



Relevance to institution



Copyright4



Relationship to other projects



Feasibility of image capture



Metadata (too expensive or time consuming?)



Condition of originals



Sensitivity of content (2012: 9)

On selecting objects for digitisation, Elkington comments that “collection managers
often select particular materials or collections to be converted based on their
understanding of user interest and on their desire to limit use of deteriorated or
endangered originals” (1999: 246). Therefore, it is important to balance carefully the
requirements of the users against what is best for the preservation of the materials.
The decision of what to digitise seems to tie-in with factors such as user demand as
well as finances. The usefulness of a digital collection is highlighted by Hadžić, who
notes, “some museums count more attendance in cyberspace than on Earth, with
the international museum audience estimated to be 1 billion” and that the internet
offers institutions “possibilities of distribution of information that are relatively
limited in costs and their public is enlarged geographically and on a social level”
(2004: 74). Jones et al comment that the web is like a library with all its documents,
but that “all libraries … are based on selections” (Jones et al, 2006: 2). It seems as
though it is equally important to consider what should not be included as well as
what should be included, in order to ensure content is concise and relevant. Jones et
al further comment that there are two main components in the construction of
digital libraries: technologies and metadata (ibid: 21). Note comments that because
digitisation is a relatively new endeavour, “institutes may too often concentrate on
technology before deciding on a project’s purpose,” (2011: 139) however, a project
should be driven by the needs of users and not technology.

4

Padfield states that an inability to discover who holds copyright is not a reason to assume it does not
exist (2010: 187).

64

It can be useful to use a formula when assessing materials for digitisation so as to
have a regular basis for comparison. In their digitisation project handbook, the North
East Document Conservation Centre match the qualities being assessed for
digitisation selection with the skills used to assess items prior to acquisition by
archives and libraries (Sitts, 2000: 46-47). Examples of how selection could be
documented were followed by a list of what should be assessed which was
accompanied by definitions of the assessment criteria to ensure clarity of the terms
(ibid: 53- 58). The Working Group on Digitisation provided a list of criteria for
selection of sources of knowledge for digitisation. They claimed digitisation will
facilitate access to materials that are (1) frequently used in their analogue format,
(2) required or requested by several user groups and (3) especially difficult to access.
Other criteria included:


The materials are of particular current relevance or national interest or relevant to an
integrated range of services offered by the institution.



The materials are suited to being published and displayed on a computer.



The materials have the potential for digital processing and/or analysis.



Digitisation will protect fragile original materials and will not endanger or damage the
original (Working Group on Digitisation, 2006: 29).

Digitisation does not necessarily have to occur within the institution. Outsourcing
the work to be carried out by digitisation specialists outside the institution is a
different option. Bülow & Ahmon suggest this option is best for one-off digitisation
projects in institutions that lack training and facilities. However, if long-term
digitisation is desired then it is best to purchase equipment and train or hire staff to
carry out the work (2011: 21). The CCA aims for long-term digitisation and so
initiated this MPhil project in order to acquire the digitisation knowledge for future
use.

3.3.4.1 Instructive Guides to Digitisation
Written guides are included in the literature review because it became apparent
whilst researching that although many published case studies will indicate where
mistakes were made, they typically utilise advanced technical language that

65

potential readers of this thesis may not have. Therefore, this issue was addressed by
investigating written guides and particularly those aimed towards beginner and
intermediate users in the field of digitisation. It then became apparent whilst
researching guides that many of them relay similar information and instruction, each
with small differences, such as with terminology. All guides emphasised that there
was, as of yet, no single way to digitise material but that institutions should follow
similar procedures to one another in a de facto standard. Many guides offered the
reader a list of abbreviations/glossary of terms, which was useful, particularly for
technical terms. Ooghe & Moreels agree there is a lack of uniform terminology for
selection for digitisation and “over the years several guidelines have proposed
significantly different approaches to the task” but when guidelines are not stated
“selection practices appear most often based on ad hoc decisions or on available
funds” (2009). The creation of guidelines for digitisation work therefore seems a
practical pursuit for the CCA. The following is a selection of material that is useful as
a guide to digitisation.

JISC Digital Media provide a number of useful articles on the preparation and
implementation of digitisation, which are listed freely on their website.5 Many of the
documents are applicable, but only five (5) guides that were considered
fundamental by the researcher have been overviewed here.

(1) “Basic Guidelines for Image Capture and Optimisation” (JISC Digital Media
2013b) provides a guide to good practice in still image capture to help the user to
design a workflow for capture and optimisation. The document highlights the main
points that should be considered to ensure the highest quality output from
equipment, organised in a useful table. According to JISC pre-image capture activities
include: testing and calibrating equipment, software and the environment, testing
and establishing operational specifications for image capture, establishing a capture
workflow, collecting and preparing original images and clean both these originals
and the capture device. Tips for capturing the image include: capture at the highest
5

Please consult http://www.jiscdigitalmedia.ac.uk/guides/a-z and
http://www.jiscdigitalmedia.ac.uk/digitisation

66

quality colour settings6 and resolution necessary for uses, record the metadata,
visually check each and every image and save it. The instructions for image
optimisation (post-scanning and saving) were: create a working copy and keep the
master file just for storage, crop if necessary, optimise colour and density range
(shadows and highlights), check for faults, name the file and save progress
appropriately and frequently.

(2) “Selection Procedures for Digitisation” (JISC Digital Media 2013d) looks at points
to consider when developing a selection criteria for digitisation and it is intended to
be of use to resource managers who want to digitise all or part of their collection.
JISC points out that some of the points will not be relevant to all projects and
collections, but the document has been designed to serve as a useful overview and
to stimulate some further thinking and research. The guide gives reasons why and
why not to digitise. JISC advises an assessment of the important characteristics of
the collection: its size and scope, uniqueness, comprehensiveness, value, intellectual
property rights, physical condition (suitability and risk) and availability of metadata.
It is also advisable to consider the needs of users: who is the likely user, will
digitisation be beneficial to users, what material would users like to see prioritised,
will digitisation increase demand for the originals and will there be adequate means
of controlling access and use of the digitised collection. Furthermore the guide
advises the consideration of wider context issues: the priorities of the institution and
its resources, external sources of funding, legal, educational and research contexts,
technological changes and awareness of external collections. JISC provides the
following ‘decision tree’ diagram (as shown in Figure 19) that clearly sets out rules
for selection of material for digitisation.

6

“This should certainly be at least 24bit (8bit per channel), however many scanners now offer the
ability to capture at higher colour depths (30-48bit). This will be slower, uses more memory and will
increase storage requirements. However the archive image will then have been stored at the best
possible quality from the device allowing re-use with confidence” (JISC Digital Media 2003b).

67

Fig 19. Selection of Material taken from JISC Digital Media 2013d

(3) “Setting up a Workspace for Digitising Images” (JISC Digital Media 2013e)
considers the appropriate planning of the digitisation environment as well as
whether to digitise in-house or outsource the work.7 Every project will have its own
individual requirements which will vary enormously depending on the size and scope
of the project, the type of materials being digitised and the method of capture. The
guide advises the consideration of what exactly the digitisation space will be used
for, what type of material will be captured, what sort of equipment will need to be
accommodated, how many staff will be working at one time, as well as health and
safety. JISC considers the photograph shown in Figure 20 a suitable example of a
correct digitisation workspace.

7

The issue of outsourcing is also discussed by JISC in more detail in a separate document: “To
Outsource or to Digitise In-house? (JISCDigitalMedia 2013f).

68

Fig 20. Suitable layout of digitisation equipment (JISC Digital Media 2013e)

(4) “Generic Image Digitisation Workflow” (JISC Digital Media 2013c) reviews the
general concepts of 'best practice' within an image digitisation workflow and looks at
how these concepts can be mapped onto the workflow to allow the efficient
production of all required deliverables. The guide advises to capture at the best
quality possible, collect required technical metadata as work progresses, archive
original capture files, plan for sustainability, and to “sign-off” completed stages of
digitisation. The article provides a clear workflow diagram as shown in Figure 21.

69

Fig 21. Generic Image Digitisation workflow (JISC Digital Media 2013c)

70

(5) “An Overview of Scanners” (JISC Digital Media 2013a) details the features of the
typical flatbed scanner and what to look out for when choosing one for a digitisation
project, including a list of advantages and disadvantages, as seen in Table 6.

Scanner advantages
A scanner is easier to operate and
requires less technical knowledge to
produce high quality, repeatable results
than is required to use a pro-sumer
digital camera. Common photographic
problems such as focus, exposure or
perspective errors are almost impossible
with a scanner. Some libraries are
installing simple publically operated
‘push button’ scanners for their users.

Scanner disadvantages
Less flexible than a camera, can normally
only scan 2D objects. A camera can
capture most types of original though
additional lenses or other equipment
might be required.

The controlled lighting environment in a
scanner eliminates exposure and colour
temperature issues.

Scanners are limited to a maximum scan
area e.g. A4 or A3.

Scanners can be set up to scan objects in
batches, most flatbeds can scan several
negatives, one at a time. Some models
are designed to scan multipage
documents automatically then pass the
data through an Optical Character
Recognition application to produce a
readable and searchable digital version.

Specialist scanners can be very expensive
at over £20,000.

Most scanners only require a small
amount of desk space, cameras however
require a formal or ‘make shift’ studio
space with controlled lighting.

Scanners are typically deskbound. They
are easily damaged in transit and so the
original must be brought to the scanner,
a camera in contrast can be taken to the
original if necessary.

Dedicated book scanners can digitise
bound volumes without placing the
object under stress.
Table 6. Scanner advantages and disadvantages based on a table by JISC Digital Media 2013a

71

Hughes & Green’s Digitizing Collections: Strategic Issues for the Information
Manager (2003) provides an informative and realistic guide for the manager of a
digitisation project. Amongst many topics, the authors discuss the characteristics of
digital and analogue formats, the past, present and future place of digital
information within society, the advantages and limitations of digitisation, criteria for
digitisation, and cases when digitisation should not be undertaken. Hughes & Green
highlight that technological developments within digitisation are market-led and not
led by the needs of scholarship and research. Therefore, it is important to consider
how technology can be appropriately applied to an academic institution such as the
CCA. They also observe the different options available during digitisation in terms of
quantity. For example, an institution can digitise either every object in a collection,
the ‘greatest hits’ of a collection or objects based around a certain theme. In
consideration of the time limitations of this project, as well as its infancy, the
quantity of digitised material should be evaluated.

Bülow & Ahmon’s Preparing Collections for Digitization (2011) covers all of the tasks
that need to be done prior to imaging (e.g. selection, rights clearance, document
preparation) as well as those associated with the digitisation process itself (imaging,
quality assurance, transcription, metadata creation). From their archives
perspective, Bülow and Ahmon strongly advocate the involvement of conservation
staff from the outset of digitisation projects (2011: 18). They offer a useful model
detailing four phases of digitisation (Figure 22).

72

Stage One
 Proposal, evaluation,
selection
 Resource enhancement
 Copyright clearance
 Partnering (commercial
or academic)
 Condition assessment
 Preparation for
scanning
 Project Planning

Stage Two
 Imaging
 Quality Assurance
 Transcription
 Structural Metadata
 File Management

Stage Three
 Creation of database
 Delivery (hosting)
 Marketing
 User evaluation

Stage Four
 Long-term sustainability
Fig 22. Four-phase model for digitisation, based on a figure by Bülow & Ahmon, 2011: 11.

Stage one involves a great deal of decision-making as to how a digitisation project
should be implemented; including what material will be digitised. Stage two is the
more active stage with practical work such as scanning. Stage three is where the
digitised material is used in various ways; where the purpose of the digitisation
occurs. Stage four happens throughout and beyond the digitisation work because it
is concerned with where the digital material is stored and therefore preserved longterm and is subject to developments in new technology (2011: 10-13). Bülow &
Ahmon also overview the main details to consider when creating and reviewing a
digital image:

Resolution

Bit-depth/colour
depth

Colour
management

 Pixels per inch (PPI) – the number of pixels used to represent one inch in the
digital image.
 Dots per inch (DPI) – the number of ink dots printed out over the length of an
inch on paper.
 Bit depth – the number of bits used by a computer to represent each individual
pixel, e.g. 24-bits means that each pixel is represented using 24-bits (3 bytes).
 Colour depth – a colour’s representation within an indexed colour image (a
palette representing the distinct colour in an image).
 The computer’s accuracy in its understanding of colours, such as FF0000 as
red.

73

Archival masters
vs. service copies

Image
enhancement
Compression

 Archival masters – high quality images for storage, usually in a format such as
TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) for quality and endurance.
 Service copies – derived from the master for use by users, for example, on a
website, usually in a format such as JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group)
for quick and easy transfer
 Where necessary, crop the image or alter the contrast, brightness, angle, etc.
 Optimizes disk space taken up by a digital file by taking advantage of
redundancy found in digital information, however not all file formats offer
compression mechanisms
Table 7. Details to consider when creating and viewing a digital image,
adapted from Bülow & Ahmon, 2011: 34-41.

Youngs’s Managing the Digitisation of Library, Archive and Museum Materials (2012)
is a short but useful introduction to digitisation. Youngs notes the important fact
that currently there are no British standards or equivalent for digitisation, however,
institutions should work to a de facto standard in order to allow resources to be
compatible with other learning resources. Youngs stresses that “there is no definitive
way of undertaking a digitisation project” and gives a 3 point framework for creating
and managing a digital image archive: (1) data capture and creation (digitisation,
metadata, storage), (2) Data access and delivery (plan and implement the delivery
mechanism to ensure access) and (3) Managing the digital collection (quality control,
good practice and standards) (2012: 7). Youngs offers sections on both planning and
managing a digital project. The planning section includes discussion of the aims and
objectives of a project, the scope, risk analysis, standards and resources. The
managing section covers different aspects including the project lifecycle (beginning,
middle, end), timing, task analysis (hidden tasks may be identified during the course
of the project), staffing and crisis management. Youngs also suggests some predigitisation and post-digitisation activities.

The Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR) published the article
“Building and Sustaining Digital Collections: Models for Libraries and Museums”
(2001). The article assesses digitisation projects and organisations and provides
recommendations, business models and elements of sustainability. CLIR emphasise
“a successful project must have clear definitions of purpose, mission, and audience”

74

(CLIR, 2001: 14). The JSTOR project aimed to archive and expand access to scholarly
journals but “most libraries see it [JSTOR] as a great delivery system, not an archive”
(ibid). According to CLIR, JSTOR considers its core mission as an archive but it
“cannot ignore the demand for access” (ibid). JSTOR say:
Our activities, our fee structure, and the way we manage the service and its resources reflect
our historical commitment to serve colleges and universities as a trusted digital archive, and
our responsibility to publishers as stewards of their content. This underlying philosophy at
JSTOR remains the core of our service even as we continue to seek ways to expand access to
people beyond academic institutions (JSTOR, 2013).

CLIR’s comments on JSTOR suggest that institutions have a main aim for a digital
collection, such as for access or for archiving, and this aim must be carefully
considered. However, even though JSTOR defines itself as a trusted archive it does
not undervalue access. To conclude, CLIR identified four distinct areas LAMs need to
consider when addressing short- and long-term needs: (1) a sound business plan, (2)
the elements needed to sustain digital efforts, (3) interinstitutional issues and (4)
funding (CLIR, 2001: 20)

Note’s Managing Image Collections (2011) discusses the management of the
digitisation process from start to finish and instructs users in the definition and
assessment of the project requirements and the evaluation of the many digitisation
options available. Although the book focuses on the management of photographic
material, the instructions are easily applicable and Note provides clear diagrams.
When selecting file types, Note suggests using “JPEG8 for web display, TIFF9 for
storage, and PDF10 for print reproduction” (Note, 2011: 46). Note provides a useful
diagram to demonstrate digital image recommendations (Figure 23).

8

“JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group)… combines small file sizes with at least respectable quality
and… when small file sizes are important, JPEG is hard to beat” (Steinhoff, 2011)
9
“TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) is a file format that encompasses many internal formats, several
compression methods, and color depths” and “scanned TIFF files… contain the maximum image
information the scanner can produce” (ibid)
10
PDF (Portable Document Format) … is a versatile document format that can store text, image,
graphics, and… hyperlinks” (ibid).

75

Capture initial high-res,
uncompressed digitised master file

Colour

24 bit
sampling

Store in TIFF

Black and white

Create lower-resolution derivatives as
compressed JPEGS for web delivery

8 bit
sampling

Retain master files in
secure storage
environment for
reference and future use
Fig 23. Digital image recommendations, based on a diagram from Note, 2011: 46

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (2002)
published a set of guidelines for digitisation projects for collections and holdings in
the public domain. The aim of the guidelines was not to duplicate existing texts but
rather to offer a synthesis of available information, drawing upon both published
sources and on the operations of specific projects. The guidelines “identify and
discuss the key issues involved in the conceptualization, planning and
implementation of a digitisation project, with recommendations for "best practice"
to be followed at each stage of the process” (UNESCO 2002: 5). The publication
considers the particular circumstances of the countries of the developing world.

Sitts published a Handbook for digital projects (2000) in collaboration with the
Northeast Documentation Center. The handbook interprets digital technology from
the perspective of the unique needs of institutions and explores how institutions can
justify digital imaging projects. It also stresses that project managers take as much

76

time as is needed at the outset of a project to clearly define its goals and outcomes.
Experts in the field comment on: rationale for digitisation and preservation,
considerations for project management, selection for materials for scanning,
copyright issues, guidelines from case studies.

Kenney’s Moving Theory into Practice: Digital Imaging for Libraries and Archives
(2000) is a self-help reference for libraries and archives that choose to convert
cultural resources into digital form. It focuses more on how digitisation occurs,
rather than why it occurs, looking at the technical aspects of the process and
considering case studies. Kenney reviews benchmarking, quality control, metadata
and Photoshop software. Despite not focusing greatly on art or ceramics it is useful
guide for non-experts.

Parry’s A Review of Digitisation Projects in Local Authority Libraries and Archives
(1998) is a useful guide to digitisation and an overview of various projects. It is
somewhat out-dated but the points Parry raises are still applicable to digitisation
today. Parry overviews archives, museums and galleries, looking at their positions
within local authorities, digitisation projects, information technology priorities,
networks, standards and future co-operation. Parry believes the main elements of a
digitisation project are: selection of material; copyright issues; selection and
installation of hardware and software; data capture; cataloguing and indexing; and
document and file management. Parry covers issues with standards, action plans,
funding, and selection of material; the criteria for the latter included: improving
access, networking potential, conservation, institutional considerations,
local/national importance, education, user needs and copyright (1998: 44-46).
According to Parry, prominent funding came from internal local authority funding
and bids to the Heritage Lottery Fund (ibid: 55), which are still common funders in
2013, however funding was not listed as one of Parry’s main elements of a
digitisation project and this may contradict 2013 due to the recent economic
downturn.

77

Beagrie and Greenstein’s strategic framework (1998) is a practical guideline suitable
for implementation; however, it is not specific to museums, galleries or archives. The
guide not only provides the framework (with the three main stages of creation,
management/preservation and use) but also offers a section on how to use the
framework, which includes useful hints such as doing a walkthrough of each stage.
The framework looks at case studies from different cultural institutions, including
the Victoria & Albert Museum.

3.3.5 The Impact of Digitisation
Whether an institution, a group or an individual undertakes digitisation there are
many implications to the task. One issue faced by many organisations seeking
digitisation is finance. Digitisation involves time, effort and technology, as well as
expertise, which can all be costly. However, there are ways to tackle financial
problems, such as collaboration with other organisations to split costs, time or
effort. Youngs comments that “collaborative projects allow complementary, or split
collections … to be digitised at the same time and brought together as a new, virtual
collection” (2012: 4). Bülow & Ahmon point out that digitisation “will have an impact
on the resources of an institution” (2011: 17). However, they claim that digitisation
“has the potential to benefit both the development of a collection as well as its use”
and that “a well executed digitization project will result in detailed cataloguing
information and metadata about a collection, while enhancing possibilities for its use
in ways previously not conceived” (2011: 6). They explain that digitisation preserves
a collection by maintaining its value through reduced access to the original and
allowing it to be stored more cost-effectively (in terms of storage location and
environment). At the same time, digitisation allows information to be made
accessibly online on a broader basis and in doing so supports the use of the
collection (2011: 13-14).

Parry observes that the presence and push of digital provisions in contemporary
museums shapes and drives new workflows, new directories, new strategic aims,

78

new funding streams and government priorities (2010:1). Therefore, digital work
impacts not only the ‘face’ of the museum (the collection displays, user facilities and
events) but also the ‘behind-the-scenes’ workings of a museum. LAMs face many
logistical and financial issues as a result of undertaking and maintaining digitisation
work. Ooghe & Moreels suggest that careful selection of materials can prevent
digitisers “from ending up with a cumbersome mass of data that is practically and
financially impossible to maintain or access” (2009). Elkington comments on correct
decision-making in order to ensure the longevity of a digitisation project. Elkington
writes, “the images and data created will need to be in a form that is sustainable and
migratable over the long-term” (1999: 250) and suggests that standard file formats
and compression strategies ensure this happens. Elkington also highlights the
importance of running costs, potential income, operational commitment and market
longevity to ensure a digitisation project is long-term.

Chenhall and Vance group museum activities into three major categories: (1) initial
activities, (2) ongoing activities, and (3) terminal activities. All of these activities are
involved in the digital work of a museum. Initial activities, when an artefact is
acquired, involve the object being “accessioned, identified, registered, and, possibly,
restored” (2010: 43). The information gained from this stage is documented in digital
format and metadata. Initial activities also includes the digitisation or photography
of objects. The ongoing activities are “the essential business of the museum” such as
storing, exhibiting, loaning, or restoring objects (ibid). In some ways this could be
considered the ‘current status’ of each object and its accompanying digital record
needs to be updated accurately. Information continually needs to be updated, for
example, if an artist passes away or if the object is on loan. The recorded status of an
object also applies to terminal activities, when the departure of the object, in
whatever manner, needs to be documented. If an object is given to another
museum, the digital records could be transferred for continual use.

Tanner notes many implications of digitised resources for learning, teaching and
research. Digitised resources can provide easier access to scholarly publications,
enable new areas of research, make use of unused collections, encourage economic
79

competitiveness, offer efficiency savings, connect communities and encourage
community engagement (2013: 105-117). Tanner concludes by offering five modes
of value for digitised resources (Table 8).

Value
Option value

Prestige value

Education value

Existence value
Bequest value

Description
People value the possibility of enjoying the digitised resources
and the resultant research outputs created through the
endeavors of academic and higher education (HE) now or
sometime in the future.
People derive utility from knowing that a digitised resource, HE
institution or its research is cherished by persons living inside and
outside their community.
People are aware that digitised resources contribute to their own
or to other people’s sense of culture, education, knowledge and
heritage and therefore value it.
People benefit from knowing that a digital resource exists but do
not personally use it.
People derive satisfaction from the fact that their descendants
and other members of the community will in the future be able
to enjoy a digitised resource if they choose to.

Table 8. Five modes of value for digitised resources, adapted from Tanner, 2012: 119.

Oliver highlights the implications of digitisation on archival functions and services:
“appraisal, archival description and access services are the three core areas that are
impacted” (2012: 57). Appraisal is the selection of specific archival materials from an
overall quantity that are carefully chosen based on their value. In light of this, it may
be that only certain materials are digitised and not all will stand the test of time. For
archival description, Oliver says there should be “greater awareness and readiness to
use tools that will facilitate the addition of user-generated content,” such as
popularised family history “to enhance existing archival description” (ibid: 58).
Access services have been impacted by the broader community of users caused by
digitisation. Oliver concludes that digitisation presents enormous opportunities for
archives, particularly in terms of enhancing information retrieval, but the investment
required is immense.

80

The Working Group on Digitisation highlighted some needy recipients of digitisation
work as: the general public; genealogists and local historians; researchers; students;
school pupils; tourism; publishers and the media; public administration; and the
institutions themselves who digitise (Working Group on Digitisation, 2006: 25-26).
Jones et al argue that an institutional repository should be able to meet the
following criteria, many of which apply to a digital collection. The criteria state it
should be institutionally defined, scholarly, cumulative and perpetual, open and
interoperable, searchable with constraints, and able to digitally capture and preserve
many events of campus life (2006: 53).

Figure 24 shows the useful 4-layer model offered by DigiCULT in regards to unlocking
the value of cultural heritage resources, specifically in bringing knowledge to the
attention of the broader public. LAMs must ‘provide access’ to databases that
contain descriptions of their holdings, such as digital catalogues, as the first
requirement for further functionality. LAMs must ‘provide objects’ to the users in
the form of descriptions and digital surrogates of the objects. Expert knowledge that
resides in LAMs must be used to ‘provide expert knowledge & creativity’ in order to
integrate this into the services offered and DigiCULT comment: “this process leads to
information environments that explain and narrate, offer recommendations, and
create meaningful relationships with user[s]” (2002: 185). Finally, ‘provide user
personalisation & community’ enables users to actively participate in the creation of
context and to manipulate and interact with resources in order to develop a sense of
ownership. From DigiCULT’s model it is clear that digital holds more value than
analogue, however, it is unclear in what sense the term ‘value’ is used. In an
economic/financial sense, value would suggest here that digital is more beneficial to
the profit of a cultural heritage institution. In an intellectual/social sense, value
would suggest here that digital is more rewarding to users and visitors.

81

Fig 24. “Unlocking the value: core functions of cultural heritage organisations” chart
(DigiCULT, 2002: 184)

Hemsley et al believe that the only future forecasts on digitisation that may be
regarded as ‘safe’ are generally held to be limited to the two following types: (1)
demographics – barring ‘doomsday developments’ and (2) the continuation of
change in technology, tastes, markets, etc. but without being able to predict the
precise changes (2005: 297). Despite the advent of large-scale digitisation initiatives
in the last decade, Bülow and Ahmon consider that most cultural heritage
organisations would not currently be in a position to consider digitising any more
than a relatively small proportion of their content (2011: 47).

82

3.4 Metadata
Ooghe & Moreels claim “Digital documents serve no purpose unless metadata are
linked to them, but creating these is usually time and labour intensive” (2009). Most
commonly, selection for digitisation is based on the sufficiency of metadata,
however, items with minimal metadata may be selected for digitisation due to their
uniqueness or as a stimulus for metadata-creation (ibid). Note defines metadata as
“structured data about data,” and “information that facilitates the management and
use of other information,” with its function being to “provide users with a
standardized means for intellectual access to holdings” (2011: 117). There are three
types of metadata: Administrative, Descriptive and Preservation (Deegan & Tanner,
2002: 160-120) to detail with different types of information on an object (Table 9).

Type of metadata
Administrative

What it Does
Describes the features
of an object(s) used to
manage the object(s)

Example
Who printed the book
and when; where it is
kept and if it is in good
condition. If the book
has had conservation
treatments or been
loaned.
Describes what the
book is about, what it
looks like, the paper it
is printed upon and
when etc.

Function
Used to manage an
object throughout its
life. Includes all data
needed for managing
preservation (Deegan
& Tanner, 2002, p.
120)
Descriptive
Describes the
Object descriptions
appearance of the
help humans identify
object(s)
an object. Also aids
attributing meaning to
an object (Deegan &
Tanner, 2002, p. 116)
Structural
Describes the internal
Describes the
Structure is part of the
structure/arrangement arrangement of the
meaning of an object.
of the object(s)
item or the set of items Especially important
e.g. the order of the
for digital objects as
pages of a book or
structure doesn’t have
which page an
an enduring physical
illustration is in that
form. Structure is part
book
of meaning (Deegan &
Tanner, 2002, p. 117)
Table 9. The three different types of metadata, based on Deegan & Tanner, 2002: 160-120.

Once metadata is gathered on a computer it needs to be arranged in order for it to
be understood by users and this is done using a metadata schema. Eden claims
“metadata schema and standards are now a part of the information landscape” but

83

that there is a “proliferation of metadata standards” (2004: 6). This suggests that
although metadata is extremely important it lacks standardisation – a similar issue to
digitisation. Eden highlights MARC (MAchine-Readable Cataloguing), Dublin Core
(DC), Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) and Instructional Management System (IMS) as
some of the main metadata schema. The results of a 2006 survey showed that the
most widely used metadata standards in digitisation projects were Dublin Core
(92%)11, MARC (84%), XML (eXtensive Markup Language) (75%), and EAD (Encoded
Archival Description) (69%) (Mugridge, 2006: 15). To take one example, MARC
involves the use of coding to allow a computer system to read and manipulate the
description and headings in a catalogue. This enables printing of catalogue data, the
production of other products (shelf lists, book and spine labels), and the
standardization of a machine-readable format for bibliographic records on an
international scale (2007: 35). Carini & Shepherd claim one of the main problems
with MARC in the archival environment is that, “while it serves the needs for
collection level description fairly readily, it does not lend itself to the more detailed
parts of the description as easily” (2004: 19). They conclude that standardized
descriptions improve usability of archival descriptions by new groups of users who
may be inexperienced in archival research.

The use of metadata schema based on an XML format is an “indisputable advantage”
because converting one schema to another is relatively simple and “a technologically
savvy non-programmer” could do it (ibid: 26). Andressen agrees: “XML offers a more
general standard for describing data for transport” (2004: 45). The use of XML also
creates an environment where it easy to change the look and feel of hundreds of
finding aids. These are important considerations for the CCA, which lacks expert
knowledge and skills in the area. Another metadata schema in XML format is METS
(Metadata and Encoding Transmission Standard). Cundiff defines METS as:

11

Jones et al note that the first generation of institutional repositories used the Qualified Dublin Core
metadata schema to describe the content of their objects: “Dublin Core is still widely used, mainly
because it is specified by the OAI-PMH [Open Archives Initiative - Protocol for Metadata Harvesting]
as a ‘lowest common denominator’ format” (Jones, 2006: 22).

84

An XML schema designed for the purpose of creating XML document instances that express
the hierarchical structure of digital library objects, the names and locations of the files that
comprise those digital objects, and the associated descriptive and administrative metadata
(2004: 53).

METS is flexible, easy to manage and, as it is in XML format, there is a wide range of
software, often free, that can be used to create, store, display, transform, navigate,
query, or publish METS objects (ibid: 63).

Orna & Pettitt highlight the importance of consistency in terminology for metadata,
noting “descriptive terms tend to be applied inconsistently, with the same object
being described in different terms by different recorders” (1980: 58). They further
provide a list reasons why vocabulary control is needed, which includes: to avoid
missing relevant information, group similar terms together to provide the same
results, information is found under precise terms to avoid irrelevant information and
similar terms and topics to the search term are suggested. They also offer a useful
diagram (Figure 25) to explain the method of ensuring all relevant search terms are
used and the user finds what they are looking for. The diagram explains how
incorrect spelling in search queries can still produce correct results.

List the variants

-

Desk bed

-

Dess bed

-

Folding bed

Decide on the standard term

-

Desk bed

-

entry term

-

Dess bed

-

entry term

-

Folding bed

-

index term

Record the decision, with instructions

-

Desk bed

-

Use

Folding bed

-

Dess bed

-

Use

Folding bed

-

Folding bed

-

UF*

Desk bed
Dess bed

* UF = “use for”
Fig 25. Instructive diagram of correcting search terms, based on a diagram by Orna & Pettitt, 1980:61

85

The CDWA (Categories for the Description of Works of Art) is a metadata standard
designed for researchers of art history as well as staff who manage works of art (Kao
& Tsai, 2009: 26). CDWA includes around 540 categories and subcategories but a
small subset of categories are considered core in that they represent the minimum
information necessary to identify and describe a work (CDWA, 2013). Kao & Tsai
observe that, even though elements designed in the CDWA standard are able to
satisfy the archive management requirements of museums, differences in Chinese
and Western developments and in the characteristics of their collections have
caused differences in categories and definitions of elements when using metadata
(2009: 30).

In a collection of writings on issues to do with electronic records management,
Cumming (2005: 36) states that:
The application of appropriate metadata can help to maintain records and preserve their
structure, content, accessibility and meaning but, at a higher level, implementation of
metadata can also help testify to the authenticity of records....Because of their inherent
vulnerabilities and the threats that they face, it is critical that records are able to be
demonstrably valid and accountable chronicles of the business they document. Applying
metadata can help testify to the authenticity of records by documenting their effective
maintenance and management.

Wood-fisher argues that, in Cumming’s statement, the word “record” can be
replaced with “digital file” to equally apply to issues faced in digitisation projects.
Wood-fisher suggests “while authenticity is not a regulatory requirement in this
particular instance, demonstrable, effective documentation processes can only help
with finding solutions when problems do occur” (2012: 56).

86

3.5 Cataloguing
Once metadata has been created it can be organised into some type of catalogue to
help users locate items. According to Mortimer, cataloguing “is the preparation of
bibliographic information for catalog records” and consists of descriptive
cataloguing, subject cataloguing and classification (2007: 10). Descriptive cataloguing
describes an item and identifies and formats access points, subject cataloguing
determines the subject headings for an item in words and/or phrases and
classification determines the classification number for an item, which represents the
subject of the work in a number and/or letters (ibid). Catalogues are particularly
valuable when users are researching new areas and are unaware of the best sources
because a simple keyword search can locate all accounts of a word (Reid, 2000, p.
144). Chenhall & Vance argue “the only reason for creating any sort of artefact
record is to provide various individuals with information they will probably need to
carry out certain defined activities,” primarily information that assists in the ongoing
activities of a museum (2010: 44).

Having a set of rules for cataloguing provides consistency within a single library, as
well as between libraries, reduces time involved in cataloguing, provides ease of use
for library users and ensure that the purpose of the catalog is achieved (Mortimer,
2007: 11). However, Carini & Shepherd argue cataloguing systems limit the number
of fields and characters which can lead to difficulty in fully representing the
collection using note fields, while still having enough fields for added entries and
subject headings (Carini & Shepherd, 2004: 19).

Mortimer provides a useful diagram highlighting the cataloguing process, as shown
in Figure 26. The diagram considers the different situations where cataloguing
information is found and not found and provides solutions for both.

87

Fig 26. The cataloguing process (Mortimer, 2007)

88

Klijn and De Lusenet argue “a good description is the key to every collection; it
makes a photograph visible, for the researcher, the cataloguer or the occasional
visitor” (Klijn and De Lusenet, 2004: 7). They add that a catalogue provides a
photograph with context, because a photograph and its information belong
together, and that catalogues add extra meaning that cannot be seen in the image
alone. This can help users understand and interpret what they see and the catalogue
helps with searchability (ibid). According to Carini & Shepherd cataloguing is just one
aspect of archival description, which is the process of capturing, exchanging and
providing access to information about records (Carini & Shepherd). They describe a
‘finding aid’ as “any tool that assists with discovering and using archives and
manuscript materials,” such as repository guides or descriptive catalogue cards. This
is similar to Mortimer’s ‘access points.’

3.6 Archiving
In What are Archives? (2008) Craven declares that the issue of electronic records is
the most enduring challenge for archives and she draws a fundamental distinction
between paper records and electronic records: “With paper records, the paper (or
parchment or vellum) must be preserved, for this is the authentic record; with
electronic records, it is the information which must be preserved, for that is the
authentic record” (2008: 21). Craven does not define whether “electronic records”
refers to born digital material, digitised analogue material, or both. In contrast to
Craven, Kilbride argues that digital preservation is not just about data, access or risk
but it is about people and opportunities (2013). Whilst paper is subject to more
decay, electronic records do require a certain level of preservation in the form of
storage, hardware and software.

Johnson highlights 3 problem areas for a large archival digitisation project as:
navigation, context and search behaviour (2008: 145-146). On the topic of
navigation, Johnson says research shows that “users continue to find digital archives
difficult to navigate and search” (2008: 145) while Craven argues that new search

89

engines, digitised records and automatic indexing question the relevancy of
cataloguing and finding aids (2008: 21). On the topic of context, Johnson uses an
example from a digitisation study project in which it was observed that there was “a
lack of understanding that the digital object represented a ‘real’ object that could be
accessed locally” and as a result “users did not associate the digital object with a
‘real’ object [and therefore] contextualization of the object within a wider
perspective was poor” (2008: 146). This suggests that some users consider a digital
object as original or different and detached from the analogue original. On the topic
of search behaviour, Stevenson comments on the issue of users searching a library
catalogue online at home as opposed to visiting the library itself, saying: “users of
archives are increasingly physically remote” and “perceptions of access are now
shifting due to the increasing numbers of electronic resources available online, but it
is still the case that personal visits to repositories and physical contact with the
archives themselves are seen as the main goal in terms of user statistics, and
therefore in terms of the success of the record office” (2008: 91). Johnson rather
controversially comments “users lack the support of archivists in formulating
queries, identifying archival sources and interpreting and contextualizing the search
results” (2008: 153). Johnson does not specify what form of “support” she is
referring to.

A 2005 study by the Arts and Humanities Research Council found that archives,
museums and libraries are the most trusted information sources; however, the
sources most easily accessible are least trusted, such as the Internet, newspapers
and television, despite being most used (Usherwood, 2005). Craven rather
interestingly discusses the psychology of archival use. She claims that “paper records
have a set of ‘signs’ which we absorb automatically” and that “just as typefaces tell
us things about the meaning of the words they convey, the outward form of paper
records tells us about the significance and authority of the content within. A book
bound in red leather says ‘I’m important’” (2008: 22). In this case, it would seem as

90

though electronic records need cataloguing metadata for survival and use. 12 As for
electronic records, Craven claims they have no such signs of importance: “moreover,
in the digital context, characterized by the automatic transfer from an electronic
records management system (ERMS) to an archive’s digital storage and online
presentation system, rearrangement and description by an archivist is unlikely”
(ibid).

Johnson offers a useful set of questions for the manager of a digital archive project
to consult. In regards to the user, the managers must ask themselves who uses
digital archives and for what purposes and what are the motivational factors. As for
the information-seeking and retrieval process, managers must question how users
currently seek and retrieve information within a dynamic digital environment.
Managers must consider how to model the interaction between the user and the
digital archive to capture the “multidimensional context that exists in each
interaction” (Johnson, 2008: 147). In regards to translation of information, managers
must look at how to support the user in translating information to meet his or her
own specific information needs. Finally, managers must consider the wider
perspective: how do the findings from the work fit into the wider theoretical debate
within the subject field? These are all issues that should be considered prior to and
during the management of a project.

Oliver argues that archival records have enduring value as evidence of accountability
as well as intrinsic informational value for the present and the future. Oliver suggests
the three main influences on digitisation activities in archives are: “the changing
usage and user profile of archives; reformatting as a preservation strategy; and the
ability to crowdsource and harness ‘user power’” (2012: 49). Oliver points to the
popularisation of family history as a purpose and requirement for digitising archives,
however, issues can arise in that materials are removed from context in digital form
and, almost ironically, there can be increased demand for the originals.
12

Craven expands: “the archivist’s intervention here – putting the documents in order, describing
them and producing finding aids – simply reinforces this notion of importance, and gives the user an
indication of what to look at and where to start. Signs of conservation are similarly significant: ‘ooh,
this has been repaired: it must be valuable!’”(Craven, 2008: 22).

91

3.7 Oral History
The Ceramic Archive & Collection (CCA) has a large collection of oral history material
in a variety of formats, some of which is in the process of being digitised. Material
includes lectures and interviews with artists as well as paper materials of interview
transcriptions. Leavy comments that oral history is “a method of qualitative
interview that emphasizes participants’ perspectives, and generally involves multiple
open-ended interview sessions with each participant” and that it is “an effective
method for gaining in-depth knowledge from participants, from their perspective”
(ibid: 3-5). Therefore, material gained from interviews is a valuable source of
information.

Oral histories have advantages in that they contain distinctive information and they
complement traditional materials already held in LAMs (Weatherford Stevens &
Latham, 2009: 213). Tanner argues oral histories are “an especially powerful means
of connecting personal stories with digitised content to create a wider contextual
framework” and therefore “we can better understand or engage with a subject than
if they remain uncollected” (Tanner, 2012: 117). However, Tanner notes that the oral
history resources of the United Kingdom are a vast and untapped resource because
only a small quantity has been digitised.

Leavy highlights ontological13 and epistemological14 as the two main sets of
philosophical assumptions in relation to oral history and these guide methodological
decision making. Ontologically, oral history is based on a conception of research as a
process, not an event, while epistemologically; oral history positions the researcher
and participant in a collaborative relationship (Leavy, 2011: 7-8). The difference

13

An ontological position is based on assumptions about the nature of the social world and what can
be known about it. Ontological reflects answers to questions such as “what is the nature of social
reality?” and “how can social reality be studied?” (Leavy, 2011: 6).
14
An epistemological position is based on assumptions about the nature of the relationship between
the researcher and research participants and assumptions about how research should proceed.
Epistemological reflects answers to questions such as “how can we learn what we think we can
know?”, “who is a knowing party in the research process” and “what is the relationship between
researcher and participants?” (Leavy, 2011: 6).

92

between process and event is that an event is more end-focused and conclusive.
Leavy’s suggestion that oral history is a collaborative relationship somewhat
contradicts her statement that participants are privileged parties with valuable
knowledge to share; as this suggests an imbalance of power. It would seem the
balance of power is constantly tested in interviews with the interviewer’s success or
failure in acquiring information and the participant’s willingness to reveal
information.

Leavy argues that “because of the open-ended and unstructured nature of oral
history interviews, the participants have a lot of leeway to determine the content of
the interview sessions” (2011: 19). The level of participant control is determined by
the interviewer’s control through preparation, organisation and conversational
strictness. Memory and truth are two major issues in oral history interviews as well
as they can impact the quality of the content. Different interview strategies and
research methods have pros and cons and so certain questions should be considered
prior to selecting a method. Some of these questions include:


What kind of data are you interested in?



Do you have a specific topic about which you want to ascertain data?



How much background information are you interested in?



Do you have a specific list of questions you seek to gain responses to?



What size sample of participants are you seeking?



Do you need to seek similar data from all of the research participants?



Do you want to compare the responses of different participants? (Leavy, 2011: 14-15)

These questions are useful to keep in mind when preparing for an interview in order
to ensure control and organisation of the interview.

The digitisation of different materials, whether sound or image, seems to be unified
in the creation of separate files for preservation and access. A project to digitize
Jacksonville State University’s Houston Cole Library’s oral history collection used
.wav as preservation files and .mp3 as access files in a similar way to using tiff and
.jpeg for images. The .wav format was good for storage, editing and manipulation of
audio but it was large in size, while .mp3 was small in size and therefore “better
suited to the end users’ needs,” (Weatherford Stevens & Latham, 2009: 217) even
93

though there was some degradation in sound quality due to compression (ibid). The
files were uploaded to the web server with a main index page and secondary pages
for each interview and these were linked to fields in the bibliographic and holdings
records in the library’s catalogue.

3.8 Ceramics and Digitisation
This MPhil project was concerned with digitisation work on the CCA’s collection of
materials on the International Ceramics Festival (ICF), specifically the festival
programmes and demonstration videos. However, as the CCA has a large collection
of ceramic objects, it was deemed relevant to research digitisation work in ceramics.

In her book Ceramics, Frances Hannah makes reference to the use of technology in
the preservation of ceramics.15 Hannah advises the use of equipment, which, as of
2013, is considered commonplace and common sense, such as a hand-held magnifier
and a local light source, to “highlight the irregularities and textures of the surface”
(1986: 42). Although Hannah does not refer to digitisation or scanning, she does
refer to photography as a means of documentation: “photography used in
conjunction with the microscope can be an extremely useful method of
documenting unusual and interesting features” (1986: 43-44). Hannah discusses the
use of “energetic” x-ray technology16, claiming it can “penetrate materials normally
opaque to visible and ultraviolet radiation to produce a two-dimensional
representation of the internal three-dimensional structure.” However, the sense of
3D depth is lost on a 2D reproduction, which Hannah claims can be somewhat
overcome by taking views from different angles and comparing the various images
(1986: 45). Hannah’s observations can be read as a predecessor to, and history of,
the digitisation of ceramics. Hannah highlights a key issue in the digitisation of
ceramics: that 3D objects are not ideally represented with 2D digitsation. Therefore,
15

Hannah’s book was published in 1986 and both photographic and preservation technology has
significantly progressed since then, however, it is still interesting as a background to the use of
technology on ceramics.
16
“X-rays, which are of an even shorter wavelength than ultraviolet radiation, can be used to present
an image of an object on a sensitized photographic plate” (Hannah, 1986: 45).

94

3D scanning appears to be the best form of digitisation for ceramic objects. Hemsley
et al explain that a “High Resolution Laser Scanner simultaneously digitises the 3D
shape and colour of traditional museum objects and provides a maximum depth
resolution of 10 microns” (2005: 29).

The E-Curator project at University College London used 3D colour scans for remote
object identification and assessment (Hughes, 2012: 129). It created a prototype
application for 3D laser scanning of museum artefacts, which was tested by curators,
conservators and museum and heritage researchers. Hughes says a tool such as this
that aids in the analysis of temporal and spatial data allows the representation of
content in many formats (ibid). The Digital Michelangelo Project,17 which officially
began in January of 1997 and ended in 2000, utilizes laser scanning technology to
digitise sculptures and architectures from the Renaissance in Italy (Lu and Pan, 2010:
134), most famously, Michelangelo’s sculpture of David (c.1501-1504) and other
works. Zhou et al note a 3D laser scanner was used to “digitalise [sic] Michelangelo’s
works, including a 7.5 meter high of the David sculpture, which contains 2 billion
points, with accuracy of 50 micrometer” (2012: 7).

Creating abstractly and teaching simply insects: a collection in multiple dimensions
(2012) by Chamberlain was a project-based thesis that involved the use of a 3D
scanner to scan insects. Chamberlain commented that for one of the largest insects
in the world, “it seemed appropriate to make it even larger for a fun way to connect
to the kids. To do this, I used a 3-D scanner to create a digital copy so I could use a
rapid-prototype printer to make a replica” (2012: 6). On the practicality of the
project, Chamberlain noted:
One of the main objectives for me was to create the best possible representation of the
[28,000] specimens while keeping efficiency in mind. To put this into perspective, if it took
one minute per insect, the process to document all 28,000 would take 466 hours. This means
that to repeat some processes, such as 3- dimensional scanning, is just not feasible (2012: 3).

17

“The Digital Michelangelo Project was performed by Stanford University, the University of
Washington, and the Cyberware Corporation” (Lu and Pan, 2010: 134).

95

The project was a collaboration with the University of Iowa Museum of Natural
History’s 100-year-old insect collection which, upon becoming available to the
public, Chamberlain commented: “the photographs can be used in the future to
inform potential funding sources. It is a cycle: the potential funding sources make it
possible to improve the collection, reach more people” (2012: 16).

3D digitisation is not always a possibility, largely due to its cost, and in this case 2D
digitisation can suffice as a suitable alternative. Ceramics Digitisation Procedures
Guideline (2008) by Kao & Tsai is a highly instructive guide to the 2D digitisation of
ceramics. The guide overviews the preliminary operations of digitisation work, such
as planning the workflow and selecting objects, and describes the process of
ceramics imaging from artifact and equipment preparation to photographing and file
storage. Kao & Tsai instruct in the use of a still-life photography case for image
capturing (Figure 27). The guide explains how to establish metadata and related
tasks, including ceramics metadata fields using CDWA and DC. The rest of the guide
discusses equipment selection and costs, outsourcing, protection of content and
benefits and prospects of digitisation. The authors conclude that every step of the
digitisation process is closely linked with other steps and often lessons were learned
through trial-and-error (2008: 50).

Fig 27. The use of a still-life photography case for image capturing (Kao & Tsai, 2008: 21).

96

The Crafts Study Centre Digitisation Project (2000-2003) was collaboration between
the Surrey Institute of Art and Design, University College, the Crafts Study Centre
and VADS. It was funded by JISC to digitise 4,000 images of the collection and archive
and to produce six learning and teaching modules (Vacher, 2003). The resource was
delivered through the JISC-funded Visual Arts Data Service's (VADS) collections
repository so it could benefit from “interoperability with other collections hosted by
VADS and the work VADS is doing to promote the use of its collections for learning
and teaching” (JISC, 2013c). One challenge acknowledged on the project was a lack
of standardisation due to different people using different systems for cataloguing.
Another challenge encountered was that the “specialist” nature of the collection
could sometimes be compromised by the richness of the descriptive vocabulary in an
attempt for standardisation. The importance of documenting all the processes and
steps of the project was emphasised (Vacher, 2003).

Yin et al claim that after entering the 21st century, “the research and development of
computer hardware, communication engineering and sensor technology have put
forward more and new requirements on the quantity, quality, variety, conformation
and functions of functional ceramics” (2010: 345). Zhou et al observe that “the
digitalization of cultural heritage is the process of digitalizing the movable or
unmovable cultural heritage using contemporary remote-sensing and virtual
technologies to achieve 2D or 3D digital archiving, for the merits of protection,
reparation, restoration, and archaeological research” (2012: 2).

3.9 Relevant websites
The following is a list of websites for organisations that are of use and interest to
digitisation and ceramics. The organisations are variously interested in the
management, running and collaboration on digitisation projects and so they were
deemed relevant for researching digitisation work. Many of the organisations
provide services, suggestions, guidelines and tools that will be of continuous use and
interest beyond this project for long-term digitisation in the CCA.

97

The V&A (Victoria & Albert museum) Channel
Web address: www.vam.ac.uk/channel
The V&A Channel is the home for the films from the Victoria & Albert Museum, and
is a gateway to the museum’s leading programmes and collections. Cultureshock
Media created the channel in 2009, and continues to manage and produce its
content (Cultureshock Media, 2013). Users can search for video material by entering
a keyword search query or by browsing the 3 main themes of ‘People,’ ‘Things,’ and
‘Happenings’ (such as the latest news from the museum). Aside from video material,
users can go to the ‘Magazine’ section to view digital copies of back and current
issues of V&A Magazine. A keyword search for “ceramics” (Figure 28) produced 9
results in all 3 themes and results could be organised by date and popularity. When a
video from the ‘things’ theme is selected the user is linked to the ‘things’ area of the
website where the video is located. When watching videos (Figure 29), users are able
to play/pause, maximize to full screen, dim the rest of website, adjust volume and
embed the video elsewhere. Most videos are approximately 5-10 minutes long, shot
in high definition, and have subtitles. Each video page has a title and short
descriptive information about the video.

Fig 28. Screenshot: a search for “ceramics” on the V&A Channel, 2013

98

Fig 29. Screenshot: viewing a ceramics video on the V&A Channel, 2013

When viewing digital copies of V&A Magazine in the ‘Magazine’ section, users can
view the current issues, the recent issues and the back issues up to 2006. Upon
selecting an issue, users are provided with a title, such as ‘V&A Magazine:
Autumn/Winter 2013,’ a short description of the issue and a small thumbnail image
of the front cover (Figure 30). Below this, users can view the digital issue with similar
tools to the videos. Users are able to zoom in and out, scroll between pages,
maximize to full screen, dim the rest of the website and share the item elsewhere on
the internet (Figure 31). However, a keyword search for “ceramics” within the
‘Magazine’ section redirects the user to the 9 video results discovered previously.
This suggests users are unable to search solely within specific themes and the
website has a single search facility that broadly searches all the themes. This can
make it harder for users to find what they are looking for, however, as there were
only 9 results for “ceramics” this was not a challenge and perhaps it highlights a
need for more content on ceramics.

99

Fig 30. Screenshot: accessing the V&A Magazine Autumn/Winter 2013 on the V&A Channel, 2013

Fig 31. Screenshot: viewing the V&A Magazine on the V&A Channel, 2013

100

In a 2011 website review for Guardian newspaper the V&A channel was described as
a “strong addition” to the V&A website18 but it is not as integrated with other
sections of the website as well as it could be (Joseph, 2011). However, perhaps a
new addition to the website as of 2013, users are encouraged to ‘discover more at
the V&A’ and are provided with relevant links on the V&A website (Figure 32).

Fig 32. Screenshot: “discover more at the V&A” section of the V&A Channel website, 2013

JISC (Joint Information Systems Committee)
Web address: http://www.jisc.ac.uk/
In 1984, the Joint Academic Network (JANET) was set-up to provide universities and
research councils in the UK with access to a national research network for the first
time with a 9.6 kilobit data transfer rate. In 1990, it was identified that there was a
need for colleges and universities to communicate with each other and so a national
mailing list service was created. In 1991 the Information Systems Committee was
formed which took over the management and development of a fragmented
computer network service. JISC was subsequently created in 1993 to “provide vision
and leadership to universities, to stimulate innovation and fund research into
technology developments for the benefit of all universities and colleges” (JISC,
18

The main V&A website received marks of 22/25 for content, 23/25 for usability, 24/25 for branding
and 21/25 for monetization, giving it a total score of 90/100 (Joseph, 2011).

101

2013b) and to take on responsibility for managing the UK’s network infrastructure
for universities through JANET. The same year, the Follett Report19 was published
which recognised the need to support the library community into the digital age
including technical requirements and study space for teaching and research in
universities (Follett, 1993). In 1994 the JISC eLib (electronic library) programme was
developed to change the “culture of academic libraries,” develop the “librarian of
the future” and lay the cornerstones of JISC’s work in content development and
resource discovery (ibid).

Fig 33. Screenshot of the JISC website homepage, 2013

JISC publishes all of its material on its web pages, which allows the users to choose
the articles they are most interested in and download those. To JISC the benefit is
that they can update their web pages regularly to reflect the most current view on a
topic. JISC provides users with links to its associated websites where they can view
electronic journals and books, maps, learning and teaching resources, films and
images and resource discovery links. For example, JISC Journal Articles
A December 1993 report for: Higher Education Funding Council for England, Scottish Higher
Education Funding Council, Higher Education Funding Council for Wales, and Department of
Education for Northern Ireland.
19

102

(jiscjournalarchives.ac.uk) enables users to search over 4 million journal articles by
bringing together a selection of archives of key providers into a single place. JISC
Digital Media (www.jiscdigitalmedia.ac.uk) is a particularly useful website that
provides online resources and expert advice guidelines on finding, creating,
managing, delivery and using digital media. Users can enter keyword search queries
(Figure 34) or browse information by topic, such as digitisation (Figure 35).

Fig 34. Screenshot of search for “digitisation” on JISC Digital Media, 2013.

Fig 35. Screenshot of digitisation section on JISC Digital Media, 2013

103

DPC (Digital Preservation Coalition)
Web address: http://www.dpconline.org/
The Digital Preservation Coalition was established in December 2001 to foster joint
action to address the “urgent challenges of securing the preservation of digital
resources in the UK” and to work with others internationally to secure a global
digital memory and knowledge base (DPC, 2012a). It was launched officially in
February 2002. It is a not-for-profit membership organisation. The DPC describes
itself as: “An advocate and catalyst for digital preservation, enabling our members to
deliver resilient long-term access to content and services, and helping them derive
enduring value from digital collections” (DPC, 2012b).

Fig 36. Screenshot of DPC homepage, 2013.

104

The DPC have a set of core values for the publications they provide in order to
ensure respectability and reliability. The material on the DPC is downloadable and is
uploaded as a continuous series of updates rather than a discrete database. For
example, the DPC annual reports are uploaded yearly and new papers and
conference reports are uploaded as soon as possible. While the DPC focuses more
on digital preservation than digitisation itself, the two topics are closely related with
overlapping information. An example of access to the DPC’s Digital Preservation
handbook is shown in Figure 37.

Fig 37. Screenshot - accessing the DPC’s Digital Preservation handbook, 2013

105

VADS (Visual Arts Data Service)
Web address: http://www.vads.ac.uk/
Created by the University for the Creative Arts (London), VADS describes itself as
“the online resource for visual artists” (VADs, 2008a). It offers a number of digitised
collections from academic and cultural institutions across Britain. Users can easily
browse, search or use an advanced search tool. VADS accepts digital resources
created by, and of relevance to, visual arts education. A visit to the VADS “resources”
page shows a series of learning and teaching resources based around the VADS
image collections, written by subject specialist authors and lecturers. One such
resource featured well-known potter/ceramicist Bernard Leach (Figure 38). The
resource linked to biographical information on Leach with digitised images as well as
a “full catalogue record” of metadata information on the Leach article (Figure 39).

Fig 38. Screenshot- viewing “the life and work of Bernard Leach” on VADS, 2013.

106

Fig 39. Screenshot- full catalogue record for “the life and work of Bernard Leach” on VADS, 2013.

Most recently, in 2013, VADS has worked on a project entitled “Zandra Rhodes
Digital Study Collection” (ZRDSC).20 The project piloted a digitised collection of
design work belonging to fashion designer Zandra Rhodes as well as and an
accompanying Open Education Resource (OER), which VADs hosted on its website.
The project was a collaborative venture between the University for the Creative Arts
(UCA) and the Zandra Rhodes Studio and was funded by JISC as part of their Content
20

See http://zandrarhodesarchive.wordpress.com/about/,
http://www.zandrarhodes.ucreative.ac.uk/p/welcome.html and
http://www.vads.ac.uk/projects/index.html

107

programme between November 2011 and January 2013. On the study blog, the
project described itself as follows:
The Digital Study Collection will provide unique open online access to images of 500 of the
designer’s most iconic and landmark costumes… From this substantial collection of intriguing
and innovative fashion designs, 25 key works will be chosen to build an OER with the aim of
embedding it in learning and teaching. These 25 captivating digital images will be enriched by
primary and secondary source material in digital format (Zandra Rhodes Digital Study
Collection, 2013).

On the VADS page, the user has the option to “view all garments” or specific items
(fashion collections, objects, techniques, textile designs, fabrics) from the ZRDSC,
which are displayed in a format similar to that of online clothes shopping. Figure 40
shows an example of this, an image result for “Chinese Constructivist” textile design.
Users operate thumbnail images to viewer larger images that can be manipulated
with tools such as zooming and each object has its own record of metadata.

Fig 40. Screenshot of ZRDSC on VADS © Rhodes, 2013.

108

Users can also view digitised sketchbooks (Figure 41) belonging to Zandra Rhodes
however these are hosted on a separate website to VADS but still part of the UCA
website family (http://uca.onlineculture.co.uk/zandra_rhodes/). One engaging
feature of the digital material on this website is that when users move between the
digitised pages the pages are animated to turn in the fashion of a physical book.

Fig 41. Screenshot of Zandra Rhodes digitised sketchbooks© Rhodes, 2013

DCC (Digital Curation Centre)
Web address: http://www.dcc.ac.uk/
Funded by JISC, the DCC claims to be a “world-leading centre of expertise in digital
information curation with a focus on building capacity, capability and skills for
research data management across the UK’s higher education research community”
(DCC, 2013b). It provides access to a range of resources including how-to guides,
case studies, training programmes and online services. Material can be read both
directly on the website and via download. The DCC are committed to making all
information and resources on the website accessible to all users.
109

Fig 42. Screenshot – DCC homepage, 2013

The DCC explains that digital curation “involves maintaining, preserving and adding
value to digital research data throughout its lifecycle” and that “active management
of research data reduces threats to their long-term research value and mitigates the
risk of digital obsolescence” (DCC, 2013c). Whilst this project is not primarily
concerned with digital curation, ongoing work to digital material is still a relevant
issue and concern. A keyword search result for “digitisation” on the DCC website
offers numerous results, including a useful paper entitled “What is Digital Curation?”
by Abbott (2008). In relation to digital curation it discusses the short-term benefits
(persistent access, improved quality of data, authenticity checks, improved speed of
and range of access, etc.), the long-term value (preserving/protecting data,
encouraging re-use of data, the use of tools and services to migrate data, metadata
and other representation information into new formats, etc.) and the issues to be
considered (costly process in terms of time investment and expertise, an ongoing
process not a one-off action, best practice changes as new tools and standards are
developed, etc.) (2008).

110

Another interesting keyword search result for “digitisation” provides an overview of
the Storage and Archive Management (SAM) analysis tools created by PrestoSpace
free of charge (released in 2006). PrestoSpace was a project that ran from 2004 to
2008 to propose tools and strategies for an integrated approach to the preservation
of audiovisual materials. 21 SAM consists of three browser-based tools which aid in
planning for audio-visual digitisation projects. A storage calculator (Figure 43) allows
the user to input the types and volume of media in their collection and then
calculates how much bit storage will be necessary. A cost calculator allows the user
to input the types of media and an estimate of how much of the media is in a
deteriorated state and then calculates the cost of the digitisation project. A
preservation calculator uses the cost estimate to create a month-by-month project
plan.

Fig 43. Storage assessment calculator © PrestoSpace and System Simulation Ltd

21

The completion of the PrestoSpace project led to the PrestoPRIME project (2009-2012) which
developed the tools that are now made available online by the associated organisation PrestoCentre
(https://www.prestocentre.org/library/tools/storage-planning-tool-0)

111

DigiCULT (Digital CULTure)
Web address: http://www.digicult.info/pages/index.php
DigiCULT was a project set up to establish a regular technology watch for cultural
and scientific heritage in Europe for a 30-month period (2002-2004). It aimed to
benefit the Cultural Heritage sector “through monitoring and assessing existing and
emerging technologies that provide opportunities to optimise the development,
access to, and preservation of Europe's rich cultural and scientific heritage, within
the emerging digital cultural economy” (DigiCULT, 2005) The project discussed and
analysed current and future trends in several technology domains that were
identified as key areas during the DigiCULT study. In 2002 Salzburg Research 22
collaborated with the University of Glasgow on the DigiCULT project. The DigiCULT
Report (2002) provided recommendations for policy making in both the cultural
institutions themselves and the public authorities directly responsible for funding
those institutions. The 4 key recommendations for archives, libraries and museums
were identified as follows: (1) raise the competence in cultural heritage institutions,
(2) cooperation at all levels is key to marketing to new target groups, (3) strive to
better exploit your own strengths and core competencies and (4) become
methodical.

One issue discussed in the report was how small institutions can manage to
participate in the emerging information society. One curator of a small institution
commented:
I feel the lack of employee expertise in technological areas is one of the most pressing
problems for adoption of new technologies… In a small institution, where no staff are hired
specifically to perform these functions, the responsibility falls on individuals to develop
policies and programs often with scant knowledge of development in other cultural
institutions. - Geoff Barker, University of Sydney, Macleay Museum, (The DigiCULT Report,
2002: 15).

This is of particular relevance to the CCA as a small institution that needs to be
aware of its limitations in terms of financing projects and staff time and training. The
DigiCULT report noted that models, guidelines and best practices for digitisation
22

The Salzburg Research website (http://www.salzburgresearch.at) shares a number of online
publications in the areas of digitisation and the applications of information technology.

112

needed to consider scalability in order to be appropriate for small institutions with
less resources (2002: 39). It was noted that an “estimated 95% of all cultural
heritage institutions in Europe are not in the position to participate in any kind of
digital cultural heritage venture” due to a lack of financial resources, and a shortage
of staff, skills and technology (ibid: 47). DigiCULT experts suggested setting up
regional information centres that would help small organisations develop basic skills.
This concept reflects the work of the PCW, which has its own “ambassador centres”
for digitisation around Wales that hold a number of scanners and laptops for
digitisation work. The PCW staff travel around Wales holding sessions on digitisation
and specifically seek out smaller groups to work with. DigiCULT also suggested that
small institutions should get on-board with larger projects and initiatives and they
could “piggy-back” with experienced cultural organisations in common projects to
foster knowledge transfer (ibid: 50-51). An example of this would be this MPhil
project in which knowledge is acquired from the NLW and applied to the CCA. The
suggestion that the state could finance only selected initiatives (ibid:123) reflects the
application process of the Arts Council of Wales, which funds the CCA.

Association of Research Libraries (ARL)
Web address: http://www.arl.org/
ARL is a US-based group that provides several relevant resources via its website,
such as reports, briefs and presentations in the field of library studies. There is some
material available in relation to digitisation, along with ‘SPEC-kits’ which contain the
up-to-date information on the latest issues of concern to libraries and librarians. The
Managing Digitisation Activities SPEC-kit (2006) investigates the digitisation efforts
of libraries, the organisational structures used to manage digital initatives,
management of staff, the allocation and origins of funding, outsourcing and the
assessment of digital activities (Mugridge, 2006). There are numerous digitisation
statistics which are useful for decision-making, such as organisational charts, mission
statements, policies and procedures, and selection criteria. Another SPEC-kit,
Managing Born-Digital Special Collections and Archival Materials (2012), explores
the tools, workflow and policies that archive and special collections staff use to
manage, process and provide access to born-digital materials (Nelson et al, 2012).
113

The SPEC-kit Digital Image Collections and Services (2013) examines how research
libraries and their parent institutions have responded to the transition from analog
to digital images. It includes examples of digital image collection websites, finding
aids, image use training materials, copyright and use rights policies, selection
policies, descriptions of digital image service points, and digital collection
promotional materials (Kandiuk, Lupton & Davidson, 2013).

MINERVA EC (MInesterial Network for Valorising Activities in digitisation,
eContentplus)
Web address: http://www.minervaeurope.org/about/minervaec.htm
A 2005 report by the Commission of the European Communities, “i2010 – A
European Information Society for growth and employment,” promoted an open and
competitive digital economy, emphasised ICT as a driver of inclusion and quality of
life and aimed towards an integrated approach to information society and audiovisual media policies in the EU. MINERVA was a “Thematic Network in the area of
cultural, scientific information and scholarly content” that brought together
stakeholders and experts from all over Europe to support the 2005 report by the
Commission of the European Communities (MINERVA, 2012). MINERVA aimed to
improve accessibility to and visibility of European digital culture resources and
contribute to increase the interoperability between existing networks. The project
supported both public and private organisations that create/collect/own digital
content, as well as universities, schools and private citizens. MINERVA had many
partners throughout Europe, with the Museums, Libraries and Archive Council (MLA)
its main partner in the UK. Other organisations involved in the UK include: CYMAL,
British Library, British Museum, JISC, National Council on Archives, National Library
of Scotland, UKOLN and the Victoria and Albert Museum. The MINERVA website
provides access to many useful resources, including, digitisation guidelines, IPR
(Intellectual Property Rights) guidelines, good practices in digitisation, technical

114

guidelines for digital cultural content creation programmes, quality principles for
websites and the European and National rules on web applications.23

AHDS (Arts and Humanities Data Service)
Web address: http://www.ahds.ac.uk/creating/index.htm

The AHDS was a national service in the UK funded by JISC and the AHRC (Arts and
Humanities Research Council) that ended in 2008. It aimed to promote, preserve and
collect the electronic resources that resulted from research and teaching in the arts
and humanities. Information continues to be made available through online
catalogues. The management of the AHDS is spread out geographically between
various universities around Britain. The AHDS was involved in numerous projects,
including: the DAAT (Digital Asset Assessment Tool), which aimed to develop a digital
preservation assessment tool for use within the UK Higher Education/Further
Education and research, learning and teaching communities, the NeMLA (Northeast
Modern Language Association), which aimed to produce a range of supplier training
courses within the digitisation sector, and the Digital Images Archiving Study which
investigated the way digital image files were preserved and determined archiving
methodologies and future research possibility (for both ‘born digital’ and digitised
images).

The AHDS offers some useful publications relevant to the topic of digitisation such as
guides to good practice, case studies and depositing guidelines. On the AHDS
website there is a useful page called “Acronym Buster” (Figure 44) which explains
the acronyms of institutions, organisations, projects and services. However, it does
not explain technical acronyms and instead links the user to a different website
(whatis.techtarget.com/).

23

British are rules available at
http://www.minervaeurope.org/eu_nat_webapplications/unitedkingdom.html

115

Fig 44. Screenshot – AHDS Acronym Buster, 2013

A search within the Visual Arts field for “Guides to Good Practice” produces two
documents. One document entitled “Creating Digital Resources for the Visual Arts”
(2000) was produced by VADS and TASI (Technical Advisory Service for Images, now
JISCDigitalMedia). It highlights examples of practice in the creation of digital
information in the visual arts domain and makes recommendations for best practice
in data creation, collection, description, delivery and preservation. The second
document, entitled “Creating and Using Virtual Reality: a Guide for the Arts and
Humanities,” (2002) was also made by VADS in collaboration with the ADHS. It
concentrates on an accessible desktop virtual reality which may be distributed and
viewed online and is concerned with the variety of virtual reality models that may be
produced and how to ensure that these can be delivered successfully to users and
preserved for future reuse.

Ariadne
Web address: http://www.ariadne.ac.uk
Ariadne is an online magazine for professionals within the field of information
studies in Higher Education based in the UK and worldwide. Ariadne was formed in
1996 as part of the eLib Programme and was provided by JISC and the Innovation
Support Centre until July 2013 when it was taken over by the University of Bath
Library. It originally reported on developments within the UK Electronic Libraries

116

Programme (eLib) although it now also reports on JISC-funded programmes and
services as well as other developments within the UK and abroad. A keyword search
for ceramics produces many results, including a 2013 article by Garrett et al which
describes the exploration of the importance and nature of research data in the visual
arts and the requirements for their appropriate curation and preservation. Garret et
al use the 2011-2013 KAPTUR project funded by JISC and led by VADS as an example.
KAPTUR sought to investigate the nature of the visual arts research data and develop
and apply a model of best practice. One challenge observed was the lack of a
comprehensive technical solution, which addresses the needs and behaviour of
visual arts researchers and research teams, and meets the requirements of curators,
institutions, funders and the wider community (Garrett et al, 2013).

Fig 45. Screenshot – Garret et al article on Ariadne, 2013.

117

3.10 Reflections on the Literature Review
Practical problems were encountered in carrying out this literature review. Firstly, it
was challenging to find sources that usefully considered more than one of the areas
that needed to be covered. For example, books and articles exist on the subjects of
ceramics (Rawson 1971, Hannah 1986, De Waal 2003) and digitisation (Hughes 2003,
Sitts 2000, Youngs 2012) but there appeared to be very little which made links
between the areas. Many search results for ceramics, digitisation were a scientific
analysis of ceramic materials (Carr, 1993). Also, sources about digitisation tended to
be published more recently than sources about ceramics; however, ceramics had
more longevity in research.

Secondly, when writing the literature review for this project, the line between
methodology and subject could be blurred due to the nature of the MPhil. For
example, VADS (the Visual Arts Data Service) was reviewed as both an exemplar
database of sources for this project and as a public resource of digital images.
Likewise, JISC (Joint Information Systems Committee) provided much useful
knowledge on how and why digitisation occurs but it was also researched as a funder
of digitisation projects.

As Hart suggests, “all reviews, irrespective of the topic, are written from a particular
perspective or standpoint of the reviewer” and that, consequently, “the particularity
of the reviewer implies a particular reader.” (Hart, 1998: 25). Comparing or
synthesizing arguments can be difficult when, for example, two authors could
approach the same topic but from different subject origins, such as digitisation in
museums and digitisation within hospitals.

Another difficulty is that because technology continues to advance so rapidly, books
and journals written before a certain date are somewhat obsolete, apart from being
useful in historical analysis. Therefore the researcher tried to find sources published
since the early 2000s to ensure up-to-date information was acquired.

118

These limitations identified a gap in the specific subject of digitisation of ceramic
materials, which was taken as a justification for this research project.

3.11 Chapter Summary
Digitisation is still a progressing field. Historically speaking digitisation is
comparatively new to other fields of study but it is advancing quickly due to the
rapid developments in technology from which it was born. Since the 21 st-century
digitisation has become a primary focus particularly for LAMs that want to preserve
collections and provide access to the collections. This has resulted in the
establishment of numerous digitisation organisations and projects. However, due to
broad variety and unpredictability of analogue materials, there is still no one-way to
digitise and perhaps there never will be just one-way.

There are many reasons why digitisation is undertaken. Some of the main reasons
include: to save physical space, to preserve items, for educational benefit, for
analysis of items, to encourage tourism, to deepen and broaden access to items and
to increase income.

As for the actual process of digitisation, there are many different aspects to consider
before, during and after the work. Selection of materials is crucial as it ties-in with
issues such as funding, staff training, accessibility of equipment, user requirements
and availability of information. Instructive guides to digitisation are useful
documents for assisting beginners through all stages of digitisation work as well as
for reference for regular digitisation workers to maintain uniformity. However, there
are a number of different guides available and so research must be done to ensure
digitisation is continually done with accuracy.

Digitisation can have a large impact on an organisation and this must be considered
prior to deciding to undertake digitisation work. Finance is a major issue, particularly
in the economic climate of 2013, because digitisation demands money for

119

equipment, training, time and continuing maintenance. However, institutional
collaboration, outsourcing and funding programmes can solve this issue. Digitisation
has an impact on the way different users interact with a collection but this can
potentially generate income for an institution.

Metadata and cataloguing are important components that support digital material.
Metadata aids users in understanding digital material. There are several different
types and schemas of metadata, such as DC, MARC and XML, but when one is
appropriately chosen it must be adhered to for consistency. Catalogues work with
metadata to aid users in discovering digital material and, again, consistency and
clarity are important.

Archiving has been changed a great deal by the advent of digitisation. Analogue
materials in archives can be digitised to increase access and save physical space and
the analogue materials are subsequently better preserved. However, archives must
evaluate how they interact with users as a result of digitisation. Oral history can be
valuable and unique material when it is carefully planned and strictly conducted. The
digitisation process of audio and video material is somewhat similar to that of
images, but an issue with oral history is attracting users.

Ceramics have been exposed to different technologies for study, analysis and
preservation. Until the development of 3D scanning, the digitisation of ceramics was
limited to 2D reproduction, which was not perfect in representing the nature of the
3D objects, however, 2D reproduction can suffice as a practical and cheap
alternative.

A number of different websites were included that were considered to be of
continuous use during and beyond this MPhil project. Some of the websites were
inspirational examples of how different digital material can be offered to users in
collaboration with metadata. Other websites provide useful guides to digitisation
and reviews of digitisation projects, as well as offer digitisation services and
consultation.
120

Chapter 4: Acquisition of Knowledge for this Research
This chapter incorporates the different sources of knowledge of digitisation work
acquired by the researcher during the research period. All of these sources are
different in nature but they have all contributed towards further understanding and
applications of digitisation. The primary source of knowledge is the work experience
at National Library of Wales, however other sources come in the form of reports,
observations, courses and notes. The majority of objectives outlined in section 1.4
regard to the acquisition of different knowledge and these objectives are fulfilled in
this chapter. Chapter 5 explains how the acquired knowledge was applied to the CCA
and Chapter 6 discusses and reflects upon the transfer of knowledge. The researcher
chose to write this chapter in first-person narrative in order to best describe the
experiences of acquiring knowledge.

4.1 Work Experience at National Library of Wales: the
Digitisation, Description and Legacy Acquisitions Section
(Strand A) and the People’s Collection Wales (Strand B)
Dates: November 2012 – February 2013

4.1.1 Introduction
As part of my MPhil project I undertook approximately 3-months of work experience
at the National Library of Wales (NLW) in order to acquire knowledge on the
fundamentals of digitisation and metadata. Encouraged by my supervisor at NLW,
Professor Lorna Hughes, I considered three specific aspects of the topic while I
underwent my work experience: (1) why we digitise, (2) how we digitise and (3) the
impact of digitisation. It was useful to keep these three points in mind while I
performed tasks and spoke with members of staff. During the work experience I
always kept in mind the fact that the NLW was a large-scale institution, whilst the

121

Ceramic Collection & Archive (CCA) was a small-scale institution, and therefore there
would be both obvious and subtle differences in scope, potential and practicality of
digitisation.

During the course of my work experience at NLW it was suggested that I should
undertake two strands of work. Strand A consisted of my work with the Digitisation,
Description and Legacy Acquisitions Section, primarily the Digitisation Services Unit
and the Digitisation Metadata Unit. Strand A involved learning by using equipment,
observing work and talking to staff. Strand B consisted of my work with PCW, which
involved the same tasks Strand A, as well as attending public workshops on
digitisation and running my own digitisation project with Merched y Wawr
Llanfarian. As shown in Tables 10 and 11, I was provided with a document that
outlines my training schedule and the relevant staff involved.
Strand A: Digitisation, Description and Legacy Acquisitions Section
Planning

Digitisation Metadata Unit (Lyn Lewis Dafis)

Digitisation workflow

Digitisation Metadata Unit (Rhys Davies)
Digitisation Services Unit (Scott Waby)

Benchmarking

Digitisation Metadata Unit (Rhys Davies)
Digitisation Services Unit (Scott Waby)

Material preparation &

Collection Care & Digitisation Services Unit (Scott Waby)

conservation
Scanning

Digitisation Services Unit (Julia Thomas)

TEI Text-Encoding Initiative

Digitisation Metadata Unit (Morfudd Nia Jones)

Long-term Preservation

Systems Unit (Glen Robson)

Project Management

Rob Phillips, WEWW1 Project Manager

Online Publishing

Web Unit (Dylan Wyn Jones)

File Management

ICT Section (Owain Pritchard)

IPR and Licensing

Public Services Department - Rights and Information
Manager (Dafydd Tudur)
Table 10. NLW work experience schedule: Strand A

122

Strand B: People’s Collection of Wales
Introduction to past projects

PCW Offices

Digitisation workshop

Cardigan

Digitising WW1 materials

PCW Offices

Introduction to metadata

PCW Offices

Merched y Wawr Llanfarian collection - introduction

NLW conference room

Digitisation workshop

Llangrannog Urdd

Merched y Wawr Llanfarian collection - scanning

PCW Offices

Digitisation workshop

Aberystwyth Town Library

Merched y Wawr Llanfarian collection - metadata

PCW Offices

Merched y Wawr Llanfarian collection - meeting

NLW conference room

Table 11. NLW work experience schedule: Strand B

4.1.2 Induction
I was given an induction into the NLW by the Human Resource team as part of a
group of new staff members, which included another research student and library
volunteers. We were given presentations on the history and aims of the NLW as well
as health and safety instructions and a guided tour around the building. I was also
given a staff card so I could access the building. I then met with Scott Waby (SW),
Manager of the Digitisation Services Unit (DSU), who guided me around his
department. We discussed my project and his plans for my work experience,
however, he explained that the NLW was currently being restructured and
departments were relocating and as a result there were some delays to my work
schedule. Afterwards I met with Carys Morgan (CM), Project Officer at PCW, who
guided me around her department. We discussed my project and her plans for my
work experience. Finally I met Lyn Lewis Dafis (LLD), Head of Digital Development,
who provided me with the training schedule as indicated in Tables 10 and 11.

123

4.1.3 Strand A: Digitisation, Description and Legacy
Acquisitions Section

4.1.3.1 Meeting with Lyn Lewis Dafis (LLD), Head of Digital
Development
I met with LLD who introduced me to the history and the current situation of
digitisation at NLW. The NLW began digitisation on a small scale without much
knowledge. There were 2 small projects; one the “Campaign!” exhibition and the
other an “inventory” cataloguing project. The success of these two projects would
determine whether the NLW would focus their digitisation on temporary exhibitions
or permanent collections. A project cataloguing framed works of art proved more
successful and suitable, and so digitisation became a core function of the NLW.
The NLW was one of the first institutions to mainstream digitisation as a core
function of work. Typically in the UK, digitisation had occurred as a project, meaning
it was temporary. The downside to running digitisation as a project is that the skills
and knowledge gained by staff were lost upon completion of the project. By running
digitisation as a core function, the NLW ensured the knowledge and skills of staff
were fostered and improved.
There are three reasons why the NLW digitises:
1. Access of material (users are able to access material from any computer).
2. Preservation of material.
3. Income generation.
The NLW’s main reason for undergoing digitisation was for access. The institution
was keen to modernize itself and to appear relevant. Contemporary internet users
had high expectations due to the fast-developing nature of technology and
programmes such as Google Books reinforced the popularity and need for
digitisation. Another driver for digitisation was the government, which wanted
institutions to provide e-services to citizens. On the digitisation of born-digital

124

material, LLD noted this is described as “re-formatting.” LLD describes the main
‘prongs’ to digitisation as:
1. Prioritisation
2. Selection
3. Significance
4. Rights/legal
5. Technical/practical
All of these prongs are subject to difficulties and challenges. For example, in the
NLW, priority is for material in Welsh or about Wales, and therefore non-Welsh
material, no matter how interesting, needs extra justification if it is selected at all. As
previously discussed, significance and relevance can be subject to objective and
subjective judgements. As for technical/practical issues, digitisation may not even
be possible for certain materials, and new technology may need to be invented.

The term “mass digitisation” means that everything in a specific class is digitised, and
not just a selection of items. This raises an ethical issue with the question “who is to
decide what is important and what is not?” Different researchers consider different
information valuable. It is the job of the NLW to provide all the information a
researcher might need. If the NLW were to be selective this would not be sustainable
or useful. Archive material, for example, makes more sense as a whole; if a few
random pages are selected from an archive they have little meaning without the
other pages. Another ethical concern is that the majority of contemporary users and
buyers in the music industry, for example, automatically choose digital material over
analogue material. LLD questions whether or not this will or should happen to books,
journals, and similar material. Digitisation and technology such as Kindles and iPads
make readable material more available in a digital format. However, as a result, the
use of analogue materials may decline and libraries could become mere storage
facilities. Perhaps analogue materials have the potential to become shadows to their
own digital copies.

Figure 46 shows the main units relevant to my project, as described by LLD. The
Digitisation Metadata Unit and the Digitisation Services Unit are the main two units
125

in the Collections Department; the difference between the two units being that the
latter is where the scanning itself occurs. The NLW produces Digitisation Strategy
documents to outline and overview its aims and intentions with digitisation and this
acts as a point of reference and an instructive guide. The major plans in the NLW are
decided by the Board of Trustees (directly) and by the government (indirectly). The
government appoints approximately half of the trustees on the board and is the
largest contributor of funds. The NLW is a registered charity and has a “2020 vision”
long-term plan. The plan tries to identify the most significant factors – economic,
political, social and technological – that are likely to affect the Library up to 2020 and
it suggests how the library itself will develop over the same period.

NLW Departments:

Public

Services

Collections

Digitisation, Description and
Legacy Acquisitions Section

Other
Sections

Digitisation
Metadata Unit

Digitisation
Services Unit

Other Units
Fig 46. An overview of relevant departments in the NLW

126

4.1.3.2 Digitisation Workflow
I met D. Rhys Davies (RD) who guided me around the Digitisation, Description and
Legacy Acquisitions Section. RD introduced me to the “Welsh Experience of World
War One” (WEWW1) project and the staff working on it. RD overviewed the
workflow procedure for conducting digitisation work. The workflow at the NLW
Digitisation Services Unit (DSU) is regulated by the specially designed database,
Wombat. Wombat was initially designed by CASIS (Centre for Advanced Software
and Intelligent Systems) at Aberystwyth University for NLW with further
development undertaken by the NLW. Wombat is completed with the decisions
made at the project benchmarking meeting. Prior to a benchmarking meeting,
archival materials are removed from their permanent storage and into the
intermediate storage area. This storage area acts as a halfway house between the
controlled conditions of the permanent store and the warmth of the digitisation
studio. The workflow (Figure 47) was followed so that each part of it was learnt
completely and separately either by practical work or discussions with staff. This was
so that I was clear about where each part of the workflow began and ended. My
practical work experience focused on the digitisation and metadata stages of the
workflow. Prior to my work experience, materials had already been gathered as part
of the WEWW1 project and DSU had selected a box of materials for me to work on.

127

Obtain copyright
clearance

Select archival
materials to be
digitised

Hold a benchmark
meeting

Start the
workflow on the
database

Metadata writing

Digital objects
quality check

Digitise archival
materials

Conservation
processes

Complete the metadata
and attach the digital
object to the record

Publish the catalogue
record with the digital
object attached

If required make an
exhibition to introduce the
collection using the Web
design software

Fig 47. DSU’s digitisation workflow

4.1.3.3 Benchmarking
I met with RD and SW to discuss benchmarking. This is when different sections
involved in the digitisation process have a meeting to look at an object or a sample
of objects from a collection to decide how the digitisation work should be
implemented. A sample collection is used instead of looking at every object in a
collection because this saves time. For example, a hundred newspapers from the
same publisher are likely to require the same work. However, some objects from a
collection may be singled out for specific instructions for differing from the rest of
the collection. This is noted in the Project Outline document that is completed during
the benchmarking meeting.

I sat in on a benchmarking meeting for the WEWW1 project with the Project
Manager, Rob Phillips (RP), and 3 other staff from different sections. During the
meeting staff discussed preservation treatments, storage, handling of archival
materials, use of equipment, as well as to agree a timetable of actions for the

128

completion of the project. The agreed actions were recorded and circulated so that
all involved in the project are aware of the commitment and processes required for
completion. This meeting was useful for me to understand the current state of the
WEWW1 project and I became aware of limitations and pressures, such as the time
restraints on a project. Another issue was that, as the digitisation work progresses
around different sections, one section couldn’t begin work until another section had
completed their part of the process. RP explained to me that this was always taken
into consideration and so staff were kept occupied with different projects to avoid
time wasting.

RD highlighted some of the problems that can occur during benchmarking. For
example, books usually have two double-sided pages and archival documents have
one single-sided page. Occasionally this may be different and an archival document
may have two sides. This can become a problem when the benchmarking document
instructs you to specifically “scan one side of every document,” for instance. If you
were to scan both sides of this archival document, the title of each file would read:
“p. 33, recto” and “p. 33 verso” (for example). This would then be out of line with
every other title in the collection, which would read: “p. 31, recto,” “p. 32, recto”
and “p. 34 recto,” due to having only one side. However, these special circumstances
are noted in the benchmarking document to instruct the digitiser to scan both sides
despite the main instructions.

4.1.3.4 Material Preparation: Pagination
I was given a box of documents from the WEWW1 collection that contained a
manuscript, letters, postcards and government documents. The box contained a
document that outlined what was supposed to be inside. I used this to crossreference while I worked and I noted its usefulness if an item was missing from the
box. I was asked to paginate the documents in preparation for scanning. This
involved lightly numbering each side of a document with a pencil and the number

129

needed to be in the top-right hand corner on every page. Although this seems easy,
it took concentration to ensure correct numerical order. In perspective of the whole
digitisation process, the pagination stage will later guide a person through scanning
every page of an item. The page number translates to part of the file name of the
scan and therefore the physical page and the digitised page can be cross-referenced.

As I worked I encountered some exceptions and alterations to the pagination
process. One issue was that certain pages had limited free space in the top-right
hand corner due to the content and in this case I was instructed to paginate as near
as possible to the top-right corner. Another issue was that not every part of certain
items required pagination, for example, the leather cover of the manuscript.
Although the front cover (FC), inside front cover (IFC), inside back cover (IBC) and
back cover (BC) are scanned, they are not paginated and instead of page numbers in
the file name they are given: FC, IFC, IBC and BC, respectively.

4.1.3.5 Using “Wombat”
After paginating the materials in the box I was introduced to Wombat, the NLW’s
digitisation workflow system, which involves each unit or section involved in the
digitisation process to complete and sign-off their involvement in the stages of
digitising each item. At the stage of post-pagination my task was to type in the URI
(Uniform Resource Identifier) into Wombat for each item I had paginated. It was
important to consciously enter each URI to ensure they were numerically accurate.
One digital item is allocated one URI, which is a sequence of numbers and, or, letters
that uniquely identifies a resource (Berners-Lee, Fielding, & Masinter, 2005: 1). The
URI was a 3-letter and 5-number code significant to the WW1 project. When
entering items into the workflow it is important to leave a gap between groups of file
numbers as they are allocated. These gaps allow for the insertion of extra scans if,
during the digitisation process, it is discovered that particular features would benefit
from being scanned separately. Additionally by running a check to see where there

130

are gaps in the numbering highlights where scans could have been missed or, where
the beginning and end of sections are. For example, the URIs for Manuscript A run
from “11020” to “11083” and the URIs for Manuscript B run from “11090” to
“11147.” There is a numerical gap of 7 between the end of Manuscript A and the
beginning of Manuscript B.

Consult project
outline document

Paginate the
analogue materials

Note any missing or
damaged items

Pass on the materials
for the next stage

Complete the
workflow database

Fig 48. DSU’s “Wombat” workflow

4.1.3.6 Scanning
I was introduced to Julia Thomas (JT), from the DSU, who gave me a tour around the
different scanners. There were a dozen scanners in total and each one catered to a
specific material, such as film, glass plates and maps. The scanners were all large,
high-tech pieces, different to the flatbed scanner I was used to, but I was excited to
use them.

I was instructed to take the manuscript I had paginated from the WEWW1 collection
to use for scanning. The scanner I used was a flatbed scanner commonly used for
photographs and postcards. It had a tracking overhead Charge Coupled Detector or

131

Device (CCD), which was essentially a large camera pointing down on the bed, with a
plate of glass in between. There was also a balancing apparatus on the bed which
allowed the manuscript spine to sit flat on the bed. Each page of the manuscript had
to be set up individually against a neutral background and in this case the
background was a uniform grey. To show that the colours represented in the scan
were consistent a greyscale patch was included in each scan. These shades were
used to measure the values of the colours being produced by the scanner as they
appear on the monitor, before the scan is accepted. The camera head of the scanner
passed over the area of the scan, then displayed it on the monitor. When it was
accepted the scan was transferred to the allocated folder space without any further
processing.

Firstly, I needed to scan the leather front cover of the manuscript. I always clicked
“preview” before I scanned, to ensure the scan was correct. Using the computer, I
opened photoshop and imported the scan from scanner. The manuscript was much
smaller than the scanner so, using the scanner settings, I cropped the location of the
manuscript on the scanner in order to scan the required area and to save time. Once
I was happy with the preview, I scanned the front of the manuscript. The actual
scanning took longer than the preview scanning, as it was higher quality. Following
this, I cropped the scanned image on photoshop, allowing a small margin
surrounding the manuscript. The image was saved as a .tiff file and uploaded to
Wombat with a URI and the title “FC” (Front Cover).

I repeated this process for the whole manuscript, with the titles: “IFC” (Inside Front
Cover), “P1, P2…” (Page 1, Page 2…), “IBC” (Inside Back Cover), “BC” (Back Cover),
and “S” (Spine). Like the pagination and URI tasks, this process was repetitive but it
was important to ensure I did not lose track of my process. Instead of uploading to
Wombat after each scan I was advised to upload a dozen at a time to save time.
Something I questioned whilst scanning the manuscript was whether or not the
reverse of the spine (the page edges) would be scanned. I asked JT who informed me
that the reverse spine is rarely scanned but it would be if there was potentially
relevant information on it. On Wombat I “signed off” the scanning process and the
132

scans were sent off to the next section in the Wombat digitisation workflow.
Another person carried out quality assurance of the digital objects on Wombat as
they would not be as familiar as I with the manuscript as so would be more objective
when noticing errors. Any corrections that were required were made by adjusting
the digital image until it was satisfactory.

Create a preview
scan

Check the preview
is suitable

Create the scan

Repeat for each
item

Complete the
workflow
database

Save to the
designated folder
as a .tiff file

Quality
assessment

Create copies for
viewing as .jpeg
files

Save to allocated
folder

Fig 49. DSU’s scanning instructions

Training to use the scanners to the expected standard of output began with direct
supervision of me adjusting the digital items sourced from the manuscript. Mistakes
were pointed out and suggestions on how to make suitable corrections were made
then and there so that the difference the adjustments made could be seen
immediately. This method of training made use of the fact that people working in
this field have strong visual skills and that what are small differences to most, appear
large to them. It is also an example of student-centred learning as it acknowledges
that making mistakes is part of the learning process.

133

4.1.3.7 Metadata
During a digitisation project metadata is used to control the workflow. The metadata
collected is used to fulfill several purposes, some of these include: to complete
catalogue data, to locate the digital object, to control the digital object, to control
the collection, and to preserve the digital objects. Metadata writing was learned by
analyzing a metadata spreadsheet, completing a tracking sheet and discussing the
work with staff. Feedback was given on the mistakes I made and how to avoid them
in future. On reflection I observed that the key to successfully carrying out metadata
writing is being methodical to ensure that all the fields on the MARC forms are
completed accurately.

In the NLW the catalogue records are written using AACR2 (Anglo-American
Cataloguing Rules 2) rules in MARC records. MARC records provide a standardised
layout of information. Main entry forms for each format of material are created with
as much information as possible. Digital objects are added to the relevant main entry
via an added entry form, which translates to catalogue entry on the website. AACR2
is a standard for writing catalogues. It controls specific details such as whether to
place a full stop after the word ‘Mrs’. These rules offer consistency of entries and
make it easier for a user to scan the detail in a catalogue. It also enables precise
automated searching for specified entries because machines cannot ‘see’ variation
(Rowley & Hartley, 2008: 72).

In order to conduct some metadata writing I was provided with a new box of
materials from the WEWW1 collection, which contained military photographs. I did
not continue working with the manuscript at this stage because staff wanted me to
experience handling a different type of material (photographs).

Each photograph already had an Accession Number (AN) written on the reverse with
a soft pencil, e.g. “PZ5185/21.” The AN is an alphanumeric code that associates a
photograph with a certain group of other related photographs. Many photographs

134

had writing on the back which would also need to be scanned and so the AN was
carefully written in the top-right hand corner. The metadata spreadsheet listed a
photograph’s AN, as well as information such as box number, title, description, date
and LCN (Library Catalogue Number). When users search for something the LCN
links the library catalogue to the metadata spreadsheet. Figure 50 shows the LCN as
“vtls…”

I created a tracking sheet which contained the AN, the LCN and a new Individual
Identifier (ID). The ID was made up of 3 letters and 5 numbers specific to the project.
The 3 letter code can be taken from the title initials of the collection, but it needs to
be unique. For my photographs the 3 letter code was “ARJ” followed by 5 numbers
ascending from 00001 (Figure 50). A list of the 3 letter codes used in projects should
be kept and updated each time a project is started in order to avoid reuse.

Fig 50. Example metadata spreadsheet at DSU featuring the ID, the AN and the LCN

Whereas the AN and LCN were concerned with the whole object, the ID was
concerned with all sides/parts of an object. Therefore, each side/part received its
own ID, for example, the front and back of a photograph. In the majority of cases
where both the front and back of a photograph were scanned, the AN in the tracking
sheet was altered to read, for example, “PZ5185/21: front” and “PZ5185/21: back.”
However, in cases where the back of a photograph was deemed unnecessary to

135

scan, only one ID was made and without adding “front” or “back” to the AN (See row
77 in Figure 51). After this was done for every photograph the tracking sheet was
uploaded to the Wombat workflow and the box of photographs sent off to the
scanning team. The tracking sheet in Wombat instructed the digitiser in what he or
she should scan per object.

Fig 51. Metadata spreadsheet at DSU showing a lack of need for a “front” or “back” for the AN

The definitions of the Accession Number, Individual Identifier and Library Catalogue
Number are provided in Table 12.

Code

Description

Task

(AN) Accession

A code linking an analogue object to

Used to cross-reference an

Number

a metadata spreadsheet.

analogue object with its
metadata.

(ID) Individual

A code (3 letters and 5 numbers)

Used in a tracking sheet to guide

Identifier

linking all sides/parts of an analogue

digitisers on what sides/parts of

object with a digitisation workflow.

an analogue object require
scanning.

LCN (Library

A code linking a metadata

Used to help library users find

Catalogue

spreadsheet with a library catalogue.

items.

Number)
Table 12. Definitions of AN, ID and LCN

136

Figure 52 outlines the metadata workflow at DSU.

Consult
benchmarking

Paginate materials
with Accession
Number

Create Metadata
Spreadsheet

Assign an ID
number for all
relevant
sides/parts of
material

Create a Tracking
Sheet

Assign an LCN
number

Save Tracking
Sheet and
Metadata
Spreadsheet

Upload Tracking
Sheet to Wombat

Use to guide
through scanning

Fig 52. DSU’s metadata workflow

Figure 53 shows the metadata spreadsheet with which I was provided. Column A is
the number of the box that contains the photographs, in this case box 988 from the
WEWW1 collection. Columin B is the AN that was written on the back of the
photographs in pencil. Column G is the LCN, which is an identifier given to each item
to link it to the NLW’s catalogue. Figure 54 shows the tracking spreadsheet I had to
complete. Column A is the ID made up of 3 letters and 5 numbers specific to the
project. Column B is the AN written on the back of the photograph, along with the
specified “front” and “back” (unless only the front of the photograph was to be
scanned). In column C, the LCN identifier was still retained to each object, and not
each side.

137

Fig 53 DSU’s metadata spreadsheet
138

Fig 54. DSU’s tracking spreadsheet

139

TEI (Text Encoding Initiative)
I met with Morfudd Nia Jones (MNJ) from the Digitisation Metadata Unit to discuss
the use of TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) at the NLW. MNJ defined TEI as the structure
of text online in XML format. According to its website, TEI is a consortium which
collectively develops and maintains a standard for the representation of texts in
digital form. Its chief deliverable is a set of guidelines which specify encoding
methods for machine-readable texts, chiefly in the humanities, social sciences and
linguistics. Since 1994, the TEI Guidelines have been widely used by libraries,
museums, publishers, and individual scholars to present texts for online research,
teaching, and preservation (TEI 2013). The TEI’s guidelines (Figure 55) make
recommendations about suitable ways of representing the features of textual
resources which need to be identified in order to facilitate processing by computer
programs. In particular, they specify a set of markers (also known as tags), which
may be inserted in the electronic representation of the text, in order to mark the
text structure and other features of interest. Many, or most, computer programs
depend on the presence of such explicit markers for their functionality, since without
them a digitised text appears to be nothing but a sequence of undifferentiated bits.

At NLW the TEI guidelines started on version 3 for the Welsh Biography Online
(Figure 56) project1 but are now on version 5 with more detail and relevancy. MNJ
commented that one must tag as much as possible but that tagging in both English
and Welsh was not a practical system and it needed to be changed because there are
place name terminology standards, for example, which differ from English to Welsh.
Every person in the TEI dictionary/biography has a unique ID, which can be tagged
when relevant. It is also advisable to tag related information, such as family
members.

1

Welsh Biography Online: http://yba.llgc.org.uk/en/index.html

140

MNJ also introduced me to the TILE (Text-Image Linking Environment) tool, which is
described as a web-based tool for creating and editing image-based electronic
editions and digital archives of humanities texts. TILE features tools for importing
and exporting transcript lines and images of text, an image markup tool, a semiautomated line recognizer that tags regions of text within an image, and plugin
architecture to extend the functionality of the software (TILE: 2011).

Fig 55. A screenshot of the TEI guidelines for the use of names (TEI, 2013b)

Fig 56. Two screenshots from the Welsh Biography Online showing the web-face and the TEI.

141

4.1.3.8 Online Publishing and File Management
I met with Dylan Wyn Jones (DWJ) to discuss online publishing and file management,
particularly the use of XSLT (Extensible Stylesheet Language for Transformations).
XSLT is an official recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. It provides a
flexible, powerful language for transforming XML documents into something else,
such as an HTML document, another XML document or a PDF file. An XSLT stylesheet
is written to define the rules for transforming the XML document and the XSLT
processor does the work (Tidwell, 2008: 1). XSLT is how the NLW apply XML
documents, such as metadata spreadsheets, on to online metadata fields, such as
those that accompany an online image. DWJ said that the XSLT process is currently
manual but the NLW are looking into making it automatic.

I also met with Owain Pritchard who gave me a tour around the NLW’s IT storage
facilities. There are 2 separate, self-contained server rooms. Each server backs-up
different aspects of work at NLW, such as permanent tasks or on-going/incomplete
tasks. Servers are cooled with a fanning system to avoid overheating and fires.
Digital content at NLW is stored in 2 main ways: (1) a Digital Archive (a server and
tape library, an archival copy of the material in VITAL, and other digital materials
collected and copied from original media) and (2) VITAL2, a digital asset management
system, based on Fedora.3

For the CCA and ICF, storage is managed by Aberystwyth University Information
Services (IS) and XSLT is managed by Web Services. The servers hosted by IS benefit
from centralized and off-site backup, maintenance by trained and experienced staff
and being in an environmentally controlled server rooms with secure physical access.
As this work is carried out sufficiently and externally for the CCA it is not a key issue
that requires resolving in a project such as this MPhil.

2
3

http://www.vtls.com/products/vital
http://fedoraproject.org/

142

4.1.3.9 Long-term Preservation
I met with Glen Robson (GR) and staff at the Systems Unit to discuss aspects of longterm preservation. The NLW has a Digital Preservation Strategy, now on its second
edition of 2012-2015 (NLW, 2012) which built upon the lessons learned from the
2008 strategy. The NLW uses Archivemattica4, a free and open-source digital
preservation system that is designed to maintain standards-based, long-term access
to collections of digital objects. The NLW also uses the VITAL and VIRTUA5 systems.
VITAL is for digital libraries and repositories with automatic metadata capture,
superior searching capabilities, standards-based protocols and open source Fedora
at the core. The NLW uses the Fedora operating system, a free to download Linuxrun operating system that is an alternative to Microsoft Windows or Mac OS X.
VIRTUA is a feature-rich integrated library system (ILS) with a depth and range of
capabilities, including multilingual user interfaces and support for Unicode6 and FRBR
(Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records).

The NLW uses ALTO (Analyzed Layout and Text Object), an XML Schema that details
technical metadata for describing the layout and content of physical text resources,
such as pages of a book or a newspaper. ALTO knows the coordinates of every word
on a webpage. It most commonly serves as an extension schema used within the
METS administrative metadata section (The Library of Congress, 2013). GR noted
that there is currently no Welsh Dictionary for OCR (Optical Character Recognition),
which is a key concern for a national institution in Wales such as NLW. The NLW
currently runs the DigiDo (Figure 57) digitisation project7 to support small to medium
creative businesses within the convergence areas of Wales. The aim of the project is
“to encourage innovative Welsh businesses and give them the tools to be able to
compete both locally and globally” and to provide “an opportunity for businesses to
exploit and re-use” the large repository that exists within the NLW (The National
4

https://www.archivematica.org/wiki/Main_Page
http://www.vtls.com/products/virtua
6
A computing industry standard for the consistent encoding, representation and handling of text
expressed in most of the world's writing systems
7
http://www.llgc.org.uk/index.php?id=6021
5

143

Library of Wales, 2013). The project has resulted in the digitisation of manuscripts,
archives, printed material, sound and video, pictures, exhibitions, maps and
photographs that have been uploaded to the NLW’s Digital Mirror.

Fig 57. Screenshot of DigiDo homepage, 2013

4.1.3.10 Project Management
I met with Rob Phillips (RP), the Project Manager for the WEWW1 project, to discuss
aspects of project management and digitisation. RP explained that before embarking
on a project there is a great deal of planning to do, without which the project is
unlikely to succeed. The NLW has many forms that need to be completed prior to a
project, some of which include:

144



Project roles and structure (sets out the roles of individuals, groups and
organisations within the project management structure as well as the various
groups within the project generally or specific work packages).



Risk management strategy (defines how the Project will identify, analyse,
prioritise, monitor, communicate and appropriately manage its exposure to
potential risks).



Communications management strategy (identifies all parties involved with
and interested in the business of the project and defines the nature, method
and frequency of communications to enable the appropriate and timely bidirectional transmission of essential information about the project).



Selection of content (outlines the scope of the workpackage including
products, timescales, dependencies, responsibilities, tolerances and
acceptance criteria).

As Project Manager, RP meets regularly with Team Leaders from each unit involved
in the project (Figure 58) to ensure the workflow is correctly implemented to the
predicted pace. There are “tolerances” with any project: all projects have strict
guidelines and plans; however, it is reasonable and realistic that these guidelines
cannot be followed religiously. RP reviews the progress of each team or team
member and if they stray over 5% from the guidelines then it is RP’s job to get them
back on track. For example, a member of the scanning team may be scanning 100
items per week instead of the required 130. This also applies if someone is working
faster than expected, in which case a task needs to be lined up for when they are
finished.

Team members can be working on multiple tasks or projects at once. Time
management and prioritisation are important in ensuring a member of staff is not
left without a job to do. Some parts of the process take longer than others, which
should be considered and planned for. There may be different institutions or groups
involved in a project, some of whom may need results faster than others.

145

Department Head

Project Manager

Team Leader

Team Leader

Team Leader

Team Member

Team Member

Team Member

Team Member

Team Member

Team Member

Fig 58. Project management - hierarchy of team responsibility

For further information on project management, RP recommended PRINCE 2
(PRojects IN Controlled Environments), a de facto process-based method for
effective project management. On the official website, PRINCE2 explains its purpose:
“Used extensively by the UK Government, PRINCE2 is also widely recognised and used in the
private sector, both in the UK and internationally. The PRINCE2 method is in the public
domain, and offers non-proprietorial best practice guidance on project management.

The key features of PRINCE2 are: a focus on business justification, defined
organisation structure for the project management team, product-based planning
approach, emphasis on dividing the project into manageable and controllable stages
and flexibility that can be applied at a level appropriate to the project (PRINCE2,
2013).

4.1.3.11 Intellectual Property Rights
I met with Dafydd Tudur (DT) to discuss copyright issues with digitisation and
metadata. DT recommended “Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual Property
Growth,” by Professor Ian Hargreaves, which was commissioned by the UK
government. It makes 10 recommendations designed to ensure that the UK has an IP

146

framework best suited to supporting innovation and promoting economic growth in
the digital age. One recommendation is the creation of a "Digital Copyright
Exchange" to simplify the process of licensing, making it easier to license "orphaned
works", where the copyright holder can't be identified. Duncan Geere from
Wired.co.uk commented that the Digital Copyright Exchange permits parody,
legalises CD ripping and abandons website-blocking proposals and that “it could
have a bigger impact on the British creative industries, as well as the wider economy,
than any other proposal in the government's re-think of intellectual property”
(Geere, 2011).

Some main points I gathered from my meeting with DT were:


70 years after the death of the creator, an item loses its copyright.



90% of people are happy to give credit.



http://www.tineye.com/ is an image search to find out if an uploaded image
exists online.



The NLW does not use watermarks on images.



If NLW is the rights holder they use the Creative Commons License.



The NLW has no intellectual copyright property policy yet but the plans in
place will be a significant departure and more open to the rights in the
collection.



Institutions need to maintain a balance between free access and income
generation. Some institutions have a retrieval fee and a rights fee in order to
generate income.



The British Library is more business-oriented, the National Portrait Gallery
has a decent balance between access and income, and the V&A is “best” at
income generation.



An issue with Hargreaves’s reports is that they are based on EU law with an
EU directive.



Digitisation is a means to an end.



As technology is developing at a rapid speed, it is putting pressure on rights,
which need to be re-evaluated in parallel.

147

JISC Legal published a document titled “3D Digitisation and Intellectual Property
Rights”8 which may be of some relevance to digitisation of ceramics. The guidance is
intended for staff in colleges and universities and related organisations involved in
3D digitisation projects and focuses on the IPR issues.

4.1.4 Strand B: People’s Collection Wales

4.1.4.1 Digitisation Workshops
PCW Project Officer Carys Morgan (CM) invited me to attend a digitisation workshop
in Cardigan, Wales, which was to be run by 3 staff members from the PCW
instructing members of the public on digitisation work. Workshops such as this are
held frequently around Wales in order to encourage usage of PCW website and
services, to expand digitisation knowledge and to ensure digital preservation of
valuable materials around Wales. PCW encourages many smaller local organisations
and groups, such as historical societies, to attend the workshops, as well as
interested individuals. After attending the Cardigan workshop I attended two other
workshops in Llangrannog and Aberystwyth during the course of my work
experience. By attending these workshops it was hoped I would learn how to
digitise, why digitisation is done and the impact digitisation could have, as well as
equip me with skills to pass on digitisation knowledge.

Prior to the start of a workshop I aided staff in preparation, which involved settingup PCW’s ‘digitisation kits’ to be used by attendees. One kit contained a laptop, an
Epson Expression 10000 XL flatbed scanner, a computer mouse and a greyscale
patch.9 The equipment from a single kit fitted comfortably on an average-sized desk.
It was useful to set-up the equipment with the staff as it gave me an idea of what
8

JISC Legal: http://www.jisclegal.ac.uk/ManageContent/ViewDetail/ID/2863/3D-Digitisation-andIntellectual-Property-Rights.aspx
9
PCW hires out their digitisation kits for periods of 4-6 weeks to encourage others to digitise.

148

equipment was needed, how it connected together and how it should be arranged.
After a meet and greet with the attendees, staff began the workshop with
powerpoint presentations that introduced PCW, digitisation, metadata and
copyright. One note of interest regarding copyright was that anything uploaded to
the PCW website belongs to the owner, unlike other websites such as Facebook
where uploaded images belong to everyone. These presentations were incredibly
useful because they were designed for beginners and so it was very easy to
understand the digitisation and metadata processes. I observed how staff avoided
confusing attendees by using clear diagrams and pictures and avoiding technical
jargon where possible. This later aided me when passing on digitisation knowledge
to students and staff at CCA.

After a lunch break, the attendees broke into small groups and began using the
laptops and scanners themselves. Many attendees brought photographs and paper
documents with them to use in the digitisation activity. Staff provided attendees
with a set of digitisation guidelines on paper and the attendees were encouraged to
go through the steps on their own although staff were always nearby to assist. The
majority of attendees were over 60 years-old and I observed an overall hesitancy of
using computers. For example, when I joined in with a group on the activity, my
group members encouraged me to operate the equipment while they observed me
and read the guidelines. However, I generally observed that attendees seem to
understand the concepts best when they eventually had a go themselves. The
guidelines were very easy to follow and each step was accompanied with a
screenshot to reassure readers they were digitising correctly. The guidelines went
through the whole process of preparing the scanner, scanning the object,
benchmarking, preparing photoshop, saving the file as .tiff (for storage), cropping
the image, saving the file as .jpeg (for using), uploading the .jpeg to the PCW website
and completing the metadata.

Figures 59-61 are photographs of the PCW staff undertaking digitisation work.

149

Fig 59. PCW staff digitising © PCW

Fig 60. PCW staff digitising © PCW

150

Fig 61. PCW staff digitising © PCW

Going through the guidelines was very useful in helping me to understand the
digitisation process. The hardest part of the process was in preparing the scanner
because you need to ensure the colour levels are accurate by using the greyscale
patch in the scanner as a guide. By doing this you are ensuring the image on the
screen correctly represents colour values of the actual object. My group had to do
this process a few times because the colours often came out inaccurately.

After this activity the staff introduced the attendees to flip-cameras, which are small
devices that allow for video and image recording and are particularly useful for
interviews. They were very easy to use due to their simplicity and ergonomic design.
I made note of the flip-cameras for the CCA as it has a collection of oral history and
the curator regularly conducts interviews.

151

I attended a second workshop in Llangrannog, which was slightly different to the
workshop in Cardigan. The workshop was implemented as a private demonstration
to staff at the Urdd, which is an organisation that provides recreational activities for
young people through the medium of Welsh. One challenging aspect of this visit was
that it was done all through the medium of Welsh language. I do not speak Welsh
but the others were happy to translate for me. However, despite not understanding
the language, I found that I still understood what PCW staff were instructing because
I had become familiar with the digitisation process from working with PCW. I thought
it was a testament to PCW’s skills in instructing and presentating that I was able to
follow without understanding the language and I took these teaching skills on board.
It was useful to see the digitisation process repeated and I left feeling more
confident in my digitisation knowledge.

The final workshop I attended was held at Aberystwyth Town Library for members of
the public. It ran to a similar structure as the first workshop I attended with
presentations followed by practical sessions. I invited my supervisor, and CCA
curator, Prof. Moira Vincentelli (MV) to attend this workshop because I found the
other workshops very informative and I thought it would be an opportunity to
directly transfer digitisation knowledge from NLW to CCA. Prior to the workshop I
had informed MV about the PCW’s use of flip-cameras and I suggested the benefit
the equipment could have for the CCA’s oral history collection. PCW staff instructed
MV in the use of the flip-cameras during the Aberystwyth workshop. I agreed with
MV that a flip-camera would be purchased using the KESS budget.

By attending these three workshops I acquired knowledge on how to digitise and
write metadata, what equipment was involved in the process and how the
knowledge could be effectively transferred to others.

152

4.1.4.2 Digitisation Workflow at PCW
PCW Project Officer Carys Morgan (CM) informed me that I would work with the
Merched y Wawr Llanfarian group on a digitisation project as part of the WEWW1
project. However, before I could do this I needed to learn how digitisation was done
at PCW. I was given a political satire magazine from WW1 to digitise. It was owned
by a member of staff at PCW and would be uploaded to the PCW website as part of
the NLW’s WEWW1 project. CM provided me with the same digitisation guidelines
(Figure 62) the PCW give to attendees of the digitisation workshops they host around
Wales. I immediately noticed that at the PCW I would do all the stages of digitisation
myself, unlike at the Digitisation Unit where the process was passed around different
sections.

Since the materials had been selected and the copyright had been checked I
proceeded to set up the equipment at my desk. This consisted of a laptop, an Epson
Expression 10000 XL flatbed scanner, a computer mouse and a greyscale patch. The
scanner required calibrating to ensure the resolution was at 300 dpi (dots per inch)
and the colour depth was at 24-bit so that the scan would be accurate and high
quality. The software used was Adobe Photoshop 7.0 and the greyscale patch was
used to adjust the colour levels in Photoshop. After a preview scan was done, I used
the eye-dropper tool to ensure the colour was accurate against the greyscale patch.
Following this a real scan was done, which took longer than a preview, and this was
saved as a .tiff file for storage. The scan was then cropped, straightened and saved as
a .jpeg file to be uploaded on the internet. This was because the .tiff file is a large
format which is perfect for storage but not good for online publishing as the images
would take too long to upload. By saving the images as .jpegs the size and resolution
were decreased but still acceptable for use and appreciation.

153

Select materials

Check copyright

Prepare
equipment

Scan

Check quality
against greyscale
patch

Preview scan

Save as .tiff for
storage

Crop and
straighten scan

Save as .jpeg for
use on internet

Fig 62. PCW’s digitisation guidelines

PCW advises to keep file names short but meaningful and unique. When numbers
are used in file names they should always be at least two digits instead of one digit
to maintain numeric order (e.g. 01 instead of 1). Copies of the scans should be made
on servers, trustworthy online vaults or on removable media such as external drives,
CDs or DVDs. PCW enter metadata at different stages of the digitisation process.
When two staff members work with a group on digitisation, one person scans the
materials while the other person talks to the group to get basic information on the
materials for the metadata spreadsheet (Figure 63). They do this to take advantage
of the knowledge the owner has of the materials. Metadata is later completed by
assessment of the materials, conducting research and using any information
provided by the owners. PCW consider the file name, title, creator, subject,
description, date, rights, identifier number and location to be the essential
information required for metadata. The PCW’s metadata guidelines are shown in
Figure 64.

154

Fig 63. PCW’s metadata spreadsheet

Name files
appropriately

Make copies

Input file name in
metadata
spreadsheet

Upload .jpeg to
PCW website

Keep information
up to date

Complete other
fields in metadata
spreadsheet

Use metadata
spreadsheet to
support image

Users can find
image using
metadata
Fig 64. PCW’s metadata guidelines

The PCW’s use of a “Parent ID” for linking together two or more sides/parts of one
object is similar to the DSU’s use of an LCN because both are used to signify a whole
object and all its parts. I felt the PCW’s digitisation workflow was a slightly simplified
version of the DSU’s workflow. I saw this as a positive aspect because the workflow
was easier to understand and achieve. This was a crucial factor since the digitisation

155

knowledge was to be transferred to the CCA; an institution with limited digitisation
knowledge and facilities. By completing all the stages of digitisation myself while sat
at the same desk, I felt more knowledgeable about the history of each item’s
digitisation and more in control of the process. There was more responsibility here in
that different people did not check off the digitisation stages and so there was a
higher chance of an error going unnoticed. To sum up: the DSU’s digitisation
workflow was catered to digitisation professionals, whereas the PCW’s digitisation
workflow was designed so anyone could digitise with relative ease.

4.1.4.3 Merched y Wawr Llanfarian (MyWL) Project
PCW staff informed me that they had been in contact with the Merched y Wawr
group from Llanfarian, who were interested in digitising their collection of
photographs. It was decided this would be a good project for me to work on to see
the digitisation process from start to finish. Prior to a meeting with MyWL, the group
sent some photographic material to PCW and I aided staff in the digitisation and
metadata process outlined previously. This was done in order to show the MyWL
what was done with their materials at the meeting. With the support of PCW staff I
set up the equipment and met with two women from the MyWL who brought in a
further portfolio of approx. 280 photographs. It became evident the material MyWL
had previously sent PCW had been digitised not only to show the work but also so it
could be returned back to MyWL during the meeting. As the two women preferred
to speak in Welsh during the meeting, a PCW staff member discussed as many of the
280 photographs as possible with them in order to get metadata information. Whilst
this happened I used the Epson Expression 10000 XL scanner to scan each
photograph after they were done talking about it. This system was speedy and
practical. It allowed us to utilise the knowledge of MyWL while it was available and
allowed them to retain as many photographs as possible.

156

After the meeting the rest of the 280 photographs were scanned in the PCW office.
Metadata was written based on notes from the meeting and from analysing the
photographs. Most photographs had dates, names and other descriptive information
on the back. However, the backs of the photographs were not to be scanned. This
was a key difference between the PCW and the DSU. I had several more meetings
with MyWL throughout the course of my MPhil to discuss the photographs with
them in order to acquire substantial and accurate metadata. After all the
photographs were scanned and returned I began preparing them to be ready for
online publication. This involved cropping and rotating each photograph and resaving the .tiff file to a .jpeg. Towards the end of my work experience I created an
account for MyWL on the PCW website, uploaded 14 photographs as prototypes and
I input the metadata in the fields provided on the website (Figure 65).

Fig 65. Screenshot of MyWL’s page on the PCW website

157

4.1.5 Summary of Work Experience at NLW
My time at NLW was split into two strands. Strand A involved working with the DSU
and Strand B involved working with the People’s Collection Wales. There were many
differences between these two strands, most notably in how they each implemented
digitisation. The PCW, as a small-scale operation like the CCA, became something of
a useful model in helping me think about how digitisation could be done in the CCA
due to their similar scope. The DSU was seen as more of an “ideal” model for
digitisation due to being more meticulous and more technologically advanced,
however, the methods were largely unrealistic for the CCA. It became clear that I
would need to initially employ the digitisation methods of the PCW as a
fundamental/base and then edit the method where suitable using the digitisation
methods of the Units (always keeping in mind the capabilities of the CCA).

Certain training sessions from my work experience, such as on-line publishing, server
management and IPR, were less applicable than others, despite being interesting.
This is because these aspects of digitisation are carried out externally for the CCA by
Aberystwyth University and, as such, are unlikely to be affected by my research
project. For example, I will not be constructing a new website and so will not need to
be proficient in html language. However, it was still useful for me to understand the
basics of these aspects in order to gain a more comprehensive overview of the
subject.

Despite being confident in my IT skills, I embarked on my work experience as an Art
History graduate with little knowledge about digitisation and metadata. Thanks to
the training sessions I received from staff at NLW, within the first couple of weeks of
my work experience I felt much more knowledgeable and capable with digitisation
and metadata. It was both useful and interesting to see “behind the scenes” of an
extensive national library and I felt very privileged. I left my work experience feeling
more confident in my ability to undertake my MPhil project.

158

4.2 Work Experience at CCA
Dates: July 2012 – September 2012

Prior to the official start of this MPhil project in October 2012, I undertook work
experience at the CCA for 3-months in order to familiarise myself with the
organisation. I acquired knowledge on some of the CCA’s administrative tasks,
specifically those tasks related to digitisation and the CCA website, and I gathered a
sense of the organisation’s potential capabilities for digitisation work. This
knowledge contributed to the outputs I produced for the MPhil project (Chapter 5).

My main tasks were as follows.

4.2.1 Quality Assurance of CCA Website
The CCA website contains information about all the ceramic artists and their work in
the collection, including photographs of the work. The artists, potters and pottery
companies are listed on the website both alphabetically by name and alphabetically
by country (Figure 66). I was assigned with the task of going through the list of artists
and to make a note of spelling or grammatical errors, out of date information,
missing information, missing or poor quality photographs, and formatting
inaccuracies. Any errors or inaccuracies were documented on a spreadsheet
designed by the CCA (Figure 67). This task was very time consuming, however it was
necessary to ensure information was accurate and up-to-date. When reviewing the
quality of the photographs I realised digitisation was not a finite task and that, due to
advancements in technology, the acceptable standard for digital replicas was ever
increasing. The photographs of ceramics were considered above average 5-10 years
ago, however, in 2013, particularly in light of the capabilities of 3D-digitisation, the
CCA now considers them behind the times and capable of improvement.

159

Fig 66. Screenshot - A-Z list of makers on CCA website

Fig 67. Screenshot - using a spreadsheet for quality assurance of CCA website

160

4.2.2 Checking Files
The CCA office has a number of filing cabinets that contain paper files with
information on all artists or “makers” in the collection. Each file contains a contents
list that states what should be inside the file and this contents list is replicated on the
computer in an .xml spreadsheet. My task was to go through the files and complete
the instructions listed in figure 68.

Like the quality assurance of the website, this was also a time consuming task but it
was necessary to ensure information was up-to-date and accurate. While working I
was conscious of the dual use of the computer and paper as a means of
documenting the contents of the archive. This seemed to be done for practical use
so the files could be checked without turning on the computer, as well as for
backing-up the information in case either version was lost. Staples were removed
and replaced with paper clips for conservation means, as staples were prone to
rusting. The removable of plastic folders and duplicate items seemed to be driven by
a need to save space.

161

Use the contents list at the back of the file to cross reference items in the file.

Check each item corresponds with its numbered listing.

Check each item has a number in pencil on the front of the document.
For conservation purposes, remove all staples and replace
with paper clips, as staples are prone to rusting.
Do not attach paper clips to the file itself as they will catch, leave items loose.

Remove all plastic folders.
Remove all duplicates and dispose.
Leave all photographs as they are, as they require special chemically stable
envelopes. Please mark if a file contains photographs on the spreadsheet.
If an item is missing mark it missing with the current date e.g. ‘missing 28/7/2012’.
Number of sheets-in this column record the document length as there has been
discrepancies here e.g. 4 x A4, or 8 pages x 4, A4 or 1 part A4.
Record any changes in pencil on the sheet and then transfer them
to the word document on the computer.
Use the computer opposite the door. Go to .xml
spreadsheet contents list and find the makers name.
Make the changes, save and print.
Replace only the contents lists you have made the changes to-i.e. in a big file there is
no need to print out a 15 page list when there are only changes to the last page.
In the contents list there is also a separate spreadsheet entitled “Artists’ Files
Queries” for inputting any queries that need checking by CCA staff.
Fig 68. Instructions for checking files in CCA

162

4.2.3 Social Media

I did some work on social media marketing, which was a fairly new initiative in the
CCA. I worked with Archive Assistant Louise Chennell (LC) to set up web pages for
the CCA on Facebook, Twitter and Wikipedia. These websites were selected due to
their popularity and it was hoped this would raise the publicity of the CCA. I learned
that digitisation and social media are closely linked in that the digitised material can
be used for promotional work. Therefore, it was important digital materials were of
high-quality in order to appeal to the public and exhibit professionalism.

4.2.4 Scanning
I did some work scanning the Ceramic Archive Bulletin, published in both English and
Welsh, using the Epson flat bed scanner and iMac in the School of Art’s Mac Suite.
The purpose of scanning the bulletins was to create .pdfs of them to publish on the
CCA website. LC provided me with scanning instructions, as outlined in Figure 69.

Configure scanner
to 300 dpi and 24bit colour

Preview scan page

Quality check

Repeat for all
pages

Save as .jpeg

Scan page

Compile scans
into a single .pdf

Email to LC,
Archive Assistant

Make .pdf
available on CCA
website

Fig 69. CCA’s original scanning instructions

163

In the instructions there was no specification to save the scan as a .tiff file for
storage, however, this was only because the purpose of the digitisation was for
public access to the bulletin, and not for preservation. There was no instruction
regarding file naming conventions for the .pdfs (Figure 70) and I was encouraged to
invent my own. To take the example “CB199701E,” CB refers to Ceramic Bulletin,
1997 refers to the year, 01 refers to the edition and E refers to the language being
English. “CB199701C” refers to the same edition published in Cymraeg (Welsh). I
decided to use a 4-character year (“1997”) instead of 2-characters (“97”) in order to
maintain numerical progression. If “01” had been used instead of “2001,” this file
would be organised at the top of the list, above “97.”Upon reflection the edition
number may have been more suitably placed before the year, e.g. “CB011997E,” in
order to start from the number “01.” This practice work had an impact on my later
work scanning programmes from the ICF and used my experience to influence my
decisions. The digitised copies of the Ceramic Archive Bulletin are now available on
the CCA website (Figure 71).

Fig 70. Example .pdf of Ceramic Archive Bulletin

164

Fig 71. Ceramic Archive Bulletin .pdf on CCA website

4.3 Conference: “Digital Preservation: What I Wish I Knew
Before I Started”

Date: 24th January 2013

Location: University College of London (UCL)
Website: www.dpconline.org/events/details/50-StudentConference2013?xref=53

With support from the KESS budget I attended a conference at UCL that discussed
the challenges of digital collections management and digital preservation. The
following bullet points summarise the points made by the various speakers that I
considered most relevant to this project. Footnotes are also provided with web links
to view the speaker’s presentation, where available.

165

What’s the Problem with Digital Preservation? – William Kilbride10


JISC projects bleakly say they will last ‘in perpetuity’ or ‘indefinitely’ which is
not good because we need to know where the data will be at the end of the
project.



Digital data is an asset. It holds much value and potential and can create new
opportunities. Its use has direct and indirect outcomes.



Deployment depends on software, hardware and people, all of which change.



Loss of data is insignificant if nothing is done with the data in the first place.



Good records management proves ownership and avoids lawsuits.



Digital preservation is not just about data or access or risk, it’s about people
and opportunities.



3 basic approaches to long-term (and short-term) preservation:
1. Migration. Change the file format to ensure the information content is
readable.
2. Emulation. Intervening at operating system or software level to
ensure information content is readable. Emulation is the main topic of
research over the next decade.
3. Hardware preservation. Maintain access to data and processes by
manipulating physical computing.



Challenges:


Technology creates conditions for obsolescence.



Digital preservation systems are subject to the same obsolescence as
the objects they safeguard – a paradox.



Digital resources are intolerant of gaps in preservation. Resources can
be corrupted/tampered without trace.



Challenges can be faced by different groups and institutions working
together.

10

www.dpconline.org/component/docman/doc_download/821-wiwik2013kilbride

166

Web Archiving at the British Library – Helen Hockx-Yu


Talked about her job as Head of Web Archiving at the British Library and
watched a video about her job.



A non-print legal deposit was established in the British Library on the 5th April
2013. It is estimated to crawl 4-5 million UK websites at least once a year.

Digital Curator at the Wellcome Library - Dave Thompson11


The Wellcome library uses the Goobi workflow12 tracking system to manage
digitisation.



Streamline and simplify processes - keep them simple.



More social problems than technical problems. Data needs to have meaning
and context and it needs to be useable. E.g. Hillsborough documents are to
be archived.

Digital Archivist at University of London Computer Centre – Patricia Sleeman13


Context is a universal truth, regardless of technology.



An object without information is meaningless.



Learn coding and learn project management.



Money hurts but money matters – learn budgets for economic sustainability.



DAIS (Digital Archiving Information System) is a good model for digital
preservation.14



Project failures are useful in learning from mistakes.

The conference proved to be a useful opportunity for me to experience the
contemporary climate of digital preservation direct from professionals in the field.
Overall I observed that there are many ways to organise and use digital data but the
data is reliant on other factors, such as back-up and metadata, for preservation.

11

www.dpconline.org/component/docman/doc_download/823-wiwik2013thompson
http://www.digiverso.com/en/products/goobi/workflow
13
www.dpconline.org/component/docman/doc_download/822-wiwik2013sleeman
14
http://dais.cah.ucf.edu/).
12

167

4.4 Web Design
Understanding how websites work is a key part of my project because the digitised
material ends up on a website as an interacting platform for users. Sections 4.4.1
and 4.4.2 overview knowledge I have acquired on websites, with section 4.4.3
summarising this acquired knowledge.

4.4.1 Website Review and Comparison: CCA and the Craft
Study Centre
Having used the CCA’s website in my work experience with the organisation, I
wanted to understand the state of the website in comparison to a similar website. I
felt it was important for me to know the potential of a ceramics website if I was to
research digitisation and how digital material could be used. In order to do this I
reviewed and compared the CCA website (Figure 72) with the Craft Study Centre’s
(CSC) website (Figure 73) so as to understand the pros and cons of website creation.
Each website is critiqued under the three main categories of (1) structure, (2)
navigation and (3) design. The two websites under evaluation are:

Fig 72. A screenshot of the CCA website home page, 2013.

168

Fig 73. A screenshot of the CSC website home page, 2013.

4.4.1.1 Structure
Both websites are structured in a similar fashion with the main or “home” page
roughly divided into 4 sections (Figure 74):
1. Both websites have a banner at the top of the page, a common feature of
website design, which features the logo and title of the organisation as well
as a close-up image of an artefact. The CCA provides hyperlinks to different
pages in its banner.
2. Both websites have a navigation bar on the left-hand side of the page which
features hyperlinks so users can reach different pages of the website. The
Craft Studies Centre (CSC) has more hyperlinks here than the CCA.
3. There is a main body of text/images in the centre of both home pages. Both
organisations use this space to introduce the website/organisation.
4. There is a footer at the bottom of each home page which features hyperlinks
and copyright information. The CCA’s footer features exactly the same
hyperlinks from its banner. However, the CSC’s footer provides hyperlinks
purely of a communicative nature (Figure 75).

169

Fig 74. The four main sections of each website are highlighted.

Fig 75. The Craft Studies Centre website footer.

4.4.1.2 Navigation
Both the CSC and the CCA are fairly easy to navigate around as they use the typical
navigational medium of hyperlinked text. The 3 main categories of information on
the websites are:
1. Content (history and information on the content of the collection as well as
the database itself).
2. Current and ongoing projects (new acquisitions, research and learning).
3. Communication (contact details, location, access, etc).

170

The two websites differ in how the content database is provided to users:
The CCA provides an A-Z list of the makers and countries in the collection (Figure 76).
Each maker has their own page which features biographical information and images
of their work (along with archival information of the work). Users can also enter a
search query. The CCA’s database is simple yet sufficient though it could make use of
an “advanced search” feature.

Fig 75. The CCA’s database of makers in the collection.

The CSC does not have a database within its own website but instead it redirects
users to two different websites (Figure 77):
1. VADS (http://www.vads.ac.uk/collections/CSC.html), a database for the
entire University of the Creative Arts. The CSC has its own page with VADS
and users can enter a search query or browse within specific materials,
such as textiles.
2. The Archives Hub15 (http://archiveshub.ac.uk/), maintained at
Manchester and Liverpool, describes itself as “a gateway to thousands of
the UK’s richest archives.” The website features archival contributions
from nearly 200 institutions, including Aberystwyth University.16 The
Archives Hub offers search, browse and help facilities.

15

The CSC website directs users to The Archive Hub by writing: “Collection-level descriptions of many
of our archives may be found on the Archives Hub”
16
However, the CCA is not featured in The Archives Hub. Most Aberystwyth University contributions
are academic papers.

171

Fig 77. CSC’s collection: VADS and the Archives Hub.

On the main CSC website there are small lists of artists and makers featured within
the different ‘materials’ pages (ceramics, furniture & wood, etc.) but, when clicked,
these hyperlinks direct users to VADS. The fact that the CSC does not have a
database within its own website could be considered a drawback because it could
seem disjointed to users. Also, users may find it frustrating and confusing to be
redirected to two different websites. This ‘convenience’ factor is where the CCA
exceeds the CSC. However, both VADS and the Archives Hub are of a high quality
structure and design and the search facilities surpass those of the CCA.

4.4.1.3 Design
The CSC utilises a pallet of neutral greys and white, which could be interpreted as
either professional or unexciting. The close-up image on the banner is similarly grey
and simple. When contrasted to the attractive and modern University for the
Creative Arts (UCA) website (Figure 78), the CSC is somewhat subdued. However, it
could be argued that the UCA website (http://www.ucreative.ac.uk/) needs to
appear innovative and fashionable in order to appeal to prospective students,
whereas the CSC is mainly a resource and therefore its practicality is its chief
concern. Nevertheless, colour could give it more vibrancy

172

Fig 78. The CSC and University for the Creative Arts home page

The CCA, in contrast to the CSC, utilises a pallet of blue and purple with white,
making it slightly bolder. Similarly to the CSC, the CCA falls behind its university
parent in its aesthetic appeal and innovation for navigation (Figure 79). It could be
argued that if the CCA and the CSC adopted the newer designs they would be more
integrated with the university community and would reach a wider audience.

Fig 79. The CCA and Aberystwyth University’s home page, newly designed in 2012

Both the CSC and the CCA have appropriately consistent typeface, layout and visual
design which fit with the web design norms. However, the CSC and the CCA must
keep up to date with the experience their users have of the websites. This could
involve the use of a “feedback” section, pop-up questionnaires, email questionnaires
or evaluation workshops.
173

4.4.2 “Web Design with Dreamweaver” Short Course
Date: July 2013

I attended a week-long training course on web design using Adobe Dreamweaver
software in order to expand my understanding of websites. The course was run by
Aberystwyth University Lifelong Learning department. One task for the course was
to create my own prototype website and I decided to create an archival website for
material from the International Ceramics Festival. In a sense this section (4.4.2) can
be treated as both an acquisition of knowledge and an application of knowledge
because the work produced on the course is of use to the CCA as an example of how
material can be used.

4.4.2.1 Website Commission
Prior to starting the course I wrote a list of requirements for my ICF Archive website
as one would provide to a commissioned web designer. This was useful for me to
understand what I needed to put on my prototype website before I created it. The
main requirements I identified were as follows.


Capable of displaying high-quality archival materials
o Documents. Page scans – view individual pages in sequence by either
clicking, scrolling, flipping, etc. PDF documents – view online and/or
download. Features such as “zoom in.”
o Photographs. Thumbnails/small scale and high-resolution scans and
born-digital images.
o Videos of varying lengths. Either published on this website or
published on a separate website and linked/embedded. Simple
play/stop/pause/search buttons.
o Audio material of varying lengths. Simple play/stop/pause/search
buttons.
o Lectures in the form of audio-accompanied slideshows.

174

o Each item can be commented on and “shared” by users and visitors.


Material uploaded to archive is both official and amateur
o Official material: ICF, Ceramic Archive, etc.
o Amateur material: users.
o Amateur material is submitted for review before it is published online.



Search facilities
o General website search
o Entire archive search
o Specific materials search (documents, photographs, etc.)
o Advanced search feature



Account user feature
o Login, password, create account. “Forgot login/password” tool.
o User accounts. Personal information/details, profile picture.
o Users able to interact with material. Users can upload own material
following a set of instructions. Users can comment on, “favourite,”
and “share” other material.
o Users able to interact with other users. Befriend users and
communicate with publically and privately.
o Users able to personalise their account settings, e.g. alerts, password
change.



The design of the website fits with ICF brand

A potential structure of the ICF Archive website is highlighted in Figure 80. This
website encompasses the requirements outlined above.

175

Home

About

Documents

News

Photographs

Account

Archive

Videos

Audio

Lectures

Upload
material

Links

Login/passw
ord/ create
account

Upload
material
View
uploaded
material

Programmes

Hand-outs

Favourites

Leaflets

Friends

Account
Settings

Fig 80. Potential structure of ICF Archive website

176

4.4.2.2 Web Design with Dreamweaver Visual Diary
As part of my assessment for the course I had to produce a diary reflecting on the ICF
Archive website I had created. It has been included in this chapter as a reflection on
how digitised material from the ICF can be used either on its own website or on an
existing website.

Please refer to Appendix M for the visual diary, which features screenshots of the
website developed by the researcher.

4.4.3 Summary of Web Design
This section summarises the lessons learned from the website review and
comparison and the web design course.

Technology is rapidly evolving, which has both positive and negative consequences
for websites. For example, a website may spend a lot of money on a modern redesign only to discover a year later that the design has become somewhat obsolete
in favour of another new “modern” design. The CCA will continue to be tied to
Aberystwyth University (AU) and although this provides the CCA with a number of
services and resources, AU could potentially attempt a blanket redesign of all
associated websites under a new brand image. As a result, the CCA website could
drastically change and its individuality lost. A positive aspect of the CCA website is
that users interact with content on a single website, unlike the CSC where users are
redirected to VADS. The School of Art Gallery & Museum website directs users to the
CCA when they search for ceramics in the collection, however, any information
needs to be accurately mirrored on both websites.

The ICF Archive is potentially a place where users can interact with a range of
materials related to the ICF in a social environment. The creation of an archival
website for the CCA’s ICF material can be handled in several different ways with

177

many implications. It could be extended as a branch of the main ICF website, as a
branch of the CCA website, or as its own website. Either way the website could be a
valuable link between the CCA and the ICF and could potential increase access to
both organisations.
As of 2013 the CCA staff are working with a web designer to plan a redesign of the
CCA website. The website is suitable for web browsing on a computer but it is not
efficiently designed for use on mobile web browsing because it uses old codes and
old versions of flash. The use of mobile web browsing is considered essential by the
CCA for marketing and access purposes. The web designer observed there are some
dead hyperlinks that have no purpose and components such as this slow down the
website. The website requires a site map and a better search engine visibility. The
proposed new website structure is shown in Table 13. According to the web
designer, new content on the website is not being as highlighted as well as it could
be, but the issue is not just how to market content but how also how to encourage
users to participate. Queries made to the CCA could be published on the website to
encourage others to make queries. However, one problem with increased user
participation is the need to supervise the comments made. The CCA could better
utilise its social media presence by linking published comments from all website
profiles, such as Facebook and Twitter. Aberystwyth University brought in a content
management system in 2010 and insisted that all departmental websites use the
same format, however, the CCA has always maintained an independent hosting
system to avoid being constrained by the university model, which would not fit well.
The web designer commented that it was becoming increasingly difficult to futureproof a website but current and future technological developments can be prepared
for.

178

HOME

WHAT’S IN THE COLLECTION (A-Z) WHAT’S ON (link to arts centre diary) SEARCH

CURRENT EXHIBITION (image and text)

NEWS

EVENTS

A-Z Makers in the collection

(New acquisitions, grants,
awards, etc.)

(Talks, workshops, festival
etc.)

IMAGE

IMAGE

IMAGE
Visit Us

Exhibitions

Resources

About Us

Location

Current exhibitions

Ceramic Archive

History of Collection

Opening times

Past exhibitions

Research

Mission Statement

Disability and Access

Touring exhibitions

Information for
schools

Contact

Facebook
Twitter

School of Art

Children’s activities
Loans
Enquiries
Finding and buying
images
Table 13. Proposed new website structure for CCA, 2013

179

4.5 International Ceramics Festival 2013
Dates: 28th June – 1st July 2013)

The digital material for my project is centred on the International Ceramics Festival
(ICF). In light of this, my supervisors and I deemed it beneficial for me to attend and
participate in the 2013 festival in order to observe how material is made, why it is
selected and any errors or difficulties that occur. An opportunity arose for me to
work with 3 Film students who were going to working on a project filming the
festival.

4.5.1 ICF 2013 28th June
The day before the festival I met with 3 Film students from Aberystwyth University
who filmed someone interviewing people at the ICF. We discussed what we would
be doing over the weekend. I was essentially observing how the audiovisual material
from the festival was created. I would spend some time with the interviewer and the
students and then I would observe the rest of the festival on my own. After our
discussion we went around the festival and filmed its preparation. It was interesting
to discover the many difficulties that arise during filming and it became clear that
you could not just start filming straight away. You need to consider:


The physical space, the distance, perspective, noise and lighting



Which camera to use (hand held or on a tripod)



The practicality of getting footage (you could film the interview and then
return later to film shots of the work)



Permission. When we started to film Stephanie Quayle constructing a clay
rhinoceros, a member of staff asked us if we had Stephanie’s permission to
film.



Health, safety and risk. Although there were 4-5 of us in the team the camera
equipment was still bulky and valuable and so needed to be watched

180

carefully. In some of the gallery spaces there were ceramics sat atop plinths
and so we had to be careful we did not damage anything.

4.5.2 ICF 2013 29th June
This was the day the festival opened to the visitors. We had a list of who and what to
film and this was colour-coded by prioritization: red meant that we should definitely
film, blue meant that we should try to film and green meant that we should only film
if we had spare time. Before any filming took place, the interviewer approached each
interviewee and asked if she could have a quick interview. Upon participation in the
festival, all demonstrators were required to sign a contract giving their permission to
be filmed.


It took a few minutes to set up the camera, particularly with the tripod.



The film crew rotated filming roles: one or two would operate the camera
while the other listened to the audio using headphones.



The interviewer was not required to be in the shot. The crew focused the
camera on the interviewee but would occasionally pan/zoom the camera to
include the ceramic/pottery work.



The interviewer would begin by saying, for example, “Steve Dixon, thanks for
talking to us today,” in order to introduce the video.



Interviews lasted 5-10 minutes each.



There is no designated director and each crewmember filmed using instinct.
However everyone offered feedback and suggestions.



The tripod camera has an adjustable height and its stability offers a smooth,
still shot.



On several occasions we had to wait for the demonstrators to finish working
or talking to visitors before we could conduct interviews. The interviews were
not scheduled, however, this would have been impractical as the
demonstrators were very busy and we only needed 5-10 minutes of their
time.

181



There was a lot of background noise at the festival from talking visitors,
burning kilns and forming clay, however this had little impact on the audio
quality of the interviews.



Takeshi Yasuda worked at his throwing wheel while the interviewer
conducted the interview at some distance. While this provided a good visual
shot, the audio quality was not perfect.

As part of their academic work, the film students produced a short promotional film
using some of the footage. The researcher has not seen this film but the festival coordinator decided not to use it for official promotional work.

The trade tent at the ICF housed a number of stalls run by various organisations
associated with ceramics. I judged this to be a good opportunity to talk with some of
the organisations in order to gauge understanding and interest in digitisation.

Ceramics Ireland17
I spoke to Tina Byrne from Ceramics Ireland about the organization’s digitisation.
They had a paper newsletter which acted as a platform to promote Irish ceramics as
well as review Irish and international ceramics. Ceramics Ireland also had a DVD that
contained audiovisual footage of potters at work, interviews and clips of Ceramics
Ireland’s activities. While these publications provided some financial profit, the
primary purpose was for promotion and access. Ceramics Ireland does no in-house
digitization however they are aware of its value and importance and would like to
pursue it if they had more money, time and knowledge. NIVAL (The National Irish
Visual Arts Library) provides Ceramics Ireland with outsourced digitization services.
Ceramics Ireland frequently fill an envelope with material they wish to be digitized
and send it to NIVAL. Ceramic Ireland also does not engage in back up of material,
archiving or social media although they have a strong desire to do this. They
appreciate and worry about material preservation.

17

http://www.ceramicsireland.org

182

The Oxford Ceramics Gallery18
The Oxford Ceramics Gallery does not undertake frequent digitisation activities,
however they have produced some videos. They are “in two minds” as to whether
they should make the videos open source or for profit.

Wolverhampton University19
Wolverhampton University provide some digitized material online for students at the
university through a virtual learning environment called WOLF (Wolverhampton
Online Learning Framework). The university has worked with IFERICA (International
Foundation for Experimentation Research and Innovation in the Ceramic Arts,
www.iferica.com), however, its website is incomplete with very little information.

4.5.3 ICF 2013 1st July
The day after the official end of the ICF 2013 I attended and presented at a
symposium, held at the School of Art Aberystwyth, which focused on the topics of
Filming, Recording, Digitising and Archiving, mostly in relation to ceramics. My
presentation was primarily an introduction to digitisation and metadata and is
available to view in Appendix B. As outlined in Table 14, the symposium featured
varied talks by presenters from different institutions. Not all talks were relevant to
this research but there was lively discussion about the general issues surrounding
the topics and it was a good occasion to promote this KESS project.

18
19

http://www.oxfordceramics.com
http://www.wlv.ac.uk/default.aspx?page=24995

183

Time

Presentation

Presenter

10.30
11.00

Coffee and setting up
Introduction

Professor Moira Vincentelli, CCA.

11.15

“Filming Indian Potters”

Jane Perryman, artist and writer.

11.45

“Blasting History into the
Present: Performing utopian
images of the past, present and
future in a Welsh landscape.”
“Digitising Bill Ismay’s
collection”
Lunch
“Taiwanese Women Potters”
“Filming Potters at Work”

Reuben Knutson, PhD student, Television and
Theatre Studies, Aberystwyth University

12.15
12.45
1.30
2.00
2.30
3.00
3.30

“Digitising and Working with
Archive Film”
“Digitising the International
Ceramics Festival”
Closing discussion

Curator at York Museum and PhD student

Vicky Chen, PhD student, Bath Spa University
Leah McLaughlin, PhD student, Cardiff
Metropolitan
Ben Partridge, MA student, School of Art,
Aberystwyth University
Jack Snow, MPhil student, School of Art,
Aberystwyth University

Table 14. Schedule for ICF 2013 symposium on Filming, Recording, Digitising and Archiving

4.6 KESS workshop
Dates: 9th – 10th May 2013

I attended a 2-day KESS workshop in May 2013 as part of my MPhil project. I gave a
presentation on the progress of my work and attended several workshops to
enhance skills in: working as part of a team, project management, learning, teaching,
organisation, problem-solving and communication. The following are some notes
from the workshop that I considered most relevant to my MPhil project.

The sustainability of a project must be considered. This includes environmental,
social and financial sustainability. In regards to my project, it could be argued the use
of digital materials as opposed to paper is environmentally sustainable. The
digitisation of archival materials will provide continued access to the collection
(social sustainability) and from this financial benefit could be drawn.

184

The four stages of competence, or the "conscious competence" learning model,
relates to the psychological states involved in the process of progressing from
incompetence to competence in a skill. A diagram is shown in Figure 81. Unconscious
incompetence means being unaware of what you don’t know. Conscious
incompetence means being aware of what you don’t know; however you are still
unable to do it. Conscious competence means knowing how to do something but
only with focus and energy. Unconscious competence is the effortless ability to do
something. This theory has been applied to the understanding of digitisation (Figure
82).

Fig 81. The four stages of competence diagram © Focus Pocus: The Magic of Inquiry and Intent

Unconscious
incompetence

Conscious
incompetence

Not knowing
what
digitisation is
or how it
works.

Knowing what
digitisation is
but unable to
do it.

Conscious
competence

Unconscious
competence

Knowing what
digitisation is
and able to do
it with effort,
e.g. by
following
instructions.

Effortlessly and
successfully
doing
digitisation
work, e.g. from
memory.

Fig 82. The four stages of competence applied to digitisation knowledge

185

In the KESS workshop I also discovered some useful websites and applications that
could be of use to the CCA. Academia.edu (www.academia.edu) is a platform for
academics to share research papers in order to accelerate the world's research.
Mendeley (www.mendeley.com) is a free reference manager and academic social
network to help with organising research, collaborating with others online, and
discovering the latest research. The CCA could use Mendeley and Academia.edu to
promote its research work. Google Keep (drive.google.com/keep) lets you quickly
take and save notes, photos, voice memos, and checklists to Google Drive, and then
access them again on any other web-connected device you use. It is useful for quick
note-taking on the go. The CCA could use Google Keep for capturing and sharing
information whilst travelling to exhibitions and meetings. Camscanner
(www.camscanner.net) is an application for mobile phones that allows users to
scan/digitise analogue materials using the camera in their phone and edit and
convert the pictures to .pdf files. Camscanner can be synced with other devices and
is a useful tool for instant digitisation. Whilst Camscanner is not suitable for detailed
digitisation work, it could be used by the CCA to share documents amongst staff.
Slideshare (www.slideshare.net) is an internet community used primarily for sharing
presentations, as well as documents, .pdfs, videos and webinars. The presentations
gave at the ICF could be shared on Slideshare in order to expand the festival
audience.

4.7 “Digital Information: Discovery to Delivery” Audited
Module
As outlined in section 1.5, it was recognised when the scholarship was granted that
there would be gaps in background knowledge in one or more project areas of the
chosen candidate. In light of this, supervisor Lucy Tedd advised the researcher take a
module she ran at Aberystwyth University, which was titled, “Digital Information:
Discovery to Delivery.” This took place before the official start of the research and
the researcher was not assessed for the module. The researcher read through the
module guidebook in order to increase knowledge on digitisation and to become

186

familiar with references prior to the start of research. The module covered the
different types of digital information, the management and evaluation of digital
information sources, how and why digitisation is undertaken, access to digital
information and the standards, interoperability and metadata for digital information.
This guided the researcher in selecting references and subjects for the literature
review and in becoming familiar with key terms in the field. The module required the
researcher to do several activities, such as comparing the readability and navigation
of two different e-books.

4.8 Chapter Summary
Knowledge on digitisation work was acquired from a variety of sources, chiefly the 3month work experience placement at the National Library of Wales. The work
experience consisted of two strands of work: Strand A involved the researcher
learning from the Digitisation, Description and Legacy Acquisitions Section and
Strand B involved the researcher working with the People’s Collection Wales. The
two strands performed digitisation work at different scales using different methods
and the PCW method was deemed most applicable to the Ceramic Collection &
Archive.

Work experience at CCA provided the researcher with an understanding of the
organisation’s capabilities and current operations in terms of digitisation. The
researcher undertook a web design course in order to understand how websites can
be used, specifically an “International Ceramics Festival Archive” website to publish
the CCA’s ICF collection. The researcher attended the ICF 2013 and acquired
knowledge on how digital material is generated at the festival, and as well as this the
researcher discussed digitisation work with 3 ceramics organisations. A conference
on digital preservation provided the researcher with an insight into the
contemporary situation of the field. By participating in a KESS workshop the
researcher acquired project management skills and knowledge on useful websites
and technology. The “Digital Information: Discovery to Delivery” module enlightened
the researcher on the topic in a similar way as with the literature review.
187

Chapter 5: Application of Knowledge to the CCA
This chapter incorporates the different outputs produced by the researcher after acquiring
and developing knowledge from the various sources outlined in Chapter 4; primarily the
work experience at NLW. The outputs (see Table 15) are chiefly in the form of documents
that assist digitisation work at the CCA and through these documents the digitisation
knowledge can been transferred. The outputs were primarily tested and reviewed by the
researcher, staff at the CCA as well as undergraduate students working on a digitisation
project. The work outlined in this chapter fulfils the objectives (section 1.4) of transferring
knowledge to the CCA. This chapter overviews the application of knowledge while Chapter
6 discusses the implications of the results. Where appropriate, the outputs can be located
in the Appendices as they were judged to be too lengthy to put in this chapter.

Output to CCA

Developed from

Tested/reviewed by

Digitisation Strategy

NLW’s Digitisation
Strategy document
NLW’s Project Outline
document
PCW’s Digitisation
Guidelines
PCW’s Metadata
Guidelines
PCW’s Metadata
Spreadsheet
PCW’s digitisation
workshops
NLW work experience

CCA staff

Project Outline
Digitisation Guidelines
Metadata Guidelines
Metadata Spreadsheet
Presentation and Workshops on
Digitisation and Metadata
Digitisation and Metadata for approx.
260 pages of ICF programmes
Metadata for approx. 86 born-digital
ICF demonstration videos
PDF testing

NLW work experience

CCA staff and researcher
CCA staff, undergraduate students,
researcher and Curatorial Intern
CCA staff and undergraduate students
CCA staff, researcher and
undergraduate students
CCA staff and undergraduate students
CCA staff, researcher and
undergraduate students
CCA staff and researcher
CCA staff and researcher

KESS equipment

MPhil project work,
web design course
NLW/PCW equipment

Grant application

MPhil project work

Culture Colony blog

MPhil project work

CCA staff, researcher, Aberystwyth Arts
Centre, NESTA (National Endowment
for Science, Technology and the Arts)
Culture Colony website users

CCA staff and researcher

Table 15. Outputs developed by the researcher for the CCA

188

5.1 Digitisation Strategy for the Ceramic Collection & Archive
Developed from: NLW’s Digitisation Strategy document
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff
Appendix: C

During the work experience at the National Library of Wales (NLW) the researcher
encountered the organisation’s Digitisation Strategy document. This document
outlines the NLW’s aims, intentions, principles and activities for digitisation work. It
acts as a useful reference and an instructive guide and it ensures clarity of purpose
regarding an organisation’s digitisation work. The researcher learned from the NLW’s
Digitisation Strategy and used it as a guide in order to develop a Digitisation Strategy
for the CCA. The researcher maintained a similar heading structure to the NLW’s
document, with a few exceptions and alterations to fit with the CCA’s smaller-scale.
The work experience with the CCA furthered the researcher’s understanding of the
organisation and this also contributed towards the developed of the Digitisation
Strategy. The CCA contains both digitised and born-digital resources and the strategy
deals with both of these categories. However, if digitisation expands to a
mainstream operation in the future, it may be advisable to create two separate
strategies for each category. The Digitisation Strategy was reviewed and approved by
the Curator of the CCA.

5.2 Project Outline: Digitisation of International Ceramics
Festival Programmes 1993 – 2011
Developed from: NLW’s Project Outline document
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff and researcher
Appendix: D

The NLW produces a Project Outline document for each digitisation project it
embarks on. The document outlines the scope, description, timescale, method,
189

available metadata, costs, resources, benefits, beneficiaries, sources of funding,
partners, stakeholders and required preparatory work for a digitisation project. It is a
useful document for a project manager to refer to whilst running a project and it
ensures clarity of objectives. The document developed for the CCA can be used as a
template for future digitisation projects, however, in this case its contents is for the
digitisation of approx. 260 pages of ICF festival programmes. Undergraduate
students carried out the scanning and metadata work for this project as part of their
digitisation project. In this way, the Project Outline document was used by the
researcher and by the students’ teacher (and CCA Curator) Prof. Moira Vincentelli to
supervise the project. Due to the nature of the student project, some sections of the
document were unnecessary, such as costs and funding, because the students used
the School of Art’s facilities. However, these sections may be relevant for future
digitisation projects.

5.3 Digitisation Guidelines – Ceramic Collection & Archive
Developed from: PCW’s digitisation guidelines
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff, undergraduate students, researcher and School of
Art Curatorial Intern.
Appendix: E

Digitisation guidelines were considered an essential output by the researcher after
undertaking work experience at NLW and conducting research for the literature
review. Throughout the course of the MPhil, different digitisation guidelines proved
to be valuable in teaching the subject to newcomers. The researcher experienced
two different digitisation methods at the NLW and considered the PCW’s method to
be most applicable to the CCA. The PCW’s digitisation guidelines were used as a
model and the new guidelines took into consideration the facilities available in the
School of Art and the users of the guidelines. The long-term users of the guidelines
were staff at the CCA while the short-term users were undergraduate students
working on a digitisation project. Before the guidelines were provided to the

190

students, the researcher and the Curatorial Intern at the School of Art tested them.
The guidelines produced successful scans and the only alteration made to them was
the additional instruction of converting the scans into a .pdf file as per Prof.
Vincentelli’s suggestion. Upon completion of the project the students were asked to
fill in a questionnaire to give feedback and this was used to assess the effectiveness
of the digitisation guidelines. The outcomes of the questionnaires are discussed in
Chapter 6.

5.4 Metadata Guidelines – Ceramic Collection & Archive
Developed from: PCW’s metadata guidelines
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff, undergraduate students and researcher
Appendix: F

Metadata guidelines were written to instruct the CCA staff and the undergraduate
students in how to complete a metadata spreadsheet accurately. The guidelines
gave specific rules on the format of the metadata writing, for example, that the date
should be written in the format of YYYY-MM-DD. The PCW’s metadata guidelines
were used as a model to create these new guidelines because the PCW’s digitisation
work was deemed most applicable to the CCA. The metadata guidelines and
accompanying metadata spreadsheet were written in consultation with CCA staff to
ensure they were consistent with the organisation’s wishes. The undergraduate
students used the metadata guidelines to complete the metadata spreadsheets as
part of their digitisation project work. Before the guidelines were provided to the
students, the researcher and the Curatorial Intern at the School of Art tested them
to satisfaction. As with the Digitisation Guidelines, upon completion of the project
the students were asked to fill in a questionnaire to give feedback and this was used
to assess the effectiveness of the metadata guidelines (discussed in Chapter 6).

191

5.5 Metadata Spreadsheet
Developed from: PCW’s metadata (or “tracking”) spreadsheet
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff, undergraduate students and researcher
Appendix: G

The metadata spreadsheet was developed from the PCW’s model for use in the CCA
and for undergraduate students. The students were required to complete a
metadata spreadsheet to support their scans of the ICF programmes. The PCW’s
model was slightly altered to fit the requirements of the CCA, for example, the PCW
list 3 possible copyright owners, whereas, after consultation with CCA staff, it was
decided only 2 possible copyright owners would be needed. Upon completion of the
project the students were asked to fill in a questionnaire to give feedback and this
was used to measure the success of the metadata guidelines (discussed in Chapter
6).

Aside from the students’ digitisation and metadata work, the researcher wrote
metadata for approx. 86 demonstration videos from ICF 2011. As this process began
the researcher used the same metadata spreadsheet as the students used for
scanning programmes. However, the researcher consulted with CCA staff who
requested the addition of three more fields: file type, file duration (in minutes) and
file size (see Figure 83). This was because video files are larger in size than .tiff or
.jpeg scans and CCA staff were keen to anticipate storage of the files. Furthermore,
each demonstration was approx. 45-minutes long but these had been split into
separate video files approx. 9-minutes long each, and CCA staff wanted to know the
sizes of the videos. These three new fields were added to the original spreadsheet to
support the nature of video material and the requirements of the CCA.

192

Fig 83. The addition of 3 new fields to the metadata spreadsheet: file type, file duration, file size.

5.6 Presentation and Workshops on Digitisation and Metadata
Developed from: PCW’s digitisation workshops
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff and undergraduate students
Appendix: B

The researcher assisted Prof. Moira Vincentelli, Curator of the CCA, in a module for
undergraduate students. As part of the students’ assessment they did a digitisation
project that required them to each to digitise an ICF programme and write the
metadata. The Project Outline document was written to manage the student project
and the Digitisation Guidelines, Metadata Guidelines and Metadata Spreadsheet
were created prior to the project for both the students and CCA to use. In this sense,
the students would be testing the suitability of the documents for the CCA. The
students were selected as a small, convenient sample and because they were
already required to complete a digitisation project an experiment would not need to
be arranged for this MPhil.

Prior to assisting in the module, the researcher had completed work experience at
NLW, which included attendance at three digitisation workshops run by PCW. The
researcher witnessed PCW staff successfully teach members of the public about
digitising using powerpoint presentations and practical sessions. These observations

193

were acquired and applied when the researcher gave a presentation on digitisation
and metadata for the undergraduate students and CCA staff. The presentation began
with a short powerpoint that overviewed the subject, avoiding advanced technical
terminologies. Following this, the researcher ran a practical session during which the
students and CCA staff were walked through the Digitisation Guidelines and
Metadata Guidelines using the scanner and Mac in the School of Art. The equipment
was the same equipment the students were to use for their scanning work.

After the presentation, the researcher ran weekly drop-in workshops in the School of
Art for the undergraduate students to attend should they require assistance with
digitisation and metadata. This was also an opportunity for the researcher to witness
the implementation of the guidelines. Upon completion of the project the students
were asked to fill in a questionnaire to give feedback and this was used to measure
the success of the guidelines (discussed in Chapter 6).

5.7 Digitisation and Metadata for approx. 260 pages of ICF
programmes
Developed from: NLW work experience
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff, researcher and undergraduate students
Appendix: I

As part of the undergraduate students’ module assessment they did a digitisation
project that required them each to digitise an ICF programme and write the
metadata. As well as being provided with digitisation and metadata guidelines, the
students were emailed an .xml metadata spreadsheet to input their metadata. Each
student was assigned a different year of the festival to work on for their projects.
Festivals were assigned randomly starting from the most recent year, ICF 2011, and
working backwards until every student had a year. This was because there was more
material available for recent years, which made the students’ task easier. As a result
the ICF festivals 2011, 2009, 2007, 2005, 2003, 2001, 1999, 1997, 1995 and 1993

194

were aimed for and assigned to 10 students, including the researcher. Towards the
end of the project the researcher reviewed the students’ work and provided
feedback for improving the scans before the work was submitted. Table 16 shows
the majority of digitisation and metadata work was completed.

ICF year

Scans

Jpegs

Crops

Digitisation

Metadata

2011

24

24

24

Complete

Complete

2009

28

28

28

Complete

Complete

2007

28

28

28

Complete

Complete

2005

26

26

26

Complete

Complete

2003

24

24

24

Complete

Complete

2001

24

24

24

Complete

Complete

1999

24

24

24

Complete

Complete

1997

24

24

24

Complete

Complete

1995

19

0

0

Incomplete

Incomplete

1993

0

0

0

Incomplete

Incomplete

TOTAL

221

202

202

8/10

8/10

Table 16. Completed digitisation and metadata work for ICF programmes

5.8 Metadata for approx. 86 born-digital ICF demonstration
videos
Developed from: NLW work experience
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff and researcher
Appendix: H

As mentioned in section 5.5 the researcher wrote metadata for approx. 86 borndigital videos of demonstrations from the 2011 ICF. This festival was selected as the
CCA has a wide range of materials on 2011 and videos were chosen as an alternative
to working with the programmes. The metadata spreadsheet was updated to cater

195

for the video material and this involved the addition of three more fields: file type,
file duration and file size. The researcher created the “IC11VD” (International
Ceramics festival 2011 ViDeos) .xml metadata spreadsheet. The majority of
demonstrations were 45-minutes long, split into 5-6 9-minute long .avi video files.1
An exception to this standard was the inclusion of the closing ceremony (IC11VD071IC11VD074) at approx. 26-minutes long, split into 4 .avi video files. The researcher
experienced some .avi files that had errors and these were entered in red font (See
Figure 84). The errors were chiefly a lack of sound and the filming of cleaning-up
after a demonstration, which were considered unnecessary for inclusion and can be
edited out.

Fig 84. Use of red font to highlight errors on metadata spreadsheet for ICF videos

5.9 PDF testing
Developed from: MPhil project work, web design course
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff and researcher
Appendix: J

The CCA aims to provide digitised material online to deepen and broaden access to
its collection. In the case of the digitised ICF programmes, the CCA considered
publishing them online in PDF format to be downloaded by users. After a discussion
with the CCA curator, the researcher selected the most thorough digitisation and
1

A 09:12-minute video was usually 2,104,299,768 bytes (2.1 GB)

196

metadata work from the student project to use as a prototype for PDF publishing.
This was the digitised programme for the 1999 ICF and its supporting metadata. The
researcher converted the scans into a PDF using Adobe Bridge and offered three
suggestions as to how it could be used.

Table 21 shows a typical website layout similar to the CCA’s website. In this option,
users scroll horizontally through the page and view the front covers of each
programme along with metadata boxes below the images. The PDF can be
downloaded via a link in the metadata box, or by clicking on the image. Hovering
over the image could preview the other scanned pages, as if flicking through the
programme. The images do not need to be included at all, but they provide a more
visually interesting design for users and allow users to preview what they are
downloading.

Table 22 is a similar design but with vertical scrolling. This design also exhibits how
metadata can be used on the web page to support the PDFs. Not all metadata will be
of relevance or interest to users, but certain fields could be used. For example, users
may like to know how many pages are in each programme, how large the PDF file is,
when the PDF was uploaded to the website, as well as tags relevant to the content of
the programmes. The tags could be linked to a search within the entire website to
find entries on the same topic. All this metadata can be taken from the metadata
spreadsheet. The issue with tagging is that each digitised page has been tagged with
its individual page content and so if tags are to be used a tag list for the whole
programme must be complied.

Table 23 shows an alternative or additional option for using PDFs. In this design,
users could view individual page ‘profiles’ for each programme, in this case 1999.
User could be directed to the profile pages by clicking on the front covers. This
design allows room for more metadata information to support the PDF.

197

5.10 KESS equipment
Developed from: NLW/PCW equipment
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff and researcher
Appendix: L

The KESS budget allocated money for equipment, all of which would remain with the
CCA at the end of the project. The decision to purchase a Macbook Pro laptop was
based on the following:


That the CCA had only two computers and so a portable laptop was
considered practical for the researcher and for the staff to use for digitisation
and metadata work.



That the researcher observed laptops in use by PCW in digitisation work and
that they proved practical.



That staff in the NLW Digitisation Unit used and recommended Macs for
digitisation work because of their high-quality imaging tools.



That a laptop could be easily moved and could be taken from the CCA office
to the scanners in SAGM.

The researcher used the Macbook Pro throughout the project when digitising and
writing metadata individually, working with students, note-taking during meetings,
sharing work with supervisors and CCA staff and writing the thesis. The laptop stored
files that would be of continuous use for the CCA beyond the MPhil project,
including: the researcher’s work on the web design course, the students’ scans and
metadata, video material from the 2013 and 2011 ICF, information acquired through
work experience at NLW and other documents of relevance to digitisation and
metadata, such as guidelines.

A flip-camera device was also purchased through the KESS budget. The researcher
and CCA curator decided on this purchase after witnessing its use at a PCW
workshop. The flip-camera can be used for interviewing for the CCA’s oral history

198

collection, note-taking and image and video capture. The flip-camera was used by
the researcher at the ICF 2013 in Aberystwyth during which it became clear that the
device was not for collecting high-quality photographs and videos but for quickly
taking photographs and videos for reflective and memory purposes. For example,
the flip-camera could record an interview, which can later be referred to when
writing up the interview.

5.11 Grant Application
Developed from: MPhil project work
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff, researcher, Aberystwyth Arts Centre and NESTA
(National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts)

The Digital Research and Development Fund for the Arts in Wales2 is a partnership
between the Arts Council of Wales, Arts & Humanities Research Council (AHRC) and
NESTA to support arts projects across Wales that work with digital technologies to
expand audience reach and engagement and/or explore new business models for
the arts sector within Wales.

The researcher worked with the Curator of the CCA and ICF Festival Co-ordinator
from Aberystwyth Centre on an application to the grant. The grant proposal was
viewed as something of an extension of the MPhil project work, as it sought to use
digitised material from the ICF. A requirement of the proposal was to know how
much material there was, how much required digitisation, editing and metadata
work and how long it would take to do this work. From this, it could be worked out
how much money would need to be requested to fund the work. The researcher
wrote an assessment of the material in the CCA’s ICF collection, which not only
contributed towards the grant but also towards the CCA itself as a valuable
assessment document.3
2

http://www.nesta.org.uk/project/digital-rd-fund-arts-wales
As of November 2013, the grant proposal lost out on the first round of funding allocation but is
undergoing re-evaluation for submission to the second round of funding allocation.
3

199

5.12 Culture Colony blog
At the beginning of the MPhil project the researcher and supervisor Professor Moira
Vincentelli met with Pete Telfer, owner of Culture Colony; an online space for
sharing and developing creative ideas (www.culturecolony.com). It was agreed the
researcher would keep a blog updating the progress of the MPhil (Figure 85). The
purpose of this was to both promote the MPhil research as well as promote Culture
Colony as a platform for creative expression and social media. The researcher also
created a ‘platform’ page on Culture Colony for the CCA (Figure 86) and encouraged
staff to use the website for sharing news. The researcher trialled an “Artist of the
Week” feature for the CCA’s blog. This involved selecting a ceramicist from the CCA’s
collection and providing bibliographic information and images of work (Figures 87
and 88). The purpose of this was to promote the CCA’s collection and encourage
further interaction with the CCA. The researcher also uploaded informative
documents on the CCA, such as its history and its learning and outreach programme,
in order to promote the CCA’s work (Figure 89).

Fig 85. Screenshot of a blog post by the researcher on Culture Colony

200

Fig 86. Screenshot of the CCA’s platform on Culture Colony

Fig 87. Screenshot of the “Artist of the Week” feature on the CCA’s platform on Culture Colony

201

Fig 88. Screenshot of an “Artist of the Week” blog post on Bernard Leach

Fig 89. Screenshot of informative blog posts on the CCA

202

5.13 Digitisation Questionnaire
Developed from: MPhil project work, advice from supervisors
Tested/reviewed by: CCA staff, researcher, undergraduate students
Appendix: K

As stated throughout this chapter, the students involved in the digitisation project
were asked to complete a feedback questionnaire upon completion of their work.
The researcher designed the questionnaire, which developed after discussions with
supervisor Professor Lorna Hughes who advised getting feedback from the students.
The researcher selected a Likert scale design, which consists of a series of
statements followed by a number of ordered response alternatives and a person’s
score is determined by summing the number of questions answered in a particular
way. Likert scales are considered to have a high “reliability” (Monette, Sullivan &
DeJong, 2010: 354-359). The questionnaire was short with only six questions
regarding the main activities on the project: understanding digitisation and
metadata, using a scanner, using a Mac, and using Microsoft Excel. Due to the small
sample of participants a pilot questionnaire was deemed unnecessary by the
researcher and supervisors.

5.14 Chapter Summary
The knowledge acquired from the various sources throughout the course of the
MPhil project was applied to the CCA in equally various outputs. The primary source
of knowledge came from work experience at NLW, which influenced practical
digitisation work and the development of useful documents for digitisation and
metadata. The NLW’s procedures on digitisation work were applied to the CCA in the
form of a Digitisation Strategy document and a Project Outline document. The
workshops run by staff at PCW provided the researcher with skills in teaching and
knowledge transfer, which were utilized for undergraduate student projects on
digitisation. The researcher maintained frequent contact with the CCA staff during
203

the development of outputs to ensure cohesion. The KESS equipment budget
allowed for the purchase of a Macbook Pro and a flip-camera, which the CCA will
retain after the MPhil, and these will support enduring work in digitisation,
metadata, website design and oral history. Finally, the work produced and the skills
acquired throughout the MPhil led to the researcher’s contribution towards a grant
application to further digitisation work on the ICF.

204

Chapter 6: Discussion
This chapter discusses and reflects upon the acquisition, development and application of
knowledge to the CCA. Knowledge was acquired primarily from work experience at
NLW, as well as literature research, work experience at the CCA, a web design short
course, the ICF 2013 and events attended by the researcher. The knowledge influenced
the development of outputs that were applied to the CCA; primarily digitisation and
metadata documents and practical work, as well as a presentation, workshops,
equipment purchases and a grant application to further the MPhil work. Table 17
outlines how the acquired knowledge was applied to the CCA through the development
of outputs.
Acquisition

Application (full details given in Appendices)

NLW work experience


















Digitisation Strategy document
Project Outline document
Digitisation Guidelines
Metadata Guidelines
Metadata Spreadsheet
Presentation and Workshops on Digitisation and Metadata
Digitisation and Metadata for approx. 260 pages of ICF programmes
Metadata for approx. 86 born-digital ICF demonstration videos
KESS equipment
Grant application
PDF Testing
Digitisation Strategy document
KESS equipment
Grant application
Digitisation Strategy document
Digitisation Guidelines








PDF Testing
Grant application
PDF Testing
Grant application
KESS equipment
Presentation and Workshops on Digitisation and Metadata

CCA work experience

Conference: “Digital
Preservation: What I Wish I
Knew Before I Started”
Web Design studies
ICF 2013 observations

KESS workshop

Table 17. How the acquired knowledge was applied to the CCA through the development of outputs

205

6.1 Digitisation Strategy and Project Outline documents
In the literature review it was discovered a successful digitisation project must have
clear definitions of purpose, mission, and audience (CLIR, 2001: 14). Many institutions,
such as the British Library, the Smithsonian Institution and the National Archives of
Australia, include digitisation work in their strategic plans (Bülow & Ahmon. 2011: 3).
Bülow & Ahmon listed project planning in stage one of their four stage model to
digitisation (2011: 11). Youngs emphasised the importance of planning and managing a
digitisation project and advised the consideration of the following factors: the aims and
objectives of a project, the scope, risk analysis, standards, resources, the project
lifecycle (beginning, middle, end), timing, task analysis (hidden tasks may be identified
during the course of the project), staffing and crisis management (2012: 7). During work
experience at NLW, the researcher was introduced to the institute’s digitisation strategy
and project outline document. These documents explain an organisation’s general aims
and intentions for digitisation, as well as specific plans for an individual digitisation
project. In light of the literature research and work experience, the researcher
developed a digitisation strategy and a project outline document and applied them to
the CCA through a project digitising approx. 260 ICF programmes. The documents
seemed more necessary in a large-scale institution such as the NLW in order to correctly
manage a large staff and large collections of material. The CCA has a comparatively
smaller staff and collection and so there is less to manage, however, the documents are
useful for reference and for justification of digitisation work. The documents can also be
reused as a basis for future digitisation projects and for developments in digitisation
work, taking into consideration advancements in technology. In consideration of
Youngs’ factors in planning and managing a digitisation project, the documents
produced by the researcher do not focus on risk analysis or crisis management,
however, the NLW produces separate documents on these matters and these could also
be replicated for the CCA.

206

6.2 Digitisation Guidelines
In the literature review it became clear that digitisation guidelines were widely used for
instruction on digitisation work (Hughes & Green 2011, Bülow & Ahmon 2011, Youngs
2012). In particular, JISC produce numerous documents instructing on the various
aspects of digitisation work (JISC Digital Media 2013a-e). The importance of digitisation
guidelines was further reinforced when the researcher undertook work experience at
NLW. It was observed that both the Digitisation Unit and the People’s Collection of
Wales used digitisation guidelines, however, the PCW’s guidelines proved to be most
applicable to CCA due to similarities in scope. The researcher used the PCW’s
digitisation guidelines to create basic guidelines for digitisation at CCA. The guidelines
were implemented in a student project to digitise approx. 260 ICF programmes. Upon
completion of the project the students were required to complete a questionnaire that
evaluated their knowledge before and after the project. In 2/5 cases understanding of
digitisation remained the same before and after, while 3/5 cases increased their
understanding of digitisation. The 2/5 cases had scored themselves highly on their
understanding of digitisation prior to the start of the project. No cases claimed to have
decreased in understanding of digitisation after the project. In 4/5 cases understanding
of how to use a scanner remained the same before and after the project and in 1/5 case
the understanding increased. In all cases this understanding had been above average in
the first place and ‘using a scanner’ came out as the easiest of tasks. The overall
increase, and total lack of decrease, in knowledge of digitisation and scanning,
combined with the completion of the majority of project work, could suggest the
digitisation guidelines were successful. Operating a Mac computer was considered the
most difficult task and this could explain why every student did not increase knowledge.
A possible improvement of the digitisation guidelines would be the addition of images
and screenshots to further instruct users, as PCW use in their guidelines.

207

6.3 Metadata Guidelines and Metadata Spreadsheet
Literature research into metadata revealed there are many different metadata
standards, such as Dublin Core, MARC, XML and EAD, but an XML metadata schema was
simple to understand and easily transferrable (Carini & Shepherd 2004, Mugridge 2006,
Andressen 2004). This was an important factor for the CCA because staff do not have
expert training in metadata and digitisation. The use of XML was reinforced during the
researcher’s work experience at NLW, where staff used ALTO (Analyzed Layout and Text
Object), an XML schema. PCW staff create XML spreadsheets for metadata and this was
seen as a viable option for CCA staff who were familiar with XML spreadsheets. The
researcher built upon the PCW’s spreadsheet to develop a metadata spreadsheet for
the CCA and this was used on the student digitisation project as well as the researcher’s
metadata writing for the approx. 86 demonstration videos. Upon completion of the
project the students were required to complete a questionnaire that evaluated their
knowledge before and after the project. In 4/5 cases the understanding and application
of metadata increased, with 2/4 cases increasing significantly. The remaining 1/5 case
maintained the same level of knowledge prior to the project. 2/5 cases increased their
knowledge of using Microsoft Excel to create the XML metadata spreadsheet. The other
3/5 cases maintained their previous knowledge, all of which were above average. The
overall increase, and total lack of decrease, in knowledge of metadata and XML,
combined with the completion of the majority of project work, could suggest the
metadata guidelines were successful. Understanding metadata was voted the second
most difficult task behind using a Mac computer; which, as with digitisation, could
explain why every student did not increase knowledge. During the project work the
researcher observed metadata to be difficult to understand for both students and CCA
staff and so a possible development for the metadata guidelines could be the addition
of images and screenshots for guidance. It is likely the familiarity of Excel contributed to
the general completion of the metadata work and had students been required to learn
new software the metadata may not have been as successful.

208

6.4 Presentation and Workshops on Digitisation and Metadata
The presentation and workshops conducted by the researcher for students and CCA
staff were a support to the guidelines and were developed through work experience at
NLW, particularly with PCW. The presentation was also an opportunity to directly
transfer digitisation and metadata knowledge to staff at CCA who attended. During work
experience the researcher observed PCW staff running workshops on digitisation and
metadata where they gave presentations and practical demonstrations in addition to
providing attendees with guidelines. In this way it was hoped attendees would have
more help and would be more engaged in the subject by learning through both reading,
seeing and listening. During work experience members of staff at NLW guided the
researcher through learning and therefore this seemed an appropriate method to teach
the subject to students and staff. The results of the questionnaire completed by the
students showed the majority believed they had gained useful skills through the project
and all had either maintained or increased their previous knowledge, with no students
feeling more confused after the project. The questionnaire attempted to reveal the
easiest and most difficult of the tasks, however, there was no standout result. This could
suggest all areas were sufficiently covered in the presentation and workshops and the
results were down to individual differences amongst students. However, 3/5 students
found using a Mac computer to be the most difficult task and although this is not a
significant number it could be relevant in light of the fact that the presentation did not
cover basic usage of a Mac computer. Most students pointed out that they were more
familiar with a Windows computer and therefore a potential development of the
presentation could be an introduction to using a Mac computer.

209

6.5 Digitisation and Metadata for approx. 260 pages of ICF
Programmes
The literature research revealed that selection of materials for digitisation required
careful consideration and there were different options for selection based on an
organisation’s resources (Ooghe & Moreels 2009, Hughes & Green 2003, Hadžić 2004).
The CCA’s ICF collection was selected prior to the start of the project and, after
conversations with CCA staff, the researcher decided the ICF programmes would be
digitised. This decision was made because the programmes were easily accessible and
the collection of programmes was complete, as well as because the paper-based
material reflected the researcher’s work on manuscripts and photographs during work
experience at NLW. The researcher’s digitisation workflow was based on the PCW’s
workflow and these both matched the fundamentals of the guidelines from the
literature review. These fundamentals were: scanning the object, edit/optimize the
scan, save as .tiff for storage and save as .jpeg for use. (JISC Digital Media 2013c, Bülow
& Ahmon 2011, Youngs 2012, Note 2011).

The quality and quantity of digitisation and metadata work was varied, with some
students having completed everything to a good standard, while a few students had
done little work. At the end of the project the students were required to give their scans
and metadata to the researcher for storage on the KESS Macbook. The researcher
assisted Professor Moira Vincentelli in grading the work. As is typical with educational
work, students produced scans and metadata of varying quality due to differences in
skill and motivation. For example, the student allocated the programme from ICF 1993
failed to turn up to any lectures or workshops. Therefore, the target of approx. 260
pages was not achieved, however the majority of scanning and metadata writing was
done. This suggests that students require considerable supervision or they are arguably
not reliable to work on a professional digitisation project due to a lack of dedication that
would not be an issue for a project employee.
210

After the student digitisation project, one aspect that changed upon review was the filenaming conventions. To take one example, the programme pages were initially named
IFPG93001 (IF = IcF, PG = ProGramme, 93 = 1993, 001 = start number). This was loosely
based on NLW’s rule of 3-letters followed by 5-numbers. However, it was realised this
would lead to files being organised by type of material, and not by year, for example, all
of the IFPGs 1993-2011 followed by all of the IFPHs (PHotographs) 1993-2011, etc. By
changing the file name to IF93PG001, the files would be organised by year, e.g. IF93PG…
IF93PH… IF93RV… (ReViews). Furthermore, it was agreed between the researcher and
CCA staff that ‘ceramics’ was the key word and so the ‘F’ was replaced with a ‘C’ in the
file name: IC93PG001. This process of trial and error was reinforced in the literature
review as a common occurrence (Hughes & Green 2003, Kao & Tsai 2008).

6.6 Metadata for approx. 86 born-digital ICF Demonstration
Videos
During the work experience at NLW the researcher worked on a manuscript and
photographs for digitisation and metadata work. This led to the development of a
metadata spreadsheet for students to use on the ICF programmes project. However, the
CCA holds a large amount of video material and requested for metadata to be written
for some of the ICF demonstration videos. The researcher initially used the same
metadata spreadsheet used for the programmes, however, after discussions with CCA
staff, it became evident the video material required further information and so three
more fields were added. It could be argued the three new fields – file type, file duration
(in minutes) and file size – are not essential in light of the fact that PCW considers the
following to be essential: title, creator, subject, description, date, rights, identifier and
coverage. However, given that the addition of the fields was a specific request by the
CCA, with legitimate reasoning, the fields can be considered necessary. The issue of
what to include and what to exclude in metadata is debatable and the decision seems to
211

come down to individual requirements and capabilities. However, the literature
research emphasised that metadata was extremely important and needed to exist in
some consistent form (Eden 2004, Note 2011, Orna & Pettitt 1980). In light of the
alteration of the metadata spreadsheet for video material, it may be necessary to alter
the spreadsheet for other different materials, such as audio. If several metadata
spreadsheets are created, each one must be labeled correctly and used with the
appropriate material.

The CCA requested the researcher note any errors or discrepancies while viewing the
demonstration videos and writing the metadata. A common issue was the camera being
left to film while the stage was cleaned up after a demonstration. Before the videos
could be published online the cleaning up would need to be cut out of the video. The
inclusion of the cleaning up causes the videos to be longer in duration and bigger in size,
meaning they will take longer to upload and they will also appear somewhat unfinished
and unprofessional. When the videos are appropriately cut, edited and published, the
metadata spreadsheet, entitled “IC11VD,” can be used to provide users with more
information.1

6.7 PDF Testing
The CCA makes a few of its materials available to download from its website in PDF form
and aims to continue this process. Websites such as JISC, the DPC and the DCC also
allow users to download documents. The student digitisation project did not require the
students to convert their scans into a PDF document and this detail was later added to
the digitisation guidelines. The CCA was interested in how the digitised programmes
could be used on the website in PDF format in collaboration with the metadata
spreadsheet. The researcher selected the 1999 programme, which had received the
most thorough digitisation and metadata work, and converted it into a PDF using Adobe
1

IC11VD refers to the .xml file for metadata (section 5.8)

212

Bridge. Then, three design prototypes were drawn up as suggestions for how the PDF
can be used on the CCA website with the metadata. The main two points are that (1) the
metadata supports the PDF download link, so users know what they are downloading,
and that (2) the metadata works with the website’s search facility so users can find the
PDF. The issue with using metadata as supportive information to the download is how
much information to include from the metadata spreadsheet. There is some information
the majority of users will be uninterested in. When thinking about the different types of
metadata outlined by Note (2011) and Deegan & Tanner (2002), ‘descriptive’ metadata
is arguably most relevant to users, while ‘administrative’ and ‘structural’ metadata are
of more use to staff members. These different types of metadata can be kept in mind
when deciding what to include and exclude. It is possible that the use of metadata
increases the sense of authenticity for users, who may be hesitant to download items on
to their computer through fear of viruses. Each metadata spreadsheet comes with a list
of tags and these tags need to be linked with the website so that when a user searches a
tagged word it will reveal the PDF programme as a result. An issue that arose during
discussions prior to the student digitisation project was how much to tag. The benefit of
tagging as much as possible means that more keyword search results will be produced,
however, the downside to this is that there will potentially be more irrelevant results for
a user to read through in order to find what they are looking for. Each programme could
potentially generate hundreds of tags. The CCA decided a ‘common sense’ approach to
tagging would be best: prominent, featured words in the programmes would be tagged
(such as ceramicist’s profiles) and tedious links would be avoided. The success of the
level of tagging can be evaluated by viewing the number of search enquiries, the
number of downloads and by any email enquiries/complaints.

213

6.8 KESS Budget
Table 18 summarises how the KESS budget was received and used, with further details
provided in Appendix L. The largest expenditure on the project came from the
equipment budget through the purchase of the Macbook Pro and the flip-camera, which
will remain with the CCA for future use. This expenditure exceeded the equipment
budget by £60.86; however, this amount was taken from the consumables budget,
which was unused. Upon conversations with other KESS students it became clear they
had used the consumables budget to purchase items such as petri dishes and materials
for testing (such as chemicals), however, for this project the materials (videos and
photographs) already existed. The £6.00 consumables expenditure was for postage of
equipment. Upon reflection, more expenditure would ideally have been made in travel
and training, however, as the project was only 1-year long, the priority was completion
of the work experience and project work during the time available.

Stipend
Equipment
Consumables
Travel
Training
Academic Travel

Budget
Expenditure
Budget remaining
£9,835.00
£9,835.00 £
£1,000.00
£1,060.86
-£60.86
£2,000.00
£6.00
£1,994.00
£1,000.00
£124.50
£875.50
£500.00
£70.00
£430.00
£200.00
£0.00
£200.00
Table 18. Summary of KESS budget expenditure

6.9 Grant Application
The CCA receives funding support from organisations such as Arts Council Wales and
CyMAL and this requires grant applications to be written. It is an important task in order
to secure the survival of the CCA in the difficult economic climate of 2013. The CCA was
awarded a £5,000 audience development grant in 2013 to redesign its website but aside
214

from this no funding has been applied for with technology issues in mind. The NESTA
grant applied for in collaboration with the researcher and Aberystwyth Arts Centre was
an opportunity to win funding for a digital project in the CCA. Throughout the
researcher’s work experience at NLW and through literature research it became clear
that digitisation is an expensive process and cannot be achieved successfully with
insufficient resources. The CCA should maintain an awareness of potential sources of
funding if it is to ensure successful long-term digitisation work.

6.10 Culture Colony Blog
On social media and sharing websites such as Facebook and Twitter, users can only see
content they have opted to see by adding friends and liking pages. Culture Colony, on
the other hand, permits users to see everything posted by all other users. The benefit of
this is that it creates more of a public community where content is more accessible,
however the drawback to this is a lack of privacy and personalisation. Culture Colony
links its Twitter posts with its own website in an effort to encourage interaction and
traffic between the websites. The researcher’s individual blog posts and the CCA’s blog
posts did not receive comments from other users, with the exception of the researcher’s
first post, which received 3 comments. However, this lack of activity was not unusual as
the typical activity by users was observed as 1 post every few days and the same
frequent users mainly did this. A reason for this could be explained by the fact that
Culture Colony requires a paid subscription, while popular websites such as Facebook
and Twitter are free to use. The ‘platform’ on Culture Colony with significantly the most
members was “’Pitch’ on Radio Cardiff,” with over one hundred members, while the
CCA had six, Aberystwyth Arts Centre had fifteen and Ceredigion Museum had three.
‘Pitch,’ a weekly arts and culture radio programme, claimed to use Culture Colony as a
place to archive their broadcasts in video format. The CCA currently has no video
material uploaded and, in light of Pitch’s high membership rate, it may be useful for the
CCA to upload some material to its platform to gain more members on Culture Colony.
215

While it is generally beneficial for the CCA to have a presence on Culture Colony, the
website should not be its main or sole platform for publishing material online and the
CCA should use its own website for complete control of materials.

6.11 Chapter Summary
This chapter discussed the transfer of knowledge to the CCA, taking into consideration
the literature review, the acquisition of knowledge and the production of outputs. A
Digitisation Strategy and a Project Outline were useful documents for organising
digitisation work and they can be reused on a long-term basis, however, they must be
updated with advancements in technology. Digitisation Guidelines were vital for
undertaking digitisation work and proved to be useful in helping students understand
digitisation work. Metadata was considered a difficult task but most students increased
their understanding through the use of the Metadata Guidelines. Both the Digitisation
Guidelines and the Metadata Guidelines could be improved with visual aids, such as
pictures and diagrams, as used by PCW. The presentation on digitisation and metadata
introduced students and CCA staff to the topic and the workshops provided the
researcher with an opportunity to observe and assist where necessary. For future work
it may be beneficial to include an introduction to using Mac computers in the
presentation. The majority of digitisation and metadata work for the ICF programmes
was completed and file-naming conventions changed in light of developments in project
work. Metadata was created for approx. 86 born-digital demonstration videos and
errors were noted in order to prepare the videos for publishing. At the request of the
CCA, the researcher suggested how a digitised programme could be published on the
website in PDF format. The KESS budget was used throughout the research to support
the researcher’s work. The researcher worked on a collaborative grant application to
receive funding on a digital project to expand this research. The researcher kept a blog
on Culture Colony with updates on the research throughout its duration.

216

Chapter 7: Conclusion
This research investigated how the knowledge of digitisation practices could be
transferred from a large organisation, the NLW, to a small organisation, the CCA.
Chapter 1 introduced the nature of the research: the aims, objectives and
methodology, the management of the project and the structure of the thesis.
Chapter 2 outlined the various organisations involved in the research. These were
primarily the CCA and the NLW, as well as SAGM, Culture Colony and the ICF.
Chapter 3 was a review of literature relevant to the research area in the form of
books, websites, e-books and e-journals. Chapter 4 described the knowledge that
was acquired for this research. This knowledge primarily came from the researcher’s
work experience at NLW, as well as attendance at other events and courses. Chapter
5 explained how the acquired knowledge was transferred to the CCA through the
development of various outputs. Chapter 6 discussed the impact of these outputs in
light of the literature review and the acquisition of knowledge. This chapter, Chapter
7, overviews the research and discusses its meaning as a contribution to other
research. Following this there is a bibliography and appendices.

This research was implemented in four stages (outlined in section 1.6): learning from
various sources, developing outputs from knowledge, applying the outputs to the
CCA and reviewing them. My work experience at NLW resulted in the development
of several instructive documents to aid the CCA in digitisation work. It was useful and
interesting to compare the different digitisation workflows in the DSU and the PCW.
Although the DSU’s process was much more advanced, and therefore a very high
quality, the PCW’s process was more realistic in terms of my project and the
capabilities of the CCA. I tested the documents I developed and supervised
undergraduate students who used them in a digitisation project. The vast majority of
digitisation and metadata was completed accurately and the students reported a
general increase in their understanding of the topic. The CCA received digitisation
and metadata work on their ICF collection, specifically the festival programmes and
the demonstration videos. The documents can be used by CCA staff and others to

217

carry out digitisation and metadata work un-aided. With the support of KESS, the
CCA also received equipment to support digitisation work in the form of a Macbook
Pro and a flip camera. Throughout this research, reading literature and attending
relevant events supported my understanding of the topic. The limitations, as
described in section 1.5, imposed by the research boundaries on the transfer of
digitisation knowledge were mitigated. This is because:


The funds available through the KESS budget were sufficient to allow the CCA to
acquire suitable equipment and equipment was also available for use at the
School of Art, Aberystwyth University



The funds available through the KESS budget were sufficient enough to provide
the researcher with relevant training



Digitisation activities and future requirements were considered throughout the
research by the researcher and CCA staff



The materials pre-selected by NLW for the work experience were similar in
nature to those at the CCA



The materials selected by the CCA were representative of their collection



The researcher maintained constant contact with the CCA and the research
supervisors.

As stated in section 1.1.1 it was hoped this research would contribute to the Digital
Economy of Ceredigion, Wales, as part of the European Union’s Convergence
Programme. As two cultural organisations for members of the public, the CCA and
the NLW both benefit from this research. Other organisations involved in this
research were: ICF and Aberystwyth Arts Centre, SAGM and Aberystwyth University,
Culture Colony and KESS. Through the National Centre for Ceramics in Wales, the
research can benefit other universities in the group. The research could also
contribute towards the CCA’s educational work by using digital works as teaching
materials.

One of the key principles of this KESS MPhil was the transfer of knowledge from a
large organisation to a small one. During the work experience at NLW the researcher
was made aware of the difficulties that can arise when transferring knowledge

218

between organisations of different sizes. “Large” and “small” organisations have
differences in capabilities, facilities, finances, staffing, work targets, types of users,
and many other factors, on both a long-term and a short-term scale. The researcher
saw the PCW’s smaller-scale work as being most easily and suitably transferrable to
CCA. The DSU’s workflow was more stringent to ensure the numerous staff involved
in the work accurately digitised the large amount of material. However, in the case
of anomalies and exceptions to instructions, it may be more desirable to have less
stringent rules and to give the individual worker more control. In NLW, managers
make decisions during benchmarking meetings and then individuals perform specific
tasks. However, the CCA has only 4-5 staff, most of who do numerous other tasks,
and so would benefit from giving more control to these individuals.

Digitisation is a solution to increasing access to a collection and ensuring long-term
preservation of materials. However, digitisation is costly and therefore should not be
undertaken without careful consideration of the implications. Technology is
developing at a rapid pace and organisations must keep up-to-date on this matter to
ensure digitisation is implemented accurately and effectively. The face of libraries,
archives and museums has changed drastically since the birth of the World Wide
Web but certain fictional neurotic librarians are not so optimistic about this change:

“… I’m from the old school now. When you come into this library, what’s the first
thing you see? Kids wet behind the ears in front of the comic book shelves. And
alongside them, Music. Just behind that, D.V.D.s, that’s where cultural
democracy has got us. It’s not a library anymore, with silence reigning over
shelves full of intelligence, it’s a leisure centre where people come to amuse
themselves.”

- The librarian, The Library of Unrequited Love (Sophie Divry, 2010: 54)

Through the lessons I have learned throughout this research, I would argue that the
introduction of technological developments to paper-dominated libraries could only
mean deeper and more varied access to collections. Historically speaking, our

219

ancestors communicated through paper-based materials, by reading books and
writing letters, however, nowadays communication is largely centred around
technology: mobile phones, laptops and tablet devices, amongst many others.
Libraries, archives and museums are institutions where knowledge should be shared
and this knowledge is more likely to be shared in a format that is familiar and
popular with contemporary society. The unnamed librarian from The Library of
Unrequited Love symbolises a knowledge institution of yesteryear, when such
institutions were only accessible to academics and those of a wealthy status.
Knowledge knows no class; it is free and accessible to all in increasingly varied forms,
and all the better if it also amuses.

7.1 Further Work
This research can be expanded in numerous ways. As stated already, the research
contributed to a grant application with the CCA and the ICF (sections 5.11 and 6.9).
Increasingly so, grants are a primary source of funding for digital projects and arts
projects. If digitisation becomes a more mainstream activity in the CCA, it may be
advisable to have two Digitisation Strategy documents: one for born-digital material
and one for digitised analogue material. All documents produced in this research can
be used as a basis for future digitisation and metadata projects. During work
experience at the NLW, the researcher came across many different documents that
support digitisation work. Only some of these were developed for the CCA during
this research, while others can be developed in the future, such as risk analysis or
crisis management documents. JISC also produce numerous guidelines and
documents on the subject of digitisation and these are an excellent source of
reference. More research can be done into how different materials can be published
online and how users can access and interact with them. This research focused on
digitisation of 2D materials but since ceramics are 3D objects, 3D digitisation was
briefly investigated in the literature review. 3D scanning is a key area of interest to
the CCA, as well as the NLW (which holds a 3D scanner as of December 2013), and so
this aspect might offer an additional collaborative project or avenue of exploration.

220

