WISE PRACTICES FOR MANAGING COMMUNITY COLLEGE
LIBRARIAN BURNOUT: A DELPHI INVESTIGATION
by
Marie D. Mestas

KEITH JOHANSEN, EdD, Faculty Mentor and Chair
ROBIN CALOTE, EdD, Committee Member
TRINA GREER, EdD, Committee Member

Feranda Williamson, EdD, Dean, School of Education

A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Philosophy

Capella University
July 2014

UMI Number: 3645842

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3645842
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Marie D. Mestas, 2014

Abstract
In the 21st century, California community colleges are undergoing a metamorphosis in
mission, pedagogy, funding structure, and patron populations. These changes have
created an environment in which continued daily stress can overwhelm faculty librarians
as they strive to meet the ongoing challenges created by increased student needs, the
rapid proliferation of electronic information resources, and decreased funding for
materials, library faculty, and staff. Burnout becomes common for librarians already
facing an overladen schedule of repetitive public service work and the gradual but
perceptible shift in how the college, other faculty, and students perceive the value of their
core mission—teaching and promoting information literacy, research skills, and reading.
This study examined California community college librarians who self-identified as burnt
out on the job, with the goal of recommending wise practices—those tried and true
methods that teach important life skills and are passed from one group to another within a
community—to cope with workplace burnout. Results from an initial questionnaire were
examined by a modified Delphi-method panel of experts from within this community
who worked through three rounds of questions and answers before achieving consensus
on recommended practices. Participant-identified hindrances to good workplace
performance were thematically matched to a conceptual framework based on Gilbert’s
2007 behavioral engineering model (data, resources, incentives, knowledge, capacity, and
motives) and the six worklife domains predictive of engagement or burnout as posited by
Leiter and Maslach in 2005 (workload, control, reward, community, fairness, and values).

Dedication
I dedicate this effort with loving gratitude to my parents, Nick and Bertha Mestas.
Because of them, I have never known a day in my life when I did not feel protected,
guided, and comforted by the love of my family.

iii

Acknowledgments
I want to acknowledge and thank my family, especially my brother Nick Mestas,
sister Cecelia Mestas-Holm, and sister-in-law Sandra Mestas, because this research
project would never have been completed without their love and encouragement. I
gratefully acknowledge the support of my cherished friends Janna Tolleson, Therisa
Church, and Eddie Hidalgo. Thanks, too, to the lifelong friends I have made in my career
at San Bernardino Valley College. In particular, I’d like to acknowledge the incredible
staff and faculty in the Library, those individuals who work so hard every single day to
serve our students—especially Angie Gideon, Circulation Supervisor, and librarians Patti
Wall, Celia Huston, and Ginny Evans-Perry. I also wish to acknowledge the debt of
gratitude I owe to Dr. Keith Johansen, my mentor (and favorite instructor at Capella
University!), for his inestimable knowledge, support, patience, and advice. Finally, I
extend my most profound thanks to Dr. Robin Calote—committee member, visiting
scholar, retired president of Ventura Community College in California, and my
professional role model—because without her unwavering belief in me and my abilities, I
would never have believed enough in myself to undertake this work. She has shared
unstintingly of her experience, her exceptional gift for innovation, and her help, guidance,
and mentorship over the last two decades and more. I am honored by her generosity of
self and spirit, and am deeply proud to call her my friend. My life would be greatly
diminished without her presence in it.

iv

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments

iv

List of Tables

viii

List of Figures

ix

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1

Introduction to the Problem

1

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework

4

Statement of the Problem

5

Purpose of the Study

9

Research Questions

10

Rationale, Relevance, and Significance of the Study

11

Nature of the Study

13

Definition of Terms

15

Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations

17

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

20

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

21

Introduction

21

Theoretical Framework

22

Themes

23

Review of Research Literature and Methodological Literature

29

Librarians and Burnout

38

Human Performance Technology

50

Burnout Interventions

53
v

Chapter Summary

68

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

74

Introduction

74

Research Design

75

Delphi Method

76

Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures

80

Ethical Issues

86

Chapter Summary

87

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

88

Introduction

88

Description of the Sample

89

Summary of the Findings

90

Detailed Analysis

108

Chapter Summary

119

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

122

Introduction

122

Summary of the Findings

123

Discussion of the Findings

124

Discussion of the Findings in Relation to the Literature

142

Limitations

145

Implication of the Findings for Practice

147

Recommendations for Further Research

148

Conclusion

149
vi

REFERENCES

151

APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK

166

APPENDIX B. VALIDATION CONSTRUCT MATCHING BEM AND SIX
WORKLIFE DOMAINS AGAINST RESPONDENT-CITED
FACTORS

168

vii

List of Tables
Table 1. Workplace Burnout Symptoms and/or Consequences as Identified by
Librarians

93

Table 2. Respondents’ Open-Ended Descriptions of Workplace Burnout
Symptoms and/or Consequences

95

Table 3. Causal/Contributing Factors to Workplace Burnout as Indicated by
Librarians

96

Table 4. Respondents’ Descriptions of Causal/Contributing Factors for
Workplace Burnout

97

Table 5. Delphi Panelists’ Experiences of Specific Times or Events Predictive
of Sporadic Burnout

100

Table 6. Delphi Panelists’ Experiences of Constant Workplace Burnout

101

Table 7. Delphi Panelists’ Stress Relief Activities/Techniques

105

viii

List of Figures
Figure 1. Burnout symptoms

35

ix

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

Introduction to the Problem
In the 1970s, when the initial investigations into the phenomenon of burnout and
its barriers to optimum workplace performance examined various professional groups in
the human services, librarians were not included, even though “burnout can have
profound negative consequences for individual librarians, for the library, and for [library]
users” (Nauratil, 1989, p. 3). The early researchers focused on linking the burnout
concept to a group of human services professions in which employees did “people-work
of some kind” (Maslach & Jackson, 1981, p. 99).
Librarians face many of the same stress-producing factors in the modern library
workplace as those discovered during the earlier studies of public servants (McCormack,
2010). Yet, apart from a few articles written and published in the library field’s
professional journals (e.g., Bold, 1982; Bunge, 1987; Clark & Kalin, 1996; Griffey,
Clark, & Davis, 2009), and two short books on the topic, also written by librarians (i.e.,
Caputo, 1991; Nauratil, 1989), burnout in the library profession did not receive the same
public attention as other high-stress occupations, such as law enforcement, health care,
education, and therapy (Moore, 2009; Nauratil, 1989; White, 1990).

1

In a 1999 editorial, Kniffel blamed his fellow librarians for making their work
look so easy that Kranz, author of the Jobs Rated Almanac, rated it as being lower on the
stress level than that of a dishwasher.
For years we’ve been able to convince people that being a librarian means sitting
around and reading all day, when, in fact, it meant presiding over a nonstop
barrage of interpersonal relationships that would drive a psychiatrist (rated high
on the stress chart) crazy. (Kniffel, 1999, p. 38)
With this view of the profession, it may therefore surprise the general public that
nothing could be further from the truth in the modern library. Since the 1990s, there has
been a growing threat of physical violence, sexual assault, even murder, in the library
workplace (Arterburn, 1996; McCormack, 2010). Gang activity and an influx of the
homeless and/or mentally unstable have added to the environment’s stressors (Bold,
1982; McCormack, 2010). In the aftermath of the shootings at Virginia Tech on April 16,
2007, university campuses, libraries, and schools across the country were put on high
alert. Within days, eight bomb threats resulted in mass evacuations and bomb squad,
S.W.A.T., and police surveillance activities in university and public libraries (Flagg,
2007). In a 3-week period in 2010, a student with an AK-47 entered the University of
Texas at Austin Perry Castañeda Library and committed suicide in full view of other
students; a man with a knife hid in Philadelphia’s Greater Olney branch library’s
children’s section, where he attempted to attack a police officer, who then shot him; and
outside the Dayton (Ohio) Madden Hills branch library, a man beat a woman until a
library assistant rescued her, but the suspect pulled a hidden gun and then tried to shoot
the library assistant by firing blindly into the library. Librarians are not even safe among
their coworkers; a fourth act of library violence in 2010 saw librarian Alan Gordin

2

murder fellow librarian Devin Zimmerman in a violent rage over Zimmerman’s
promotion (Goldberg, 2010).
In addition to dealing with the threat of potential violence in their workplace,
librarians also face deeply damaging funding cuts to budgets, staffing, hours, and services
(Nauratil, 1989; Pinkowski, 2007; Woos, 1989). The socioeconomic, political, and
technological ills affecting governmental agencies in modern society are reflected in the
library (Raffensperger, 2010); and across the nation, librarians, along with other
government workers, have attempted to cope with the results of downturns in both
governmental and private sector funding (Hodgetts et al., 2008; Nauratil, 1989). Nonlibrarian managers (Caputo, 1991), aging infrastructures and overcrowded facilities,
austerity management, rampant growth of technology (Huwe, 2005), and a more
aggressive, demanding, and vocal clientele have contributed increasingly negative stress
to the profession (Kennedy, 2005). In selected cases, stress drove librarians to such
uncharacteristic behavior as brandishing a handgun and threatening a supervisor over
poor evaluations; accelerated the use of sick leave to the detriment of the entire public
service department; and engendered aggressive, persistent bullying of coworkers (Pantry,
2007). Researchers have examined the stressors and the consequences of continued
emotional distress on workers from several different public service professions and
carried out trials with various intervention programs designed to manage ongoing
workplace stress (DeJoy, Wilson, Vandenberg, McGrath-Higgins, & Griffin-Blake, 2010;
Lander, Friche, Tornemand, Anderson, & Kirkeskov, 2009). The library field, however,
was not among those areas of interest (McCormack, 2010).

3

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework
All of the same factors stressing other workers in the so-called helping
professions also affect librarians. Sheesley (2001) noted specific workplace issues as
repetitive tasks, dissatisfied and sometimes hostile clients, and the provision of services
that arouse negative feelings in the client’s life (e.g., assisting impatient and sometimes
antagonistic students with research assignments, or supervising the work of someone
resentfully performing court-ordered public service) tended to feed back that negativity to
the service provider.
To be a modern librarian is to be continually challenged and often frustrated by
missing resources, insufficient and out-of-date materials, the rapid pace of technology,
and a lack of funds to provide adequate services for all of the library’s clientele. The
typical library, once a haven for readers, scholars, and young people in need of help with
homework assignments, struggles to provide even minimal services to growing
populations against consecutive years of no-growth budgets. Libraries are expected to
embrace all new technologies in information storage, dissemination, and access, but the
current financial situation makes the continued use of limited and outdated technology
more than likely (Kennedy, 2005). Libraries support the burden placed on them by other
government agencies that no longer address the immense needs of the homeless and the
mentally impaired (Ferrell, 2009), all the while working to continue attracting and
providing necessary services to its audience of children and taxpayers, those core clients
who now may not even feel safe entering an establishment frequented by mentally ill or
homeless persons, those individuals who have often taken over entire areas for
themselves and their belongings while blocking access to the restrooms, lawns,
4

entryways, study areas, easy chairs, and computer labs (Dokoupil, 2008; Oder & Hadro,
2009).
These risks to personal safety do not pertain solely to the patrons who utilize the
library. Library administrators have been forced by necessity to develop security
measures for the public as well as for their own employees (McCormack, 2010). In
Canada, libraries are considered to be at a higher risk for workplace violence than other
workplaces because library work involves six of 10 high-risk factors noted by
occupational health and safety experts:
[a] working with the public; [b] handling money; [c] providing service, care,
advice or education; [d] working with unstable or volatile persons; [e] working
alone, in small numbers, or in isolated or low traffic areas; and [f] working in
community-based settings. (McCormack, 2010, p. 74)
Due to growing challenges to public and employee safety and to the demand for
provision of the same level of services (Robertson, 2002, 2009), librarians may be
increasingly susceptible to the onset of workplace burnout. It is for this reason that it was
worth exploring two questions: To what extent are librarians suffering from the same
effects of burnout? and What could be done either by the librarians themselves or by their
institutions to avoid or decrease burnout’s detrimental consequences on workplace
performance, especially in light of the fact that the fundamental causes of the
phenomenon show no signs of lessening in the immediate future?

Statement of the Problem
The problem investigated was how California community college librarians cope
with stress-related burnout in the academic library workplace. The study focused on two

5

elements: (a) input concerning librarians’ lived experiences with burnout and (b)
feedback on any coping mechanisms they might recommend to deal with burnout in the
workplace. The data sought were not specifically about any formal techniques (called
interventions in the language of performance technology) to which these individuals may
have been exposed by performance professionals. Rather, the researcher hoped that by
compiling data on the coping techniques these individuals viewed as valuable, informal
practices for individuals dealing with burnout as well as formal performance
improvement interventions based on these techniques could then be crafted by human
performance technology (HPT) professionals. Home-life experiences were not a focus of
any study questions, but any mention was recorded for accuracy in reporting findings.
This study was aimed at gathering information on the methods librarians
themselves had utilized as they attempted to deal with the negative effects of burnout on
workplace performance. Data on professional and/or organizational interventions to
which they may have been exposed also were sought and recorded to complete the
research, but information concerning the techniques used by librarians themselves was
the focus of the study.
The word burnout has a variety of meanings in today’s academic and business
lexicon. Four historical uses of the word follow. The original meaning aligned with
ancient warfare, when to burnout a village or home was “to drive out or destroy by fire”
(Encyclopedia Britannica Online, 2010). In the era of jet propulsion, burnout (n.d.) took
on the newer, more contemporary meaning of “the cessation of operation due to loss of
fuel, usually of a jet or rocket engine.” In the 1970s, the word became standard
terminology to describe a person worn down from the effects of protracted drug abuse
6

(Edelwich, 1980). Most recently, in the last half of the 20th century, burnout became the
term used to describe the
dislocation between what people are and what they have to do . . . an erosion in
values, dignity, spirit, and will . . . a malady that spreads gradually and
continuously over time, putting people in a downward spiral from which it’s hard
to recover (Maslach & Leiter, 1997, p. 17).
It was this final meaning of the word burnout, describing the psychological and
physical syndrome that was explored in this research project. For the last four decades,
researchers have been studying the occupational stressors contributing to the effects of a
phenomenon, now entitled burnout, on employees in the human service field (Holcomb,
2007; Maslach & Leiter, 1997; Wood, 1989).
Schaufeli and Taris stressed that “burnout should be conceptualized as a workrelated (thus, not a context-free) phenomenon” (as cited in Cox, Tisserand, & Taris, 2005,
p. 188). Burned-out public service workers are individuals for whom everyday
professional activities involve two factors that work in unison to generate ongoing
distress: (a) nearly-constant interpersonal contact with those who seek their help and (b)
the fact that those they help are usually experiencing (and often exhibiting) a high level
of personal distress. In these vocations, individuals typically give of their knowledge,
focus, training, skills, compassion, advice, physical efforts, inner faith, and beliefs;
however, in most cases, they receive very little in return. Burnout has been noted as the
negative result of this predominantly unbalanced relationship between care provider and
care recipient (Day, Sibley, Scott, Tallon, & Ackroyd-Stolarz, 2009). Librarian Kevin
Harwell (2008) stated,
Chronic exposure to stress in the workplace can lead to emotional, social, and
mental exhaustion. Personal resources are used up or “burned out.” One has
7

difficulty feeling positive emotions. Patrons become queries instead of human
beings. The easy, directional queries become annoyances. The challenging ones
may trigger feelings of dread. (p. 379)
Perhaps the most widely read and cited researcher in this field is Dr. Christina
Maslach, whose landmark Maslach Burnout Inventory is used worldwide to measure the
effects of occupational burnout (Kitaoka-Higashiguchi et al., 2004). Maslach (1982)
defined burnout as a syndrome characterized by three key components: emotional
exhaustion, depersonalization, and a lack of personal accomplishment. With these three
elements and the host of other contributing symptoms and factors, burnout can cause
serious mental depression and provoke grave health issues, such as deep physical fatigue,
insomnia, headaches, psychosomatic syndromes, and an increased use of alcohol and
drugs (Potter, 1980).
Workplace stress and eventual burnout affected high-, middle-, and low-level
workers simultaneously. Caputo (1991) noted that at the top and mid-levels, executives
discovered they lacked the control of the environment that was once theirs and to which
they gave little thought as they devoted themselves to the mission of growing the
business or expanding operations. Leiter and Maslach (2005) found that midlevel
managers faced the mounting, double-edged pressures of reduced budgets and increased
workloads presented to them by their supervisors on the one hand, and backlashes against
these same pressures from their subordinates on the other, while low-level workers
suffered from feeling unappreciated, overburdened, overstressed, and resentful. Pachner
(2010) suggested that burnout created a snowball effect on its sufferers. The lack of any
sense of personal accomplishment in the workplace fomented apathy in the worker as a
type of armor to protect against feelings of ineffectiveness and insecurity. As apathy
8

increased, so did emotional exhaustion. And as a worker became mentally exhausted,
tasks once viewed as merely boring became challenging as well as unwelcome and
demanding. Cynicism also increased, and overall, work quality suffered when repetitive
tasks became monotonous and unrewarding; a cycle of errors and missed deadlines
became standard behavior. The rate of absenteeism jumped as concomitant personal and
organizational output plummeted (Pachner, 2010).

Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this research study was to learn recommended practices that
academic librarians had used to deal with burnout in the community college library
workplace. The study collected personal insights about burnout (symptoms, causes,
consequences) and about the techniques for dealing with burnout these faculty members
had used successfully to improve their own workplace performance. Such practices and
personal insights should further performance improvement research and may lead to
interventions that enable librarians (and by extrapolation, other human service and public
service business professionals) to effectively deal with the syndrome.
The researcher understood that each workplace would present its own particular
stressors that lead to burnout but nevertheless reasonably anticipated this study could
provide insights unique to this field of work that would add to the body of research on
performance improvement. Although individual librarians’ frames of reference (beliefs,
assumptions, opinions, and perceptions) about the effects of burnout in their workplace
was studied, the research was not intended to trace a full psycho-socio outline of their
personal lived experience. Rather, the focus was on how burnout affected respondents’
9

working lives in the library workplace and how they coped with the syndrome. Data were
gathered by asking librarians to describe their lived experiences with burnout as well as
the coping mechanisms they had used to deal with burnout in their daily work lives.
There was no investigation of the effects of burnout outside of the workplace.
The respondents were California community college faculty librarians employed
in one or more of the library service areas of reference, circulation, technical services,
acquisitions, technology, cataloging, bibliographic instruction, or in some combination of
these areas. Due to California community college minimum qualifications for hiring
faculty, the research was limited to individuals who held at least a master’s degree from a
graduate library school accredited by the American Library Association (ALA) and held
faculty status at their respective institutions (Mize, 2000).

Research Questions
Central research question. How do community college librarians most
effectively come to terms with burnout to improve their workplace performance?
Subquestion 1. What meaning do California community college librarians assign
to the term workplace burnout—that is, in their opinion, what does it mean to be burnt
out on the job?
Subquestion 2. What do respondents believe to be the causal
issues/themes/dimensions that cause burnout, and its resulting effects on their own
workplace performance?

10

Subquestion 3. What sort of remedies (interventions) have respondents
employed, or thought about employing, to help them deal with burnout’s effects on job
performance?
Subquestion 4. Which of these techniques do respondents consider to be the most
effective for librarians to employ to combat burnout and improve their workplace
performance in the modern academic library workplace?
The literature review showed that some librarians have found effective ways to
deal with burnout (Affleck, 1996; Bunge, 1987; Caputo, 1991; Clark & Kalin, 1996;
Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008; Landry, 2000; Nauratil, 1989). However, development of ways
to deal with the syndrome is dependent on the unique qualities of the person and the
challenges presented in his or her work environment (Leiter & Maslach, 2005).
A specific goal for the study was to uncover coping mechanisms endorsed by
community college faculty librarians as the wise practices that helped them deal with
burnout and improve their workplace performance. Recommended practices from a
community to the same community maintain the genuineness of the spirit of wise
practices, help to ensure specific occupational relevance, maintain a sense of community
ownership, and encourage application.

Rationale, Relevance, and Significance of the Study
Today’s librarians continue to experience burnout at work (Manley, 2012). Yet,
unlike police officers and firefighters, librarians receive no training to deal with the
stressors they face in the library, “the most stressful workplace of all,” according to
psychologist Saqib Saddiq (as cited in BBC News, 2011, p. 1). In the literature describing
11

burnout in public service employees, librarians were not referenced; as a result, this
researcher discovered a gap in research concerning this syndrome in today’s modern
academic library workplace. The rationale for the study, therefore, was to provide current
and meaningful research into the lived experiences of professional librarians coping with
workplace burnout.
Research into burnout had become an important area in performance
improvement research since the mid-1970s (Nauratil, 1989). Researchers (Kühnel,
Sonnentag, & Westman, 2009; Leiter & Maslach, 2009; Yip & Rowlinson, 2009) looked
at its consequences in the modern economy and found that few, if any, workplaces were
immune to its detrimental effects, making burnout a major barrier to best performance.
The researcher anticipated this examination of burnout’s causes and consequences, along
with any intervention tips and techniques utilized by professional librarians, would be of
use not only to the professional community on which it was focused but also to HPT
professionals studying burnout in all professions.
From this study, practicing California community college faculty librarians
suffering from the effects of burnout will be able to learn what was helpful to other
librarians working in the same environment and under most of the same conditions. This
study was focused on librarians already in the profession and suffering from the effects of
burnout, but it should also serve to alert those librarians who might be susceptible to
burnout but have not yet succumbed to it. The results of this study also will inform those
considering the librarian career path. Study results also may guide continuing learning
and development programs in graduate library schools and beyond.

12

Nature of the Study
This study was completed using a qualitative research methodology. The initial
portion of the data collection process involved the use of a brief questionnaire designed to
collect elementary demographic information as well as baseline phenomenological data
concerning the population’s lived experiences with burnout, particularly their beliefs
about its symptoms, causes, and consequences in their professional workplaces. Close
attention was given to the meaning of words the individual librarians used in describing
their experiences with workplace burnout. The primary methodology utilized in this study
was a modified Delphi approach, using a panel of expert librarians to explore and distill
the data through three rounds of questions and answers focused on reaching consensus on
wise practices. The justification for utilizing the brief survey as part of the qualitative
approach was the desire to first discover if a framework based on the work of Gilbert
(2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005) would prove to match the causal factors for
workplace burnout as experienced by community college librarians. Additionally, the
Delphi portion of the study was focused on eliciting data from a panel of experts from
inside this community so that the recommended coping skills would be a valid fit against
similar community college workplace stresses.
The overarching goal for the study was to collect meaningful data on burnout’s
causes and consequences that would be as useful to HPT professionals crafting burnout
interventions for public service workers as it would be to interested librarians. Toward
these ends, the qualitative data collection survey was used to gather direct quotations
from the respondents that were descriptive and revealing of their knowledge of burnout
(Patton, 1987). These were analyzed against the rubrics for engagement or burnout
13

created by Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005). Gilbert’s behavioral
engineering model (BEM) models how deficiencies in the workplace environment or in
the individual worker can affect the performance of employees; likewise, Leiter and
Maslach’s worklife domains predict engagement or burnout dependent on deficiencies in
those domains. Although these scholars worked in different areas, the similarity of their
conclusions allowed for creation of a structure that was used to frame lived experiences
with burnout.
The modified Delphi approach employed in this study, true to the classic Delphi
method as devised by the Rand Corporation in the 1950s, was built upon three tenets:
anonymity, iteration, and controlled feedback. Anonymity, the first tenet, was considered
important because it freed participants from any social constraints to allow them to make
decisions based on intrinsic merit and not on the identity of their proponents (Skulmoski,
Hartman, & Krahn, 2007). Anonymity also served as a tactic to structure indirect
collaboration without influence or bias from direct contact with the others working on the
same problem, as “anonymous collaboration alleviates peer pressure and other
performance anxieties that are common to group collaboration methods and allows
participants to focus on the problem” (Paul, 2008, p. 10). For the purpose of this study,
anonymity was preserved with care. Maintenance of privacy was at the forefront in all
correspondence and in the formal Delphi question/response rounds in this study.
The second tenet of Delphi research was iteration—in this case, three rounds of
questioning. Here, information was gathered; after each round of questioning, it was then
compiled as anonymous lists of responses for the panel to scrutinize before each
subsequent round began. As each round was built on questions focused on an aspect of
14

burnout, such as causation or intervention, a data sheet of information about those aspects
was also included in the materials sent to the panel before the next round took place. The
same process followed each round of questioning.
The third Delphi tenet was controlled feedback, which “informs the participants
of the other participants’ perspectives, and provides the opportunity for Delphi
participants to clarify or change their views” (Skulmoski et al., 2007, p. 3). In this study,
after the initial questionnaire was sent to the larger population, responses were collected
and recorded as part of the first controlled, compiled document distributed to the panel.
Panelists were encouraged to feel free to modify their responses after reviewing the
results of the previous round of questioning in order to refine the group’s work toward
the stated goal. As the object of the rounds of questioning was consensus, controlling the
feedback presented to the panel allowed them to concentrate on the key pieces of
compiled data without the distraction of extraneous information.

Definition of Terms
Academic librarian. A librarian who works in an academic library, usually a
member of the faculty of that institution who is trained in library and information science
and who may or may not also hold a teaching credential or certification (Online
Dictionary for Library and Information Science [ODLIS], 2014; Reitz, 2004).
Academic library. A library that is central to a community college, college,
polytechnic school, or university, and provides educational support by providing
information and research materials and resources for students, faculty, and staff.

15

Burnout. A chronic stress syndrome consisting of three qualitative dimensions:
mental exhaustion, depersonalization, and reduced personal efficacy (Maslach, 1982). It
is an emotional state that arises as those under long-term pressure at work unsuccessfully
deploy strategies with which to deal with the syndrome (Lernihan & Sweeney, 2010;
Maslach, 1982).
Client. A contemporary term for a library user, although librarians in academic
and public libraries distinguish the unpaid nature of their work by using the older term
patron (ODLIS, 2014).
Distress. An emotional or physical state of pain, sorrow, misery, suffering, or
discomfort (Mosby’s Medical Dictionary, 2006). The negative stress response; opposite
of eustress (Nelson & Cooper, 2005).
Eustress. Any form of stress that is beneficial, usually associated with a feeling of
fulfillment and achievement rather than anxiety (Colman, 2003). Moderate or normal
psychological stress interpreted as being beneficial for the experiencer (Oxford
Dictionaries, 2010).
Patron. The formal term for a library user (ODLIS, 2014; Reitz, 2004).
Performance improvement. “A systematic process of discovering and analyzing
human performance improvement (HPI) gaps, planning for future improvements in
human performance, designing and developing cost-effective and ethically-justifiable
interventions to close performance gaps, implementing the interventions, and evaluating
the financial and nonfinancial results” (Ehrlich, n.d.). Refers to the way people do their
jobs and the results of their work (Banzhoff, 2008).

16

Stress. Psychological and physical strain or tension generated by physical,
emotional, social, economic, or occupational circumstances, events, or experiences that
are difficult to manage or endure. A physical, chemical, or emotional factor that causes
bodily or emotional tension and may be a factor in disease causation (Colman, 2003).
Eustress and distress are two types of stress.
Wise practices. Practices, based in knowledge learned from a community and/or
culture that are models from which others may learn. Seven elements are seen as
characteristic of wise practices based on aboriginal or First Nations cultures: identity and
culture; leadership; strategic vision and planning; governance and management;
accountability and stewardship; performance evaluation; and collaborations, partnerships,
and external relations (Calliou, 2011). Wise practices created for sustainable human
development are recognized for characteristics such as long-term benefit, strengthening,
sustainability, transferability, interdisciplinary and intersectoral elements, participatory
processes, consensus building, effective and efficient communication processes, cultural
and human rights respectfulness, sensitivity to gender and ethnic issues, strengthening
local identities and policies, documentation, and evaluation (Cambers, 2001).

Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations
Assumptions
The researcher assumed respondents answered all questions with frankness and
honesty. More so, the researcher assumed the individual librarians who chose to
participate strove to coherently describe and explain their experiences in ways suitable
for analysis and synthesis during the study. The researcher also assumed the respondents
17

who chose to take part in the Delphi rounds of questioning put forth their best effort to
compose the emergent and collective perspectives of the expert panelists.
The modified Delphi approach to investigation engaged a panel of self-identified
experts defined by their service as faculty librarians serving in a California community
college and as individuals who had experienced burnout in the workplace. The
respondents completed an initial questionnaire and were then invited to participate in the
Delphi panel part of the research. Although the researcher did not expect that every
participant would have full experience of all of burnout’s symptoms, causes, and
consequences, she assumed all willing to take part in the study had some sort of personal
exposure to the syndrome, as well as knowledge obtained from peers in literature,
conference presentations, or library-related literature searches, blogs, or wikis. Exposure
to this collected information on the topic of burnout allowed respondents to form
personal beliefs, assumptions, opinions, and/or perceptions of workplace burnout’s
causes and consequences.
Care in recording and reporting the respondents’ comments and suggestions
followed rigid confidentiality protocols as identified in Chapter 3. The use of computerbased software provided a platform for ensuring that verbatim recording of responses
took place throughout the research study.
Limitations and Delimitations
The population of this study was limited to community college librarians working
in California who self-identified as having suffered or were presently suffering from
workplace burnout. Although Caputo (1991) showed that burnout affects librarians
working in all four types of libraries—school, public, special, and academic—this study
18

focused exclusively on community college librarians. This was a delimitation because the
very different service goals, service populations, information needs, and organizational
structures of the four types of libraries could present divergent influences, workplace
conditions, and working styles not addressed in the study. Another limitation was that
although 44 librarians responded to the initial survey, only 12 agreed to take part in the
Delphi portion of the study.
Although useful components of interventions were explored within the context of
the Delphi portion of the research, no plan of action for implementing burnout
interventions in the workplace was created. The study was intended only to identify
appropriate (albeit possibly rudimentary) intervention techniques from a panel of experts
from the community college librarian field who have utilized these and other techniques
to cope with burnout and improve workplace performance. The researcher hoped the
techniques identified as wise practices here would form a basis for future development,
implementation, and evaluation of performance improvement practitioner-crafted
interventions.
Any wise practices that surfaced as a result of this research were not intended to
be recommended as appropriate for all employees of all public service workplaces;
rather, they were sought as informational, pragmatic, real-life resolutions to deal with the
problem of workplace burnout on the layperson’s level within the community college
library community. It was not the object of the study to quantify the number of
respondents or the types of experiences in a statistical form for presentation, as this
would have given no insight into possible coping techniques or pragmatic resolutions to
the syndrome. The study was intended as a step toward better understanding of the
19

experiences and opinions of members of the body of California community college
librarians and to seek wise practices employed by this population as they dealt with
workplace burnout.

Organization of the Remainder of the Study
Chapter 2 contains background information on the factors contributing to burnout
in the workplace as experienced by public service employees, the commonalities and
differences among stressors in the library workplace, and an examination of the literature
on burnout in general as well as a comprehensive review of the literature on burnout as it
affects librarians. HPI theories are touched upon in the chapter as pertinent foundational
data. Chapter 3 discusses the study methodology, including the steps involved in the
research procedures, and the approaches used for analysis of the data. Chapter 4 provides
a review of the results of the study and discusses the themes verified as well as any new
themes discovered in the investigation. Finally, Chapter 5 contains a discussion of the
results of the study, conclusions, the Delphi panel’s proposed wise practices for dealing
with burnout in the form of recommendations, and suggestions for further research.

20

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

Introduction
Kent (1991) noted that although “some 50 articles” (p. 350) were written on the
topic of libraries and librarian burnout in the 1980s, they were focused on “paradigms
and structures from social science literature” (p. 350), with the lived experiences of these
librarians only mentioned in passing. Review of articles on workplace burnout produced
in the 30 years since that time revealed a focus on public servants in helping vocations,
such as clergy, police officers, and nurses. A more specific review of librarian-related
burnout in academic literature accessed via databases from ProQuest Business, EBSCO
Master File, Behavioral Sciences, and Academic Search Premier revealed few scholarly
research studies directly linking librarians and burnout over the last two decades.
Books that mentioned burnout’s effect on librarians (amid larger discussions of
other librarian-specific topics) were written near the end of the 20th century by Katz
(1987), Baldwin (1991), and Fox (1993), and in the 21st century by Gertzog and
Beckerman (2003), Siess (2003), Mosley (2004), Hines (2010), Smallwood and Clapp
(2011), Ellis (2011), and Smith (2012). Only two books exclusively on topic have been
written thus far: The Alienated Librarian by Nauratil (1989) and Stress and Burnout in
Library Service by Caputo (1991).

21

Conceivably, however, evolving discussion of the syndrome has been taking place
within workplace peer groups, committees, conferences, workshops, teleseminars, and
webinars as a result of the aforementioned articles. Contemporary resources such as
Books in Print, Amazon, Alibris, OCLC WorldCat, and Ex Libris also were scanned for
additional information.
Literature on the broader topic of burnout referenced both the syndrome itself and
the research that has been done on its effects in specific workplace environments and on
individual professions. Studies into the causes of burnout were well documented, as were
ongoing investigations into techniques used to alleviate its negative effects. Whatever the
research focus, however, it should be noted that distress was overwhelmingly referred to
simply as stress in both the professional and popular literature concerning its role in the
onset of burnout. Another salient factor is that in all of these studies, burnout was shown
to be a negative response to ongoing stress within various arenas: the home, with
stressors experienced by caregivers for the aged, mentally and/or physically disabled
(Maslach, 1982); in the blue collar workplace, where demand for production output is
increasing at the same time as are counterproductive and counterintuitive staff and supply
cutbacks (Leiter & Maslach, 2005); in the military, both on duty and off (Barry, 2007);
and in many, if not all, of the social service areas (Maslach & Jackson, 1981).

Theoretical Framework
The theoretical framework for this study was based on Gilbert’s (2007) research
into performance improvement and Leiter and Maslach’s (2005) study of burnout through
their work in industrial psychology. Gilbert’s BEM model depicts three organizational
22

and three personal factors in workplace performance (data, resources, incentives,
knowledge, capacity, and motives). These six variables were the basis for the content
analysis of participants’ responses in the current study. Leiter and Maslach’s six worklife
domains predictive of exceptional performance or burnout (i.e., workload, control,
reward, community, fairness, and values) served as a useful cross-reference filter where
additional insights were possible. More details of how Gilbert’s model and Leiter and
Maslach’s worklife domains formed the thematic filters for the content analysis of
respondents’ answers are provided in Chapter 3.

Themes
In his 1978 work Human Competence, Gilbert, a founder in the field of HPI,
theorized that an environment lacking support for performance is the most detrimental
factor to workplace performance. His BEM was based on elements in the workplace that
are predictive of exemplary or poor performance (Sanders & Ruggles, 2000). Gilbert
postulated a combination of three environmental and individual factors can affect
performance in the workplace. By looking at each of these three factors (information,
instrumentation, and motivation) in terms of the environment and the individual, he found
that when the environmental supports of data, resources, and incentives were matched by
the individual employee’s knowledge, capacity, and motivation, then performance was
exemplary. Negatives in one or more of these areas, however, impeded performance and
could drive an individual to burn out. This model influenced the variables used as half of
the framework for the thematic analysis of the data from the current study.

23

Information
Information about the job itself, how it is to be done, and its performance
expectations make up this thematic area encouraging or impeding performance. This
variable is called data when used in the environmental aspect of the workplace, and
points to such important information as clearly defined roles, strong performance
expectations, and guidelines describing the work process. The variable is called
knowledge when it is used to describe an individual’s repertory of behaviors and speaks
to the questions, Does the individual have adequate training to perform the job? and Does
the employee’s placement in the workplace match that level of training? (Chevalier,
2003). Variation away from any of these factors negatively affects the ability of an
individual to perform.
Instrumentation
The BEM variable of instrumentation describes the workplace factors concerning
tools, materials, scheduling for performance, the ability to learn necessary skills, and the
selection of employees to match the work requirements. As an environmental support, it
is termed resources and calls to mind the necessary match of tools, assets, adequate time,
and materials to the job required (Gilbert, 2007). Known as capacity when it pertains to
the individual, the variable describes aptitude to learn, visual aids, adaptation, and other
abilities to do the work involved, and encompasses the notion of the right person for the
right job.
Motivation
Gilbert (2007) called motivational factors incentives when they serve as
environmental supports and motives when describing issues in human behavior. He noted
24

that environmental incentives could be both positive, such as rewards (financial and
nonmonetary) and upward mobility (career development), or negative (consequences for
poor performance; Dean, 1999). Personal motivational factors encouraging or impeding
performance could be found in assessment of individuals’ intentions for working. In
order to perform well, the individual’s motivation for working must align with the work
he or she performs and with the work environment; desire to do the job must be there in
addition to a match of the employee to the realities of the workplace situation (Chevalier,
2003).
Leiter and Maslach’s Six Worklife Domains
Leiter and Maslach (2005) proposed there are six domains (or themes) in the
workplace environment that are predictive of engagement or burnout. These domains can
Either contribute to greater exhaustion or sustain the energy people bring to their
work. They either cause cynicism and alienation or promote increased
involvement and commitment to the job. They either produce a lack of
accomplishment and inadequacy or lead to greater effectiveness and achievement.
(Leiter & Maslach, 2000, p. 4)
The worklife domains, as proposed Leiter and Maslach (2005), are areas that bear careful
scrutiny during the execution of a professional performance analysis, and function as root
causal factors for performance or its disintegration. All six areas are vital to employee
well-being and either boost or hinder everyday performance, and each theme holds within
it a continuum between good and bad workplace performance for the individual reacting
to it.
The six basic worklife domains, as noted by Leiter and Maslach (2005), are
workload, control, reward, community, fairness, and values. These, along with Gilbert’s

25

(2007) variables from his BEM, were used in this study for thematic sorting and the
analysis of responses.
Workload. Workload is not a grave issue when there are sufficient funds to
employ enough workers to share the burden of a given body of work. However, when a
bad economy necessitates downsizing the work force—something that has been
profoundly true during the last decade in the state of California, where the country’s
dismal economy has been exacerbated by a governmental budget crisis—the concomitant
reduction in work force in both the private and government sectors has been devastating
(Terman, 2010). The “do more with less” maxim of modern work environments places
heavy burdens on employees who then, according to Pines and Aronson (1988), tend to
react in three distinct ways: One group will grab the challenge and find ways to absorb
the added work; the next group will continue with the exact same output as before and
pay no lasting attention to the added work responsibilities; and the final group will take
on all additional chores but begin to suffer from the unbalanced relationship between
themselves and the heavier workload.
Work overload can be one of the critical drivers in the onset of burnout (Leiter &
Maslach, 2005), and when it becomes constant instead of something occasional, “the
onset [of burnout] is . . . progressive, and may cause indifference, disengagement, and
withdrawal” (Lombardo & Eyre, 2011, p. 3). Initially, primary symptoms began to
surface—feelings of being pressured, worn out, unable to keep up, and/or plagued with
excessive demands. This can be especially true in social service work, where, in addition
to enormous public contact workloads, additional mundane and burdensome tasks, such
as completing redundant and often excessive paperwork tracking multiple funding
26

sources, or attendance at frequent, required meetings, can feel overwhelming. Though not
crucial to the actual work of personal contact with the service recipients, meetings and
paperwork are tasks inevitably deemed necessary by the larger organization and can be
the sources of feelings of overload that lead to burnout (Pines & Aronson, 1981).
Control. The domain of control is believed to be a major precipitator of burnout.
Control issues arise when individuals experience problems with authority and the
influence of others. Workers who suffer from a limited sense of control in their
workplace environment do not automatically object to the tasks they are asked to
perform, nor do they necessarily view them as inappropriate; rather, they simply object to
the absolute lack of autonomy over assigned tasks (Yip & Rowlinson, 2009). Employees
feel trapped in a no-win situation where they believe they cannot possibly fulfill all the
demands they face, in addition to dealing with the other constraints of workforce
reduction, such as a negative time factor (i.e., the same amount of time to do more than
formerly required), cuts in staffing, and the ongoing reduction of resources with which to
work (Cooper, Mallinger, & Kahn, 1978).
Reward. A paycheck is only one aspect of the larger idea of reward, the third
workplace theme contributing to burnout, according to Leiter and Maslach (2005).
Employees who have problems with the amount of pay they receive for their work make
up only a portion of this group; other individuals believe they are not sufficiently
compensated for their services through other means—that their hard work is not
recognized, they do not receive appropriate compensation for their perceived level of
worth, or they simply feel little satisfaction from the work they do throughout the day
(Leiter & Maslach, 2005).
27

Community. Leiter and Maslach (2005) discovered that those who experience
problems with the social community in which they work also are susceptible to burnout.
These individuals have problems with their bosses, their coworkers, and/or their clients;
their days are filled with disagreements, bickering, demands, patronization,
dissatisfaction, and conflict. Three areas are built into the theme of workplace
community: communication, alienation, and conflict, and problems with any of them
create distress in the workplace. Maslach and Leiter (1997) related the importance of a
sense of community:
Lack of community is the result when people lose a positive connection with
others in the workplace. Employees in a workplace, just as human beings outside
of the workplace, tend to thrive in a community, and they function best when
praise, comfort, happiness, and humor are shared with others they like and
respect. Likewise, burdens that are shared amongst members of a group are
notably lessened. But sometimes the job isolates people: they may be physically
separated, they may spend most of their time with computers, or they may be just
too busy to get together. (p. 14)
If the workplace community is divided due to one or more of these factors or,
worse yet, by internal conflict among the employees, and if that conflict is chronic and
unresolved, it can destroy the feeling of community that is necessary to a healthy
workplace environment. Maslach and Leiter (1997) confirmed this observation when she
observed that chronic and unresolved workplace conflict is extremely destructive to the
overall sense of community in a workplace: “Conflict infuses the workplace with
frustration, anger, fear, anxiety, disrespect, and suspicion. It tears apart the fabric of
social support, making it less likely that people will help each other out when times get
tough” (p. 15).

28

Fairness. The Library Bill of Rights and the Intellectual Freedom Principles for
Academic Librarians are focused on equal access, fairness, and nondiscrimination. This
can draw individuals to the field who are already dedicated to promoting fairness and
equality, but it can also make individuals already working in the field particularly
susceptible to actions that diminish those qualities, so that when library workplace issues
such as promotions, task assignments, desk schedules, office assignments, and other
decisions are made arbitrarily or on the basis of favoritism, these individuals may suffer
even more than other human service workers from feelings of unfairness and disrespect
because of their innate focus on fairness.
Values. Leiter and Maslach (2005) discovered that an individual’s set of internal
values can contribute to burnout and can surface when individuals begin to feel stressed
over the fact that their work is actually quite meaningless, or perhaps even dishonest or
unethical, such as when their workplace regulations force them to accept standards that
are objectionable or that feel wrong to them. The resulting internal conflict between work
and personal integrity causes distress and eventually degenerates to feelings of burnout
(Leiter & Maslach, 2005).

Review of Research Literature and Methodological Literature
“Burnout is formally defined and subjectively experienced as a state of physical,
emotional, and mental exhaustion caused by long-term involvement in situations that are
emotionally exhausting . . . [due to] a combination of very high expectations and chronic
situational stresses” (Pines & Aronson, 1988, p. 9). This definition echoed Maslach’s
(1982) identification of the three fundamental characteristics of burnout as caused by
29

long-term stress: emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and a lack of personal
accomplishment. In 2004, Osborn corroborated this view and expanded the causal
connection to the workplace as he studied the depletion of emotional energy caused by
prolonged stressors encountered at work. Lernihan and Sweeney (2010) further described
burnout as “the emotional state that results in the deployment of unsuccessful coping
strategies by those who are experiencing long-term pressure in their work” (p. 27).
Physician (and recovered victim of burnout) Shelton (2007) stated,
Burnout is a common term describing a loss of energy for one’s work or
profession. It’s accompanied by a sense of being used up, of one’s vitality being
depleted. Burnout has become an especially prevalent stress phenomenon among
those in the helping or service professions. (p. 8)
Researchers began investigating burnout as a negative result of stress in the late
1960s. The initial cases identified as burnout came from the corporate community.
Psychologists identified a group of “high-achieving, rapidly rising young executives who
deteriorated into victims of chronic fatigue and who demonstrated attitude changes,
decreased performance, and occasionally ‘office paranoia” (Caputo, 1991, p. 1). The first
moniker for these individuals was “flameouts” (Patrick, as cited in Caputo, 1991, p. 1).
According to Caputo (1991), it appears the first time the phenomenon was
referred to as burnout in any literature, popular or scientific, was in Graham Green’s
1961 novel A Burnt-Out Case. The central character, Querry, a successful architect, is
described as suffering from burnout when he became disgruntled with the life he had
been living and left it behind to work in a leper colony in the Congo.
In 1974, psychologist Freudenberger began researching the phenomenon in
individuals in the helping profession who were wearing out mentally after years of

30

intense, interactive human service. He is believed to be the first to use the term burnout
when writing about the human service sector’s reaction to years of constant stress
(Nauratil, 1989). Freudenberger (1980) compared some of burnout’s symptoms to those
emotional reactions brought about by the crushed expectations experienced in a failed
relationship, or from faith that is lost. Osborn (2004) agreed that burnout appears when
individuals begin to feel lost and become emotionally and physically depleted as a result
of protracted stress on the job. In broader terms, psychologist Cherniss (1980) described
burnout as a syndrome of negative change in attitude and behavior caused by job strain.
Many early studies focused on burnout as particularly problematic in the human
services, as noted previously. An explanation for this came from Farber (1983), who
noted that human services were based in the immediate community surrounding an
individual until after World War II, at which point they were rigidly socialized due to
government interference. Now bureaucratized, services such as counseling became
widely available, and clients grew accustomed to receiving immediate attention and felt
entitled to service from professionals. This was in marked contrast to previous times,
when talking with friends and neighbors or seeking counsel from relatives, clergy, or
other members of the immediate community was the accepted method of counsel
(Maslach & Leiter, 1997). Due to this reason and the government cutbacks in funding for
human service work in the last few decades of the 20th century, professionals working in
the field were shouldering larger workloads than ever before.
Today, the syndrome of burnout is rampant across the human services, and affects
teachers, counselors, police officers, social workers, nurses, clergy, psychiatrists, and
corrections officers (Lee, Kissinger, & Ogle, 2010). Burnout is also not limited to front31

rank workers; it affects everyone from top administration downward (Edelwich, 1980;
Lee et al., 2010; Pinkowski, 2007). In 2005, American workers’ claims based on burnout,
depression, and stress were the fastest growing sector of long-term disability insurance
claims (Leiter & Maslach, 2005). The stress that preceded burnout was also the second
most frequently reported work-related problem in the European Union (Boersma &
Lindblom, 2009). A recent study in Canada showed that nearly three out of every five
healthcare workers were headed toward burnout because of being overloaded with work
(Pachner, 2010). According to Leiter and Maslach (2005), sick leave, excessive turnover,
and long-term disability claims related to burnout and job stress have been estimated to
cost the American economy $300 billion; “burnout is the biggest occupational hazard of
the twenty-first century” (p. 3).
The constant contact service providers encountered with those they assisted
exposed them to individuals who were frequently despairing, needy, and negative,
clashing against the care providers’ hopeful, empathetic, and compassionate presentation
(Maslach & Schaufeli, 1992). Eventually, years of empathically serving others who could
be desperately needy and negative would use up the capacity for compassion in service
providers, and they would become emotionally exhausted (Farber, 2000).
Even though burnout attacks the individual, Maslach and Leiter (1997) argued
forcefully against the conventional wisdom that the problem is within the person and that
individuals burn out because of certain flaws in their nature:
We believe that burnout is not a problem of the people themselves but of the
social environment in which people work. The structure and functioning of the
workplace shape how people interact with one another and how they carry out
their jobs. When the workplace does not recognize the human side of work, then
the risk of burnout grows, carrying a high price with it. (p. 18)
32

In developed countries, burnout has advanced due to a number of fundamental
changes in the modern workplace over the last few decades. “The corporate world has
become more immense and more separated from the concerns of ordinary people than
ever before” (Leiter & Maslach, 2005, p. 4). Fanning (2012) noted that
Job burnout [is] more common than getting the flu (with much longer term
effects). With the pressures of the job mounting and the digital stress of
computers, phones, and blackberries; it’s just getting worse. This doesn’t even
take into account the hit on your employees’ personal lives. . . . It’s just not
healthy. Moreover, burnout is also showing up in the bottom line of the company
and having a shocking impact. Work stress cost businesses $300 billion per year
in absenteeism, loss of talented employees, health costs, and programs to reduce
stress. (p. 1)
A loss of hope for the future of one’s professional life also was linked to employee
burnout (Pachner, 2010). Energetic young workers lost their ideological aspirations as the
realities of repetitive work, drudgery, low pay, and negative interactions with those
whom they served began to take their toll. Researchers proposed two reasons that modern
workers are more vulnerable to burnout than their predecessors. First, in the
contemporary workplace, few employees can expect a long, rewarding career in the same
occupation or a steady pension from that same workplace to keep them financially secure
after they retire, as could their fathers and grandfathers. “Once upon a time, you could
count on getting a big, fat pension if you put 30 years into a job. But now, pension plans
everywhere are failing” (Snyder, 2010, para. 3). Today’s work environment is unstable in
terms of longevity on the job; many people move from job to job as employers continue
to downsize or simply do not hire replacements when employees retire or otherwise move
on. In terms of pension security, Snyder (2010) stated,
As the first of the 80 million Baby Boomers have begun to retire, it has become
increasingly apparent that the United States is facing a pension crisis of
33

unprecedented magnitude. State and local government pension plans are woefully
underfunded, [and] dozens of large corporate pension plans either have collapsed
or are on the verge of collapsing. (p. 1)
Job satisfaction is out of reach for the majority of the population; immediate
needs require simply a steady job in order to pay the bills. Salary.com publishes trends
from its annual survey of employee job satisfaction on the Web. In 2009, its fourth
survey brought with it the sobering news that less than 15% of respondents were
“extremely” (Skillings, 2009, p. 1) satisfied, while 65% said they were “somewhat” (p. 1)
satisfied with their jobs. The most satisfied class of respondents was working retirees,
while the least satisfied class was the Millennials (respondents under the age of 30;
Skillings, 2009).
“Amid layoffs and hiring freezes, many organizations today are looking for more
productivity from fewer people” (Pachner, 2010, p. 1). Workers are expected to do more,
faster, and with less. Corporate eyes on the bottom line focus on a short-term gain for a
limited few—primarily stockholders—but not for their employees. An example of this
trend is outsourcing, where jobs and services are exported to developing nations at
greatly reduced costs for shareholders but at the substantial cost of livelihood and
security for mainstream workers. As Maslach and Leiter (1997) noted,
The workplace today is a cold, hostile, demanding environment, both
economically and psychologically. People are emotionally, physically, and
spiritually exhausted. The daily demands of the job, the family, and everything in
between erode their energy and enthusiasm. The joy of success and the thrill of
achievement are more and more difficult to attain. Dedication and commitment to
the job are fading. People are becoming cynical, keeping their distance, [and]
trying not to let themselves get too involved. (p. 1)
It is likely that burnout will seep into every modern workplace as demands
continue to grow greater than the average individual can address. This result will affect
34

workers at all levels and in most, if not all, occupations. Burnout affects the sufferer’s
behavior as well as psychological and physical health (see Figure 1).

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

PSYCHOLOGICAL
SYMPTOMS
The sufferer is . . .
Opposed to change
Suspicious
Paranoid
Frustrated
Feeling powerless
Feeling futile
Depressed
Feeling stagnated
Apathetic
Emotionally exhausted
Irritable
Impatient
Feeling alienated
Fearful
Lacking in joy
Unenthusiastic
Feeling overburdened
Lacking in coping skills
Bored

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

BEHAVIORAL
SYMPTOMS
The sufferer . . .
Is withdrawn
Performs poorly
May abuse drugs and
alcohol
Has frequent conflicts
Is frequently absent
Has poor concentration
Communicates less
Lacks purpose
Has no job satisfaction
Is frequently cynical
Is absent-minded
Is accident prone
Is forgetful
Is a workaholic
Has lost enthusiasm for
work
Complains about work
Labels clients
Dehumanizes clients

BURNOUT
Figure 1. Burnout symptoms.

35

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

PHYSICAL
SYMPTOMS
The sufferer has . . .
Frequent headaches
Gastrointestinal problems
Frequent or long-lasting
colds or flu
Insomnia or hypersomnia
(sleeping too much)
Hypertension
Physical exhaustion
Constant fatigue
Ulcers
Weight loss or gain
High cholesterol
Coronary disease
Shortness of breath
Sexual dysfunction
Impaired speech
Frequent backaches

As burnout takes hold, sufferers start to feel overwhelmed by their day-to-day
tasks. They become both physically and mentally exhausted. Anxiety replaces calm, and
as a result, sufferers sleep badly (insomnia), or else sleep too much (hyposomnia).
Burnout also can bring on nightmares featuring workplace situations (Pines & Aronson,
1981). Burnt-out workers’ enthusiasm for daily tasks is replaced by chronic exhaustion
and a mental change in outlook from zeal to cynicism (Leiter & Schaufeli, 1996).
Negativity is often a mechanism burnt-out workers use to place mental distance between
themselves and overwhelming workplace demands (Ahola et al., 2006, p 11). They soon
find it impossible to “go the extra mile; instead, they give the barest minimum . . . even
though their self-confidence suffers from such a lack of positive input into their careers.
Self-doubt and insensitivity to others creep in to replace enthusiasm and zest for work”
(Leiter & Maslach, 2005, p. 7).
The developmental sequence just described fits the classic progression of burnout
as chronicled by Maslach (1982)—mental exhaustion, depersonalization, and feelings
that personal accomplishment is lacking or nonexistent. The relationship between low
self-efficacy and performance drive, according to Okhakhu (2011),
Can potentially develop into a negative cycle, in which low self-efficacy leads to
less cognitive learning effort, leading in turn to reduced learning success,
resulting in even lower self-efficacy. . . . The marked difference between
possessing sub skills and being able to use them effectively under diverse
circumstances . . . is why different people with similar skills, or the same person
on different occasions, may perform poorly, adequately, or extraordinarily. (p. 37)
If mental effects were not enough, burnout also has physical symptoms that affect
the health of burnt-out individuals. Workers may feel more than mental exhaustion,
cynicism, and a lack of professional efficacy; they may literally become sick as well, and

36

suffer from any number of physical maladies including exhaustion, headaches, back pain,
and increased susceptibility to illnesses such as colds or flu. A 1976 article by Cooper
and Marshall linked workplace stress and burnout with coronary heart disease and mental
ill health. Affected individuals can suffer from a plethora of psychosomatic illnesses as
well (Pines & Aronson, 1988). Other health problems (e.g., high blood pressure, muscle
tension, gastrointestinal illness, and chronic fatigue) also are linked to burnout (Maslach
& Leiter, 1997).
Burnout can be placed on a continuum with job satisfaction and a sense of wellbeing at one end, distress and imbalance occurring next, after which come unproductive
coping mechanisms, a loss of self-worth, and finally, complete workplace burnout at the
other end. The three classic aspects of burnout as identified by Maslach (1982)—
emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and the lack of feelings of personal
accomplishment—mirror this cycle. Leiter and Maslach (2005) urged organizations to
pay attention to burnout because its consequences can be shattering in the workplace.
Leiter and Maslach wrote that burnout is “a phenomenon that has been increasing
everywhere, creeping into every corner of the modern workplace, growing like a virus,
poisoning the increasingly alienated, disillusioned, even angry relationship people today
have with the world of work” (p. 3).
It should come as no surprise, then, that many affected by burnout turn to alcohol,
to drugs such as tranquilizers or stimulants, to cigarettes, or to food as sources of comfort
in their struggle to combat burnout’s negative effects (Maslach, 1982). All of these
remedies have the potential to be abused in and of themselves, and all can and do
contribute their own problems to compound those already affecting the individual.
37

Librarians and Burnout
The first time an editorial on librarian burnout appeared in the library professional
literature was 1980. In 1984, Taler wrote a report about library directors and burnout that
was later published as an ERIC report. Some 50 articles would appear in this decade, and
more were written on the subject in the 1990s. It is obvious the topic of burnout was
beginning to touch a nerve in the library world. By 2010, 11 more articles discussing how
burnout affects those employed in academic, public, and even law and school libraries
could be found in the library professional literature.
In 1987, Katz created a reference book of articles for library professionals dealing
with various library workplace topics that included a chapter on burnout. In 1989,
Nauratil explored stress and burnout in the library field in her book The Alienated
Librarian. Two years later, Caputo’s (1991) Stress and Burnout in Library Service was
published. Both books explored the causes, signs, and symptoms of burnout in library
work. Both acknowledged that librarians experience significant stress on the job resulting
from both the human service/interpersonal interaction nature of the work and libraryspecific stressors such as unpleasant encounters and even frequent quarrels over fines,
library records, open hours, a shortage of new books and other materials, loan period
limits, reserve materials, and more (Kean & McKoy-Johnson, 2009). In 1993, Fox wrote
a 30-page pamphlet discussing possible librarian burnout when downsizing a law library.
The articles in the reference book touched on most, if not all, of the same stress
factors that contribute to burnout in other public service professions. As in those other
people professions, one common factor is the intense and repetitious nature of the
interaction between patron and librarian—interaction sometimes laced with emotions
38

such as urgency, entitlement, frustration, anger, even despair—that can wear down even
the most idealistic librarian. Other factors common to these human service professions
include budget constraints, insufficient staffing, and the rampant growth of technology
(Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008). Still other workplace causes of burnout cited in library
literature include a lack of personal autonomy and control over library operations, role
conflicts and ambiguity, fewer opportunities for personal accomplishment, a lack of
positive feedback, heavy workload, no-win situations in which lack of resources prevent
positive outcomes, and common physical stressors in the environment such as poor
lighting and ventilation and lack of privacy (Caputo, 1991).
Yet another element that stresses employees is organizational change. Bernerth,
Walker, and Harris (2011) noted that today’s organizations are “increasingly engaging in
change efforts” (p. 321) in order to respond better to new challenges; and while change
may be necessary for the organization for a variety of reasons, stability, on the other
hand, “enables employees to maintain a sense of identity and understanding . . . [given
that] a main aspect of human nature is that people have an inherent need for predictability
and order” (p. 321). When the need for stability and unprecedented change are at odds,
the results are often stress, change fatigue, and mental and physical exhaustion—all
indicative of workplace burnout.
For the majority of community colleges, four primary values have been the
traditional cornerstones of college functions: a comprehensive mission, open access,
student success, and service to the community (Anderson, Harbour, & Davies, 2007;
Anderson, Lujan, & Hegeman, 2009; Hegeman, Davies, & Banning, 2007). These values
have allowed faculty, staff, and administration to sharpen the focus of their services and
39

build a committed identity in their communities. However, the service roles for
community colleges are widening and their employees are struggling to hold on to former
ideals as well as learning to serve
Changing student and employee demographics, pedagogical and curricular shifts,
advances in technology, aging physical facilities, increased competition, multiple
and conflicting opportunities, reliance on partnerships, mission drift, diminished
budgets, increased scrutiny and calls for accountability, and all the other realities
of today’s community college world. In striving to meet the challenges,
community college professionals find themselves trying to fulfill their social
contract, provide good stewardship for the resources entrusted to them, and meet
public expectations within that ethical framework. (Dougherty; Vaughan; both as
cited in Anderson et al., 2009, pp. 19–20)
Community college librarians face all of these problems as they struggle to
provide necessary services. California’s changing demographics mean that more and
more students are underprepared to perform at basic college level and need additional
attention from their instructors in order to succeed. Instructors themselves, however, are
dealing with larger classes than ever before and are unable or unwilling to provide this
extra assistance. The result is that students are either directed to go to the library or find
their way there on their own; either way, the extra burden falls on librarians.
Mission drift in education, where the institution fails to serve key constituents due
to factors such as its search for greater profitability or greater numbers of students, takes
instruction to new areas where traditional and counted-on supportive materials and
services are unavailable for students studying in these new areas (Côté & Allahar, 2008).
Changes in pedagogy or curriculum may not be announced to library faculty before
students come to them asking for help with the new assignments or activities; librarians
are then unpleasantly surprised by this new coursework and scramble to determine
whether there is even sufficient material to support the new curriculum area in the library
40

collection. If new materials are deemed necessary, budgetary cutbacks can make it
impossible to purchase materials to serve students studying in these new instructional
areas.
Other contributors to librarian burnout are more personal in nature and point to
the personality of the individual who goes into library service. Librarians often identify
themselves with their profession, and often hold idealistic beliefs such as being able to
help every patron with their needs (Caputo, 1991). Librarians as a professional whole
vigorously support the ideal of freedom of access to information for all, just as they are
vigorously against censorship of reading material and information, according to the
Library Bill of Rights (ALA, 1996). White (1990) stated that librarians are often
perfectionists who display a tendency to overcommit themselves to their work. They
work hard to provide patrons with accurate, timely, and high-quality print materials and
electronic data to address research needs (Beck, 2010; Harwell, 2008).
In today’s library, the ideal of open access is in direct conflict with those who
would take unfair advantage of what the library provides. Librarians in all types of
libraries struggle to uphold their personal beliefs and professional ethics concerning
protecting their patrons’ privacy and freedom of access while at the same time coping
with individuals who use library computers to inappropriately log into pornography
websites or pages linked to criminal activities (e.g., illegal drug deals).
When highly idealistic librarians face these additional workplace situations that
are in stark contrast to professional principles, they must choose between the principles in
which they believe and the reality of a public with sectors that often seek to take free
access far beyond the norm to clearly unacceptable levels (Comstock-Gay, 1995). The
41

ALA’s (2008) Code of Ethics for librarians states, “We protect each library user’s right to
privacy and confidentiality with respect to information sought or received and resources
consulted, borrowed, acquired or transmitted” (Article III). Yet, a uniquely unpleasant
and often stressful situation occurs when patrons view obscene materials on a library’s
computers, dictating that librarians must monitor what patrons are accessing on the
library’s computers to prevent the possibility of mental harm to minors and other
susceptible individuals. The ethical dilemma is this: If they monitor what someone is
viewing, it can be construed as an invasion of privacy and thus a violation of professional
ethics; if they do not, they are not exercising their institution’s duty to protect children
and the general public from potential harm caused by what others may be looking at or
what they are viewing with the public’s computers (Adams, 2005). This situation arises
again and again in public and academic libraries and is one that has sparked heated
debate on either side of the issue from both within and outside of the library community.
The dilemma of ethics versus unethical individuals brings with it the other side of
the moral coin: censorship. Combating censorship and ensuring the freedom to read for
all are arguably the principal ethical concerns for librarians. Librarians strive to preserve
the right to read against religious or other zealots, such as those individuals who take it
upon themselves to censor through mutilation of library materials, and school board
members or school principals eager to kowtow to dictatorial parents in order to protect
their jobs. Librarians tread a fine line between providing classic literature, peer-reviewed
materials, and other items requested by their patrons and those who feel the need to
dictate the reading materials for themselves and all others on a moral, religious, or
political basis.
42

Another source of ongoing stress mentioned in the library professional literature
is that of the professional demand for librarians to keep up with the advances in
technology that are paramount to accurate and timely information delivery. In its
Professional Competencies for Reference and User Services Librarians, the Reference
and User Services Association (RUSA, 2010), a division of the ALA, encourages
librarians to conduct frequent environmental scans “for emerging technologies that are
relevant to delivery of reference and user services” (Environmental Scanning section,
para. 1). Librarians already stretched to cover all work requirements during the course of
a workday must stay current with technology in order to provide the best service to
library patrons, regardless of the reality that many libraries cannot afford to keep up with
even not-so-recent developments in technology; librarians are often forced to work with
equipment that is 5 or more years old (Griffey et al., 2009; Tenopir & Neufang, 1992).
RUSA standards also dictate that librarians should attend at least one professional
conference per year if possible. Professional standards such as these are frustrating for
librarians, especially in the current economy, when they are likely to be dependent on
their own finances rather than on their institution’s funding to cover the cost of pricey
conference attendance—if staffing shortages even allow them the luxury of time away
from the workplace to attend. There is simply not enough time to devote to reading about,
listening to, or watching videos or webcasts concerning advances in technology, not
enough money to pay for professional workshops or conferences, and not enough money
in the budget to keep the library’s technology infrastructure anywhere near the cutting
edge of new technological products and advances in software. Professional standards
such as these can cause librarians stress and frustration in the workplace.
43

Other consequences of technological advances can place librarians under stress.
Librarians in public service also spend a great deal of their workday doing
nonprofessional tasks, such as troubleshooting equipment problems and loading paper
and toner cartridges into printers and copiers (Tenopir & Neufang, 1992). In the last two
decades, reference librarians have been forced to devote more time to learning to use new
or updated versions of software than ever before. They also deal with a steady stream of
upgrades to individual computer components such as monitors, hard drives, keyboards,
mice, and printers. If these components also are being upgraded along with the library’s
online catalog, database, and computer lab areas, the librarians go through rapid “learn on
the job” periods where the equipment is as new to them as it is to the public, yet they are
looked to for guidance as the experts in utilizing it. Technostress is a term used in the
library literature to describe the result of attempting to keep up with ever-changing
technology (Champion, 1988; Clark & Kalin, 1996). Patrons, especially older individuals
or those not comfortable with technology, now also experience technostress as they face a
steeper learning curve to access information in a way they never needed to understand
when retrieving data from standard print resources.
In the academic library, several daily stressors—disgruntled patrons who quarrel
with staff over unavailability of requested materials or regarding fines, library records,
open hours, loan periods, unpopular rules about food and drinks or cell phone use in the
library, and the paucity of new books or computer workstations, for example—are nearly
the same as in those in the public library, but there are also those challenges that are
unique to academia and bring their own anxieties. These include students who routinely
question the short loan periods allowed for instructor-reserved materials, criticizing the
44

library and librarians while claiming that the time allotted per checkout period is
insufficient to accomplish their studies. Academic librarians also work according to the
ebb and flow of the academic year. There are enormous rushes of baffled, brand-new
students needing immediate instruction on the location and use of everything in the
library at the beginning of every instructional session or during examination or term
report periods, and then slower periods during intersessions when some behind-thescenes work can be accomplished, unless librarians are needed by the rest of the college
community to serve on hiring committees or to perform other shared-governance duties
during these times when other faculty are typically not scheduled to work.
The initial article devoted to the topic of burnout and academic librarian burnout
was published in a journal specifically intended for readers from the academic library
community. In this 1990 article, Pillsbury, Lloyd, Schobert, and Seibert wrote on library
bibliographic instruction, recording the responses of five academic librarians who were
asked the following question: “How can you prevent the instructional librarian from
becoming burnt out from repetition and overwork?” (p. 220). Opinions varied from
acceptance of the reality of the syndrome to problem solving within the library
community itself. Others suggestions included coping techniques such as practicing yoga,
taking a sabbatical, participating in stress-relieving physical exercise, and meditation.
Mindfully working to consciously set and regularly attain reachable goals also was
mentioned as a way to combat feelings of losing effectiveness, and requesting and
receiving support from library administrators was suggested to fight the symptoms of
burnout (Pillsbury et al., 1990). The librarians who offered their opinions were
responding to Pillsbury et al.’s supposition that burnout in instructional librarians arises
45

from job-related anxiety brought on by long hours of continuous, repetitive work,
inadequate staffing, and constant distress coupled with an internal fear that the efforts of
a single librarian can have little effect on the overall quality of service provided).
Many academic librarians must deal with students who have at their fingertips the
latest in technological devices. These come from the generation known as the
Millennials, those students under 30 who have grown up in a multitasking technological
environment (Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008). Their expectation for immediate gratification is
acute, and when they must wait for something—whether it is in reality only a matter of a
minute or less while a librarian looks up a reference or when they themselves must first
scan a print index to obtain a reference but then must proceed to searching another
resource to find the actual desired information—the delay affects their expectation of
immediate feedback and can breed impatience, disdain, and even anger. Yet, even when
patrons ask for something that is outside of the librarian’s scope or training, or not a part
of library service, most librarians tend to feel a sense of guilt rather than anger at an
unreasonable demand simply because they are unable to immediately meet a patron’s
service expectation. Knibbe-Haanstra (2008) stated, “Reference librarians are liable to
experience many stressful situations where expectations surmount their knowledge
capabilities” (p. 23). She went on to say that this also holds true when a library patron
asks for something far beyond the scope (extent) of the library’s collection.
Technology contributes to elevated stress levels even when the task comes down
to the very act of reading. “Transliteracy is a term that was born out of a need to describe
how communication has changed” (Jaeger, 2011, p. 44). Human communication has
progressed down a road that has not excluded earlier modalities but rather absorbed and
46

changed them as it moved from talking to painting to printing to music to multimedia
exchange of ideas. The term acknowledges the fact that reading is now not the only skill
needed to be fully literate. Librarians have long been at the forefront of teaching basic
literacy skills, alongside elementary educators abreast of the changing face of education,
because although the means of transmission of ideas and information changed from
printed page to electronic screen, formal instruction is still dependent on the foundation
of knowing how to read. And yet, the ability to read printed words is not enough in
today’s world. Librarians have to teach students how to apply a variety of technical skills
in order to access a variety of media containing needed information.
We now have to read across electronic platforms, apply previous knowledge to a
new application, broaden our scope of reading to include critical evaluation for
credibility, and apply rules of decoding and encoding to new content platforms
such as video, Skype, blogging, and online discussions to become a productive
member of society. . . . Reading was top-down, left-right, black and white. We
read a passage, found meaning, and were expected to answer questions. Reading
is now unpredictable as most reading is done outside of school on an electronic
medium and is now three dimensional. Hyperlinks can bring students deeper or
foster surface skimming depending on the skills and speed that the reader applies
to a website. (Jaeger, 2011, pp. 44–45)
In the academic teaching library, the repetitive nature of library and literacy
instruction activities takes its toll, particularly when instructing multiple sections of the
same course or when teaching groups or individual students the identical sequence of
technical skills to access library resources and tools. This is especially true at the onset of
new instructional sessions, because librarians are then bombarded with multiple requests
for bibliographic instruction sessions from teaching faculty who want their students to
learn to use the library as early in the term as possible. On these occasions, librarians face
daylong (and often weeklong or longer) intervals of back-to-back bibliographic

47

instruction sessions. These sessions tie up their working hours and provide no time for
breaks, friendly interaction with their colleagues, quiet work in their offices, or to
perform other necessary tasks. Admittedly, this intense session-related cycle often lasts
only a few weeks, but the extreme demand and relentless, repetitious nature of the work,
class after class, can have debilitating effects after years of service. When the academic
librarian begins to feel that the work is unrewarding, futile, or not making a significant
difference, the feelings of personal accomplishment lessen dramatically. Add to these
stressors the complexities of balancing work and home life, spouse, and children,
collegial relationships, and the drive to achieve tenure or move up from faculty to
management, and the tendency toward burnout for the academic librarian looms large
(Spires, 2007).
Another source of stress for the academic librarian may be the difference in
physical access between academic and public libraries. Academic libraries are often
located in the center of a college campus, not on an open street in a residential or
downtown area of a community. Academic libraries can restrict their users to only
affiliated patrons (i.e., enrolled students and college faculty, staff, and contributors or
alumni), and this screening keeps all but the most determined members of the public—the
homeless, mentally ill, criminal, or otherwise disruptive patrons—out of the library. If
these individuals enter the facility and create problems, the library staff turn to user rules
that restrict entrance to the facility and trigger removal by campus security if problems
arise. But restricting the right to use to a library, even in the college or university
environment, can cause stress for ideological academic librarians concerned about

48

compromising free access to information, a basic tenet of the library profession (Jansen,
1992).
Yet another stressor in the academic library workplace is that its clients are
primarily young adults, and even those from this group who choose to act out, be loud,
disruptive, argumentative, or abusive, or who use drugs and/or alcohol are still routinely
admitted to the library by campus administration after little or no disciplinary action. In a
study by Scarpa et al. (2002), the prevalence of exposure to violence in the media for
college-aged young people was seen to have the negative effect of causing their own
development of aggressive behavior and problems with interpersonal interaction.
Researchers theorized that because these problems cause undue distress for most young
people, the result is that these
Individuals who have experienced undue exposure to violence may, as a result, be
more likely to exhibit aggressive behaviour in certain circumstances. . . . One
should, therefore, not overlook the factor of stress and the role that it can play in
the expression of rage in the academic library environment. (Kean & McKoyJohnson, 2009, p. 386)
Prolonged exposure to all the aforementioned negative stressors in the academic
library workplace has the same detrimental effects on academic library faculty as on
public librarians or other public service workers in disparate human service fields: They
suffer a significant rate of burnout (Sheesley, 2001). In 1996, Affleck used the Maslach
Burnout Inventory to survey bibliographic instruction librarians in New England. The
researcher found that 58.2% of the 142 librarians suffered from a single dimension of the
three burnout dimensions, and 8.5% suffered from all three. An earlier survey of
bibliographic instruction librarians who were members of the Association of College and
Research Libraries revealed that 39.3% of these librarians found burnout to be a problem
49

in their professional lives (Patterson & Howell, as cited in Sheesley, 2001). This is a
factor not only for disengagement but also for a lack of stimulation and positive
feedback. “Even though there is disagreement in the literature about the central cause of
stress for reference librarians, the fact that all of the writing discusses remedial solutions
to potential stress indicates that it does, in fact, exist” (Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008, p. 24).
“Consideration of factors leading to burnout in academic teaching librarians
reveals some striking parallels with the experiences of others in helping professions”
(Sheesley, 2001, p. 448). Butcher (1999) elaborated on the stressors:
Students and faculty are desperate for help in selecting databases and accessing
and evaluating information from the World Wide Web. They need help with
printing . . . [and] downloading files. . . . The physical Reference Desk has
become the place where librarians catch their breath between patrons. It is less
often the place where actual reference service takes place. Whether they work in
Technical Services or in public services, librarians face the ongoing task of
improving their technical knowledge. They spend much of their time evaluating
Internet information, organizing electronic information, linking Web pages to the
online catalog, and integrating metadata into bibliographic records. Library
instruction has increased dramatically, as has third-tier reference service.
Librarians have an increased role on campus, frequently serving on faculty
committees and student advisory groups. Finally, as libraries assume a greater
role in digitizing information, the faculty looks to librarians to participate in
campus partnerships concerning the storage and retrieval of information. (pp. 2–3)
Without a sense of personal achievement, academic librarians may discover that the other
factors of burnout—mental exhaustion and detachment—are more than they can deal
with on their own without some sort of intervention.

Human Performance Technology
HPT is a field of study that has evolved over the last 60 years from disciplines
such as psychology, neuroscience, information science, economics, ergonomics, and from

50

the application fields of instructional technology, organizational development, industrial
engineering, and human resource development (Pershing, 2006). It has interrelationships
with human resource development, organizational effectiveness, and organizational
development. Because of the rather mechanical resonance the label human performance
technology can evoke, human performance improvement or just performance
improvement have evolved as alternate terms.
Euphemisms notwithstanding, the field of HPT “has come to represent a unique
area of study, research, and professional practice” (Pershing, 2006, p. xiii). The purpose
of this discipline is to create worth for organizational stakeholders by engineering human
performance systems to work in a way that equates to value for that organization
(Pershing, 2006). Pershing (2006) provided a succinct and timely definition of the field
when he wrote, “Human performance technology is the study and ethical practice of
improving productivity in organizations by designing and developing effective
interventions that are results-oriented, comprehensive, and systemic” (p. 6). HPI study
and practice can be broken down by the key components named in the aforementioned
definition: study, ethical practice, improving productivity, organizations, designing and
developing, effectiveness, interventions, results-oriented, and comprehensive and
systematic (Pershing, 2006). Each component is an important focal point for HPI
research.
Gilbert showcased his BEM in his 1978 book Human Competence: Engineering
Worthy Performance. Gilbert (2007) posited it was a lack of support for performance,
rather than a lack of skills or knowledge, that inhibited worthy performance, and that an
employee’s environment should be examined first before (as was practiced previously)
51

focusing on the individual’s perceived shortcomings. With an engineer’s eyes, Gilbert
used his knowledge of the positive effects of technological developments on engineering
production and looked for variables that might affect the performance of human beings.
The result was his BEM. “The strength of Thomas Gilbert’s Behavior Engineering Model
is the emphasis on both the individual and the individual’s environment (Swanson &
Holton, 2001) in regards to improving human performance achievements valued by
human performers and the organization or system” (Weyant, 2009, p. 52).
Nothing is more critical to creating an individual’s competence [according to
Gilbert] than establishing clear, valuable, and measurable goals, and determining
the potential to accomplish them. Stolovitch and Keeps (1999) echoed the same
point in their text: the first step in reaching the desired results is to identify the
business requirements clearly. (Weyant, 2009, p. 52)
For the purpose of this research study, attention was focused on the syndrome of
burnout and its causes, consequences, and effects on individual faculty librarians in the
workplace. Input was sought from the pool of California community college faculty
librarians on the general topic of their experience of workplace burnout; its causes,
consequences, and effects; and any coping techniques they may have employed. These
data were presented to the Delphi panel during the three rounds of questions and answers,
and they then refined the input from the larger pool.
This process allowed a sort of holistic examination of workers, performance
expectations, and the workplace, considering
Interdependencies between the organization, business processes, and individual
performers. . . . Robinson and Robinson (1996) described the same perspective in
their definition of HPI as a systematic approach to analyzing, improving, and
managing performance in the workplace through the use of appropriate and varied
interventions. (Weyant, 2009, p. 53)

52

Attention also was directed toward the coping techniques these respondents had
utilized to deal with stress and burnout in order to improve their own workplace
performance. Despite these topics of focus, however, research into the effects of this
deleterious syndrome has touched upon other components of HPI as well. For example,
improving productivity and individual and/or organizational effectiveness is the natural
goal of any HPI intervention. Any coping techniques proposed as a result of the Delphi
response panel would logically be results-oriented and effective as they were submitted in
response to queries for any that had been successfully utilized by the respondents
themselves.

Burnout Interventions
Burnout, as a syndrome brought on by stress, is dealt with through stress
reduction practices. If an individual works under conditions that create daily stress, and
he or she does not utilize any methods to cope with these stresses, the onset of burnout is
often the result, and the individual no longer has the mental or physical energy or the
psychological ability to do well on the job.
Work can exalt the human spirit or reduce it to a pile of burnt-out rubble. . . .
Work that involves the autonomous use of individuals’ innovative and creative
abilities results in personal and professional growth and in the satisfaction that
comes from making a meaningful contribution to one’s society. (Nauratil, 1989,
p. 83)
It is unfortunate that many librarians and other burnt-out workers find that their jobs no
longer provide the promised lifelong engagement or personal satisfaction that can make
doing it worthwhile.

53

Although there is disagreement about all of the causes of workplace stress for
librarians, all of the literature on the topic discussed corrective solutions for the problem
(Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008). Interventions aimed at reducing workplace stress and burnout
are sorted into four distinct categories: cognitive behavioral approaches, relaxation
techniques, multimodal mediation, and organization-focused interventions (James-Enger,
2009). The first type, cognitive behavioral interventions, is aimed at changing the
perceptions of the individual sufferer and rebuilding coping skills. Interventions utilizing
relaxation techniques, the second type, are intended to focus on mental and physical
relaxation as a method of coping with stress and its consequences. The third type,
multimodal interventions, seeks to build up an individual’s internal battery of active and
passive coping mechanisms in combination with drug or other therapies. The fourth type,
organization-focused interventions, is designed to increase workers’ contributions to the
workplace or to improve the work environment (Van Tiem, Moseley, & Dessinger,
2001).
Each of these four types of intervention has had proven, positive effects on the
burnout sufferer. Depending on the individual, the relief from symptoms has been shown
to be anywhere from total recovery to various degrees of lessened symptoms, which
allows the sufferer to live and deal with the effects (Van der Klink, Blonk, Schene, &
Van Dijk, 2001).
Stress Management Interventions
The field of HPI categorizes stress management interventions into two classes:
educational (or instructional; Combs & Falletta, 2000) and skills-acquisition interventions
(Werner & DeSimone, 2006). Ripley (2003) wrote that two thirds to three fourths of the
54

basis of performance problems can be linked to the work environment, and that there are
over 200 HPI interventions with which to deal with them. Combs and Falletta (as cited in
Dugger, 2010) described “instructional interventions as performance improvement
solutions ‘designed to promote knowledge and skill acquisition or attitude change
through instruction-led training, small group activities, and workshops’” (p. 22). Included
in this class of intervention are programs utilizing computer-, distance-, and video-based
instruction (Dugger, 2010). Educational interventions teach individuals what stress is and
how it feels, and provide ideas on how to cope with it. On the other hand, skillacquisition interventions “are designed to provide employees with new ways to cope with
stressors affecting their lives and performance and help keep the effects of stress in
check” (Werner & DeSimone, 2006, p. 423).
Combs and Falletta (2000) described non-instructional interventions as
performance improvement solutions in which barriers to improving workplace
performance are identified and then eliminated. This class of intervention includes
performance expectations, feedback systems, coaching, and mentoring.
Regardless of type of intervention utilized, employees who are successful in using
coping techniques to solve workplace performance problems are those who acknowledge
that they need assistance with coping.
Individual employees have to possess the need to make the conviction and
commitment for self-efficacy to propel them into success. The individual has to
evaluate, weigh, and integrate all vital information of their perceived capabilities.
The individual has to initiate and expend energy, and sustain it despite possible
negating circumstances. (Okhakhu, 2011, p. 41)

55

Since they can be scaled down to fit a single individual or scaled up to encompass
an entire organization, either of these types of intervention can fit into the open systems
models for HPI. Rothwell (1999) went deeper into this assertion, explaining that HPT is
Based on open systems theory, or the view that any organization is a system that
absorbs such environmental inputs as people factors, raw materials, capital, and
information; uses them in such transformational processes as service delivery or
manufacturing methods; and expels them as outputs such as finished goods or
customer service. (p. 3)
Systems models allow HPT researchers to analyze an entire organization from top
to bottom by concentrating on the three major subsystems of the business entity:
organizational, operations, and the people subsystem (Pershing, 2006). The
organizational subsystem, Pershing (2006) explained, is another term for the
administrative hierarchy in a business; the operations subsystem is the workplace
process; and the people subsystem is the label for the category defining the living system,
the humans who perform the work.
The field of HPT also borrowed a theory of system structure from sociology,
where micro (individual), meso (group within an organization), and macro (organization
as a whole) structures allow one to look at organizations with similar subsystems as
explained previously (Schillo, Fischer, & Klein, 2001). In the HPT context, then,
interventions that are scaled to assist single individuals are considered micro-level, those
that affect a group within an organization are meso-level, and those that promote
organization-wide change are macro-level interventions.
For the purpose of this research project, interventions that apply to an individual
librarian were known as micro interventions; meso intervention(s) were applied to
librarians as a group (distinct from other library workers); and interventions conducted
56

organization-wide, including clerical staff, professional librarians, and administrators,
were referred to as macro-level interventions.
Cognitive Behavioral Interventions
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a component of psychosocial
interventions, which have been used to provide a wide range of interventions to reduce
stress and prevent relapse in burnout sufferers (M. Doyle, 2007). “In CBT, clients are
instructed how to address the causes of their stress by changing their coping skills with
regard to demands and pressures” (Ruwaard, Lange, Bouwman, Broeksteeg, &
Schrieken, 2007, p. 179). Because the essence of CBT is that irrational beliefs and/or
negative self-assessments are a factor in developing psychological difficulties, a therapist
using CBT assists his or her client to recognize these beliefs as negative cognitive
distortions that impact the client’s life. With continuing therapy, the therapist helps the
client move past these once-dominant distortions by assisting the client to rethink his or
her attitude (Franklin, 2003), and in such a way as to “feel valued, motivated, and
confident” (M. Doyle, 2007, p. 19) once again.
It is interesting to note that the literature on dealing with burnout in academic
librarians focused remedial attention on the individual rather than the employer, or on
micro as opposed to macro interventions. The result is that the majority of articles
provide information on stress management techniques focused on the worker. Caputo
(1991) posited this was because the individual employee usually had little authority to
change the working conditions and greater control over either leaving the job behind or
tackling the effects of workplace stressors through stress reduction techniques. Cognitive
behavioral approaches, relaxation techniques, and multimodal interventions all provided
57

the individual with ways to combat burnout, with cognitive behavioral interventions
proving more effective than other types (Biswas-Diener, 2009; Van der Klink et al.,
2001).
Learning self-efficacy through cognitive therapy is an excellent tool with which to
cope with change, combat stress, and reduce the occurrence of burnout (Jex & Bliese,
2001). “Researchers have found strong links between perceived self-efficacy and
[reducing] both stress and burnout” (Yu, Lin, & Hsu, 2009, p. 365). Human resource
development research has shown that employees who have been on the job for many
years may be able to regain higher levels of performance because they already had
expertise in their field, vital to regulating one’s own behavior (Werner & DeSimone,
2006). Cognitive awareness of both declarative knowledge and procedural knowledge of
a job, such as that of an academic librarian, can allow these workers to develop selfregulation concerning job performance, and in this way they may be able to regain
control strategies over their own performance level (Werner & DeSimone, 2006). If this
proves to be the case, then teaching burnt-out individuals to utilize cognitive selfregulation can make performance improvement interventions more effective.
One reason why more affected librarians do not seek this kind of assistance is that
it requires implementation by trained professionals, and clients do not seek help because
of either a lack of awareness of their conditions or the fear of stigmatization for seeking a
mental health treatment. As a way around this, clinicians familiar with these anxieties
have had moderate success with standardized cognitive behavioral treatment delivered by
e-mail (Ruwaard et al., 2007) and via the Internet (Cuijpers, Straten, & Andersson, 2008).

58

This factor suggests that once burnout sufferers become self-aware, they become
interested in learning this technique for their own use.
Among the suggestions for burnout intervention to be utilized by an individual
were such rewarding techniques as an ongoing self-care program focused on personal
nutrition and health (Maslach, 1982); confronting problem individuals candidly and
respectfully (Nauratil, 1989); setting short-term, reachable goals, taking breaks from
work, and building personal support systems (Caputo, 1991); attending professional
conferences and reading professional literature to stay fresh (Pergander, 2006);
improving one’s own immediate environment and ongoing involvement in outside
organizations; developing a balanced focus on family and church (Harwell, 2008); and
utilization of mentoring to achieve realistic goals (Steele, 2009). All of these are classic
interventions that appear throughout the literature. Each of these interventions resulted in
better tolerance for stressful situations, which in turn allowed the stressed individual to
recover from, or at least better tolerate, the negative effects of burnout.
Relaxation Interventions
Relaxation techniques also were quite prevalent in the literature on stress
reduction in general. Swedish researchers have written of the extreme efficacy of
relaxation response due to use of flotation-tank REST (restricted environmental
stimulation technique) therapy (Bood et al., 2006), but again, as in the literature dealing
with cognitive behavioral interventions, most of the relaxation techniques for dealing
with burnout for librarians have been those that can be done by the individual without a
specialized facility such as a flotation tank.

59

Maslach (1982) suggested several coping techniques for use in different
workplaces and with different work styles (and general lifestyles), which could be seen as
micro or meso intervention techniques in themselves. Among these techniques was taking
regular breaks from work in order to create some psychological distance from it, either by
taking a standardized break such as a coffee or lunch break or by moving into another
room or area of the building to put actual physical distance between the sufferer and the
task. Maslach also suggested employing relaxation techniques that suit both the person
and the work environment. For the individual who needs a change in lifestyle, Maslach
suggested such micro interventions as biofeedback and imagery techniques.
Creation of some physical distance from the workplace becomes a short
relaxation break from work where individuals
Should try to psychologically detach from work-related demands in order to
restore resources called upon during working time. This goal could be achieved,
for example, by engaging in distracting leisure activities which demand
individuals’ attention, by leaving off work consciously, and by avoiding taking
work home. (Kühnel et al., 2009, p. 590)
Another suggestion is to use mindfulness meditation as a therapeutic relaxation
intervention. Mindfulness is based on an ancient Buddhist cognitive style founded on
developing a heightened sense of awareness of the full reality of the present moment—
and only the present moment—so that individuals become fully engaged in living their
lives in the present rather than just going through the motions, reacting to life’s situations,
or thinking about future unpleasant work tasks. Research has revealed that mindfulness
techniques empower individuals to stop depressive ruminations and find release from
anticipation, worry, anxiety, and stress (Kostanski & Hassad, 2008).

60

Multimodal Interventions
Multimodal interventions are based on multiple facets of psychotherapy. Arnold
Lazarus developed the theory of multimodal therapy to supplement CBT in patients who
did not respond to CBT alone (Alic, n.d.). It involves treating the whole human being as a
complete, one-of-a-kind individual, not just treating one portion of the person, with
combined modalities treating differing areas of behavior, physiology, cognition,
interpersonal relations, sensation, imagery, and affect as necessary for the individual’s
needs (Alic, n.d.). One such study supplemented CBT with yoga and revealed significant
reduction in stress in research subjects (Adhia, Nagendra, & Mahadevan, 2010).
Also known as combined modality therapy, multimodal therapy relies on the
combination of multiple interventions to create a unique treatment package for patients.
For example, depression sufferers may be treated through the use of antidepressant
medications as well as with CBT. Researchers found that utilization of two focused
therapies such as psychotherapy and drug therapy were quite effective and allowed the
therapist to craft a treatment unique to each individual (“Augmentation Strategies for
Depression,” 2010).
Multimodal interventions into symptoms linked with burnout often are balanced
between healthcare instruction and the aid of a trainer or pharmacist in order to enable the
sufferer to assist in crafting his or her own individual therapy. A study that looked at
stress reduction utilizing the creation of a support network and training in relaxation as a
multimodal approach revealed that the combination of the two were more powerful than
each taken individually (Antoni, 2003).

61

Because these interventions are tailored specifically for each individual, and
because not every individual suffering from burnout will want or need to combine drug or
other therapies in order to find relief, multimodal therapies can be said to be micro
interventions.
Organization-Focused Interventions
Organization-focused interventions are designed to change the environmental
context of the workplace. Profitability, productivity, and customer service are prime
drivers for this type of intervention, as are market share and shareholder value. The
literature focused on three types of organizational interventions: those aimed at
empowerment, those aimed at proactive planning, and those aimed at the
instillment/refreshment of organizational values (Van Tiem et al., 2001). Organizationfocused interventions that targeted increasing profitability were much more prevalent in
the literature than those based on reducing stressors in the workplace, even though these
stressors alone or in conjunction with other factors may be hindrances to increased
profitability.
Leaders in the business world have been obsessed with improving human
performance as long as there has been business on this planet.
Like blind people around the elephant, people from different professions and
disciplines convinced themselves that only they have the correct perception of the
best method for improving human performance. They began spreading their
method and preaching their message to everyone around them. As a part of this
activity, proponents of one method vehemently attacked the infidels who
espoused other methods. (Sanders & Thiagarajan, 2005, p. vii)
It was not until the early 1960s that acceptance of multiple methods of improvement were
proposed. HPI is now accepted as a multidisciplinary field that encompasses multiple
62

methods of improving human performance. Today, when performance professionals
examine an organization in the process known as performance analysis, they build an
interface with it as they seek to understand the opportunities and problems faced by the
employees with an eye toward amplifying opportunities and negating problems. The
company’s “relationships, questions, data, dissection, conversation, synthesis,
collaboration, and marketing” (Rossett, 1999, p. 10) are systematically analyzed toward
those goals. Any of these that demonstrate value are looked at with as much interest as
those that produce problems.
Senge (2006) stated that organizations that learn quickly have a demonstrable
edge over their competition. Senge dubbed these learning organizations. Grol, Bosch,
Hulscher, Eccles, and Wensing (2007) stated the culture of a learning organization is
characterized by “an experimental mind-set, curiosity about trying new things, a climate
of openness, acceptance of debate and conflict, and an ongoing commitment to education,
growth, and development at all levels” (p. 80).
The library has always been both types of organization. Librarians provide
services tailored to the needs of their patrons. Academic librarians, especially those who
are faculty members in community colleges, teach their students individual skills that
must be used in tandem in order for them to navigate through a modern academic library:
how to find books and other materials using a variety of resources (computers, printed
lists, bound indexes, etc.), how to comprehend and utilize the classification system by
which the resources are arranged in order to locate them, how to utilize the differing
resources once found (e.g., how to access information whether in digital or print formats
through the use of tables of contents, indexes, and special icons or type used by the
63

publisher/web developer to highlight important information), and how to properly and
ethically cite resources as necessary.
The segment of librarians studied here, community college librarians, must serve
anyone 18 or over who can profit from education (and younger students in specific
programs); and even though their main patrons are young adults, the rest of their patron
audience can be extremely diverse: adults, faculty, staff, the homeless, the mentally and
physically impaired, international students and non-English speakers, community
members, and even children of their students. To be able to accomplish such a mission,
librarians must be devoted to ongoing study of new software applications and interfaces;
must always be prepared to show others how to use the latest versions of print and digital
information resources; must always understand new print layouts or inclusions/omissions
in the newest editions of standard reference resources; and must know any new standards
or citation formats for the publication of materials, such as those from the Modern
Language Association or the American Psychological Association.
In order for organization-wide change to take place, the individual people in the
organization must be able to see how and if their positions in the organization will
change. This makes it imperative that those in charge of change
Remember that any change initiative generally involves people, and the role of
change agents is to ensure that the needs, concerns, and fears of the organizational
members are addressed and that all people are working toward the same goals and
cooperating with each other. (Pershing, 2006, p. 277)
Organizations must also be careful considering there are differences in opinion as
to where to place blame for stress and burnout. Management personnel tend to believe
that the problems lie with individual workers; individual workers tend to blame the same

64

problems on the structure of the workplace and authoritarian management (Garden, 1989;
Ryan et al., 2005).
Any move toward radical change in an organization can cause stress, regardless of
the proposed positive outcome (Van Tiem et al., 2001). Nevertheless, since the 1960s, the
idea of work reform and the move toward wholesale organizational change began to
gather more momentum than it had since the early years of the 20th century. The Quality
of Work Life (QWL) Movement is a direct result of the perception of the growing need to
somehow align work activities with human desires or needs in order to create a
satisfactory fit (Nauratil, 1989). Ideas such as job redesign and participative management
grew out of this movement in order to prevent job alienation and burnout.
Maslach and Leiter (1997) concurred with the self-help interventions suggested
by Caputo (1991) as being perfectly valid for fighting burnout’s effects; however, they
pointed out that in order to truly deal with workplace burnout, focus must be on both the
individual and the workplace, not just the individual alone, because “the sources of
burnout are more situational than personal, so solutions to the problem need to be sought
within the social context of the workplace” (Maslach & Leiter, 1997, p. 79). The social
context of the workplace includes workers and management working together. From
there, it is certainly plausible that the principles espoused by movements like QWL have
within them the power to provide a framework to combat workplace burnout by creating
a humanistic and democratic workplace that reduces alienation through codetermined
goals for workers and management (Nauratil, 1989).
As has been demonstrated, librarians often are high achievers, and high achievers
often fall victim to burnout. They become totally involved with their careers and develop
65

priorities that are focused on promotion and higher pay. Once the desired position is
reached, they often marry and begin families, yet still position their major focus on
achievements in the workplace; if a dramatic event occurs that interrupts this singleminded focus, such as a layoff or catastrophic illness, the high-achieving individual has
no other support base on which to fall back (Pines & Aronson, 1988). Burnout can ensue.
And because high achievers are a vital part of any organizational structure, institutions
should do all they can to keep the negative effects of burnout under control and to fight
them as they appear. The human resources department of any organization has many
ways to intervene in order to lower the stress levels of its employees; this is vital because
The U.S. workplace is sick. Fear, anxiety, anger, depression, and burnout run
rampant in stress-filled companies. Desk rage, phone rage, rudeness, and violent
acts in the workplace make HR [human resources] professionals shudder and
sometimes wonder whether their own job description has been reinvented to
include being a psychologist. . . . Decreased performance, less teamwork, low
morale, increased health costs and workers’ compensation claims, lawsuits,
lateness and absenteeism, theft, and sabotage are all results of out-of-control
stress levels in workers. (Losyk, 2006, pp. 9–10)
The most common anti-burnout measure taken in recent years by many
organizations is the introduction of stress reduction programs. Yet, this is only part of
what should be a “two-pronged” movement, says Losyk (2006, p. 10); the other half
would be to undertake organizational change in order to lessen the stressors in the
workplace that caused the problem in the first place. Stressors in the workplace defined
by human resource development researchers Werner and DeSimone (2006) include
“organization structure, job design, selection and placement programs, working
conditions, and training and development” (p. 423).

66

In recent years, Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs) have become extremely
important tools for promoting workers’ well-being and improving performance in the
wake of heightened levels of workplace stress (Cooper, Dewey, & O’Driscoll, 2003;
Ruiz, 2006). An effective EAP can lower stress tremendously for employees
experiencing excessive stress brought on by multiple stressors, as was shown in a study
by Yu et al. (2009) concerning the association “between the employees’ perception of
EAPs, stressors, self-efficacy, and burnout” (p. 373). EAPs are designed to help workers
individually, both in the workplace and in the private, home-based environment.
Another organizational occupational stress reduction model referred to in the
literature is team-based rather than individual-based. Teams can be structured on large or
small areas where members work (for example, in the library’s technical services
department or in the circulation services area) or taken from a mix of staffing from all
areas. Teams work together to learn interventions designed to reduce stress levels and at
the same time increase workplace efficacy. The teams can be divided, with one half
training and the other half learning, for example, and then the roles can be reversed.
Teams can learn to work together to solve problems or, if these are seen as too far outside
of their area of control, they can be taught to take them to management as a team rather
than as a more vulnerable single individual. The hoped-for result is that reduced levels of
depersonalization and isolation can be achieved when individuals begin thinking and
working as a team (Ryan et al., 2005).
There is no question that interventions to relieve burnout are vital to the wellbeing of individuals and the institutions for which they work. Whether prescribed for the
individual (micro) or the organization as a whole (macro), these interventions can be seen
67

as positive engagements toward performance improvement. If the interventions utilized
are well designed and implemented with care, the results can be extremely well received,
and this affirmation will have a positive effect on performance (Pershing, 2006), job
satisfaction, burnout, and healthcare utilization (Werner & DeSimone, 2006).

Chapter Summary
Research into the negative stress response known as burnout began in the late
1960s. In 1974, Freudenberger focused research on individuals in the helping professions
as these public servants were suffering from the damaging effects of intensive
interactions with their clients. Following Freudenberger’s research trail was Maslach,
Jackson, and Leiter (1996), who created the measuring instrument known worldwide as
the Maslach Burnout Inventory.
Although librarians are considered public servants, little research has been done
on their experiences of burnout in the workplace. This research study looked at the
symptoms, causes, and consequences of burnout in the academic library workplace and
investigated those burnout coping techniques that research respondents recommended as
being efficacious in allowing them to perform better in the workplace.
Research began in the late 1960s to understand how burnout, as a negative
response to ongoing stress, first came to attention in the corporate world and later in the
helping professions. Maslach and Jackson identified the three fundamental attributes of
burnout in 1981: emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and a deficit of personal
accomplishment. Lernihan and Sweeney (2010) wrote that burnout is an emotional state
experienced from “the deployment of unsuccessful coping strategies” (p. 319) in the
68

workplace by those experiencing long-term pressure at work. Arman, Hammarqvist, and
Rehnsfeldt (2010) explained that since the initial research in the 1970s, the initial
description of burnout was
A psychological term for the experience of long-term exhaustion and diminished
interest caused by a heavy workload . . . [but now] the picture of burnout has
developed further; in a recent compilation by the Stress Research Institute,
burnout is described as a condition of emotional and physical exhaustion as well
as a long-term process in which the everyday environment is seen to be in contrast
to idealistic commitment. (p. 294)
The syndrome of burnout is overwhelmingly present in the modern human service
workplace, affecting social workers, teachers, medical practitioners, clergy, and law
enforcement personnel, among many others. Researchers looking into burnout, such as
Maslach and Schaufeli (1992) and Farber (2000), attributed this pervasiveness to the type
of work performed by these individuals in vocations that demand constant giving of
oneself in a basically unbalanced relationship with those with whom they serve.
Workplace burnout has symptoms that can affect the mental and physical health
of its sufferers. It has infiltrated “every corner” (Leiter & Maslach, 2005, p. 3) of the
modern workplace, and researchers have speculated it can cost employers from 20% to
70% of corporate expenses when measured against the return on investment (Fitz-enz,
2009). Yet, only minimal work has been done to explore its effects on the library
community. Apart from two books written in the late 20th century, and selected journal
articles spanning the 1980s through the early 2000s, very few researchers have looked at
the problem of burnout in library and information science practitioners. Those who did
attributed its causes to the same factors common in other people professions: repetitious,
uneven exchanges of assistance with the public, exchanges often overshadowed with

69

emotional displays of frustration, urgency, dissatisfaction, and anger (Caputo, 1991).
Other researchers identified the often idealistic nature of those in the library field who
often found they faced opposition from supervisors, governing bodies, and members of
the public when holding onto professional ideals of service to all, opposition to
censorship from all quarters, and concomitant free dissemination of information (White,
1990).
Also promoted was the notion that the modern library profession is so technologydependent that the ongoing pressure to keep up with constant changes in technology is
itself a source of constant workplace technostress for librarians. This stressor can run up
against the realities of the modern library, whether school, public, or academic—an
institution suffering from chronically insufficient funding to carry on all the frontline and
behind-the-scenes work involved in maintaining a quality library. It is a universal given
that libraries are important organizations in any democratic society, yet funding for them
is overwhelmingly low on the list of priorities for municipalities and educational
institutions. Librarians must constantly struggle with inadequate funding to maintain all
the facets of a well-run library: a constantly evaluated collection in all formats necessary
to serve its public, a highly educated and trained staff, sufficient modern technology, and
a facility capable of providing the proper environment for a library to flourish (Griffey et
al., 2009; Tenopir & Neufang, 1992; White, 1990).
The academic library can add its own unique stressors to the mix (Pillsbury et al.,
1990). Its patrons are young adults, for the most part, uninterested in following traditional
library rules prohibiting eating, drinking, loud conversations, and other disturbances.
Modern, ubiquitous technology such as MP3 players and cell phones have only added to
70

the list of devices that can disturb the work of students and staff in the facility but are
nearly impossible to regulate (Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008), and against which librarians fight
a daily (and usually losing) battle to maintain the library environment as a place for quiet
study, learning, and reading for everyone. Librarians in today’s academic library
workplace also must deal with exposure to some young adults who may be loud, vulgar,
and uncooperative; who may abuse drugs and/or alcohol; who may be engaged in
criminal activities; or who have already served time for crime and are now attending
college as a condition of parole whether they wish to or not (Scarpa et al., 2002).
Insufficient academic staff to share the burden of hectic, repetitious schedules of
teaching nearly identical instructional sessions, and other seasonal work can be counted
on to be overwhelmingly stressful in the first weeks of each semester before settling
down to a nonetheless grueling pace—all of which take a toll on librarians. Due to the
added expectation of serving on academic committees, service to the community at large,
and serving on hiring and ad hoc college committees, the hours away from the reference
desk or instructional classroom are often nerve-racking as librarians struggle to balance
necessary behind-the-scenes work for the library and service to the campus as a whole
(Spires, 2007).
All of the aforementioned stressors take their toll on academic librarians, and the
resulting burnout can affect over half the work force in the modern collegiate library
(Sheesley, 2001). Librarians suffering from mental exhaustion lose the capacity to make a
lasting difference and go on to accomplish less and less as time passes. This detachment
leads to a loss of the sense of personal achievement and full-blown burnout. Whether or

71

not they realize (or even care about) their diminished performance, these librarians often
face only more of the same in the future of the modern academic library.
The researcher hoped an HPT study would be a vehicle for the creation of
methods by which academic librarians could overcome the debilitating effects of burnout,
given that HPT practitioners seek to study workers’ performance holistically through a
careful, systematic analysis to improve performance. The researcher anticipated the
results from this study of librarians’ workplace experiences with burnout, and the coping
techniques used by them as they sought to help themselves move away from its effects,
would be of value to the discipline of performance improvement. By learning about the
wise practices proffered by a Delphi panel of experts from within the ranks of community
college librarians, performance improvement professionals can gain knowledge of
rudimentary but effective practices that can provide them with elemental components
with which to design professional-grade performance improvement interventions.
Burnout interventions are sorted into four categories: cognitive behavioral
approaches, relaxation techniques, multimodal mediations, and organization-focused
interventions, of which all but multimodal mediations can be offered on macro, meso,
and micro levels. Researchers disagree on the causes of workplace stress for librarians,
but all have looked to one or more of these categories of intervention to relieve the
symptoms of burnout. This research study asked librarians who have dealt with burnout
to describe their lived experiences with it; sought information on their views on burnout’s
symptoms, causes, and consequences; and collected and analyzed data on their coping
strategies. The researcher expected that some of these strategies would naturally fall into
one or more of the aforementioned categories. Study results were reviewed systematically
72

for relevance to the variables proposed in Gilbert’s (2007) BEM and Leiter and
Maslach’s (2005) six worklife domains. Connections between themes also were
examined as superordinate themes resulting from the two frames of reference were
revealed.

73

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

Introduction
This chapter details the methodology for the study and provides an overview of
how the data were analyzed to allow the reader to understand how these elements aligned
with the research problem and research questions. Today’s librarians continue to
experience burnout at work (Manley, 2012). Yet, unlike police officers and firefighters,
librarians are not trained to deal with the stressors they face in the library, a place Saddiq
called “the most stressful workplace of all” (as cited in BBC News, 2011, p. 1). This
study gathered information about methods community college academic librarians used
to deal with workplace burnout in the academic library setting, with a focus on extracting
recommended methods used to maintain or improve performance.
An answer to the central research question—How do community college
librarians most effectively come to terms with burnout to improve their workplace
performance?—was sought utilizing sub-questions asking librarians to describe the
meaning they gave to being burnt out on the job; their beliefs concerning causal
issues/dimensions/themes that, in their opinions, caused their burnout; and their views of
any resulting effects of it in their own workplace performance. The research also included
librarians’ experiences with remedies (interventions) employed to deal with burnout’s

74

effects on their job performance and their opinions concerning which of these remedies
were most effective.

Research Design
This study was conducted using a combination of two methodologies, both
qualitative in nature. The first was a quasi-phenomenological investigation into the
meaning individual librarians gave to their experiences with workplace burnout; the
second was a modified Delphi-method approach that utilized a panel of experts from the
field to gain consensus on a list of practices to cope with workplace stress for the
community college library population. Librarians were first asked general demographic
information to form a basis of information about this population for the study. They were
then asked to provide personal insights about burnout (symptoms, causes, and
consequences) and about any remedies for dealing with burnout they felt were successful
for improving workplace performance. Following this initial data collection, the Delphi
panel worked through three rounds of questions and answers based on data found in the
literature as well as on the previously gathered data from their peers to reach consensus
on the practices to recommend. The researcher confirmed that exploring the topic in this
manner would provide meaningful input concerning burnout that would be unique to the
community college library environment.
The wise practices that resulted from this investigation were focused on the
academic library workplace as the practices came from a panel of experts from within the
community college library population whose roles as givers of wise practices equated to
those of tribal leaders and elders within this population. Because the practices had already
75

been used and were recommended by members of this community, the researcher
believed their recommendations would be of greatest interest for their peers and would
thus encourage adoption by their peers.

Delphi Method
The Delphi method of inquiry was developed in the late 1950s by educators from
University of California-Los Angeles working for the Rand Corporation in Santa Monica,
California. This method for future prediction based on group information was known as
the Delphi technique, after the Greek Oracle, and is still used to conduct surveys in fields
as diverse as military research (Cuhls, 2003), information architecture (Paul, 2008),
medical procedures (Fianer & Burns, 2000; Ramanan et al., 2005), and library research
(Dyer, 1979). The fundamental premise for utilizing a Delphi process is the adage “two
heads are better than one.”
A Delphi study is intended to gather insights from experts in a particular field
(Paul, 2008). Surowiecki (2004) stated the wisdom of the masses is invaluable, which is
why the wisdom of a particular group was sought for this study. Yet, there were elements
that were necessary for this to be true—specifically, that there must be diverse opinion,
independence from other opinions, decentralization of knowledge, and finally, a way to
gather the information from the crowd (Paul, 2008). All of these elements were present in
this study, conducted via e-mail. Through the utilization of a panel of experts composed
of community college librarians, the researcher believed the information collected would
create data to construct a decision framework for librarians, library administrators,
performance improvement professionals, and others working with burnt-out public
76

service employees to improve workplace conditions and worklife in general for those
living with burnout.
The Delphi technique is ideal for use when researching a phenomenon about
which scientific investigation is ongoing, as is the case with burnout. The focus on wise
practices was intended to assist the aforementioned population and others in human
service fields. While the study drew from librarians’ personal frames of reference (e.g.,
their beliefs, assumptions, opinions, and perceptions) concerning burnout at work, the
focus of the study was the techniques they deemed useful in dealing with burnout because
of their own lived experiences with it. Deep questioning was built into the structure of
this Delphi study by asking respondents to read materials provided and then give careful
thought to crafting their responses to rounds of questions afterward.
A Delphi-method study is built on three rudimentary constants: (a) responders
remain anonymous throughout the process, (b) the repetition of issues and terminology
and controlled feedback govern the interactions, and (c) group response is guided toward
consensus that can be ranked in a simple fashion (Dalkey, 1969). Presentation of findings
from use of the Delphi technique varies from strict statistical analysis to simple
qualitative enumeration of results, a clustering approach, or a combination of these.
Delphi methodology is typically based on a series of some three rounds of focused
questioning, each round soliciting deeper and more attentive deliberation and reflection.
The goal is to achieve consensus by building toward agreement from the initial round of
structured questions to the final round of questions. In this study, the researcher analyzed
input from panel members between rounds and combined common threads to form
strong, shared themes on which to build the next series of questions. As a Delphi study is
77

aimed at reaching an agreement, at each step in the questioning process the panel was
asked if they still agreed with former statements and were reminded they were not tied to
the rankings they had favored earlier; instead, they were encouraged to observe how
others had responded and were invited to change sides or otherwise rerank their own
selections to aid in achieving consensus.
The Delphi-method approach was selected for this study’s methodology for two
reasons: (a) to reflect the subjective judgments of the respondents and (b) because the
study of individuals coping with workplace burnout does not lend itself to stricter
analytical methodologies. The iterative nature of the Delphi technique allowed for
examination of various issues in an inductive manner. The technique encouraged
panelists to focus, refocus, confirm or change their opinions to rank and rerank their
answers, and finally move as close as possible to consensus. This study of the complex
symptoms, causes, and consequences of workplace burnout as experienced by community
college faculty librarians can both enlighten burnout sufferers and provide pathways to
improvement.
A projected 10% response rate (n = 38) was expected for the initial questionnaire,
although attrition through all the phases of the study was expected. The researcher also
planned to take precautions if the population of librarians who wished to participate in the
Delphi panel was greater than 50. Had that been the case, then further refinements toward
a more manageable panel size using delimitations (such as attainment of tenure and/or a
baseline number of years of service in the California community college library) would
have been employed. At the initial stage, however, no other limits were placed on library

78

faculty, in order to receive the richest amount of input possible from the largest possible
pool of respondents to the preliminary questionnaire.
Although there are no hard and fast rules for designating individuals as experts in
Delphi studies, Adler and Ziglio (as cited in Skulmoski et al., 2007) stated panelists
should meet four conditions that would mark them as qualified for their expertise: “[a]
knowledge and experience with the issues under investigation; [b] capacity and
willingness to participate; [c] sufficient time to participate in the Delphi; and [d] effective
communication skills” (p. 10).
The panelists met the first, second, and third of the aforementioned conditions
when they read the study requirements in the letter of invitation and made the decision to
participate in the study. As highly educated faculty members (master’s degree or higher)
who regularly communicate with peers, administrators, and students in both written and
oral formats, their effective communication skills, the fourth condition, was assumed to
be a given for this study’s purpose. Therefore, the panel of experts met all of the
qualifications necessary for the Delphi process.
The e-mail method of communication was selected in deference to several
significant dynamics: the speed of this communication method (a substantial motivating
factor for retaining participants’ enthusiasm for participating), the physical realities of
multiple campuses with libraries often at significant distances from one another (i.e., 112
campuses spread across the 164,000 square miles of the state of California), the varied
daily schedules worked by academic librarians (morning, afternoon, evening, late
evening, and weekend assignments), and the workload each carried during the study.
Additionally, faculty librarians must participate in the active work of multiple campus
79

committees and often spend significant time out of the library and away from campus
promoting library services and courses to various community groups within the service
area of the college. Librarians dealing with such diverse schedules have come to use email for everything from answering reference questions to keeping in touch with
colleagues on their own campuses, in their own library, and on other campuses (O’Leary,
2003). Therefore, the researcher decided a study employing asynchronous
correspondence via e-mail matched the realities of community college librarians’ work
schedules.
Another factor considered when contemplating the use of e-mail for this study
was the belief that in order to obtain an effective number of participants, it would be
necessary to allow the respondents sufficient time to read materials and complete
responses at a time and in a format convenient to them. The final reasons for utilizing the
e-mail format for the study was the clear advantage of having raw data recorded
electronically in digital format (eliminating tedious manual transcription and the
possibility of transcription errors) and the fact that dissertation-level research projects had
successfully utilized e-mail to post online questionnaires (e.g., Cabaniss, 2001; Richards,
2009; Schmidt, 1995).

Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures
The sampling framework for this research study was built on the population
currently employed as faculty librarians in one of California’s community college
libraries. These librarians worked in one or more of the library service areas of reference,
circulation, technical services, technology, acquisitions, cataloging, and bibliographic
80

instruction. Due to California community college hiring guidelines, the study was limited
to librarians who possessed faculty status at the institutions they served and who held
master’s degrees in library and information science from graduate library schools
accredited by the ALA (or an equivalent certificate from the California Community
College Chancellor’s Office).
The criteria for receiving the invitation to participate were as follows:
1. The participant was a professional librarian (i.e., one who possesses a master’s
degree in library science or the equivalent),
2. The participant was currently working as a faculty librarian at a California
community college, and
3. The name and e-mail address of the participant was included in the most
current online address book of the Council of Chief Librarians (CCL) at the
time the data were collected.
Invitations to participate were sent to community college librarians via an e-mail
list created by the CCL for California community colleges. A self-selection sampling
design allowed each individual in this population to participate in the study if he or she
had experienced or was currently experiencing symptoms of burnout in the workplace.
The California community college system is currently composed of 72 districts
with 112 colleges, with each campus having its own library or libraries or (in the case of
college centers, which are newly formed seminal colleges) may share a library with a
larger college in its own district. No current and definitive list of all of the librarians
serving these campuses exists, probably because no one state entity is charged with
keeping an accurate listing or database of California community college library faculty
81

and managers. However, the latest count (without duplication) from the website of the
CCL of California community colleges library faculty list showed (in July 2013) that
approximately 388 librarians were currently employed in these community college
libraries.
Potential participants were invited via e-mail to take part in the study. Had there
been an insufficient number of volunteers for the Delphi-method portion of the study, the
researcher would have sent a second letter of invitation; however, amassing a sufficient
number of respondents was not a problem.
Recruitment for the study was done via an e-mail questionnaire sent to currently
practicing faculty librarians working in California community colleges. Librarians who
self-identified as current or past sufferers of workplace burnout syndrome were
encouraged to answer questions about their experiences. The data gathered from these
initial respondents were compiled to shape the questions used in the modified Delphimethod portion of the research. This approach was used during each Delphi round as the
exact research questions that were posed to the Delphi panel needed to be based on
current input from the panel.
Results of this research study are presented in the form of responses, statements,
and themed comments submitted by respondents rather than as collected statistics, as
“qualitative research involves broadly stated questions about human experiences and
realties, studied through sustained contact with people in their natural environments,
generating rich, descriptive data that helps us to understand their experiences and
attitudes” (Rees, 1996, p. 375). Data also are provided via participants’ verbatim open-

82

ended responses. In this way, the phenomenological data are presented in a manner
exposing the reader to the raw emotions articulated by respondents.
Although the study was not meant to pursue a full psycho-socio interpretation of
librarians’ personal lives, it drew from their lived experience of burnout at work.
Therefore, care was exercised in collecting data relevant to their work experience. The
researcher paid careful attention to ensuring that no inquiry into their experience of
burnout as it relates to their home life was posed, but any references the participants
made to their home-life experiences were recorded for accuracy and completeness.
Wang and Roulston (2007) asserted the results from qualitative research often
present themselves in the form of themes or constructs. In this study, all data were
collected, compiled, and thematically sorted against two frames of reference. The first
was the six worklife domains predictive of engagement or burnout as proposed by Leiter
and Maslach in 2005 (workload, control, reward, community, fairness, and values). The
second was the six behavioral engineering variables in Gilbert’s (2007) BEM model
(data, resources, incentives, knowledge, capacity, and motives).
“Thematic analysis focuses on identifiable themes and patterns of living and/or
behavior” (Aronson, 1994, p. 1). Themes were identified as recurring instances of ideas
or subject matter of discussion arising from “conversation topics, vocabulary, recurring
activities, meanings, feelings, or folk sayings and proverbs” (Taylor & Bogdan, 1989, p.
131). The data were collected from the general body of California community college
librarians and then more specifically from a panel of experts made up of members from
the larger group. Data were then analyzed and thematically assigned to one or more of the
constructs posited by Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005) as a measure of the
83

validity of the description of workplace burnout as defined by the respondents and as
discovered in the literature. Aronson (1994) wrote that “themes that emerge from the
informants’ stories are pieced together to form a comprehensive picture of their collective
experience” (p. 1). The descriptions of the shared experiences of the participants in this
study provided a clear picture of what they were undergoing and enabled the panel to
move toward consensus on the types of burnout interventions they recommended as wise
practices.
The credibility of this study is based on the solid match of the study participants’
experiences against the themes extracted from the work of Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and
Maslach (2005). The themes, based on individuals’ experiences in the workplace, clearly
marked these elements as supportive of the belief that burnout for these librarians
resulted when one or more of the elements supportive of exemplary performance went
unmet. The researcher anticipated that other themes might naturally arise from the
investigation, and provided for such when crafting inquiries through the use of “Other”
comment areas for open-ended input additional to the controlled list of responses. All
participant comments provided in these areas were carefully scrutinized to determine if
they were indeed new themes or merely reflective of one or more of the themes already
presented and expressed through different verbiage. Finally, credibility was anticipated
given that the terms used to build the checklists of response choices were taken from and
therefore controlled by the literature on burnout. No new terms were discovered after data
collection and analysis.
This research study is transferable to the general librarian profession rather than
limited to just those serving in community college libraries because the literature proved
84

that librarians from all types of libraries have experienced burnout despite working in
very different environments and despite serving very different clienteles. In every area of
the library world—whether in academic, special, public, or school libraries—librarians
are vulnerable to burnout.
In addition to librarians, this research should prove transferable to other faculty
and staff working in the California community college environment as the entire
workplace is governed by the same state laws and educational regulations, receives
funding from the same state budget, and follows curriculum guidelines enforced by the
same state chancellor’s office. Finally, this research also should prove transferable to
other areas of public service given that the same kind of burnout susceptibilities arise in
those workplaces where issues such as unbalanced person-to-person exchange, constant
giving of oneself to others, insufficient monetary and nonmonetary reward, subpar
working conditions, overload, scant recognition for achievement, poor working hours,
and so forth, mirror those of the librarians studied.
The researcher expected that results from this study would provide insights into
the consequences and causal factors of workplace burnout in the community college
library workplace and offer attractive coping techniques as recommended from within
their own population. The researcher also expected the techniques derived from this study
would honor the concept of wise practices as first developed in aboriginal and First
Nations communities—that is, as a means of passing on pragmatic systems of skills or
practices for immediate use to deal with issues or problems between members of an
analogous community. As handed down by tribal leaders and elders, these practices have

85

proven to work because they combine common strengths and core values of a population
and utilize resources readily available to the community as a whole.

Ethical Issues
Following the ethical criteria for research governed by the National Commission
for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research and upheld
by Capella University’s Institutional Review Board, this study adhered to all ethical
practices. To preserve their anonymity, privacy, and security, each participant was given
a randomly assigned coded participant designator. The designators were non-attributable
codes that had no significance without a code key, which was in the sole possession of
the researcher. At no time did the researcher discuss participant identities or their
personal identifying information with other participants or any person outside of the
research process. The code key was secured in a personal safe in the possession of the
researcher.
The data collected throughout this research project were protected at all times. All
research data were stored on a password-protected computer and on encrypted files on
flash drives kept in the researcher’s personal safe. All data related to this project will be
kept secure in this fashion for a minimum of 7 years after the conclusion of the research
project.
In keeping with the established criterion of self-selection of participants, a
specific informed consent form was distributed as part of the e-mail request to participate
in this study. The form apprised each potential research respondent that he or she was
invited to participate in a research study, and then described the purpose of the research
86

and its information-gathering procedures; the risks and benefits to the participants; the
voluntary nature of electing to join the research study; the respondent’s right to quit the
project at any time; and an outline of the procedures that would be used to protect
confidentiality of all participants (Groenewald, 2004).

Chapter Summary
Through the use of an initial questionnaire and then a modified Delphi approach
to inquiry, both delivered via e-mail, the study investigated the workplace experiences of
California community college librarians who suffered from burnout in order to produce a
list of wise practices for coping with the syndrome as recommended by fellow librarians.
Respondents answered brief, baseline demographic questions and then proceeded to
provide information on their knowledge of burnout as experienced while working in the
academic library profession. Use of a modified Delphi-method inquiry allowed a panel of
experts from within the California community college librarian population to work
through three rounds of data/question/answer sessions as they formed opinions and
arrived at consensus on selected coping skills for dealing with burnout in the community
college library environment in order to improve workplace performance.

87

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Introduction
The purpose of this study was to discover wise practices for coping with
workplace burnout, specifically recommended for use by community college librarians
for community college librarians. The question that formed the center of the study asked,
How do community college librarians most effectively come to terms with burnout to
improve their workplace performance? The topic was investigated using a modified
Delphi methodology. First, an invitation to participate in the study was e-mailed to the
population of California community college librarians. Included was an initial
questionnaire designed to collect basic demographic information as well as input on three
specific questions on lived experiences with burnout in the workplace. Conducted with an
expert panel composed of volunteers from among the field of respondents, a modified
Delphi-method study worked panelists through three rounds of questions and answers
supplemented with informational briefs and graphic depictions of previously gathered
data. The study was successful in that the expert panel was able to recommend two types
of stress relief techniques focused on coping with the symptoms, consequences, and
causes of community college librarian burnout.
As data were collected during the study, they were organized and thematically
analyzed and matched to a construct created using Gilbert’s (2007) BEM model and
88

Leiter and Maslach’s (2005) six worklife domains predictive of engagement or burnout.
The results from this comparison demonstrated that the data discovered in the study
confirmed Gilbert’s domains for burnout and Leiter and Maslach’s domains for
exemplary performance.

Description of the Sample
The sampling pool was made up of currently practicing California community
college librarians who self-identified as having suffered or currently suffering from
workplace burnout. The letter of invitation explained the details of the study as a whole
and included a list of Delphi panelist instructions and ground rules and an informed
consent form. Respondents were invited to complete an initial questionnaire that
collected brief demographic data before moving on to respond to inquiries concerning
their experiences with the causes and consequences of workplace burnout. Invitees were
notified that even if they were not interested in participating in the entire study, their
completion of the initial questionnaire would provide valuable data for the study’s
foundation.
The contact information for potential participants was provided by the CCL of
California community colleges. At the time of data collection, its website listed 388
librarians currently practicing in California community college libraries. After the
researcher and her workplace associates were removed, the remaining number was 384.
This group of 384 individuals formed the sampling framework for the study as faculty
librarians working in one or more of the typical academic library service areas. All
members of the targeted population possessed a minimum of a master’s degree in library
89

and information science or the equivalent from a graduate library school accredited by
the ALA, as required by California state community college hiring guidelines, and/or a
California community college library credential.
Participants from within this population completed and returned the questionnaire,
with some individuals electing to continue through the second portion of the study as
members of the modified Delphi-method panel of experts during the three rounds of
questions and answers.
Of the 384 librarians invited to participate in the study, only one actively opted
out of the study by selecting the “Opt Out” response provided at the bottom of the
invitation; the rest of those who did not participate either ignored or simply deleted the email. Nine e-mail addresses bounced back as being no longer valid without a redirect to a
correct address. From the 374 remaining members of the targeted population, 44 returned
the initial questionnaire, for a response rate of 12% (2% higher than the expected rate of
10%, or 38 respondents). Of the 384 e-mails sent, 44 questionnaires were returned
completed or nearly completed (11 participants did not respond to every question).

Summary of the Findings
In addition to the request for basic demographic data, the initial questionnaire also
contained data sheets, as did each of the first two Delphi rounds of questions. The data
sheets were brief, purposely designed to be one page in length, and were created to
provide refresher background information for the respondents about the topic of burnout.
The data sheets had the following titles: (a) Psychological, Behavioral, and Physical

90

Symptoms of Burnout; (b) A Refresher on Symptoms/Consequences of Burnout; and (c)
Interventions: Coping Techniques Used to Deal With Workplace Burnout.
Initial Questionnaire
Data Sheet 1: Psychological, Behavioral, and Physical Symptoms/Consequences
of Burnout was inserted after the demographic questions and before the burnout-specific
questions began. It listed examples of the symptoms and consequences of burnout
beneath each relevant broad physiological heading.
Initial questionnaire, Question 1. “How long have you worked as an academic
librarian?” Eleven librarians (25%) had worked for 10 or fewer years, 24 (55%) for 11–
20 years, seven (16%) for 21–30 years, one (2.27%) for 31–40 years, and none (0%) for
40 or more years.
Initial questionnaire, Question 2. “Have you worked at other types of libraries
(school, public, or special)?” Sixteen respondents (37%) disclosed experience in other
library types (public, university, school, medical, college, law, and special libraries).
Initial questionnaire, Question 3. “How long have you worked in your current
library?” Nineteen respondents (43.3%) indicated they had worked 0–10 years in their
current libraries, 20 (45.5%) had worked 11–20 years, four (9.1%) had worked 21–30
years, and one (2.8%) had worked 31–40 years. None of the respondents had worked 40
or more years on the same campus.
Initial questionnaire, Question 4. “Have you worked at other community
colleges?” Thirty-three respondents (75%) had worked at another community college,
while nine (20.5%) had not. Two (4.5%) did not respond to this question.

91

Initial questionnaire, Question 5. “In which library area do you work? If you
work in more than one area, please rank your selections to reflect your primary
assignment as #1, secondary as #2, etc.” Of the 44 respondents, 17 (38.6%) worked in
reference; 10 (22.7%) in instruction; six (13.6%) in technology; three each in acquisitions
(6.8%), cataloging (6.8%), and technical services (6.8%); and two (4.5%) in circulation.
Secondary duties reflected the same results as primary assignments, with 13 respondents
(30%) in reference and 21 (48%) in instruction.
Initial questionnaire, Question 6. “Please indicate your gender.” Thirty-four
(77.3%) respondents were female and eight (18.2%) were male. Two (4.5%) did not
respond to this question.
Initial questionnaire, Question 7. “Please indicate your age range.”
Respondents’ ages ranged from 30 to 69, with an average age range of 40–59. Three
respondents (6.8%) were 30–39 years old, 16 (36.4%) were 40–49, 15 (35%) were 50–59,
and 10 (22.3%) were 60–69.
Initial questionnaire, Question 8. “You acknowledge that you have experienced
burnout in your career. Please provide a brief description of what it means to you, in your
work as a California community college librarian, to experience workplace burnout.”
This request for participants’ open-ended descriptions of the experience of workplace
burnout prompted them to use simple but descriptive language to indicate what it felt like
to be burnt out at work.
Initial questionnaire, Question 9. “Please indicate any and all symptoms and/or
consequences of burnout that have had an effect on your workplace performance.” The
inventory of symptoms and consequences of burnout provided to them as items in a
92

checklist had been collected and recorded by the researcher during the initial literature
review before data collection. An “Other” response box was also made available, along
with space for inserting open-ended responses, to capture any other factors that might
have occurred to respondents. The list of symptoms in rank order according to participant
response appears in Table 1, and participants’ open-ended responses are in Table 2.

Table 1. Workplace Burnout Symptoms and/or Consequences as Identified by Librarians
Symptom/consequence

n

%

Frustration

29

87.9

Fatigue

20

60.6

Mental exhaustion

19

57.6

Loss of enthusiasm

18

54.5

Feelings of futility

17

51.5

Dissatisfaction

16

48.5

Emotional exhaustion

16

48.5

Lack of joy

16

48.5

Muscle tension

15

45.5

Apathy

14

42.4

Depression

14

42.4

Forgetfulness

11

33.3

Cynicism

10

30.3

Insomnia/hypersomnia

9

27.3

Loss of sense of self-worth

9

27.3

Withdrawal

9

27.3

93

Table 1. Workplace Burnout Symptoms and/or Consequences as Identified by Librarians
(continued)
Symptom/consequence

n

%

Alienation

8

24.2

Suspicion

7

21.2

Temperamental behavior

7

21.2

Weight gain or loss

7

21.2

Poor performance

6

18.2

Prone to conflict

6

18.2

Hypertension

5

15.2

Other

5

15.2

Disparagement

4

12.1

Frequent colds or flu

4

12.1

Dehumanizing of patrons

3

9.1

Fear

3

9.1

High cholesterol

3

9.1

Sexual dysfunction

3

9.1

Paranoia

2

6.1

Coronary disease

0

0.0

Frequent absenteeism

0

0.0

Ulcers

0

0.0

94

Table 2. Respondents’ Open-Ended Descriptions of Workplace Burnout Symptoms and/or
Consequences
Respondent

Response

001

“When I first started, mgt. and rank & file were actually partners. Now, ‘shared
governance’ means: mgt. makes a decision, then ‘shares’ it with the peons. Shared
governance = b******t.”

004

“Irritable bowel syndrome, eczema, lack of sleep, skipping exercise.”

003

“None not listed”

002

“Resentment; emotional highs and lows depending on treatment from patrons and
whether computers are working (or working well); lack of respect; anxiety about
enforcing myriad policies which are not always useful; overwhelmed by constant
technology and program changes.”

005

“Anger. Resentment. f***ing everything is unfair. Why so much work for four people?
we have to teach students who can’t write a complete SENTENCE let alone essay how to
use reference materials and cite resources. I just do it for them now, screw it. They don’t
know what they’re doing anyway. Why do classroom faculty just get to show up for
classes a couple days a week—even though the contract says they must be on campus 5
days a week? Admin turns a blind eye.”

Initial questionnaire, Question 10. “From your own experience, which causal or
contributing factors found in your working environment do you believe to be linked to
burnout? Please indicate all factors which you believe are causes of burnout in the
community college library workplace.” The complete results from the checklist of causal
or contributory factors are shown in Table 3 in rank order, while the open-ended
descriptions are recorded in Table 4.

95

Table 3. Causal/Contributing Factors to Workplace Burnout as Indicated by Librarians
Factor

n

Increased workload

22

Lack of effective leadership

21

Individuals not matched to jobs

19

Employee apathy

18

Unfairness

15

Lack of a sense of community

14

No appreciation for work performed

14

Budget

13

Loss of autonomy/control

12

Boredom or monotony

10

Favoritism

10

Lack of proper tools/equipment

10

No stated standards for expected performance

9

Insufficient training or lack of guides to performance

8

Other

8

Lack of values

7

Lack of frequent or relevant feedback on performance

6

Lack of nonmonetary rewards

6

Isolation

5

Lack of motivation

5

Inflexible scheduling

4

Lack of advancement possibilities

3

Low wages

1

96

Table 4. Respondents’ Descriptions of Causal/Contributing Factors for Workplace
Burnout
Respondent

Response

036

“Interpersonal conflicts within the dept. are the most stressful. The actual day-to-day
work rarely causes stress, except for trying to balance multiple job duties in a finite
amount of time.”

035

“None.”

021

“Bureaucracy, other departments on campus don’t tell me when they aren’t going to do
something so I have to follow up on every single little aspect of the job (requisitions, POs
[purchase orders], payments, orders). Lack of communication. Certain people do not
respond to first emails so I set up reminders to send follow up emails a week later.
Culture of negativity (new ideas immediately shot down for stupid reasons), culture of
denial of reality. The hiring process is flawed and evaluation is a joke, so we hire people
that do not do a good job. This campus is more concerned with not getting sued than in
hiring good people.”

018

“Staffing conflicts with assistants that librarians do not directly supervise. No working
solution has been found and it has been an ongoing problem for years.”

022

“Our college is a mess. We have had high administrative turnover. A good administrator
comes and then they leave. The faculty are frustrated. And I am so close to retirement so
I just struggle through each day.”

004

“Administrative dishonesty and always having to fight to maintain resources. It’s a
constant battle to keep our space and resources.”

002

“Campus climate does not support the role of the faculty librarian as a peer faculty
member.”

043

“Without a director, the two library techs have no direct supervision and work as they
please. Much more could be done, and done better, in the library if the library techs were
supervised and directed. I don’t have time to be the Reference Librarian I would like to
be because I’m doing Library Director tasks and doing the tasks the techs are
unable/undirected to do.”

Delphi Panel, Round 1
The next phase of research involved the volunteer Delphi panel. Materials were
sent on a Monday morning to give panelists 5 business days to complete the individual
rounds of questions by the following Friday. When the panel submitted their responses,

97

the researcher spent the weekend compiling and recording the results in preparation for
returning it in presentation format to the panelists at the beginning of the next round. In
this way, tallied lists, graphical representations, and textual responses from the previous
set of questions provided not only a review of the questions asked but also information on
how the panel had responded to them.
Data Sheet 2: Refresher on Symptoms/Consequences of Burnout was provided
along with the questions for Round 1. Information from Data Sheet 1 was repeated here
but listed in paragraph form under broad headings (i.e., psychological, physical, or
behavioral) rather than in tabular form as in the previous e-mail, in order to show
relationships between the specific examples and their broad headings.
Delphi Round 1, Question 1. “Please rate how much you agree with the
symptoms and/or consequences of workplace burnout as indicated by your peers.”
Panelists were provided with a 5-point Likert scale of responses (strongly agree, agree,
somewhat agree, slightly disagree, and disagree). In response to this question, nine
panelists (82%) strongly agreed and two (18%) agreed with the symptoms and
consequences of burnout as indicated in the initial questionnaire.
Delphi Round 1, Question 2. “Please rate how much you agree with the causal or
contributing factors to workplace burnout as indicated by your peers.” Responses to
Question 2 revealed that eight panelists (72%) strongly agreed, two (18%) agreed, and
one (9%) somewhat agreed with the causal or contributing factors.
Delphi Round 1, Question 3. “From the data provided in the preceding pages,
which broad range of consequences of workplace burnout do you believe are/were the
most detrimental in terms of the workplace performance of the members of the
98

community college librarian population? Please rank 1 for first choice, 2 for second
choice, and 3 for third choice.” Psychological symptoms were selected as first choice by
all but one respondent (90.9%). The panel’s second choices were mixed; seven (63.6%)
selected physical, three (27.3%) selected behavioral, and one (9%) chose psychological
consequences. Behavioral consequences were ranked third by eight (72.7%) of the
panelists; the other three (27.3%) selected physical. No respondents provided comments
in the blank space provided for them.
Delphi Round 1, Question 4. “Please rank the broad range of
symptoms/consequences in the order you believe they should be dealt with by this panel.
Please rank 1 for your first choice, 2 for your second choice, 3 for your third choice, and
4 for your fourth choice.” Six panelists (54.5%) felt that all symptoms should be the
focus, four (36%) selected psychological, one (9%) selected physical, and one (9%)
selected behavioral.
Delphi Round 1, Question 5. “Is/was your experience with workplace burnout
sporadic, or fairly constant? (If fairly constant, please skip to Question 7.)” A clear
majority of seven respondents (63.6%) stated their experience was fairly constant, while
the other four (36.4%) selected sporadic.
Delphi Round 1, Question 6. “If sporadic, is/was your experience tied to specific
times or events during your workday? Check all that apply.” Four panelists indicated
sporadic experience of burnout, and were asked to respond to Question 7 (see Table 5).
The remaining panelists moved on to Question 8.

99

Table 5. Delphi Panelists’ Experiences of Specific Times or Events Predictive of
Sporadic Burnout
Response

n

“When the college focuses on growth but does not budget for additional library faculty, staff,
materials, or hours of service.”

6

“When events at work impact the ability to do the job effectively (e.g., loss of staff or faculty
with no replacements, increased workload, longer hours, weekend duty, multiple assignments,
lack of downtime away from public service, etc.).”

5

“When the book budget is non-existent or so insufficient that replacing print reference
materials on a regular basis, or purchasing new or second copies of in-demand materials is
impossible.”

4

“When attending campus meetings or functions that cut into the time needed to do the job.”

3

“When made to do work that is outside the job description of faculty librarian.”

3

“When not treated as an equal by classroom faculty.”

3

“When not treated as an equal to classroom faculty by administrators or others.”

3

“When the budget for reference databases limits the access students need to complete their
coursework.”

3

“When the Library’s technology is not on a par with students’ technology.”

3

“When the technology in the library is old and dated but is not replaced as frequently as in
other campus areas.”

3

“No, it was not tied to any specific times or events.”

2

“Times that are linked to duties (i.e., repetitive instructional sessions, Reference duty, etc.).”

2

“When the college allows the ILS/LMS [Integrated Library System/Library Management
System] to lag behind in software updates or does not replace a dated and limited system that
no longer serves all the students’ needs.”

2

“When the Library cannot provide sufficient print materials students need to complete
coursework.”

2

Delphi Round 1, Question 7. “Please describe your experience of feeling
constantly burnt out in your workplace.” Panelists’ responses revealed feelings of

100

frustration and the development of apathy toward the workplace and the individuals
populating it (see Table 6).

Table 6. Delphi Panelists’ Experiences of Constant Workplace Burnout
Panelist

Response

DPX3

“Much of my burnout has been due to being short staffed for 10 years and that changed
last month, hooray. From reading the responses of others, my burnout symptoms do not
seem as intense. For many years, I have struggled to take care of myself while doing the
best I can at work and that means not taking work home with me, both physically and
psychologically. Over the last two years, I have found some very good ways of coping
and doing self-care. A lot of my burnout was exacerbated by things outside the
workplace, i.e., sick parents, family illnesses, etc. Also, my co-workers are awesome and
we try to hold each other up during hard times.”

DPX7

“Much of the stuff under question 6 applies here . . . but it doesn’t really matter. What
matters is that instructional tech, tutors, student workers, and their supervisors are taking
over everything done in this building. Eventually, no need will be seen for my services
and my position will be eliminated.”

DPX9

“Work is either monotonous, frustrating, or stressful. Nearly all the sporadic reasons
listed above apply. The constant nature of the burn-out makes me feel hopeless, and
because of the systemic nature of the problems, I feel like the situation will never change,
especially as the problems were there before the budget cuts.”

DPX1

“How can it get any better when the administrators are unheeding or uncaring about the
library and librarians? We compete for dollars with student services like counseling, and
since there are state guidelines as to how many counselors we need or how many students
a counselor can see (and when guidelines for librarians can be ignored with impunity),
there are dozens of counselors. If we were measured in the same way, then it would show
that there is one librarian to serve every 3,000 students! How is that fair? But who cares
except librarians. When we were on the instructional side of the house, they knew that we
were important to their retention and completion rates. But in student services? No way,
bottom of the pile. I think this was a deliberate move on the part of the administration to
phase out library and librarian services all together and just have a room with a bunch of
computers all set to let students Google their well-intentioned but stupid little brains out.”

DPX11

“All I care about is making it to retirement age. I, and all the other librarians, are
dinosaurs. I don’t for a second believe that this profession will even exist 20 years from
now. Occasionally, I get a young woman (seldom a young man) who asks about
becoming a librarian. I tell them: ‘run like hell the other way and do something
worthwhile with your life!’”

101

Delphi Round 1, Question 8. “Please rate how important you believe it is for
community college librarians to have coping strategies to enable them to deal with
workplace burnout.” Panelists were provided with a 5-point Likert scale for their
responses (very important, important, somewhat important, somewhat unimportant, and
unimportant). Ten panelists (90.9%) ranked having coping strategies as very important
and one (9%) ranked it as important.
Delphi Panel, Round 2
Compiled Data Sheet Number 3, Interventions: Coping Techniques Used to Deal
With Burnout was included along with the tabulated data from the previous round and the
questions for Round 2.
Delphi Round 2, Question 1. “Has your organization (the library, college, or
district) initiated any forms of interventions to help your college community cope with
workplace burnout? If so, what forms?” The choices provided were professional
development workshops, employee wellness seminars, employee appreciation activities,
lists of readings, referral to an EAP, or other. Two institutions had not offered burnout
interventions; seven others had offered some or all of the five listed interventions, with
professional development workshops being the most commonly indicated form with five
votes (55.5%), followed by four (44.4%) for employee wellness seminars, three (33.3%)
for referral to an EAP, and one each for employee appreciation activities (11.1%) and
lists of readings (11.1%).
Delphi Round 2, Question 2. “In your experience of burnout, what do you
believe would be the most effective intervention program(s) or service(s) for your
organization to offer? (Please rank in order of effectiveness, with 1 being most effective,
102

2 being next most effective, etc.)” Five participants (55.5%) indicated that in their
experience, activities to empower individual employees would be the most effective, two
(22.2%) selected proactive planning, and one each selected instilling/refreshing
organizational values (11.1%) and employee wellness-focused programs (11.1%).
Delphi Round 2, Question 3. “How have you come to terms with your own
experience of workplace burnout—that is, how do you cope with it each day while
performing your job? Please select all applicable responses.” Of the methods provided,
six of the panelists (66.7%) selected “I utilize a coping practice/practices to deal with it.”
The next most frequently selected responses (4 each, or 44.5% each) were “I have to
make myself work even harder in order to maintain my performance level” and “Other.”
Three panelists (33.4%) selected “I try to ignore the burnout symptoms because I lack the
energy to deal with them.” One panelist (11.2%) chose “I don’t care about anything
anymore. I show up and that’s about all I can manage.” Those who selected “Other”
provided the following brief notes in addition to their checked selections:
Respondent DPX5. Medications for stress and IBS [irritable bowel syndrome].
Respondent DPX2. Retirement planning!
Respondent DPX9. I show up, do my job the best I can (for me, not this
institution), then leave and come alive as I go home.
Respondent DPX12. Yoga, refocusing on what is really important.
Delphi Round 2, Question 4. “In your experience with burnout, what
interventions do you feel are the most effective coping techniques in order to improve
your workplace performance? (Please rank them in order of effectiveness, with 1 being
most effective.)” Cognitive behavioral interventions were the panel’s first choice as most

103

effective, with four votes (44.4%), followed by relaxation interventions (3 votes, 33.3%),
and organizationally focused (1 vote, 11.1%) and multimodal interventions (1 vote,
11.1%).
Delphi Round 2, Question 5. “Do you believe this (referring back to
interventions chosen in the previous question) to be true because this intervention is a
type that you yourself have utilized?” Nine respondents (100%) selected yes, and two
(22.3%) also selected no.
Delphi Round 2, Question 6. “Stress relief interventions are used for coping with
workplace burnout. Which of these stress reduction strategies would you recommend as
most beneficial in reducing workplace burnout for California community college
librarians? Check all applicable responses.” Four activities were recommended most
often: expressing feelings instead of bottling them up, mindfulness practice, meditation,
and taking regular walks away from the library. A complete list of responses is provided
in Table 7.
Delphi Round 2, Question 7. “Are you recommending these practices based on:
personal experience with utilizing some or all of the recommended practices, personal
research into some or all of the recommended practices, colleagues’ results from utilizing
some or all of the recommended practices, recommendations from professionals, or
other? (Please explain.)” All nine panelists (100%) selected personal experience as the
reason for recommending the activities. Six (66.7%) also selected personal research as a
reason, one (11.2%) selected colleagues’ results from use, and three (33.4%) selected
recommendations from professionals. None of the respondents provided “Other”
responses.
104

Table 7. Delphi Panelists’ Stress Relief Activities/Techniques
Technique

%

x

“Expressing feelings instead of bottling them up”

x

“Mindfulness practice”

x

“Meditation”

x

“Taking regular walks away from the Library”

x

“Yoga”

x

“Sweating out tension through regular exercise”

x

“Doing something enjoyable every day”

x

“Learning to say no”

x

“Progressive muscle relaxation”

x

“Looking for the positive in each situation”

x

“Willingness to compromise”

x

“Adjusting standards by moving away from perfectionism”

x

“Taking control of one’s own environment”

x

“Regulating breathing”

x

“Making it a priority to make time to relax every day”

x

“Focused meditation”

x

“Connecting with others who are not connected to the Library”

x

“Acceptance”

37.5

x

“Better time management”

25.0

x

“Avoiding alcohol, drugs, and tobacco”

x

“Gardening”

87.5

75.0

62.5

50.0

105

x

“Connecting with others from the same profession outside of work”

x

“Caring for a pet”

x

Other:

x

o

“Letting go of standards”

o

“Keeping the doors open”

o

“Doing what can be done and no more”

12.5

“Watching or reading a comedy”

Delphi Panel, Round 3
No data sheet was included with the compiled data from Round 2 sent to the
panelists with the third and final round of questions.
Delphi Round 3, Question 1. “After considering your own experience and the
experiences of other community college librarians collected and ranked in the study data,
please provide a final ranking of the broad classes of interventions from most effective to
least effective (1 being most effective and 4 being least effective).” Three panelists voted
for each class as being most effective: organizationally focused interventions (33.4%),
cognitive behavioral (33.4%), and multimodal interventions (33.4%).
Delphi Round 3, Question 2. “From a list of techniques provided in Question 6
of Round 2, you and your fellow panelists ranked stress relief interventions for use by
community college librarians. The results are shown in ranked order from the most
recommended to least recommended. Reading through these techniques now as they were
ranked, do you still agree with the rankings as assigned in the last round?” Appendix B
contains the thematic factors derived from comments made in the open comments area.
106

Delphi Round 3, Question 3. “Do you feel strongly about recommending any
other specific intervention technique(s) not included in the preceding ranked list? If so,
please list it/them below.” Seven panelists responded no (77.8%) and two yes (22.3%).
Delphi Round 3, Question 4. “In Round 2, you and your fellow panelists agreed
that organizationally sponsored intervention programs or services are those you believe
would be the most effective for your library/college/district to offer. Those rankings
appear below. Please study how your fellow panelists rated these choices and then rank
them once more:
Most effective: Activities to empower individual employees
Effective: Proactive planning
Somewhat effective: Instilling/refreshing organizational values/employee
wellness-focused programs
Least effective: Employee Assistance Programs.”
Seven respondents (77.8%) agreed with activities to empower individual employees;
proactive planning and employee wellness-focused programs each received one vote
(11.2%).
Delphi Round 3, Question 6. “From analysis of the recommendations made
throughout the entire course of this research study, two broad classes of stress reduction
interventions were most often utilized and/or recommended for community college
librarians: cognitive behavioral and relaxation-type interventions. Please consider your
own experiences and the experiences of your colleagues as revealed by the data up to this
point before answering this question: Do you agree that these two broad classes of
interventions (and their individual techniques such as mindfulness, meditation,
progressive muscle relaxation, yoga, etc.) are those wise practices this panel should

107

recommend to librarians suffering from workplace burnout?” Eight (87.8%) responded
yes and one (14.4%) responded no.
Delphi Round 3, Question 7. “Having participated in this Delphi research study,
and taking into account your own experiences with workplace burnout, how confident do
you feel that the list of wise practices put forward by this expert panel will assist other
community college librarians as they deal with the symptoms of burnout?” Utilizing the
5-point Likert scale provided (very confident, confident, somewhat confident, somewhat
unconfident, and very unconfident), five (55.6%) selected very confident, two selected
somewhat confident (22.3%), and two selected very unconfident (22.3%).

Detailed Analysis
Demographic data collected from the 44 responses to the initial questionnaire
provided a basic picture of the librarian respondents, beginning with an average career of
11–20 years in the academic librarian profession. Sixteen respondents revealed
experience in libraries other than those in community colleges, namely public, university,
school, medical, 4-year college, law, and/or special libraries. Nearly half of the
respondents indicated more than 10 years’ experience in their current workplace, with
some working up to 40 years in the same library. Thirty-three respondents had experience
at other community colleges. As far as work responsibilities were concerned, reference
and instructional duties were listed most often as primary assignments. Other main duties
were balanced between technology, acquisitions, cataloging, and technical services. Only
two of the 44 indicated circulation as their primary work department. Female librarians
(34) dominated the field of respondents, two declined to state their gender, and the
108

remaining eight were male. The average age range of respondents was 40–59; three were
in their 30s, and 10 in their 60s.
The three remaining questions included in the initial questionnaire turned to the
topic of burnout and were crafted to inspire respondents to delve deeply into their lived
experience with the syndrome, consistent with the goal of phenomenological research as
seeking understanding of “how individuals construct, and are constructed by, social
reality” (Gall, Gall, & Borg, 2003, p. 481). Their open-ended descriptions of the
experience of workplace burnout were given in simple but moving language. Respondent
029, for example, admitted, “I’m just muddling through now, semester to semester”;
another stated, “Burnout means a lack of enthusiasm and running around in circles . . .
[and] there is a lack of connection between the students and the librarian” (Respondent
034).
The final two questions of the initial questionnaire provided respondents with
checklists for their answers, as well as space for “Other” comments as needed. Checklists
were used frequently during this research study so that all of the many variable aspects of
burnout could be included as necessary for thoroughness and to ensure that respondents
would not inadvertently omit important data. All the variables provided in the study’s
checklists had been collected during the literature review.
Question 9 asked participants to indicate any and all symptoms and/or
consequences of burnout they felt had an impact on their workplace performance.
Responding librarians selected the symptom of frustration most often, followed by
fatigue, mental exhaustion, and loss of enthusiasm. These all are particularly strong
indicators of burnout, as proven by Maslach (2011), Van der Klink et al. (2001), and
109

Pinkowski (2007). Four respondents chose to make comments in the “Other” area, and
mentioned symptoms ranging from the physical (“Irritable bowel syndrome, eczema, lack
of sleep” [Respondent 004]) to the psychological and behavioral (“Resentment;
emotional highs and lows depending on treatment from patrons . . . anxiety” [Respondent
002] and “Anger. Resentment . . . everything is unfair” [Respondent 004]). A complete
rank-ordered list was provided in Table 1 and the accompanying open-ended responses in
Table 2.
Question 10 asked respondents to make a judgment concerning which of the
causal or contributing factors found in their own working environments they believed to
be linked to their experience of burnout. This question also provided a checklist for
responses with elements taken from Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005). Frank
statements, including “Our college is a mess . . . a good administrator comes and then
they leave” and “Administrative dishonesty and always having to fight to maintain
resources” (Respondent 004), pointed to respondents’ frustration with administrative
turnover and perceived corruption in addition to feelings of discouragement over the
battle to retain library resources. These two themes were repeated over the course of the
study. A rank-ordered list of causal factors was provided in Table 3 and the
accompanying open-ended responses in Table 4.
The Delphi-method portion of the study followed a basic pattern for each of the
three rounds. Each set of questions was sent out on a Monday morning with an advisory
noting that portion of the study was available for 5 business days and would close at
midnight on the following Friday. This allowed the data to be collected and tallied in lists
of text, but also placed into a graphical representation such as a bar graph or pie chart for
110

a visual model of the data. All of the questions asked in the previous round were included
with the textual and visual data for the best understanding of how respondents replied to
each of them. This system honored the Delphi tenet of thoughtful deliberation on the
information collected in previous rounds, and allowed the panel to move on to the next
round with this data in mind.
The first round of questions for the Delphi panel also included Data Sheet 2:
Refresher on Symptoms/Consequences of Burnout. The information in the first data sheet
was repeated here but this time listed in paragraph form under broad headings (i.e.,
psychological, physical, or behavioral) rather than in tabular form. This was done for two
reasons: (a) to show relationships between the specific examples and their broad headings
and (b) to stimulate interest in reading the list a second time by altering the way the
information was presented. Both reasons were to promote deeper understanding by the
panel of the symptoms and consequences of workplace burnout.
Delphi Round 1 consisted of eight questions. Of the 12 panelists who volunteered
to take part in the Delphi portion of the study, 11 returned the material with all answers
completed and one with sporadic responses. All 12 responses were tallied where
available and 11 elsewhere.
In this round, panelists first answered two questions about responses to the
burnout questions on the initial questionnaire: They agreed with the symptoms and
consequences and with the causal and contributing factors as indicated by their peers.
Next, all but one indicated they believed that psychological symptoms were their first
choice as the broad range most detrimental to workplace performance. At this point in the

111

study, a majority felt that all symptoms should be dealt with; in later rounds, the focus
shifted back to those that were psychological in nature.
The panel answered the next two questions about the extent of their experience
with burnout with a clear majority noting they endured a fairly constant experience with
it. They were asked to skip the next question and move on to give an open-ended
description of this experience. Others, who indicated sporadic experiences, were asked to
indicate any and all specific times or events from their workdays that were tied to these
feelings from a checklist created based on the literature review. The three most often
selected responses were again indicative of budgetary constraints as causing burnout:
x

When the college focuses on growth but does not budget for additional library
faculty, staff, materials, or hours of service

x

When events at work impact the ability to do the job effectively (e.g., loss of
staff or faculty with no replacements, increased workload, longer hours,
weekend duty, multiple assignments, lack of downtime away from public
service, etc.), and

x

When the book budget is nonexistent or so insufficient that replacing print
reference materials on a regular basis, or purchasing new or second copies of
in-demand materials, is impossible.

Those who lived with constant feelings of burnout provided open-ended responses
revealing feelings of frustration, futility, and apathy. It was telling that their responses
also included the aforementioned thread of inept administration governing the working of
the college library as a cause of their constant burnout, as in the words of Respondent
014:
112

There are so many hoops to go through and since we don’t have any real authority
anymore since we report to a dean who does not understand our issues, I have the
feelings of futility, lack of joy, and a loss of enthusiasm, and have stopped
working to make changes to help students navigate the library and the college.
I’ve become cynical about everyone’s motivations.
The final question in Round 1 was posed so as to remind the panel of its charge
(to offer their recommended coping strategies to deal with workplace burnout) by asking
them to rate the importance to their peers of having these skills. Answering through use
of the 5-point Likert scale of responses provided, 10 ranked it as very important and one
as important. These affirmative responses were considered proof of the need for coping
skills within the community college librarian population, as represented by the Delphi
panel of experts.
Delphi Round 2 was sent to the 12 panelists who submitted complete or nearly
complete responses in the first round, but only nine had returned their responses by
Friday evening. Data Sheet 3, Interventions: Coping Techniques Used to Deal with
Burnout, was included along with the listing and graphical display of the data collected in
the previous round. As this round had been created to bring the panel’s focus onto types
of stress reduction interventions, background information provided in this insert gave
brief descriptive information on the most common forms of therapies (i.e., institutional,
cognitive behavioral, relaxation, and multimodal) used to combat burnout in the
workplace. The first question asked whether the panelists’ colleges had offered any forms
of these interventions to assist the college community with stress and burnout, and
provided choices of standard institutionally provided programs such as professional
development workshops, employee wellness seminars, employee appreciation activities,
lists of readings on stress reduction, referral to an EAP, or any other method. Seven of the
113

panelists’ nine colleges had offered some sort of program, with professional development
workshops done most often. In the “Other” space provided, panelists provided insight
into their thoughts about these institutional programs:
Respondent DPX5. Rarely—maybe once every two or three years.
Respondent DPX2. No, my organization has not offered any form of
interventions for our burnout.
Respondent DPX9. No, my organization has not offered any form of intervention
for burnout. . . . There is an online health program through the health insurance,
but that has nothing to do with the problems and stresses on campus.
Respondent DPX3. We have OK medical and psychological benefits at our
college and the college is proactive about promoting the psychological services.
These responses seemed to indicate that the panelists’ institutions offered
infrequent programs not due to an awareness of a problem with burnout in the employee
population but because of a notion of some sort of institutional obligation to offer
employee programs. This conclusion was reached because the offerings seem unspecific
and sporadic rather than focused on the specific problem of burnout. Another
conclusion—that the college administrations were aware of a problem with burnout but
were leaving it up to insurance or employee assistance to deal with it—could also be
reached by looking at these responses.
Panelists were next invited to consider their experiences and rank the programs or
services their institutions could offer, from most to least effective. A slight majority (5)
selected activities to empower the individual as most effective, followed by (institutional)
proactive planning. The next question asked the panel to select techniques they had
employed to come to terms with their own burnout. Again, they were provided with a
checklist of techniques based on the literature review and an “Other” area for additional

114

comments. Six of the nine panelists confirmed they used coping practices to deal with
burnout, while three indicated they tried to ignore their symptoms. One panelist admitted
to not caring anymore and only managing to be able to show up for work. Those who
selected the “Other” area added their own coping mechanisms:
Respondent DPX5. Medications for stress and IBS [irritable bowel syndrome].
Respondent DPX2. Retirement planning!
Respondent DPX9. I show up, do my job the best I can (for me, not [for] this
institution), then leave and come alive as I go home.
Respondent DPX12. Yoga, refocusing on what is really important.
In considering their responses to this question, it was apparent that the panelists
reconfirmed themselves as representative of the larger population of librarians suffering
from workplace burnout, as nearly all had turned to one or more coping practices outside
of what had been offered by their institutions, a good indication that they had sought
professional help or had researched techniques on their own (or both). This assumption
was confirmed later when they were asked if they had voted for cognitive behavioral and
relaxation techniques as the most effective ways to deal with burnout because of personal
experience with them, and nine responded yes and two no. Three panelists added “Other”
remarks:
Respondent DPX3. Yes and No. There is a solid body of research to show
(mindfulness and relaxation) works and anecdotally, those practices work for me.
Respondent DPX9. Yes and No. The best intervention is to ACTUALLY FIX
THE PROBLEM which is at the campus and library level. That’s why I put
organizationally-focused first. Then, cognitive-behavioral works best for me, so I
put that second. But it doesn’t work for everyone, so I put the multi-modal third.
Respondent DPX5. I usually don’t take the time to “take 5 or 10” minutes out to
“meditate,” or to walk for 20+ minutes, or do some cognitive self-talk. See no
115

hope for the overload to abate w/o replacing at least one of the two retired
librarians. Now there is one librarian +10–12 hours adjunct weekly.
The final questions in this round asked the panel to select specific strategies they
would recommend as beneficial to reduce burnout and then to note whether they were
recommending these practices based on personal experience. The items in the list had
been noted and compiled based on the literature review of suggestions from therapists
and performance improvement experts. Four activities were selected most often:
expressing feelings instead of bottling them up, mindfulness practice, meditation, and
taking regular walks away from the library. Two panelists provided “Other” comments:
Respondent DPX5. I’ve let go of standards since I first began working as a
librarian in a community college. As the years have passed, and librarians have
not been replaced when they have retired, less and less gets done. The undone
tasks pile up as the most critical [tasks] demand attention. Keeping the doors open
and doing the most that I can for the students and faculty with what I can do, is it.
. . . [and] I live with less than professional every day.
Respondent DPX2. I don’t understand the distinction between meditation and
focused meditation.
The theme of burnout due to problems brought on by inadequate funding for
library operations was again the most salient in the responses to questions in Round 2. It
would also be a focal issue brought up in Round 3.
Questions for Delphi Round 3 were created with two specific intents: (a) to
confirm earlier choices of the most effective coping practices and (b) to move the expert
panel as far as possible toward consensus in their selection of the stress reduction
techniques for the panel to put forward as wise practices to deal with workplace burnout
for the California community college population.

116

The panel confirmed their ranking of stress relief activities they felt were most
beneficial for their librarian colleagues. Eight members confirmed their earlier choices
(expressing feelings instead of bottling them up, mindfulness practice, meditation, and
taking regular walks away from the library) as most effective; one dissented, but as this
panelist did not provide any insight into the reason for the dissenting response in the
“Other” area, no conclusion regarding the negative answer could be reached. When asked
if they would recommend other intervention strategies, seven responded no, but the two
who responded yes added specific suggestions, the first of which was not, in reality, an
intervention technique: “Reminding colleagues and administrators that the current
situation is unsustainable. In some ways I have accepted the ‘new reality’ but I haven’t let
go of how I think a library should operate” (Respondent DPX5). The second
recommendation was a relaxation technique: “Flotation tanks—highly, highly
recommended short vacations away from work—are lifesavers!” (Respondent DPX1).
When asked to re-rank their previous choices of activities to empower individual
employees, seven of the panelists agreed with their previous choices, although the
comments added in the “Other” space seemed to verify the burnout symptom of feelings
of futility:
Respondent DPX5. Hard to believe much could be effective in our library.
Respondent DPX9. I think only the empowering and the planning are actually
effective. The other three are varying degrees of not effective.
Responses displaying feelings of futility also were notable in answers to the next
question, which asked for the panel’s confirmation of the broad classes of stress reduction
interventions they had voted for earlier (i.e., cognitive behavioral and relaxation

117

interventions). Although eight confirmed their earlier votes, two did not. The following
comments were added:
Respondent DPX5. I do yoga, meditation practices, and exercise so maybe that
keeps me going. Workaholism and doing the work of two other librarians keeps
me going. If the workplace is too much, I’m not sure much will help. Actually,
w/o Prozac, I don’t think I could function.
Respondent DPX9. I guess. Realistically, the workplace is not going to improve,
so all we can do is deal with our responses [to burnout] by using cognitivebehavioral and relaxation. But it’s not like this is some new wise practice that
people didn’t know about. How utterly and absolutely depressing. I had hoped I
would learn something in this study that would help me.
Responses reflective of depression were mixed with upbeat and positive
comments in answer to the final question of the round and the study. The participants
were asked to note their level of confidence in the ability of the wise practices decided
upon by them as Delphi panel members to assist other community college librarians as
they deal with workplace burnout. Five panelists answered they were very confident,
while two were somewhat unconfident and two were very unconfident. Panelists’ “Other”
comments were as follows:
Respondent DPX11. Very confident.
Respondent DPX1. Very confident. I believe that they will be helpful for two
reasons: first, that librarians are suffering in silence and that simple
acknowledgment of this issue would be empowering for them to just know there
are others out there feeling the same. Secondly, I believe that we are not going to
get any assistance anytime soon from administrators and other decision makers in
light of the demands on our time, the workload, the insufficiencies of faculty,
staff, technology, and materials for the library, so anything we can do to help
ourselves is probably the only thing that can keep us moving.
Respondent DPX2. Somewhat confident.
Respondent DPX3. Somewhat unconfident.
Respondent DPX5. Very unconfident.
118

Respondent DPX9. Very unconfident. This is nothing new and hasn’t helped me
at all; I doubt it will help others unless they haven’t thought about the issue at all.
After all the data were collected, a table using elements from Gilbert’s (2007)
BEM model and Leiter and Maslach’s (2005) six worklife domains was created. The 12
elements were listed as headings in the far left column, and a row of eight boxes for
thematic factors drawn from the study ranged across the page. This provided a construct
for thematically plugging in references from the study as they were deemed to fit that
factor.
The collected data were considered carefully before being inserted into boxes in
the table. Many of the responses could have been placed in either model, such as where
factors indicating incentives (Gilbert, 2007) and reward (Leiter & Maslach, 2005)
overlap. This, however, was not judged as disqualifying the resulting visual presentation.
Once completed, this thematic analysis provided a graphical representation neatly
showing how each of the symptoms, consequences, and causal factors mentioned by the
burnout sufferers could be validated against the experts’ proven inhibitors to adequate
performance and factors predictive of burnout (see Appendix B).
The goal of the study—to recommend wise practices for community college
librarians dealing with burnout—was reached when the Delphi panel designated
cognitive behavioral and relaxation-type stress relief practices as their chosen methods to
combat workplace burnout. These broad classes of interventions, with their various
integrated practices of meditation, mindfulness, positive imagery, and yoga (among many
others), should provide techniques that appeal to members of the California community
college librarian population suffering from burnout.
119

Chapter Summary
Forty-four of 384 librarians responded to the initial survey, representing 12% of
the population. For the Delphi portion of the study, 12 respondents volunteered to be
panelists. Eleven worked through the first round; nine completed the second and third
rounds.
Demographic data collected in the initial questionnaire revealed that the
respondents were typical of those employed in the library profession in terms of years of
employment, experience in the library field, and experience in the academic library.
Workplace duties for the community college library workplace also were typical, as the
majority of respondents indicated primary assignment in reference and instruction.
Gender was divided between 34 female and eight male respondents. The majority of
respondents were 40–59 years of age, with none younger than 30 and none older than 69.
When asked, responses were reflective of the typical descriptions of burnout
found in the literature, citing multiple symptoms and/or consequences, such as
frustration, mental exhaustion, futility, loss of enthusiasm, and fatigue. Causal or
contributing factors also were noted, and included increased workload, unfairness,
individuals not matched to the jobs performed, apathy, no sense of community, and a lack
of appreciation for one’s work. Further inquiries asked for data on burnout’s effects on
workplace performance, participants’ experiences with constant or sporadic burnout, and
their opinions on the importance of burnout coping mechanisms for community college
librarians.

120

Throughout the three rounds of the modified Delphi-method portion of data
collection, respondents provided feedback based on their own experiences to questions
concerning stress reduction methods and the efficacy of organizational and personal
interventions, before recommending techniques to be used by the entire community
college library population. In the final inquiries of the study, the panel discussed their
confidence in the results of the research study as a whole—specifically, their confidence
in the ability of the recommended wise practices to assist their peers in dealing with
workplace burnout in the California community college library. The resulting decision to
recommend relaxation and cognitive behavioral stress relief interventions was reached
following the deliberative Delphi-method portion of the study.
After data collection, a graphic representation in table form was created (see
Appendix B), populated with responses gathered in the study and using themes derived
from the work of Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005) as row headings.
Responses clearly matched to the themes and provided positive validation of the
symptoms, consequences, and causal factors for burnout as experienced by the
respondents.

121

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

Introduction
The final chapter of the study includes a summary and discussion of the findings
as collected here and in relation to the literature, limitations of the study, implications of
the findings for practice, recommendations for further research, and a conclusion that
reflects on answers to the central research question.
The purpose of the study was to discover stress reduction activities that could be
recommended as wise practices for those California community college librarians dealing
with burnout in the workplace. The study was centered on the research question, How do
community college librarians most effectively come to terms with burnout to improve
their workplace performance? An initial survey and a modified Delphi-method technique
utilizing a panel of experts from the profession were employed in the research. The panel
studied aspects of workplace burnout, such as its symptoms, causal factors, and possible
intervention methods, in order to reach consensus on a final product of wise practices,
their recommended techniques for dealing with burnout endorsed by them for the
community college librarian population. A secondary aspect of the research sought to
compare Gilbert’s (2007) BEM and Leiter and Maslach’s (2005) six worklife domains
predictive of exemplary performance or burnout against the results collected in the
research. Both goals were accomplished.
122

Summary of the Findings
The responses to the initial questionnaire provided both demographic and baseline
data on participants’ experiences with workplace burnout. Responses showed that the 44
librarians who took part in the initial inquiry were typical of individuals employed as
librarians in general, and in particular of those working as community college faculty—
through such measurements as their tenure as academic librarians, experience at other
libraries, time worked in their current libraries, gender, and duties in their workplaces—
according to data from the CCL and ALA. All respondents expressed lived experiences
that closely or identically matched descriptions gleaned through previous research studies
on burnout. No new symptoms, consequences, or causal factors were discovered here;
rather, the experiences of the respondents mirrored those of other service workers (e.g.,
counselors, police officers, and clergy).
Proven through their frank responses to study inquiries, the librarians’ intense
regimen of day-to-day interactions with the public and overloaded work schedules
intermixed with two salient causal factors (budgetary constraints and administrative
ineffectiveness) to bring about symptoms of burnout in these individuals. The Delphi
panel of experts from this population demonstrated their experiences and awareness of
burnout issues and worked through three rounds of questions and answers to reach
consensus on two forms of intervention strategies—cognitive behavioral and relaxation
techniques—as those they would most highly recommend as wise practices to be utilized
by the community college librarian population to deal with workplace burnout.
After data collection was concluded, the symptoms, causes, and consequences of
burnout as experienced by the respondents were thematically analyzed before being
123

placed in a matrix created using variables taken from the work of Gilbert (2007) and
Leiter and Maslach (2005). This was a secondary goal of the research and was used to
validate the feelings of burnout experienced by the California community college
librarians against factors known for promoting or hampering workplace performance.

Discussion of the Findings
Open-ended input from the participants proved to be especially insightful into life
with burnout through frank descriptions of the day-to-day experiences, blunt remarks
concerning its causal factors, and the feelings of futility emanating from the comments of
individuals who know there is something wrong but feel powerless to alter those issues in
their present circumstances that have caused the distress.
The information collected on job tenure in this study showed nothing out of the
ordinary regarding the library profession. The librarian participants were typical of the
librarian population, known for staying with a job longer than others with an earned
master’s degree. Here, the average length of time respondents spent as academic
librarians (as opposed to working in other types of libraries) was 11–20 years.
Respondents also had been working an average of 11–20 years in their present
community college libraries; this tenure is in stark contrast to that of other professionals
such as classroom faculty, where the current median tenure is 5.5 years (A. Doyle, n.d.).
Female predominance is typical in every type of library (school, public, academic,
and special)—with 86.8% of all librarians being female (Bureau of Labor Statistics,
2012)—and proved no different in this research study: 34 respondents were female and
eight were male, with two declining to indicate their gender. This confirmed that the
124

demographics of this study group were right on target with the majority of American
librarians.
Respondents ranged in age from 30 to 69, with an average age of 40 to 59. This
average age corresponded with the latest figure from the National Study of Postsecondary
Faculty by the Department of Education, which determined that 54 was the average age
for faculty members (Masterson, 2010).
When participants were asked about their primary and secondary assigned duties,
reference was indicated as the primary job classification for 17 respondents, while 10
indicated instructional duties and two indicated circulation. Study participants were asked
this question because few community college librarians work in only one single area.
Rather, most librarians have both primary and secondary assignments (and many have
tertiary assignments and beyond, as well). The traditional focal areas for community
college librarians’ work lie in the reference and instruction departments, in keeping with
their employment as faculty instructors (ODLIS, 2014, “Undergraduate Library”).
Secondary duties also were also reflective of the typical academic librarian
assignments here, with 13 librarians assigned to reference and 21 to instruction. The
question concerning primary assigned duties was intended to seek any verifiable link
between constant public contact assignments and burnout, because the research literature
had revealed a direct correlation between employee/public contact hours and the seeds of
burnout syndrome as workers strive to place mental distance between themselves and
public demands (Ahola et al., 2006). However, public contact was not the sole predictor
of burnout indicated in the literature, nor was it here, as nine respondents reported

125

primary assignments in areas where there is little (technology, technical services) or no
public contact (acquisitions, cataloging).
The initial questionnaire also contained three questions that focused specifically
on burnout. The research net had been cast as wide as possible in the initial questionnaire
by asking respondents to simply describe their experience in their own words. This
method was used following Skulmoski et al.’s (2007) recommendation that doing so
would enable the resultant capture of descriptive experience to be at its fullest. It
certainly proved to be the case in this study, as the words participants used were rich in
evocative, experiential detail of workplace burnout symptoms and consequences.
Participants’ descriptions of life with workplace burnout were candid and sometimes
poignant, with an overall tone indicative of individuals who knew there was something
very wrong with how they felt about their work, as in the remark from Respondent 019:
“Lack of enthusiasm for the work that once was inspirational.” Other telling remarks
worth noting were as follows:
Respondent 021. Every morning I do not want to go to work, and when I come
back from vacation I spend the day wondering why I bothered to come to work.
. . . I have looked for ways to combat burnout . . . [but] I do not know how to
change.
Respondent 034. Teaching becomes a burden instead of a passion.
Respondent 002. [I] just really don’t have the energy to care.
Respondent 008. Counting down the days until retirement.
Respondent 044. Everything is an effort.
Respondent 009. I feel overtaxed and exhausted.

126

Responses given throughout the study in the “Other” comment areas proved to
validate experiences as compared to those described in the literature. Leading the list of
symptoms was frustration, closely followed by fatigue, mental exhaustion, and loss of
enthusiasm, all of which were noted as being classic burnout symptoms in the literature.
Gonzales (2012) underscored the importance of frustration as an indicator of the onset of
burnout and how detrimental it is to the human psyche when he wrote, “People guided by
frustration have a limited amount of emotional capital. They will eventually burn out, as
we have witnessed countless times before” (p. 52).
During data analysis, the researcher paid careful attention to the points
respondents made in their open comments. A repetitive theme throughout the comments
pointed to one superordinate issue that tied all participants’ experiences of burnout
together, and that was the lack of funding for operation of the library. In nearly every
response, the ramifications of an insufficient budget echoed through the causal factors for
burnout: library faculty positions unfilled; the continued necessity to do more with less;
cuts to already-scarce budgets; cuts to staff in the library (and in other service areas on
campus, obliging librarians to take on nonprofessional, clerical duties); insufficient
money to purchase core collection print materials and adequate electronic resources; and
the de facto necessity to quickly learn to use and then turn around and teach endless
updates to technology.
Lack of funding for a sufficient number of faculty kept librarians tied to the
reference desk and bibliographic instruction classroom and deprived them of the ability to
also quietly perform tasks without constant interpersonal interaction. This, in essence,
deprived them of the psychological breathing room essential in their daily routine to give
127

balance to the mostly one-sided public service work, and served to invoke the fight-orflight stress response, a “generalized, patterned, unconscious mobilization of the body
and mind’s natural resources when confronted with a stressor” (Nelson, Quick, & Quick,
1989, p. 71). Overloaded assignments that were heavily weighted in favor of constant and
sometimes unpleasant interaction with students and faculty, both of whom could be rude
or uncaring at times, created an atmosphere where librarians could not take advantage of
the stress reduction that comes from uninterrupted time to work away from the public
(Nelson et al., 1989).
In addition to becoming stressed because of a lack of time away from the public,
respondents described experiencing feelings of personal inadequacy, a key symptom of
burnout, when behind-the-scenes work had to be postponed, delayed, or even ignored
because public service came first. As discussed in the literature review, it is especially
difficult for librarians (as driven, work- and service-oriented individuals) to leave tasks
unfinished (Caputo, 1991; Huwe, 2005; Maslach, 1982). Participants’ feelings of
inadequacy were fed by their inability to complete any substantial duties away from the
public. Telltale burnout symptoms of frustration and mental and physical exhaustion were
evident in their responses, such as in this remark from Respondent 012: “Too much work,
too little time, lack of institutional support in the way of funding for library resources and
faculty. Feel like a rat in a spinning wheel—getting nowhere fast!”
In the individual library workplace, budget cuts for library materials have
accelerated the inevitable progression toward crumbling, old, outdated, incomplete, and
unused print collections in two ways. First, by making it impossible to add a sufficient
quantity of fresh materials focused on current curriculum needs, sharp cuts to materials
128

budgets are moving toward, in essence, killing the library. Without constantly being fed
with new additions to its collection, the library—as the living, changing, growing
organism it is—will begin to die (Ranganathan, 1931). The second way budget cuts work
to destroy the campus library is when there is insufficient time for trained professional
staff to work away from the public reference and instructional areas to cull unneeded,
outdated, or damaged titles cluttering the stacks (behind-the-scenes library work known
as weeding or deselection). The results are libraries whose shelves contain more tattered,
outdated, or unused materials than what is new, useful, or classic in nature.
In the area of technology for the library, budget cuts have hastened an even
quicker death for basic equipment through cycles of skipped software and hardware
updates. Respondents indicated that in the rare instances when new software was
purchased for the library, they were often too exhausted or burnt out to care or even to
learn to use it. According to Huwe (2005), “Technostress has been one of the few
constants in our professional lives for the past 30 years or so” (p. 1), and this unplannedfor result of the ongoing development of information technology coupled with too little
time to learn to use it has been a hard blow to the librarian population.
Many community colleges have been prevented from hiring seasoned, talented
administrators due to low pay scales. “State budget woes and a rocky economy have
shaken public colleges and universities. One of the most noticeable shudders has been a
pervasive ‘brain drain,’ as many state institutions face competition for their best” (June,
2008, “With the Economy Down,” para. 2). Instead, those who might be capable and
willing to tackle the enormous problems caused by years of inadequate support go
elsewhere because the salary offered is too little to justify all the time and energy that will
129

be needed to make a difference. Respondents reported administrative dishonesty and
political game playing in their descriptions of causal factors for burnout; they also wrote
of new supervisors who did not know the job or who were good at it but left after staying
only a short while. This latter result is common when other college districts offer the
same work but with a much greater financial reward (June, 2008).
Continuing on the theme of meager funding, participants noted that money
problems also created an environment in which one group of faculty was favored over
another regardless of equal standing, such as between librarians and classroom faculty,
since the latter brought dollars from the state to the institution where the former did not
(or at least, not in apportioned funds). When support for instructional faculty, supplies,
and additional class sections were voted for by administration and classroom faculty as
ways to increase the dollars brought to the campus by students, the deficit had to come
from somewhere, and it appears the cuts were made in the library’s budget.
Beyond the lack of a sufficient number of library faculty, the campus-wide lack of
sufficient clerical support for institutions of higher education has resulted in the creation
of a vacuum in the number of staff who are available to provide even the simplest
assistance to students for basic services. Several respondents complained that their days
of actually teaching students how to use library resources are gone, replaced by
necessitated hand-holding of students and nonstudents alike as they work through their
applications to the college, their online registration, assessment, orientation, and
applications for financial aid—tasks not part of the job of teaching students to become
successful library researchers. Additionally, librarians spoke of helping students with

130

printing services, online classroom technical problems, and a myriad of other services
they are no longer able to direct to less-qualified personnel in other offices on campus.
The influx of ever-more students coming to California community colleges in
response to the economic woes of the state have placed yet another burden on the
shoulders of librarians because so many of the newcomers are hampered by being
unprepared for college work, their inability to write and/or speak English, their desire to
achieve grades without putting forth any effort, and, in many cases, even their lack of the
ability to learn. The role of community colleges has expanded from strictly university
parallel programs to full-service colleges, adding components such as occupational
curricula, remedial and developmental courses, English as a second language education,
and other types of courses (Maxwell et al., 2003).
Furthermore, many uninformed administrators do not understand (or may not care
to understand) the complexity of the work involved in selecting, acquiring, cataloging,
and ultimately putting high-quality materials that support classroom instruction at
students’ and faculty members’ fingertips, and therefore see the work of librarians as a
sinecure. They ignore the challenge librarians face in teaching inattentive, uncaring,
uncooperative students to find and use information on their own (known as lifelong
learning skills, a key component of the core mission of community colleges).
Respondents also spoke of feeling “overtaxed and exhausted” when trying to instruct
these students because, “unlike classroom faculty who are in a position to demand action
from their students, we have students make demands of us—a very different relationship.
Many are appreciative, some are abusive, and we are always on the front lines”
(Respondent 009).
131

Another aspect of the lack of value noted by respondents was a lack of
institutional support for the campus library and its personnel. “Our district has been on a
mission to de-professionalize the librarians” (Respondent 017). Several others wrote of
feeling devalued themselves as well noting they felt the library was not valued by the
campus, either. One participant spoke of feeling “singled out” by an administrator, while
another commented, “I’m tired of having to constantly convince [non-library] faculty that
students need instruction in library use and research techniques. It seems that they value
serious research less and less. They don’t bring their classes in for orientations”
(Respondent 023).
Even elsewhere on campus, budget woes can affect the library when they prohibit
the number of campus security personnel available to assist the library with handling
mentally and behaviorally challenged students or those who think the library’s computers
or quiet study areas are for use to commit crimes. One of the respondents commented that
a factor of burnout included “worry[ing] over safety issues with more students with
behavior problems and mental illness” (Respondent 018).
All of these issues could be eliminated by a budget sufficient to support all areas
of the campus as needed. However, with the reality of today’s higher education, sufficient
funding seems to be a dream never to be realized. In other workplaces, the
aforementioned issues might lead some individuals to quit and look for employment
elsewhere. In the library profession, however, the notion of helping others is inbred.
Merely glancing through the open-ended responses to nearly every question in this study
reveals professionals who care deeply about doing the best work they can to assist their
students in succeeding. Words like “integrity,” “inspirational,” and “professionalism,”
132

used to describe their work experiences, were interspersed with the contrasting words of
“hopelessness,” “fatigue and frustration,” and “lack of motivation.”
It seems clear that it is not the nature of the librarians’ work that has brought on
their workplace burnout. Instead, what has created an atmosphere where burnout thrives
appears to be the overall state of an educational institution that makes budget decisions
based on the return on investment business formula instead of on the specifics of what
(and who) will help students to succeed in their coursework. The ingredients necessary
for the onset of burnout are activated when individual librarians who are dedicated to
serving their students become overworked, unappreciated, and dismissed by both their
institutions and even by other faculty members. Although most of these individuals
persist in attempting to provide service of the highest quality, their efforts are hampered
by exhaustion, depersonalization, and a reduced or nonexistent sense of personal
accomplishment—the three dimensions of workplace burnout (Maslach, 2008).
The current study revealed that causal factors for burnout, as noted by several
current community college librarians, fell into two categories, both of which were
mentioned by several respondents: (a) inadequate funding for staff, faculty, materials, and
hours of service; and (b) a growing change of attitude toward librarians and the work they
perform. As could be expected from the current state of California community college
finances, especially since 2008 when the state budget first began to fall heavily into
deficit, budget cutbacks have meant a lack of support for the hiring of library faculty, and
consequent work overload for those remaining on the job. In addition, high administrative
turnover often causes the remaining administrators to opt for moving non-librarian
administrators into library management positions. Several librarians cited this maneuver
133

as a reason for the breakdown of the library’s effectiveness, and was seen as a causal
factor of burnout.
Another causative dynamic was noted by study participants and may be unique to
library faculty on community college campuses; however, whether this is true remains
unknown. This dynamic was a distinct lack of appreciation for librarians and the work
they perform from other faculty, from students, and from administrators. For example,
Respondent 029 stated, “The Library does not feel valued, and the librarian’s work does
not feel valued”; and Respondent 008 agreed and stated, “Contributions of library faculty
(me) are ignored, devalued.”
In the literature on burnout, lack of demonstrated appreciation for individuals or
the work they perform ranked high on the list of burnout causes. Maslach (1982)
illustrated this when she wrote,
Whenever we do something for people, we like to hear how well it turned out—
did they like it or not, did it help, did it make any difference? This feedback not
only tells us if we did a good job, but it lets us know whether our efforts were
appreciated. Just like anyone else, professional helpers like to get this feedback.
They need the same reinforcing strokes as ordinary folk do. However, for them
feedback is either nonexistent or is almost exclusively negative. They don’t hear
much when things are going right, but they sure hear plenty when things are going
wrong. (p. 19)
The researcher could not determine from the data what had caused this shift in
viewpoint from other faculty, administrators, and students. Insufficient budget could be a
factor. If an administration views classroom faculty as the income earners for their
institution, and other faculty as drains on resources because their services cannot be
measured in dollars, then funds will be channeled toward the classroom and not to those
other areas. Additionally, when instructional faculty are given the task of selecting new

134

faculty hires and must choose between the classroom or the library, group dynamics may
come into play using the 50% Law requiring half of every campus’s faculty budget to be
spent on classroom instructors as a reason for choosing the former. Scarce resources can
promote so-called “tribal thinking” (Raphael-Grimm, 2008, p. 61) in the workplace, an
atmosphere where the power of groups formerly viewed as equivalent shifts, and attitudes
toward one another change as the groups polarize into “us” and “them” (p. 61).
Overall, results from the study revealed several causal factors for burnout, all
related to the overarching theme of an inadequate funding structure: loss, nonreplacement, or simple lack of sufficient faculty and staff for the library; overloaded
faculty performing additional duties outside of faculty assignments; increased student
populations to serve without increased personnel; a lack of quality managers; and general
administrative turnover.
Although 12 individuals volunteered to take part in the Delphi portion of the
study, the number eventually dropped to nine for the final two rounds. This attenuation
should not bring into question the validity of the final results, as indicated by Skulmoski
et al. (2007), whose work showed that if a Delphi group was determined to be
homogeneous, then it was possible to rely on a smaller sample for sufficient results. In
this case, the educational requirements, professional standards, instructional and
informational duties, community college curriculum criteria, and other constraints arising
from a state-run public education system combined to make the workplace and nature of
the work performed by this particular group of librarians extremely homogeneous and
representative of the larger population.

135

When identifiers for the Delphi panelists were being created and the researcher
garnered the workplace assignments of volunteers, she noticed an unplanned but
significant factor: the composition of the Delphi panel was almost hyper-reflective of the
typical distribution of the professional staff in any given community college library
(CCL, 2014). The volunteers were not made up of an indiscriminate scattering of
individuals as a random sampling might otherwise provide; instead, five of seven library
departments were represented on the panel: two acquisitions librarians, four instruction
librarians, three reference librarians, one technology librarian, and one technical services
librarian. As for the other areas (circulation and cataloging), their non-representation also
is quite characteristic of most community college libraries. Unless a library is
extraordinarily large and well-staffed, or part of a university or research institution, these
duties are usually included as a secondary and not a primary assignment.
Such an archetypical distribution of panel members, although unplanned, was
deemed especially valuable to the resulting Delphi panel conclusions because every area
in which average community college librarians function was proportionally represented
on the panel, and therefore the representation consisted of panelists who had been
exposed to all library tasks and areas that stressed the academic librarian. As expected,
the panel’s responses were rich in representative experiential detail of symptoms,
consequences, and causal factors for burnout.
The first Delphi round consolidated the results from the initial questionnaire by
reminding participants of their previous responses. The panel was asked to rate
agreement with the symptoms and/or consequences noted in the initial questionnaire;
nine strongly agreed and two agreed. The next question asked them to rate whether they
136

agreed with the causal or contributing factors forwarded from the last round. Eight
strongly agreed, two agreed, and one somewhat agreed. The researcher was comfortable
moving forward at that point, as if all members of the panel had indicated the same
degree of agreement. This outcome was consistent with that of Keil, Tiwana, and Bush
(2002), who wrote that weighted but not absolute corresponding agreement or
disagreement between panelists allowed for analysis of the results according to either
perception.
The next question asked the expert panel to select which broad range of
consequences (physical, psychological, or behavioral) they wished to focus on in their
work toward the ultimate wise practices. Each of these ranges (groups) of consequences
has coping practices associated with it. This question purposely included a fourth choice
of “All of the Above” as a way to bring the panelists to consensus on a single group of
symptoms/consequences on which to concentrate.
Unfortunately, where once the panel had voted overwhelmingly to focus on
psychological symptoms, they then voted erratically: six for focusing on all symptoms
and the others for either psychological (4 respondents) or physical (1 respondent)
symptoms. A possible and reasonable explanation in light of the studied population was
noted in the pre-data collection literature review, where Caputo (1991) explained that
librarians often totally self-identify with the library profession’s unwritten rule of
etiquette implicitly requiring them to do nothing less than help each and every patron
with their needs, no matter how challenging they appear. If librarians are inherently
customer-service-driven, then this fundamental and characteristic service response of the

137

typical librarian may well explain why six of 11 panelists wanted to help all burnout
sufferers with all of their symptoms at one time.
When the panel answered questions about whether their own experience with
burnout was sporadic or fairly constant, their responses demonstrated closer agreement
compared to the previous question. Seven of the 11 respondents indicated their
experiences with burnout were constant, while four indicated sporadic experiences. The
four panelists who indicated sporadic experience of burnout went on to indicate which (if
any) of the provided situations matched their beliefs. The response selected most often by
Delphi panelists was “When the college focuses on growth but does not budget for
additional library faculty, staff, materials, or hours of service.” This also was a causal
factor mentioned often in the literature (Butcher, 1999; Knibbe-Haanstra, 2008; Rieh,
1999).
Although one would hope that the intent of legislators and current community
college governing boards is not to discredit, devalue, and do away with the campus
library, faculty, and services, the methods used to measure the desirability and/or need for
library faculty against that of classroom faculty have set the stage for this to occur.
Classroom faculty are measured by how many bodies are in the classroom, and their
services are paid according to a funding formula. If the number of students grows, then so
does funding from the state. There is no such formula for measuring the number of
students who need the services of librarians in the library. Currently, library services and
faculty do not equate to additional monies from the state, and since no other
considerations are currently being used to measure their value, they carry this stigma up
front. Hiring librarians, in fact, can put a college on the wrong side of the 50%
138

calculation (i.e., classroom faculty and non-instructional faculty) and make the institution
vulnerable to violation of “minimum conditions” (Mize, 2000, p. 2) for which the
chancellor’s office can withdraw state funding.
When those respondent librarians who had noted constant and not sporadic
burnout were asked to describe their feelings, frustration (the most noted symptom of
burnout for the entire community) was again quite evident in their responses. Also noted
were anger and apathy. All the symptoms of constant burnout seemed to be linked to a
similarly constant lack of sufficient support for library materials, staff, and faculty, as
expressed in the following comment by Respondent DPX1:
How can it get any better when the administrators are unheeding or uncaring
about the library and librarians? We compete for dollars with student services like
counseling, and since there are state guidelines as to how many counselors we
need or how many students a counselor can see (and when guidelines for
librarians can be ignored with impunity), there are dozens of counselors. If we
were measured in the same way, then it would show that there is one librarian to
serve every 3,000 students! How is that fair? But who cares except librarians.
The final question in Round 1 asked the panel to affirm the goal of the study by
ranking their opinions on how important it is for their librarian community to have coping
skills to combat burnout. All but one ranked it as very important, with one vote for
important. The question was designed to keep the panel’s focus on coping techniques,
and their responses proved they were on track.
The second Delphi round turned the focus to burnout interventions. Panelists were
asked if their institutions had offered intervention programs for burnout in the form of
professional development workshops, wellness seminars, employee appreciation
activities, lists of readings, or referral to an EAP. Nine of the institutions had done so, but

139

two had not. Professional development workshops were the most often cited intervention
activities, followed by employee wellness seminars.
Next, panelists were asked their opinion on what they believed would be the most
effective type of these activities for their own institutions to offer. Respondents were
most in favor of activities that empowered individual employees, followed by proactive
planning.
It was interesting to learn from the responses that the two forms of intervention
offered most often by large institutions like community colleges are those that empower
individuals (institutionally provided professional development and employee wellness
programs), and that these interventions to empower the individual also were the
consensus choice of the Delphi panel to recommend to other librarians. Yet, with so
many of their peers suffering from burnout’s effects, it is logical to conclude that
although stress reduction interventions were being offered by institutions, the causal
factors for burnout were stronger and more prevalent factors affecting librarians’
performance in the workplace. In other words, the negative factors greatly outweigh the
positive in the librarians’ workplaces.
When panelists were asked how they themselves had come to terms with burnout
in their own lives, they admitted to utilizing coping practices, working harder to maintain
performance, ignoring symptoms, and basically not dealing with it at all and just showing
up each day at work. Others mentioned medications, planning for retirement, and yoga.
When looked at as a body of responses, it was clear that all of the participants realized
they were suffering from burnout, but only some had taken active steps to cope. The

140

other respondents seemed to be incapable (at the time of the study) of attempting any sort
of professional intervention practice and so just muddled through their days on the job.
The next query asked panelists for the coping strategy they believed to be most
effective. Cognitive behavioral interventions were the panel’s first choice, followed by
relaxation activities, organizationally sponsored, and then multimodal techniques. When
asked whether they made these choices based on their own utilization of these techniques,
all respondents indicated yes, and two also indicated no. The respondents who answered
both yes and no added explanatory remarks—the first having done research on
mindfulness and relaxation as well as having utilized the practices and the second
indicating organizationally focused methods would be the best way to cope because “the
best intervention is to ACTUALLY FIX THE PROBLEM which is at the campus and
library level” (Respondent DPX9).
The questions in the third and final round were specifically designed with two
objectives: (a) to remind panelists of what they had learned from their peers as a whole
and (b) to encourage forward movement toward consensus. The initial query was
designed to take advantage, if needed, of the built-in opportunity afforded by the
parameters of the Delphi method, which allow and even encourage participants to alter
“the original assessments if they want to—or stick to their previous opinion. Nobody
‘loses face’ because the survey is done anonymously using a questionnaire” (Cuhls, 2003,
p. 93). Panelists were reminded that in the previous round, they had ranked cognitive
behavioral interventions as the most effective, followed by relaxation techniques.
However, instead of coming closer to consensus in Round 3, the nine panelists voted
equally to give primary ranking to three classes of intervention, with three votes each for
141

cognitive behavioral, organizationally focused, and multimodal interventions. (None of
the panelists suggested any additional forms of intervention when asked to do so in the
subsequent question.) It is unclear what prompted this change, but in any case, by the end
of Round 3 and the study as a whole, the types of individual activities recommended were
again cognitive behavioral and relaxation techniques.
The final question put to panelists asked them to confirm their confidence in their
own choice of cognitive behavioral and relaxation-type interventions as those they would
recommend for community college librarians. The panel confirmed their overall
confidence in their selections by giving four votes for very confident and two votes for
somewhat confident, with two dissenting votes for very unconfident. One respondent
(Respondent DPX1) commented that by simply raising the issue of librarians burning out
in the community college workplace, librarians would be empowered, and went on to
state that library faculty need to help themselves move forward because of a lack of
assistance from college administration.
This thought concerning the silent suffering of academic librarians had been a
driving force behind this research study—to provide librarians with wise practices in
order to empower them to help themselves. It seems reasonable to assume, then, that
since the panel sent forth a recommendation of two types of self-empowering coping
practices, the goal of empowerment can be reached, as predicted by the Delphi panel.

Discussion of the Findings in Relation to the Literature
The results of this study reflect what has been noted in professional library
literature over the last three decades: that all the core dimensions of burnout are being
142

experienced by today’s California community college librarians. Factors such as
repetitive instructional and reference work and a lack of positive reinforcement (Pillsbury
et al., 1990); feelings of depersonalization and a lack of personal accomplishment
(Asides, 1989); technostress (Huwe, 2005); and heavy workload, faulty equipment, low
pay, and ungrateful patrons (Pinkowski, 2007) all combine to produce symptoms of
burnout in many librarians working in today’s community college libraries.
Results from this study indicated that faculty librarians are working harder but
with less support from their college community, and are dealing with resulting decreased
job satisfaction and a dwindling commitment to the job and library profession as they
struggle to get through each day. When combined with patron problems; technological
insufficiencies; and a lack of value or appreciation from other faculty, administrators, and
students, it is not surprising that librarians have joined the ranks of those in the 20th
century who were the initial subjects of research for workplace burnout: business and
public sector employees faced with daily interpersonal contact. Studies done in the last
two decades on burnout in the academic and business worlds confirmed that although it is
a psychological syndrome, its symptomatic dimensions appear along with both emotional
and physical exhaustion (Eker, Anbar, & Karabiyik, 2007).
The results from this study successfully met characteristics seen to represent the
concept of wise practices. The recommended practices were selected based on knowledge
learned from a community, and are models from which others may learn (Calliou, 2011).
In addition, they are of long-term benefit to a community, build capacity and institutional
strength, are sustainable and transferable, were discovered during a participatory process
utilizing consensus building, are offered in an effective manner of communication, took
143

into consideration the unique culture of the community college librarian during their
development, are not insensitive or gender-specific, and can be used to strengthen the
identity of the librarian as a valuable employee and person (UNESCO, n.d.).
The results of this study also neatly matched the theoretical framework found in
the literature and provided by the work of Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005).
The findings showed that the subject group of librarians provided a classic example of
Gilbert’s BEM (P = B x E) in the community college library workplace. As Gilbert
demonstrated, a person’s performance (P) is a result of the interface of his or her behavior
(B) and his or her environment (E). The workplace performance (P) of this group of
community college librarians was negatively impacted by the interaction of their intrinsic
librarian’s service orientation (B) and the current toxic environment (E) in which they
were working. Efforts to maintain either exemplary performance or an uncaring,
disassociated attitude were the result, and it led them to perform poorly in the workplace.
Self-knowledge of this failure caused them to become even more susceptible to the
downward spiral of workplace burnout.
Leiter and Maslach’s (2005) themes were overwhelmingly validated by the results
of this study. As their ongoing work has demonstrated, the core consequences of
emotional and physical exhaustion, depersonalization, and a loss of sense of self-worth
were proven over again by the words of the respondent librarians. In this case, the
individual librarians’ sense of identity as a librarian and their internal measurement of
self-esteem were both tied to the work performed. When that work became
overwhelming, sometimes toxic, and heavily weighted by giving and not receiving in
return, they began to suffer from the workplace relationship as much as from one
144

involving an overbearing, uncaring other individual. Overwhelming stress and exhaustion
began to take over. Librarians found that the passion they once held for the job had
fizzled out, only to be replaced by sourness, cynicism, and/or apathy. Their effectiveness
declined along with their sense of self-worth. In other words, the librarians had burned
out on the job (Leiter & Maslach, 2005).
The six factors cited by Gilbert (2007) in his BEM proved to be interchangeable
with Leiter and Maslach’s (2005) six dimensions predictive of workplace engagement or
burnout, as depicted in Appendix B. The experiences of the California community
college librarians who were studied provided example after example of burnout in
addition to many specific causal and contributing factors noted in the research and
reflected here. The cost of burnout on a work force was experientially demonstrated.
A hoped-for consequence of this study would be that administrators in California
community colleges could be made aware of the ramifications stemming from their lack
of support for the library and its faculty, especially when the number of librarians for the
college is insufficient to serve the number of full-time-equivalent students according to
state law (i.e., California Code of Regulations, Title 5).

Limitations
Although the themes discovered during this study readily matched those proffered
by Gilbert (2007) and Leiter and Maslach (2005), they are not the sole indicators of
workplace burnout. Other factors away from the workplace, such as marital issues, family
problems, disease and poor physical health, length of time on the job, age, caring for
elderly or disabled family members, and so forth, can trigger or worsen the degree of
145

burnout in those individuals living with these issues. Nevertheless, the external factors do
not invalidate the causal factors discovered in this study.
This research did not examine the larger community of librarians working in all
types of libraries, and so the causal factors here cannot be taken as an exhaustive list of
the issues in the library workplace that may bring on burnout. Public librarians and
academic librarians from institutions other than community colleges encounter many of
the same patrons (teenagers, for example) and patron types (homeless, mentally
disturbed, hostile) during the course of their workday. They also work with different
patron groups as well—small children and adolescents, graduate students, professors,
municipal administrators, and so forth—and have different service goals to achieve.
These factors do not disprove what was discovered in this study; however, they may
become the focus of future studies on the role of burnout syndrome on professional
librarians.
This research study was limited to community college librarians who work in the
state of California. It is conceivable the factors that contributed to burnout in California
may not be the same as in other U.S. states, or they may have greater or lesser effects
than other factors not discovered in California.
This study was limited by e-mail exchanges and relied on technology to distribute
and collect data. This data collection protocol could have played a role in the limited
number of respondents who took part in the study. Many librarians still oppose
technology and only deal with it when forced to do so; they may have shied away from
any study conducted by e-mail. Other factors that may have had an effect on the number
of respondents include the sheer number of surveys sent to faculty members’ inboxes on
146

a daily basis; the strict time limits placed on librarians; and the limited amount of time
many librarians have away from public contact desks and instructional labs, where
paying attention to reading and responding to anything is an enormous challenge because
of the priority and constant interruption of those needing their services.

Implication of the Findings for Practice
As one respondent lamented, nothing new was found during the course of this
study. However, the goal was not to find new ways to cope with burnout but to obtain
recommendations for proven practices that sufferers from within the community could
provide to their peers. Knowledge is power, especially in the library world; knowing
and/or recognizing the precise factors that lead to burnout should allow graduate library
school professors to create instructional programs including curricula that provide new
librarians with effective coping skills to deal with the negative factors found in today’s
library that were not found there in the past. Librarians also can suggest the three broad
intervention types (activities to empower the individual, proactive planning, and
wellness-focused programs) when ideas for professional development workshops are
solicited, as they routinely are in the community college.
Librarians can choose to do deeper research into the suggested wise practices
presented in this study—research is what they are trained to do, and the drive to discover
something to help oneself improve workplace performance can be quite motivational.
Furthermore, the broad categories of cognitive behavioral and relaxation therapies are
varied enough in themselves to allow for a complete personalization of practices by each
individual.
147

From the performance improvement perspective, the findings from this study
should prove valuable to any practitioner who is called upon to analyze workplace
performance and performance gaps in academicians, given that many of the causal
factors discovered in this research (i.e., repetitive instructional sessions,
hostile/uncooperative students, difficult administrators, greater numbers of students to
instruct, etc.) are the same for them. These instigating factors for burnout also are
apparent in the larger world of public service. From police officers to physicians, nurses
to clergy, every public service provider faces unbalanced giving of themselves to clients,
repetitive work, difficult clientele, too much work, and too little money; workplace
burnout is a factor in those professions and many others.
Crafting profession-specific interventions aimed precisely at those areas where
workers are faltering can only increase the chances of the interventions’ success.
Additionally, professionals interested in researching burnout in all its public service
aspects may acquire valuable information from this study.

Recommendations for Further Research
Researchers would find it valuable to study the larger population of librarians in
respect to workplace burnout, as what has already been done indicates that the social,
economic, and environmental factors that play a part in the onset of burnout will not
likely be resolved anytime in the near future, and may in fact spread to libraries that are
part of universities, research institutions, and municipalities as budgets for library
services tighten. If other library workplaces could be examined for their own specific
factors leading to burnout, as community college libraries were examined here, a more
148

comprehensive and solid foundation of coping activities from within the profession could
be created. The balance of expectation and the realities of what can be done with current
resources could well be adjusted for future librarians. The result would still be excellent
public service but its provision would not take such a toll on the psyches of the individual
librarians providing it.
A study using the current gold standard of burnout measurement instruments, the
Maslach Burnout Inventory, would be a deeper investigation of the syndrome through
dimensions not explored here. Developed by Maslach et al. in 1996, the Maslach Burnout
Inventory would certainly drill deeper into the symptoms, consequences, and causes of
the syndrome as it affects community college librarians, as it did in the study by Ray on
600 American college and university librarians in 2002. The findings from that study
indicated that “stress is due in part to the characteristics of the work, the non-work
environment, and to characteristics of the person such as gender, ethnicity, education, and
many other demographic variables that a researcher may choose to explore” (Ray, 2002,
p. 72). An investigation that includes an exploration of these facets could study the kind
of person who is most susceptible to burnout and the role the non-work environment has
on its severity.
There is also room for other investigations into burnout in the community college
library, focused on different types of burnout for managers, coworkers, and patrons rather
than on individual librarians. This line of inquiry would follow the work of Singh, who
suggested that burnout experienced by these different groups of individuals has
significant implications for service providers (as cited in Harris & Lee, 2004).

149

Conclusion
This study of burnout on the California community college librarian profession
was inspired by one librarian’s recognition of the signs of workplace burnout in herself.
As the researcher dug more deeply into the issue, it became apparent that workplace
burnout is almost a given (albeit one that is rarely discussed in the open) for many of
today’s librarians as well as many other public service workers.
In this study of community college librarians and burnout, a great many
contributing factors arising from the workplace seemed to have an unbalanced effect on
library faculty as opposed to classroom faculty. These factors include budgetary inequity;
administrative ignorance or disregard of the role libraries and librarians play in
instruction; unequal treatment of library faculty and other faculty; administrative lack of
understanding of or indifference to the size of the workload or the level of work assigned
to librarians; and other fairness issues that play against the library profession’s ethical
standards. The professional librarian’s understanding of the standards of service and
knowledge of what is necessary for an academic library to function in an exemplary
manner are in jeopardy as non-librarian supervisors force them into roles other
professionals would not be made to play or would not tolerate. It is imperative that the
contributory factors in the library itself, as well as those factors arising from the college
environment, be examined and treated at the same time, as community college librarians
are burning out from external collegial and internal library issues on an almost equal
basis. Treating only one side of the issue will not achieve the proper balance and
harmony in the workplace for these professionals.

150

REFERENCES
Adams, H. R. (2005). Privacy in the 21st century: Issues for public, school, and
academic libraries. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Adhia, H., Nagendra, H., & Mahadevan, B. (2010). Impact of adoption of yoga way of
life on the reduction of job burnout of managers. Vikalpa: The Journal for
Decision Makers, 35(2), 21–33.
Affleck, M. A. (1996). Burnout among bibliographic instruction librarians. Library &
Information Science Research, 2, 169–172.
Ahola, K., Honkonen, T., Isometsa, E., Kalimo, R., Nykyri, E., Lonnqvist, J., &
Koskinen, E. (2006). Burnout in the general population: Results from the Finnish
Health 2000 survey. Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 41, 11–17.
doi:10.1007/s00127-005-0011-5
Alic, M. (n.d.). Lazarus, Arnold Allan (1932- ). Retrieved from http://findarticles.com/p
/articles/mi_g2699/is_0005/ai_2699000528/
American Library Association. (1996). Library Bill of Rights. Retrieved from http://www
.ala.org
American Library Association. (2008). Code of ethics of the American Library
Association. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics
/codeethics
Anderson, S. K., Harbour, C. P., & Davies, T. G. (2007). Professional ethical identity
development and community college leadership. In D. A. Hellmich (Ed.), Ethical
leadership in the community college: Bridging theory and daily practice (pp. 61–
77). Bolton, MA: Anker.
Anderson, S. K., Lujan, L., & Hegeman, D. L. (2009, Winter). Prepared for challenges:
The importance of a professional and institutional ethical identity. New Directions
for Community Colleges, 148, 17–29. doi:10.1002/cc.383
Antoni, M. H. (2003). Stress management effects on psychological, endocrinological, and
immune functioning in men with HIV infection: Empirical support for a
psychoneuroimmunological model. Stress: The International Journal on the
Biology of Stress, 6(3), 173–188. doi:10.1080/1025389031000156727
151

Arman, M., Hammarqvist, A. S., & Rehnsfeldt, A. (2010). Burnout as an existential
deficiency—Lived experiences of burnout sufferers. Scandinavian Journal of
Caring Sciences, 25(2), 294–302. doi:10.1111/j.1471-6712.2010.00825.x
Aronson, J. (1994, Spring). A pragmatic view of thematic analysis. Qualitative Report,
2(1). Retrieved from http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/BackIssues/QR2-1/aronson
.html
Arterburn, T. (1996). Librarians: Caretakers or crime fighters? American Libraries,
27(7), 32.
Asides, A. (1989). Media specialist stress. American Libraries, 20(3), 189.
Augmentation strategies for depression: Options include psychotherapy, drugs, and
dietary supplements (2010). Harvard Mental Health Letter, 27(6), 1–3.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Supervising student employees in academic libraries: A
handbook. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited.
Banzhoff, E. (2008, September). Performance improvement. Paper presented at
International Society for Performance Improvement conference, New York, NY.
Barry, M. J. (2007). Seven areas to successfully execute the mental health mission in
Afghanistan. Military Medicine, 172(9), ii–vi.
BBC News. (2011). Librarians “suffer most stress.” Retrieved from http://news.bbc.co
.uk/go/pr/fr/-/2/hi/uk_news/4605476.stm
Beck, S. (2010). Reflections of a reference librarian. Reference & User Services
Quarterly, 49(4), 305–309.
Bernerth, J. B., Walker, H. J., & Harris, S. G. (2011). Change fatigue: Development and
initial validation of a new measure. Work & Stress, 25(4), 321–337. doi:10.1080
/02678373.2011.634280
Biswas-Diener, R. (2009). Personal coaching as a positive intervention. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 65(5), 544–553. doi:10.1002/jclp.20589
Boersma, K., & Lindblom, K. (2009). Stability and change in burnout profiles over time:
A prospective study in the working population. Work & Stress, 23(3), 264–283.
doi:10.1080/02678370903265860
Bold, R. (1982). Librarian burn-out. Library Journal, 107(19), 2048.

152

Bood, S. Å., Sundequist, U., Kjellgren, A., Norlander, T., Nordström, L., Nordenström,
K., & Nordström, G. (2006). Eliciting the relaxation response with the help of
flotation-REST (restricted environmental stimulation technique) in patients with
stress-related ailments. International Journal of Stress Management, 13(2), 154–
175. doi:10.1037/1072-5245.13.2.154
Bunge, C. (1987). Stress in the library: Library staff reveal sources of stress and
satisfaction in their work. Library Journal, 112(5), 47.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2012). Occupational outlook handbook: 2012-1013.
Retrieved from www.bls.gov/ooh/home.htm
Burnout. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/burnout
Butcher, K. (1999). Reflections on academic librarianship. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 25(5), 350.
Cabaniss, K. (2001). Counseling and computer technology in the new millennium: An
Internet Delphi study (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 304728569)
California Code of Regulations, Title 5. (n.d.) Retrieved from https://govt.westlaw.com
/calregs/Index?transitiontype
Calliou, B. (2011). Research project provides a wise practices approach to community
development. Retrieved from www.banffcentre.ca/departments/leadership
/aboriginal/enews/2011/research-project-community-development.aspx
Cambers, G. (2001). Conflict resolution in small islands: Voluntary contract and ethical
codes of practice: Results of the UNESCO–CSI workshop on “furthering coastal
stewardship in small islands,” Dominica 3–6 July 2001. Retrieved from http://
www.unesco.org/csi/pub/papers2/mapp2.htm
Caputo, J. S. (1991). Stress and burnout in library service. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press.
Champion, S. (1988). Technostress: Technology’s toll. School Library Journal, 35(3),
48.
Cherniss, C. (1980). Professional burnout in human services. New York, NY: Praeger.
Chevalier, R. (2003). Updating the behavior engineering model. Performance
Improvement, 42(5), 8–14. Retrieved from http://www.pignc-ispi.com/articles
/Vol 42_05)08.pdf
Clark, K., & Kalin, S. (1996). Technostressed out? Library Journal, 121(13), 30–31.
153

Colman, A. M. (2003). A dictionary of psychology. England: Oxford University Press.
Combs, W. L., & Falletta, S. V. (2000). The targeted evaluation process: A consultant’s
guide to asking the right questions and getting the results you trust. Alexandria,
VA: American Society for Training and Development.
Comstock-Gay, S. (1995). Disruptive behavior: Protecting people, protecting rights.
Wilson Library Bulletin, 69(6), 33–35.
Cooper, C. L., Dewey, P. J., & O’Driscoll, M. P. (2003). Employee assistance programs.
In J. C. Quick & L. E. Tetrick (Eds.), Handbook of occupational health
psychology (pp. 289–304). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Cooper, C. L., Mallinger, M., & Kahn, R. (1978). Identifying sources of occupational
stress among dentists. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 51(3), 227–234.
Cooper, C. L., & Marshall, J. (1976). Occupational sources of stress: A review of the
literature relating to coronary heart disease and mental ill health. Journal of
Occupational Psychology, 49, 11–28.
Côté, J., & Allahar, A. (2008). Response to “Anxious academics: Mission drift and
sliding standards in the modern Canadian university.” Canadian Journal of
Sociology, 33(2), 418–420.
Council of Chief Librarians. (2014). Library profiles. Retrieved from http://www.cclccc
.org/directory.php
Cox, T., Tisserand, M., & Taris, T. (Eds.). (2005). The conceptualization of burnout:
Questions and directions [Editorial]. Work & Stress, 19(3), 187–191.
Cuhls, K. (2003). Delphi method. Retrieved from http://www.unido.org/file.admin/import
/16959 Delphi_Method.pdf
Cuijpers, P., Straten, A., & Andersson, G. (2008). Internet-administered cognitive
behavioral therapy for health problems: A systematic review. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 31(2), 169–177. doi:10.1007/s10865-007-9144-1
Dalkey, N. C. (1969). The Delphi method: An experimental study of group opinion. Santa
Monica, CA: Rand.
Day, A., Sibley, A., Scott, N., Tallon, J., & Ackroyd-Stolarz, S. (2009). Workplace risks
and stressors as predictors of burnout: The moderating impact of job control and
team efficiency. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 26(1), 7–22. doi:
10.1002/CJAS.91
154

Dean, P. J. (Ed.). (1999). Performance engineering at work (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
International Society for Performance Improvement.
DeJoy, D. M., Wilson, M. G., Vandenberg, R. J., McGrath-Higgins, A. K., & GriffinBlake, C. S. (2010). Assessing the impact of healthy work organization
intervention. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 83, 139–
165. doi:10.1348/096317908X398773
Distress. (2006). In Mosby’s medical dictionary (7th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Dokoupil, T. (2008, March 31). Too at home in the stacks. Newsweek, 151(13), 12.
Retrieved from Academic Search Premier.
Doyle, A. (n.d.). How long should an employee stay at a job? Retrieved from jobsearch
.about.com/od/careerdevelopment/qt/stay-at-a-job.htm
Doyle, M. (2007). Burnout: The impact of psychosocial interventions training. Mental
Health Practice, 10(7), 18–21.
Dugger, D. B. (2010). Investigation and evaluation of line leaders’ perception and
application of performance management interventions used to influence employee
engagement (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses database. (UMI No. 305244322)
Dyer, E. R. (1979). The Delphi technique in library research. Library Research, 1(1), 41–
52.
Edelwich, J. (1980). Burnt-out: Stages of disillusionment in the helping professions. New
York, NY: Human Services Press.
Ehrlich, D. B. (n.d.). Glossary of terms. Retrieved from http://www.neiu.edu/~dbehrlic
/hrd408/glossary.htm
Eker, M., Anbar, A., & Karabiyik, L. (2007). The relationship between demographic
characteristics and burnout among academicians in Turkey. Journal of Academic
Studies, 34, 14–35.
Ellis, K. (2011). Partnerships and collaborations in public library communities:
Resources and solutions. Hershey, PA: IGI.
Eustress. (2010, April). Retrieved from http://oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english
/eustress
Fanning, B. (2012, September 20). Why burnout should alarm executive leaders [Guest
post]. Retrieved from http://www.greatleadershipbydan.com/
155

Farber, B. A. (1983). Stress and burnout in the human service professions. Salt Lake
City, UT: Elsevier.
Farber, B. A. (2000). Treatment strategies for different types of teacher burnout. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 56(5), 675–689.
Ferrell, S. (2009). Who says there’s a problem?: A new way to approach the issue of
“problem patrons.” Reference & User Services Quarterly, 50(2), 141–151.
Fianer, M., & Burns, T. (2000). A Delphi approach to describing service models of
community mental health practice. Psychiatric Services, 51(5), 656–658.
Fitz-enz, J. (2009). The ROI of human capital: Measuring the economic value of
employee performance. New York, NY: AMACOM.
Flagg, G. (2007). Library security threats follow Virginia Tech shooting. American
Libraries, 38(6), 29.
Fox, E. H. (1993). Stress, burnout and downsizing in the law library: How to cope/what
you can do. London, England: Legal Information Services.
Franklin, D. J. (2003). Depression. Retrieved from http://www.psychologyinfo.com
/depression/cognitive/htm
Freudenberger, H. J. (1974). Staff burnout. Journal of Social Issues, 30, 159–165.
Freudenberger, H. J. (1980). Burnout: The high cost of high achievement. New York,
NY: Anchor Press.
Gall, M. D., Gall, J. P., & Borg, W. R. (2003). Educational research: An introduction
(2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Garden, A. (1989). Burnout: The effect of psychological type on research finding.
Journal of Occupational Psychology, 62(3), 223–234.
Gertzog, A., & Beckerman, E. (2003). Administration of the public library. Lanham, MD:
Scarecrow Press.
Gilbert, T. F. (1978). Human competence: Engineering worthy performance. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill.
Gilbert, T. F. (2007). Human competence: Engineering worthy performance (Tribute
ed.). San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.

156

Goldberg, B. (2010). How to be prepared in case violence strikes. American Libraries,
41(11), 16.
Gonzales, M. (2012). Envisioning a healed world. Progressive, 76/77(12/1), 51.
Griffey, J., Clark, L., & Davis, D. (2009). Doing more with less. Library Technology
Reports, 45(1), 35–37.
Groenewald, T. (2004). A phenomenological research design illustrated. International
Journal of Qualitative Methods, 3(1), Article 4. Retrieved from http://www
.ualberta.ca/~iiqm/backissues/3_1/pdf/groenewald.pdf
Grol, R., Bosch, M., Hulscher, M., Eccles, M., & Wensing, M. (2007). Planning and
studying improvement in patient care: The use of theoretical perspectives.
Milbank Quarterly, 85(1), 93–138.
Harris, E. G., & Lee, J. M. (2004). The customer, co-worker, and management burnout
distinction in service settings: Personality influences and outcomes. Services
Marketing Quarterly, 25(4), 13–31. doi:10.1300/J090v25n04_02
Harwell, K. (2008). Burnout strategies for librarians. Journal of Business & Finance
Librarianship, 13(3), 379–390. doi:10.1080/08963560802183021
Hegeman, D. L., Davies, T., & Banning, J. H. (2007). Community colleges’ use of the
Web to communicate their mission: Slights of commission and omission.
Community College Journal of Research & Practice, 31(2), 129–147. doi:10.1080
/10668920500441721
Hines, S. (2010). Productivity for librarians: How to get more done in less time. Oxford,
England: Chandos.
Hodgetts, D., Stolte, O., Chamberlain, K., Radley, A., Nikora, L., Nabalarua, E., &
Groot, S. (2008). A trip to the library: Homelessness and social inclusion. Social
& Cultural Geography, 9(8), 2008.
Holcomb, J. M. (2007). Battling burnout. Law Library Journal, 99, 669. Retrieved from
http://heinonline.org/HOL/LandingPage?collection=journals&handle=hein
.journals/llj99&div=46&id=&page=
Huwe, T. K. (2005). Running to stand still? Computers in Libraries, 25(8), 34–36.
Jaeger, P. (2011). Transliteracy—New library lingo and what it means for instruction.
Library Media Connection, 30(2), 44–47.

157

James-Enger, K. (2009). How to overcome burnout: Follow these strategies to pinpoint
the cause of your rut, make a change, and renew your enthusiasm. Writer, 122(6),
36–37.
Jansen, L. M. (1992). Welcome or not, here they come: Unaffiliated users of academic
libraries. Reference Services Review, 21(1), 7–14.
Jex, S. M., & Bliese, P. D. (2001). The impact of self-efficacy on stressor–strain
relations: Coping style as an explanatory mechanism. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86(3), 401–409.
June, A. (2008, August 15). Public colleges fight raids on faculties. Chronicle of Higher
Education, 54(49), A1–A9.
Katz, W. (1987). Reference services today: From interview to burnout. New York, NY:
Haworth.
Kean, C., & McKoy-Johnson, F. (2009). Patron aggression in the academic library: A
study of the main library at the University of the West Indies, Mona. New Library
World, 110(7/8), 373–384. doi:10.1108/03074.800910975197
Keil, M., Tiwana, A., & Bush, A. (2002). Reconciling user and project manager
perceptions of IT project risk: A Delphi study. Information Systems Journal,
12(2), 103–119.
Kennedy, S. D. (2005). The rock of Sisyphus. Information Today, 22(9), 17–20.
Kent, A. (1991). Encyclopedia of library and information science: Volume 49–
Supplement 12: Appraisals to stress and burnout in the library workplace. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Kitaoka-Higashiguchi, K., Nakagawa, H., Morikawa, Y., Ishizaki, M., Miura, K., Naruse,
Y., & Higashiyama, M. (2004). Construct validity of the Maslach Burnout
Inventory–General Survey. Stress and Health, 20, 255–260. doi:10.1002/smi
.1030
Knibbe-Haanstra, M. (2008). Reference desk dilemmas: The impact of new demands on
librarianship. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 48(1), 20–25.
Kniffel, L. (1999, May). Survey says librarians rank low in stress. Hel-lo? American
Libraries, 30(5), 38.
Kostanski, M., & Hassad, C. (2008). Mindfulness as a concept and a process. Australian
Psychologist, 43(1), 15–21. doi:10.1080/00050060701593942

158

Kühnel, J., Sonnentag, S., & Westman, M. (2009). Does work engagement increase after
a short respite? The role of job involvement as a double-edged sword. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 82, 575–594. doi:10.1348
/096317908X349362
Lander, F., Friche, C., Tornemand, H. L., Anderson, J. H., & Kirkeskov, L. (2009). Can
we enhance the ability to return to work among workers with stress-related
disorders? BMC Public Health, 9, 372–377.
Landry, M. B. (2000, Winter). The effects of life satisfaction and job satisfaction on
reference librarians and their work. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 40(2),
166.
Lee, S. M., Kissinger, D., & Ogle, N. T. (2010). A typology of burnout in professional
counselors. Journal of Counseling & Development, 88(2), 131–138.
Leiter, M. P., & Maslach, C. (2000). Preventing burnout and building engagement: A
complete program for organizational renewal. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Leiter, M. P., & Maslach, C. (2005). Banishing burnout: Six strategies for improving
your relationship with work. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Leiter, M. P., & Maslach, C. (2009). Nurse turnover: The mediating role of burnout.
Journal of Nursing Management, 17, 331–339. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2834.2009
.01004.x
Leiter, M. P., & Schaufeli, W. B. (1996). Consistency of the burnout construct across
occupations. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping, 9, 229–243.
Lernihan, E., & Sweeney, J. (2010). Measuring levels of burnout among care workers.
Learning Disability Practice, 13(8), 27–33.
Lombardo, B., & Eyre, C. (2011). Compassion fatigue: A nurse’s primer. Online Journal
of Issues in Nursing, 16(1), 1. doi:10.3912/OJIN.Vol16No01Man03
Losyk, B. (2006, Spring). Getting a grip on stress: What HR managers must do to prevent
burnout and turnover. Employment Relations Today, 9–17. doi:10.1002/ert.20093
Manley, W. (2012). Will’s world. Your mileage may vary. American Libraries, 43(7/8),
56.
Maslach, C. (1982). Burnout, the cost of caring. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Maslach, C. (2011). Burnout and engagement in the workplace: New perspectives.
European Health Psychologist, 13(3), 44–47.
159

Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. E. (1981). The measurement of experienced burnout. Journal
of Occupational Behavior, 2(2), 99–113.
Maslach, C., Jackson, S. E., & Leiter, M. P. (1996). Maslach Burnout Inventory manual
(3rd. ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Maslach, C., & Leiter, M. P. (1997). The truth about burnout: How organizations cause
personal stress and what to do about it. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Maslach, C., & Schaufeli, W. B. (1992). Historical and conceptual development of
burnout. In C. Maslach & T. Marek (Eds.), Professional burnout (pp. 1–18).
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
Masterson, K. (2010, July 25). Economy slows colleges’ ability to hire and delays
retirements. Chronicle of Higher Education, 56(41), B33–B35.
Maxwell, W., Hagedorn, L., Cypers, S., Moon, H. S., Brocato, P., Wahl, K., & Prather,
G. (2003). Community and diversity in urban community colleges: Coursetaking
among entering students. Community College Review, 30(4), 21.
McCormack, N. (2010). Staying safe: Revisiting security measures in libraries. Feliciter,
56(2), 74–75.
Mize, R. M. (2000, December). Fifty percent law: Background paper. Retrieved from
Community College League of California website: http://www.ccleague.org/files
/public/PRP50law.pdf
Moore, K. (2009). A few insecurities. Feliciter, 55(2), 39.
Mosley, P. A. (2004). Transitioning from librarian to middle manager. Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Nauratil, M. J. (1989). The alienated librarian. New York, NY: Greenwood Press.
Nelson, D. L., Quick, J. C., & Quick, J. D. (1989). Corporate warfare: Preventing combat
stress and battle fatigue. Organizational Dynamics, 18(1), 65.
Nelson, D. L., & Cooper, C. (Eds.). (2005, April). Stress and health: A positive direction.
Stress and Health, 21, 73–75. doi:10.1002/smi.1053
Oder, N., & Hadro, J. (2009). Public libraries look at mentally ill in libraries. Library
Journal, 134(8), 14.
O’Leary, M. (2003). QuestionPoint fortifies libraries in Internet age. Online, 27(3), 70.

160

Okhakhu, E. (2011). Human performance as a contributor to the culture of safety: A
qualitative study of self-efficacy and self-cognition among healthcare
professionals (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses database. (UMI No. 3449707)
ODLIS: Online Dictionary for Library and Information Science. (2014). Retrieved from
http://www.abc-clio.com/ODLIS/odlis_A.aspx
Osborn, C. J. (2004). Seven salutary suggestions for counselor stamina. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 82(3), 319–328.
Pachner, J. (2010). When it’s more than just workaday stress. Canadian Business, 83(3),
58–59.
Pantry, S. (2007). Managing stress and conflict in libraries. London, England: Facet.
Patton, M. Q. (1987). How to use qualitative methods in evaluation. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Paul, C. L. (2008). A modified Delphi approach to a new card sorting methodology.
Journal of Usability Studies, 4(1), 7–30.
Pergander, M. (2006). Working knowledge. American Libraries, 37(7), 79.
Pershing, J. A. (2006). Handbook of human performance technology: Principles,
practices, and potential (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
Pillsbury, P., Lloyd, H., Schobert, T., & Seibert, K. S. (1990). Library instruction: A
column of opinion. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 6(4), 220–221.
Pines, A., & Aronson, E. (1981). Burnout: From tedium to personal growth. New York,
NY: Free Press.
Pines, A., & Aronson, E. (1988). Career burnout: Causes and cures. New York, NY:
Free Press.
Pinkowski, J. (2007). “Vent party” may beat burnout [Abstract]. Library Journal,
132(18), 14.
Potter, B. A. (1980). Beating job burnout. San Francisco, CA: Harbor.
Raffensperger, T. E. (2010). Safety and security in urban academic libraries: A risk
assessment approach to evaluate preparedness. ULJ: Urban Library Journal,
16(1), 1–12.

161

Ramanan, A. V., Schneider, R., Batthish, M., Achonu, C., Ota, S., McLimont, M., &
Feldman, B. M. (2005). Developing a disease activity tool for systemic-onset
juvenile idiopathic arthritis by international consensus using the Delphi approach.
Rheumatology, 44, 1574–1578. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kei095
Ranganathan, S. R. (1931). The five laws of library science. London, England: Goldston.
Raphael-Grimm, T. (2008). The pitfalls of tribal thinking in health care. American
Journal of Nursing, 108(8), 61.
Ray, B. (2002). An assessment of burnout in academic librarians in America using the
Maslach Burnout Inventory (the MBI) (Doctoral dissertation). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 276461635)
Rees, C. (1996). Qualitative & quantitative approaches to research. British Journal of
Midwifery, 4(7), 374–377.
Reference and User Services Association. (2010). Guidelines for implementing and
maintaining virtual reference services. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/rusa
/sites/ala.org.rusa/files/content/resources/guidelines/virtual-reference-se.pdf
Reitz, J. M. (2004). Dictionary for library and information science. Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Richards, C. L. (2009). A new paradigm: Strategies for succession planning in higher
education (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses database. (UMI No. 305164828)
Rieh, S. Y. (1999). Changing reference service environment: A review of perspectives
from managers, librarians, and users. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 25(3),
178–186.
Ripley, D. (2003). Methodology for determining employee perceptions of factors in the
work environment that impact on employee development and performance.
Human Resource Development International, 6(1), 85.
Robertson, G. (2002). Investigating risk: Assessing and analyzing trouble before it
strikes. Feliciter, 48(1), 30–32.
Robertson, G. (2009). Security: Grin and bear it? Feliciter, 55(2), 44.
Rossett, A. (1999). First things fast: A handbook for performance analysis. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer.

162

Rothwell, W. J. (1999). ASTD models for human performance improvement: Roles,
competencies, and outputs. Alexandria, VA: American Society for Training and
Development.
Ruiz, G. (2006). Expanded EAPs lend a hand to employers’ bottom lines. Workforce
Management, 85, 46–48.
Ruwaard, J., Lange, A., Bouwman, M., Broeksteeg, J., & Schrieken, B. (2007). E-mailed
standardized cognitive behavioural treatment of work-related stress: A
randomized controlled trial. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 36(3), 179–192. doi:10
.1080/1656070701381863
Ryan, P., Hill, R., Anczewska, M., Hardy, P., Kurek, A., Nielson, K., & Turner, C.
(2005). Team-based occupational stress reduction: A European overview forms
the perspective of the OSCAR Project. International Review of Psychiatry, 17(5),
401–408. doi:10.1080/09540260500238645
Sanders, E., & Ruggles, J. (2000). HPI soup: Too many cooks haven’t spoiled the broth.
Training and Development, 54(6), 27–36.
Sanders, E. S., & Thiagarajan, S. (2005). Performance intervention maps: 39 strategies
for solving your organization’s problems. Alexandria, VA: ASTD Press.
Scarpa, A., Fikretoglu, D., Bowser, F., Hurley, J. D., Pappert, C. A., Romer, N., &
VanVoorhees, E. (2002). Community violence exposure in university students: A
replication and extension. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 17(3), 253–272.
Schillo, M., Fischer, K., & Klein, C. (2001). The micro–macro link in DAI and
sociology. In S. Moss & P. Davidsson (Eds.), Multiagent-based simulation:
Second international workshop on multiagent-based simulation (MABS 2000) (pp.
133–148). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Schmidt, D. A. (1995). Use and integration of computer-related technology in teaching
by preservice teacher education faculty (Doctoral dissertation). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 304212752)
Senge, P. (2006). The fifth discipline: The art & practice of the learning organization
(Rev. ed.). New York, NY: Doubleday.
Sheesley, D. F. (2001). Burnout and the academic teaching librarian: An examination of
the problem and suggested solutions. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 27(2),
447.
Shelton, A. (2007). Transforming burnout: A simple guide to self-renewal. Tacoma, WA:
Vibrant Press.
163

Siess, J. A. (2003). Visible librarian: Asserting your value with marketing and advocacy.
Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Skillings, P. (2009). The latest job satisfaction stats. Retrieved from http://www
.escapefromcorporate.com/
Skulmoski, G. J., Hartman, F. T., & Krahn, J. (2007). The Delphi method for graduate
research. Retrieved from http://fepto.eu/storage/files/articole/Delphi%20method
%20for%20 Graduiate%20research.pdf
Smallwood, C., & Clapp, M. J. (2011). How to thrive as a solo librarian. Lanham, MD:
Scarecrow Press.
Smith, J. C. (2012). The laughing librarian: A history of American library humor.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Snyder, M. (2010). Happy birthday, Social Security: Now here’s 22 scary facts about
America’s pension crisis. Retrieved from http://www.businessinsider.com/happy
-birthday-social-security-now-heres-22-scary-statistics-about-americas-pension
-crisis-2010-8
Spires, T. (2007). The busy librarian: Prioritizing tenure and dealing with stress for
academic library professionals. Illinois Libraries, 86(4), 101–108.
Steele, A. (2009, Winter). Flying with the phoenixes: Avoiding job burnout as a librarian
and as a manager. Children and Libraries, 7(3), 51–52.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds: Why the many are smarter than the few
and how collective wisdom shapes business, economies, and nations. New York,
NY: Doubleday.
Swanson, R. A., & Holton, E. F. (2001). Foundations of human resource development.
San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Taler, I. (1984). Burnout; a survey of library directors’ views. Retrieved from ERIC
database. (ED283524)
Taylor, S. J., & Bogdan, R. (1989). Introduction to qualitative research methods (2nd
ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Tenopir, C., & Neufang, R. (1992). The impact of electronic reference on reference
librarians. Online, 16, 54–60.
Terman, M. E. (2010). Belt tightening. California CPA, 78(13), 14–17.

164

UNESCO. (n.d.). Wise practice characteristics (Coastal region and small island papers
12). Retrieved from www.unesco.org/csi/pub/papers2/map7.htm
Van der Klink, J. J., Blonk, R. W., Schene, A. H., & Van Dijk, F. J. (2001). The benefits
of interventions for work-related stress. American Journal of Public Health,
91(2), 270–276.
Van Tiem, D. M., Moseley, J. L., & Dessinger, J. C. (2001). Performance improvement
interventions: Enhancing people, processes, and organizations through
performance technology. Silver Spring, MD: International Society for
Performance Improvement.
Wang, J., & Roulston, K. (2007). An alternative approach to conceptualizing interviews
in HRD research. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 18(2), 179–210.
Werner, J. M., & DeSimone, R. L. (2006). Human resource development (4th ed.).
Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western.
Weyant, D. J. (2009). Critical Black Belt mentor attributes and self-efficacy (Doctoral
dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI
No. 305160029)
White, H. S. (1990). Librarian burnout. Library Journal, 115(5), 64–65.
Wood, R. J. (1989). Stress among academic librarians and library directors. Retrieved
from ERIC database. (ED330350)
Woos, R. J. (1989). Stress among academic librarians and library directors (Rep. No. IR
053 513). Retrieved from ERIC database. (ED330350)
Yip, B., & Rowlinson, S. (2009). Job redesign as an intervention strategy of burnout:
Organizational perspective. Journal of Construction Engineering and
Management, 135(8), 737–745. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000023
Yu, M., Lin, C., & Hsu, S. (2009). Stressors and burnout: The role of employee
assistance programs and self-efficacy. Social Behavior and Personality, 37(3),
365–378. doi:10.2224.sbp.2009.37.3.365

165

APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK
Academic Honesty Policy
Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) holds learners accountable for
the integrity of work they submit, which includes but is not limited to discussion
postings, assignments, comprehensive exams, and the dissertation or capstone project.
Established in the Policy are the expectations for original work, rationale for the policy,
definition of terms that pertain to academic honesty and original work, and disciplinary
consequences of academic dishonesty. Also stated in the Policy is the expectation that
learners will follow APA rules for citing another person’s ideas or works.
The following standards for original work and definition of plagiarism are discussed in
the Policy:
Learners are expected to be the sole authors of their work and to acknowledge the
authorship of others’ work through proper citation and reference. Use of another
person’s ideas, including another learner’s, without proper reference or citation
constitutes plagiarism and academic dishonesty and is prohibited conduct. (p. 1)
Plagiarism is one example of academic dishonesty. Plagiarism is presenting
someone else’s ideas or work as your own. Plagiarism also includes copying
verbatim or rephrasing ideas without properly acknowledging the source by author,
date, and publication medium. (p. 2)
Capella University’s Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06) holds learners accountable for
research integrity. What constitutes research misconduct is discussed in the Policy:
Research misconduct includes but is not limited to falsification, fabrication,
plagiarism, misappropriation, or other practices that seriously deviate from those
that are commonly accepted within the academic community for proposing,
conducting, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results. (p. 1)
Learners failing to abide by these policies are subject to consequences, including but not
limited to dismissal or revocation of the degree.

166

Statement of Original Work and Signature
I have read, understood, and abided by Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy
(3.01.01) and Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06), including the Policy Statements,
Rationale, and Definitions.
I attest that this dissertation or capstone project is my own work. Where I have used the
ideas or words of others, I have paraphrased, summarized, or used direct quotes following
the guidelines set forth in the APA Publication Manual.
Learner name
and date

Marie D. Mestas

Mentor name
and school

Dr. Keith Johansen, School of Education

June 3, 2014

167

APPENDIX B. VALIDATION CONSTRUCT MATCHING BEM AND SIX WORKLIFE DOMAINS
AGAINST RESPONDENT-CITED FACTORS
Gilbert’s Behavioral Engineering Model
Data

No performance
feedback

Resources

Incentives

168

Inefficient
bureaucracy

Untrained
managers

Non-librarian mgrs. Boss in denial
careless of
about necessary
library’s/
work/staff
librarians’ roles

Inadequate
management
structure

Insufficient budget Too little time to
do all work, or to
do it well

“Do more with
less”

Lack of proper
tools/equipment

Insufficient staff

Faculty positions
go unfilled in
library

Everything is an
effort

Lack of
nonmonetary
rewards

Low wages

No appreciation for Lack of energy
work done

No joy working
with abusive,
demanding
students

Lack of guides to Forced reliance on No budget for
good performance untrained workers professional
development

No new ideas
allowed

Data not used to
make decisions

Instructors of
lesser quality

Can’t care to learn
new software

Knowledge Insufficient
training

Absentee boss

Lack of
advancement

Constant changes
in technology

Capacity

Inflexible
scheduling

Loss of
Overtaxed/
autonomy/control exhausted

Untrained staff

Health issues

Capacity for
change “tapped
out”

Motives

Boredom,
monotony

Frustration with
Apathy from
negative workplace losing budget
battles

Coworkers not
matched to work

Lack of values

Loss of enthusiasm Depression, low
self-esteem

Leiter and Maslach’s Six Worklife Domains
Library faculty
Overwhelmed by Students
Increased workload Exhaustion,
depression, carpal doing clerical work growing number of uninterested in
and changes in
students
tunnel from
tasks
learning
overwork

Workload

Take on extra
duties

Control

Loss of autonomy, Unqualified
control
supervisor

Health issues,
Dealing with
students’ mental/ depression
behavioral issues

Reward

No advancement

Lacking
nonmonetary
rewords

Low wages

Cynical of
everyone’s
motivations

Frequent disputes Seen as a reference Campus politics: Abusive students
desk lackey
librarian work and
with unhappy
classified staff
contributions
ignored/devalued
Being singled out Not valued as equal Treated like a
as troublemakers faculty
technology
assistant

Community Sense of isolation

169
Fairness

Favoritism

Unfairness

Values

Lack of values in
upper mgmt.

Administration
Internal conflict
focus on funding,
between how a
good library should not learning—get
operate and how them in and out
own library
operates

Told not to “rock
the boat”

Unfair division of Assumption of
labor
duties by
classroom faculty

No appreciation for Library not valued Do mgmt. work
work done
without mgmt.
compensation

Give up on
professional
standards just to
get job done

Good service not
attainable with so
much work to do

Note. Words used as table headings taken from Gilbert (2007, p. 88) and Leiter and Maslach (2005, pp. 14–18).

Can’t say no when
overwhelmed

Hostile treatment
by staff allowed

District deprofessionalizes
librarians
Not able to
identify with other
faculty

No sense of team
in library or on
campus

Focus on faster,
Have to fight to
maintain library’s not better service
integrity

