Beyond the Closet:
LGBT and Queer Archiving in the United States

A DISSERTATION
SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
BY

Eric Joseph Colleary

IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

Dr. Margaret Werry
Associate Professor of Theatre and Dance
Adviser

December, 2014

UMI Number: 3686703

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3686703
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Eric Colleary, 2014

Acknowledgements
My work on this dissertation began through a remarkably generous
Interdisciplinary Doctoral Fellowship from the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) and
the Office of Interdisciplinary Initiatives at the University of Minnesota. This fellowship
provided the space, time and stimulating engagement with a community of scholars, and I
am particularly grateful to the Institute’s director, Ann Waltner, managing director,
Susannah Smith, and my graduate cohort at the IAS – Greta Bliss, Adair Rounthwaite,
Kari Smalkowski, and Daniel Winchester – for their generous support, feedback, and
collegiality. Additional research funding was provided by the University of Minnesota
Graduate School and through substantial travel grants from the Department of Theatre
Arts and Dance. I would also like to thank Lynn Hertz and Kathy Murray at Macalester
College for their work in developing a full-time adjunct professorship program that
included research stipends and paid summer stipends that allowed me the undistracted
time and support to complete this dissertation.
I am, of course, immensely indebted to the various archival sites that have
become the focus of this project. Many thanks to the volunteer staff of the ONE
Archives, who allowed me to plague them with questions on a regular basis, and who
were kind enough to photocopy and mail select archival materials to aid in my research.
Thanks to Saskia Scheffer, who was an incredibly informative and gracious host during
my visit to the Lesbian Herstory Archives in 2013. This project never would have been
conceivable without my early introduction to LGBT archives through the Tretter
Collection in GLBT Studies at the University of Minnesota, and I am deeply indebted to
Jean Tretter for his mentorship and friendship. He has been an inspiration to many,
myself included, and I will be forever grateful to him for opening up this world to me.
When Jean retired, his vision has been ably carried-out by the current curator, Lisa
Vecoli, who has continued to make me feel welcome in this home away from home. Her
feedback and encouragement on drafts of these chapters provided much needed
confidence that what I had to offer in this project might indeed be of use to archivists.
Thanks also to University of Minnesota Libraries staff Kris Kiesling (Director, Library
Archives and Special Collections), R. Arvid Nelsen (Formerly Head of Special
Collections, Rare Books and Manuscripts Division), Timothy Johnson (Curator of
Archives and Special Collections), and Stewart Van Cleve (Former Interim Curator of the
Tretter Collection), all of whom have supported my archival work and this project in
different ways and at different times. It was through my work at the Tretter Collection
that I first met Charles Nolte and Terry Kilburn, two extraordinary gay men who had
been together for over fifty years, and whose papers I helped process into the archives.
For over a year and a half, till Charles’ death, I met with them at least once a week to
interview them and to hear the fascinating stories of their lives in theatre, film and
education. I learned so much about archiving – and living – from them, and words cannot
begin to express the gift of having them in my life.
I have an incredible committee who have seen me through this project. Beth
Cleary has been a mentor, a colleague, and a friend, and has been an immense source of
strength and perspective during the critical months when this dissertation really took
i

shape. Sonja Kuftinec provided encouraging feedback on this project from the very
beginning, after having advised me so expertly on my master’s thesis, which formed the
foundation of this project. Her words of support in the years since gave me confidence to
stick with it during challenging times. Regina Kunzel was my faculty mentor at the
Institute for Advanced Study, and my desk-mate in the processing room of the Tretter
Collection. Her insights into LGBT and queer historiography and her generosity of spirit
have made both this project and myself all the better for knowing her. I will forever be
indebted to my adviser, Margaret Werry, for guiding me through this process, for her
deep engagement with the ideas I was struggling through, for her copious and detailed
feedback through multiple drafts of this project, for her generosity of time and
mentorship, and not the least of all, for finding the humor in my writing when I was too
tired and too close to it to laugh myself. Truly, the strengths of this project are owed to
them, and whatever weaknesses that remain are my own. I would also like to thank two
other faculty who shaped this project. Michal Kobialka guided this project through its
early stages. My times with him, in one-on-one meetings and in the classroom, have been
some of the most powerful and transformative moments of my life, and my view of the
world continues to change for the better because of him. His ideas and philosophies
permeate my work and will continue to for the rest of my life. John Fletcher at Louisiana
State University served on my master’s committee and continued to serve on the
preliminary exam committee that launched this project. He and his partner Alan believed
in the importance of this project early on, which was such a gift for me. John’s sense of
humor and gift for writing complex ideas in clear and articulate ways provided a model
for me to strive for.
Writing a dissertation over an extended period of time can sometimes be a
remarkably isolating experience, and I would have given up many times during this
process if not for the support of my family and friends. My dear friend and colleague
Malin Palani has been my rock throughout my entire graduate career, and with whom I
have shared in this journey’s highest of highs and lowest of lows. Over lunches of sushi
where we made puppets of everything from shrimp tails to chopsticks, during sometimes
dull conference sessions where scarves came to life, and through countless late-night,
candle-lit conversations, she helped me to experience the incredible life of objects in
ways that I hadn’t understood since childhood. So much of Chapter 4 in particular, I owe
to our time together. My thanks and my love to her. Stephanie Lein Walseth, Kimi
Johnson, Carra Martinez and Shannon Walsh were my writing companions through this
process, and were there for me when I needed an extra set of eyes, a colleague to
commiserate over beers with, or a sympathetic shoulder I could cry on. Many of the ideas
for this project have been gestating for years, developed out of graduate seminars and
shaped over happy hour drinks or through random conversations in the graduate offices. I
would like to thank the rest of my program cohort who have been my intellectual
community, my interlocutors, and my friends: George McConnell, Elliot Leffler, Beth
Ellsworth, Ivone Barriga, Pabalelo Tshane, Kay Martinovich, Jonah Winn-Lenetsky,
Rachel Chaves, Laura Purcell Gates, Will Dadarrio, Joanne Zerdy, Charles Adams,
Michael Mellas, Rita Kompelmakher, Ryan Hartigan, and Laura Winton. My Twin Cities
friends outside the program have also provided an enormous amount of support and
ii

perspective, and I particularly thank Maureen Bourgeois, Phil Duran, Wynn Fricke, Steve
Kelsven, Sarah Kozel, Joe Mitzel, Travis Salisbury, Chris Stroh, and Harry Waters, Jr.
My family live all over the country, and while our distance has been difficult for both
them and me, they have supported me in every way they can. My love and my thanks to
my parents Chris and George, my sister Amanda and her husband Dan, my grandmothers
Eleanor and Yvonne, and all my aunts, uncles and cousins who have reached out to me
over the years with words of encouragement and to express their excitement about the
possibility of having a doctor in the family.

iii

Dedication

To Charles Nolte

“[I] did satisfy myself mighty fair in the truth of the saying that the world do not grow old
at all, but is in as good condition in all respects as ever it was.”
- Samuel Pepys
February 3, 1667

iv

Abstract
This dissertation explores the ways sexual identity and culture are produced, imagined,
performed, shaped, re-shaped, and deconstructed in LGBT archives in the United States.
While a great deal of research has been conducted within the past two decades on LGBT
historiography, there has been a dearth of studies examining the archival sites from which
histories of LGBT identity are being written. This dissertation reveals that the
construction of non-heterosexual sexual identities has been a conscious, careful process –
borrowing from established historiographic, feminist, and colonial and postcolonial
theories to establish archives of LGBT history and culture counter and in relation to
dominant heteronormative narratives. There are times, however, when every archive fails
to capture the complexity and diversity of LGBT experience. Rather than see these
moments as failures, I “read” them as queer opportunities to rethink and reposition
identities which may have become politically and socially stagnant. In each chapter, I
focus on a particular archive and a specific individual (an archivist or a collector) who
helped make it. The first chapter explores W. Dorr Legg’s efforts in the 1950s to
establish the discipline of homophile studies through the ONE Institute in Los Angeles as
a way of creating a historical and archivable past for a collective homosexual minority
that was just beginning to take shape. Chapter Two focuses on the Lesbian Herstory
Archives in Brooklyn and Joan Nestle’s radical reimagining of what an archive could be
through the lens of 1970s lesbian separatist feminism. Chapter Three looks at the
acquisition and organization methods of Jean Tretter of the Tretter Collection in GLBT
Studies at the University of Minnesota as a way of describing the queer possibilities of
encountering the unexpected in an archive. The fourth and final chapter theorizes what a
queer archive might look like, grounding this theorization in the collection of 1960s
performance artist Jack Smith, which has recently been acquired by the Gladstone
Gallery in New York.

v

Table of Contents
Introduction:
Reading the Archive

1

Chapter I:
Disciplining Sexuality: ONE and the Formation of Homophile Studies

31

Chapter II:
The Archive as Hospitable Home: The Lesbian Herstory Archives

77

Chapter III:
Encountering the Unexpected: The Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies

117

Chapter IV:
Toward the Queer Archive: The Jack Smith Archive

152

Conclusion:
Tracing the Archival Threads
Bibliography

178
182

vi

Introduction

Reading the Archive
“Identities are the names we give to the different ways we are positioned by, and
position ourselves within, the narratives of the past.” (394).
- Stuart Hall, “Cultural Identity and Diaspora”
On June 30, 1986, the Supreme Court of the United States upheld the right of
states to criminalize sodomy in the landmark decision Bowers v. Hardwick. Michael
Hardwick had been observed by a police officer engaging in a consensual act of
homosexual sodomy with another adult in the bedroom of his Atlanta home. Justice
Byron White argued in the majority decision that the Court can only protect rights not
easily identified in the Constitution only when those rights are “implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty” or when they are “deeply rooted in the Nation’s history and tradition.”
Noting that thirteen colonies had laws against sodomy at the time of the ratification of the
Bill of Rights – some dating back as far as 1667 – and that many states had outlawed
sodomy since, Justice White concluded that American society had historically
condemned homosexual acts broadly defined under the term sodomy. In his concurring
statement, Justice Warren Burger reaffirmed the importance of history in the court’s
decision arguing that “proscriptions against sodomy have very ancient roots.” Justice
Burger cited William Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of England and Derrick
Sherwin Bailey’s Homosexuality and the Western Christian Tradition, noting that Roman
law under the Emperor Justinian criminalized sodomy, and Henry VIII passed similar
laws after the Reformation that later became the basis for anti-sodomy laws in the
1

American colonies. Given such overwhelming historical evidence, Burger concluded that
“to hold that the act of homosexual sodomy is somehow protected as a fundamental right
would be to cast aside millennia of moral teaching.”
On June 26, 2003, the Supreme Court overturned their ruling in Bowers v.
Hardwick with Lawrence v. Texas. Writing the majority opinion, Justice Anthony
Kennedy states outright that “the historical grounds relied upon in Bowers are more
complex than the majority opinion and the concurring opinion by Chief Justice Burger
indicate. Their historical premises are not without doubt and, at the very least, are
overstated.” Citing a litany of GLBT histories published since the 1986 case – such as
Jonathan Ned Katz’s The Invention of Heterosexuality and John D’Emilio and Estelle
Freedman’s Intimate Matters – Justice Kennedy noted that early sodomy laws also
limited sexual acts between men and women, and that since homosexuality as a separate
identity did not emerge until the late 19th century, the Court could not claim that antihomosexual morality had “ancient roots.” In fact, a review of national laws found that it
wasn’t until the 1970s that states began passing legislation directly targeting same-sex
relations for criminal prosecution. Kennedy condemned Burger’s sweeping references to
the history of Western civilization, suggesting that Burger willfully ignored historical
evidence pointing an opposite direction. Ultimately the Court concluded that consenting
adults had a “right to engage in their conduct without intervention of the government,”
and that “history and tradition are the starting point but not in all cases the ending point
of the substantive due process inquiry.”

2

The centrality of history in deciding two of the Supreme Court’s most significant
cases dealing with homosexuality underscores the extent to which history has had a role
in LGBT politics. 1 That the justices could read the same historical evidence in support of
two opposing arguments also demonstrated to gay and lesbian communities the
importance of taking control of the historical narratives that described them. In Queer
Fictions of the Past: History, Culture and Difference, Scott Bravmann notes that
the importance of history to gay men and lesbians goes beyond the lessons to be
learned from the events of the past to include the meanings generated through
retellings of those events and the agency those meanings carry to the present (4).
History is never just a retelling of the past. Histories offer myths and meanings that
actively define identities in the present, as seen in the Supreme Court rulings, or in the
appropriation of the pink and black triangles of the Holocaust in LGBT political
movements, or in the annual re-staging of the Stonewall Riot rallies commemorated by
Pride parades and festivals around the world. And to understand these histories – how
they are written, how they shape LGBT identity – one can look to the archive.
This dissertation explores the ways sexual identity and culture are produced,
imagined, performed, shaped, re-shaped, and deconstructed in LGBT archives in the
United States. While a great deal of research has been conducted within the past two
decades on LGBT historiography, there has been a dearth of studies examining the
archival sites from which histories of LGBT identity are being written. What this
dissertation reveals is that the construction of non-heterosexual sexual identities has been
1

	  Throughout this dissertation, I refer to the collective Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender movement
by its acronym, LGBT. In some cases, the acronym is listed in a different order, as in proper titles such as
the Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies.	  

3

a conscious, careful process – borrowing from established historiographic, feminist, and
colonial and postcolonial theories to establish archives of LGBT history and culture
counter and in relation to dominant heteronormative narratives. There are times, however,
when every archive fails to capture the complexity and diversity of LGBT experience.
Rather than see these moments as failures, I “read” them as queer opportunities to rethink
and reposition identities which may have become politically and socially stagnant.
In each chapter, I focus on a particular archive and a specific individual (an
archivist or a collector) who helped make it. The first chapter explores W. Dorr Legg’s
efforts in the 1950s to establish the discipline of homophile studies through the ONE
Institute in Los Angeles as a way of creating a historical and archivable past for a
collective homosexual minority that was just beginning to take shape. Chapter Two
focuses on the Lesbian Herstory Archives in Brooklyn and Joan Nestle’s radical
reimagining of what an archive could be through the lens of 1970s lesbian separatist
feminism. Chapter Three looks at the acquisition and organization methods of Jean
Tretter of the Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies at the University of Minnesota as a way
of describing the queer possibilities of encountering the unexpected in an archive. The
fourth and final chapter theorizes what a queer archive might look like, grounding this
theorization in the collection of 1960s performance artist Jack Smith recently acquired by
the Gladstone Gallery in New York.
Reading across modern, postmodern, feminist, phenomenological, postcolonial,
post-structural, and performance studies, this dissertation is the first detailed study of the
intersections of LGBT historiography, archiving and queer theory. Some of the archives
4

have been treated historically in academic texts, such as Todd White’s history of the
ONE Institute within the context of the emerging homophile movement in Pre-Gay L.A.,
or the reading of trauma in the holdings of the Lesbian Herstory Archives as in Ann
Cvetkovich’s An Archive of Feelings. Yet none have traced the discursive formation of
sexual identity through the daily practices and material holdings of the LGBT archival
collections, and it is in this that I hope this project contributes to these fields.
In a community that often does not pass down its sense of identity, its history, or
its shared sense of belonging genealogically from parent to child, and a dearth of
information about LGBT identity/community/history taught in schools, the archive
assumes a unique role in producing historical legacies for future generations. Given this,
how these histories come to be archived, by who and for what purpose, often speaks more
to contemporary understandings of identity, value, and desire than the “authentic” pasts
the archived objects claim to represent.
Since the 1950s in the United States, with the founding of the ONE Institute for
Homophile Studies in Los Angeles, gay and lesbian archives have played a central role in
defining the homosexual as a historical subject. The early compulsion to archive
materials relating to homosexuality was twofold: to understand one’s own homosexuality
as a cultural expression, rather than a medical condition; and to, in their words, reveal
narratives of homosexuality that had been suppressed within the major academic
disciplines. In the wake of the Stonewall Riots in 1969 and the birth of radical gay and
lesbian political movements, hundreds of grassroots archives opened in homes, offices,
and community centers across the country, in cities big and small; the GLBT Historical
5

Society in San Francisco, the Gulf Coast Archive and Museum of GLBT History in
Houston, the Leather Archives in Chicago, the Tennessee Lesbian Archives in Luttrell,
the Black Gay Archives in Philadelphia, and the Sexual Minorities Archives in
Northampton, MA – just to name a few, some of which are now defunct. These archives
provided a historical context for contemporary movements, and documented the
achievements and failures being made in the present. Archival collections often included
newsletters and fliers of local organizations, local and national newsmagazines, meeting
minutes from political groups, and book collections of non-fiction, fiction, and pulp
novels that included homosexual themes. They also relied heavily on personal
collections, frequently appealing to members of their community for photographs,
journals, love letters, newspaper clippings, mementos, and – where material evidence was
scarce – took the initiative to develop some of the earliest oral history projects geared
towards the gay and lesbian communities. The primary audiences for these early archives
were gay and lesbian individuals, who would visit or volunteer to learn more about the
culture they were “coming out” into, emphasizing the importance of the archive to the
development and expression of the gay and lesbian community over the desire for
recognition from the academy or society at large. 1970s lesbian and gay activists
celebrated their outsider status in society, and hoped that their lack of conformity would
help bring about positive change for society-at-large.
The 1980s and 1990s saw a conservative backlash during the Reagan and Bush
years – the failure of Bowers vs. Hardwick coupled with the crippling plague that is
HIV/AIDS. The government’s failed response to the AIDS crisis forced the gay
6

community to develop their own privately-funded health care services, aided by the
lesbian community who had a history of developing women’s clinics as early as the
1960s. Activists who were once invested in changing the political system now found
themselves literally fighting for survival and recognition. Others were simply exhausted
from the decades of fighting, only to see their achievements stripped away by the new
conservative government. Many archives closed during this time, as archivists and
volunteers disappeared from illness, fatigue, or other more pressing volunteer
commitments. As the community’s identity changed, the archives struggled to adapt. Gay
and lesbian communities were beginning to work together, and by the late 90s, the
inclusion of bisexual and transgender individuals and causes formed a singular vision of
an LGBT community.
During this same time period, colleges and universities in the United States were
establishing programs in women’s, gender, African American, Asian American,
Latino/Hispanic, Native American, sexuality and LGBT studies. The inclusion of LGBT
and sexuality studies programs brought what was once marginalized research into the
mainstream. Some of these programs – such as those at California State University,
Northridge, or the University of Minnesota – acquired the contents of grassroots
community-based archives to seed their own institutional collections. The growth of
institutional LGBT archives has meant more research and publications in LGBT history.
There is a perception the material is safer in such institutions, whereas grassroots archives
have a tendency to disappear unexpectedly or are poorly cared for by untrained
volunteers. However this shift has also taken many of these materials out of the
7

communities they represent. The archive can be an exclusive institution, unwelcoming to
the uninitiated or the uncredentialed, and who has access to LGBT material can dictate
the narratives that produce LGBT identity. The acquisition of grassroots archives by
universities and colleges often forces remarkably idiosyncratic collections to conform to
the protocols of academic institutions, and as I explore in this dissertation, the tensions
between the two radically different approaches can lead to productive questions about
identity, research, and archiving.
Never before in U.S. history has LGBT rights taken a more central focus in the
political and social spheres, but never before has the non-conformity, idiosyncrasy, and
even radical alterity represented by these collections been of more value. The rhetoric
surrounding issues like marriage equality, the recent repeal of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,”
same-sex adoption, or blood donation discrimination focuses on the restrictions which
prevent LGBT citizens from participating in or benefiting from government-sanctioned
institutions and programs. Such rhetoric actually acts to subvert any radical action within
the LGBT community because the focus of equality is limited to how an individual
achieves recognition from the state, rather than how the state can change to better meet
the needs of a diverse population. LGBT ‘equality’ can be seen as a neoliberal maneuver
towards assimilation. In light of this, there has never been a more important time to
examine the ways LGBT identity is constructed and assimilated into larger systems of
power and to find alternative ways of engaging in them.
I approach this project as a historian of performance and gay and lesbian culture. I
use archives as a regular part of my scholarly practice, and my archival sensibility is
8

derived from my training and interest in performance. It is the performative nature of the
archive which drives this engagement with the archive – the living encounter of archival
materials and spaces, the life and performance of objects, the palpable relationship
between objects and people, people’s lives archived as objects, the interactions between
archivists, library staff and visitors. All of this has helped me realize the ways in which
the archive is not a fixed, objective institution as it is frequently seen, but as a
wondering/wandering, fluid, affective subject fueled by a range of desires (longing, lust,
fear, hope, etc.).
My first visit to an LGBT archive was near the beginning of my graduate career –
I was preparing a syllabus for a class on the representations of homosexuality on the
American stage, and in conducting research on Lorraine Hansberry’s play The Sign in
Sidney Brustein’s Window, I learned the playwright had written several anonymous
Letters to the Editor to the early lesbian magazine The Ladder in 1957. The library
catalogue mentioned that the Tretter Collection for GLBT Studies on campus had a near
full-run of The Ladder in its collection, though the website for the archive only listed less
than ten finding aids. I made my way across campus to the special collections library
where I met Jean Tretter for the first time. He seemed surprised to see me, as he sat
behind his computer checking emails. While very friendly and welcoming, he informed
me that usually people contacted him first when they wanted to look at something so that
he could have time to go down into the archive’s caverns and retrieve it. I remember
apologizing, humbled by my assumption that an archive worked like a regular library and
that I could just walk in and find what I was looking for and take a peek at what else the
9

collection might hold. Mentioning the brevity of the archive’s website, I asked Tretter
what else was in the collection and how could I find it. “Oh we have lots of things,” he
replied. “We have some finding aids, but mainly if you have something you’re looking
for, just ask and I can try to find materials that relate.” He left to retrieve the issues of The
Ladder I needed, and left me in the reading room. For months, I kept imagining this
unknown trove of LGBT materials and yearned to get down there to see it myself. It was
2008 then, and the 40th anniversary of the Stonewall Riots was coming up the following
year. I returned to Tretter’s office and proposed a gallery exhibit commemorating LGBT
activism in the United States, centering around this momentous event in LGBT history. I
remain incredibly grateful to Jean for his enthusiasm at the idea, and I became a volunteer
and eventually a paid staff member of the collection. It is through this work that I became
fascinated with the archive itself, and progressively I found that when I visited an archive
to conduct research, I began paying more and more attention to the archive itself; what
did it have? How did it describe itself and its scope? How did this description impact
what the archive collected and how they organized the collection?
This is not a comprehensive history of LGBT archiving in the United States, or
even a representative sample of the hundreds of archives that have existed over the past
seventy years. Every archive has a different approach to its work that reflects the
knowledge, experience, resources and desires of those who organize them. Each has a
unique perspective on LGBT identity, what that means, and what kind of research can
and should be done with their collections, and as such, each archive has helped to shape
LGBT identity in remarkably different ways. The ONE Institute and Archive was one of
10

first institutions in the country to conceptualize a discipline of study around same-sex
sexuality, a precursor to contemporary LGBT studies, and thus set the discursive limits
on how sexual identity would be talked about for decades to come. The Lesbian Herstory
Archives established themselves in opposition to patriarchal systems of archiving that
ONE and other Rankean-style institutional archives espoused, and is unique not only for
its longevity, but for its continued commitment to its founding radical feminist principles.
Where the ONE established itself as a formal, academic, institutional archive and the
LHA marked itself as a grassroots, community-based archive, the Tretter Collection has
been both, and the ability to read this shift from grassroots to institutional archive
highlights important questions about contemporary LGBT identity and the queer
possibilities of thinking otherwise. Having the advantage of working at the Tretter
Collection as an archivist, scholar and community volunteer, I have the added advantage
of being able to discuss the frequently invisible operations of an archive from an insider’s
perspective. The Jack Smith Archive is housed in an art gallery, which by its own
admission does not know how to manage an archival collection and is not set up for it.
Their crisis of managing the collection, which has led to it being separated into items of
artistic and academic value, along with Smith’s lifelong commitment to art that disrupts
and makes audiences uncomfortable, makes this collection a particularly useful site to
theorize queer archiving.

Archiving in America

11

The basic model of the archive in the United States can be traced back to the
emergence of historicism in the early nineteenth-century. Western Europe was
experiencing something akin to the recent “Arab Spring” uprisings in the Middle East.
The July Revolution in France occurred in 1830, followed quickly by the Polish rebellion
against Russia, and Belgium’s declaration of independence from Holland. Civil war
erupted in Spain and Portugal, and similar stirrings were felt in Germany and northern
Italy. European historians sought a way of writing and understanding history objectively
– without prejudice or political motivation - with the same sense of authority and
verifiable accuracy as the sciences (Eskildsen 425). Among these historians was Leopold
von Ranke, who sought to make history a verifiable science. Ranke recognized that the
data of history was not the same as science – that history included variables of intention,
desire and free will. A historical science would require a different methodological
approach to what he saw as concrete historical phenomena. The job of the historian,
Ranke argued, was to create a trustworthy reconstruction of the past, using objects
(primarily documents) as data/evidence (Iggers 18). The documents were separated into a
hierarchy of legitimacy, based on their proximity to the event being described. The closer
the document to the event and the more reliable and proximate the document’s creator,
then the more valuable it was for Ranke’s historicism.2 The primacy of the document
gave history the legitimacy of science by endowing it with the faith it would accurately
reflect the past, and the archive – which would house and order these important
documents – would become the historian’s all-important laboratory.

2

See Ranke 1973; Eskildsen 2008; Iggers 2008, 122-123; Krieger 1977; and White 1973, 163-190.

12

Ranke’s philosophy – to see history “how it actually was” – became the bedrock
of American historicism, which Peter Novick charts in his detailed study That Noble
Dream: The “Objectivity Question” and the American Historical Profession. Ranke’s
theories were particularly interesting to American historians who were struggling to
establish their field as a legitimate profession (61). Novick argues that World War I
brought about a crisis of confidence in the Rankean ideal when historians confronted the
challenge of analyzing secret documents, and some within their profession – on both
sides of the war – were clearly writing histories that were heavily influenced by their own
nationality and political views. For example, a debate between two noted historians –
Bernadotte Schmitt and Sidney Fay – over the origins of WWI yielded remarkably
different interpretations, even though both scholars drew from the same archival source
materials (224). The archive, they feared, could not be entirely objective. American
historians Carl Becker and Charles Beard advocated a relativist approach to history, over
Rankean objectivism. Relativism required a level of introspective reflection from the
historian in order to situate themselves within the relative position of a “their time, place,
values and purposes” (166). However, when Beard presented this position in the journal
Social Science Research Council Bulletin shortly after WWII, most historians scoffed at
the idea. The end of WWII and the new Cold War had brought about a level of selfconfidence and hubris that saw value and power in history. A strong sense of patriotism
and nationhood depended on a positive historical vision of America as a nation that had
always acted on the side of liberty, freedom, and justice. Samuel Flagg Bemis, the
president of the American Historical Association, addressed this in his 1962 speech at the
13

national conference, stating that “a great people’s culture… begins to decay when it
commences to examine itself…. In self-study and self-indulgence we have been losing
sight of our national purpose” (307). To question America’s place in history was
unpatriotic, and in the age of Senator Joseph McCarthy and the House Un-American
Activities Committee, this could be considered tantamount to treason. It was in this
context that the homophile movement emerged, as I detail in chapter one, and the archive
and theorization of history adopted by the ONE Institute reflected Ranke’s objectivist
approach.

The Archival Turn
Despite Bemis’ warning, the late 1960s brought about a shift in the humanities
known as the “archival turn.” This shift sought to understand the impact of the archive on
the formation of knowledge – how it orders our thinking and defines the limits of
identity. Leading the charge was French theorist Michel Foucault, whose 1969 study,
Archaeology of Knowledge, investigated the limits of discourse and its circulation in
Western society. For Foucault, knowledge consists of series of statements that act as
rules, setting the limits of what can be thought. As soon as an event occurs, statements
are made which seek to stabilize the way that particular event will be interpreted. The
archive, then, is an institution which houses and orders these statements, and, since the
statement acts as a rule, the archive also functions as the law of what can be said (10).
The function of the archive, as both institution and law, is to blur the space between the
event and its statement. It is an illusion, Foucault wrote, to think the archive protects and
14

preserves these statements for the future. The work of the archive is actually destructive
in its ordering and ‘preservation,’ defining at the outset the event’s “system of
enunciability” (129). Foucault’s treatise on the power of statements and their relation to
the archive begs us to reflect on the ways archives simultaneously construct knowledge
while also setting the limits on what can be thought.
Foucault applied this theorization of the archive to his critique of the histories of
sexuality emerging in the early 1970s. Many of the early historians of homosexuality –
W. Dorr Legg at the ONE Institute, or Jonathan Ned Katz whose Gay American History
was among the first to reproduce an extensive collection of primary source material
relating to male and female homosexuality from American history – found a troubling
silence within the archive, an active exclusion of homosexual narratives. Where Legg and
Katz focused on the difficulty of writing histories when encountering silence from the
archive, Michel Foucault argued that the silences themselves can speak volumes about
sexual attitudes and practices. In his 1976 study The History of Sexuality, Foucault
argued that there is not a silence about sexuality at all – since at least the seventeenth
century, people have not been able to stop talking about sex (or can’t help but talk about
not talking about sex). He described the aim of his study:
…to examine the case of a society which has been loudly castigating itself for its
hypocrisy for more than a century, which speaks verbosely of its own silence,
takes great pains to relate in detail the things it does not say, denounces the
powers it exercises, and promises to liberate itself from the very laws that have
made it function. (8)
15

To do this, Foucault read through materials in the archive that were not overtly about
sexuality, or identified as such by the archivist. He examined everything from legal and
medical discourse to the arrangements of hospitals, boarding schools, prisons and other
institutions to show how the underlying awareness of sexuality influenced these
organizations. The silence of the archive was not a censorship of sex. Rather, Foucault
described the establishment of a number of apparatuses that produce “an ever greater
quantity of discourse about sex” (23).
In the context of the period in which Foucault was writing, The History of
Sexuality is remarkable in the way he challenges contemporary perceptions of the field.
When the English translation was released in 1977 – eight years after the Stonewall Riots
– Foucault’s essay directly addressed the impulse of gay and lesbian activists to claim
historical oppression as a motivation for their work. “Something that smacks of revolt, of
promised freedom, of the coming age of a different law, slips easily into this discourse on
sexual oppression” (7). Foucault argued that this encourages the historian to only speak
of sex in terms of its repression, which gives it a certain market value by placing itself at
the cusp of transgression and liberation. I argue that this extends to the LGBT archive,
which replicates these narratives. However, Foucault was unable to argue that sex is not
repressed – as “it not only runs counter to a well-accepted argument, it goes against the
whole economy and all the discursive ‘interests’ that underlie this argument” – and so
instead turned his attention to the ways in which the perception of repressed sexuality
came into being (8). In doing this, Foucault offered a complex, multi-faceted history of
sexuality spanning three centuries. He dealt with sexuality as it is constructed and
16

circulated through discourse rather than recounting the personal lives of particular
individuals who lived during the period, which was (and to a degree, remains) en vogue
in the field of LGBT historiography.3
In Archive Fever, Jacques Derrida joined Foucault in recognizing the archive as a
house of authority. Tracing the etymology of the word archive to its root arkhe, Derrida
notes that the name refers both to the concepts of commencement and commandment,
combining both into our perception of the archive. The archive is the place where things
commence – physically, historically, and ontologically – where we recognize them for
the first time. It is also the place “where men and gods command, there where authority,
social order are exercised,” which follows Foucault’s understanding of the archive as the
limitation and the law of what can be thought. (1) Carolyn Steedman’s analysis of
Derrida’s lecture in Dust: The Archive and Cultural History is particularly helpful for
noting the discrepancies between the French-language version that Derrida wrote and its
English translation. Archive fever, as Steedman points out, has less to do with archiving
than it has to do with finding origin points and reclaiming memory – she rightly notes
that Derrida only directly treats the archive in the first few pages before abandoning it to
a detailed analysis of Josef Yerushalmi’s reading of Freud’s Moses and Monotheism. The
fever of the archive, then, is the desire to find, or locate, or possess moments of origins as
the beginning of things. As I argue in the first chapter, the drive to establish LGBT
archives began as a search for origins – but not necessarily in the same way as other non3

Histories recounting the personal lives of particular individuals in an effort to portray a general history
include such volumes as Bernstein (2006), Bullough (2002), Jay (1977) and Nardi (1994). The first major
history to be published regarding the Stonewall riots of 1969 was Martin Duberman’s Stonewall in 1993,
which recounts the event through the eyes of six specific ‘characters’ who were there and whose story is
meant to represent the thousands who participated.

17

LGBT archives. The goal was to find homosexuality in existing histories, and therefore,
the quest for origins in LGBT archives was a quest to locate the origin of homosexuality
in as far distant of a past as possible – or, even better, to be unable to locate an origin
point at all (thus supporting the archive’s argument that homosexuality is as old as
humanity).

Queer Theory and Archiving
Queer theory has its roots in the post-structural debates that led to the archival
turn and influences this study of archiving. If, as Foucualt and Derrida argue, the archive
is one of the places where specific understandings of identity are affirmed, transmitted,
and naturalized, ‘queering’ is an attempt to disrupt this process. In his essay “Queer
Research; Or, How to Practice Invention to the Brink of Intelligibility,” William Haver
suggests that queer research is “characterized by the process of rendering intellectual life
uncanny” and that it “does not make the world familiar or comfortable for the student or
reader, but rather defamiliarizes or makes strange, queer or even cruel what we had
thought to be a world” (291). Following the work of William Haver, José Muñoz, and
others, to queer is to transform, a performative action that is simultaneously destructive
and creative. I am using the term queer as a verb that directly challenges the identity of
nouns. Even when used as an adjective or a noun, its transformative action is implied. It
is an interruption in the status quo. Queer is an action against normalcy. It makes the
familiar strange. Because it is the act of transformation, queer is an ongoing process,
rather than the end result. This concept allows me to mark the critical difference between
18

LGBT archiving and queer archiving. Where LGBT archives seek to affirm and promote
stable interpretations of sexual identity, queer archives attempt to break this notion of
stability. Where an individual might go to an LGBT archive to seek answers, they would
go to the queer archive to find questions. One, I argue, is not more important than the
other, and as I work through the ways queer archives operate – sometimes even within
established LGBT archives – I hope to demonstrate the ways engaging with these
archives and concepts can be useful at various times and for various needs.
It is important to understand that what I am doing in this dissertation is not “pure”
queer research or queer theory. I am trying to make sense of concepts that could lead to
queer research and an understanding of a queer archive. I am engaged in a process of
stabilizing here, of looking at archives and pointing to specific processes, in an effort to
show other possible ways of thinking about identity in the archive. The requirements of a
doctorate in academia require such a gesture of stabilization. This project needs to make
sense, and hopefully it does this. My aim must be to engage with bodies of knowledge
and explain them, not disrupt them. Here, I can only gesture to queer performance and
queer research with the hope that it might inspire queer doings elsewhere. Disruption is
anathema to educational institutions, which operate through the disciplinization of
various fields. Queer work is safely housed in cultural studies programs and sexuality
studies departments where it can be contained, and talked about ad nauseum. There is a
danger that queer research is used as a method for the reproduction of LGBT cultures,
rather than an opportunity to interrupt the (re)production of culture altogether. For queer
theory and queer archiving to “work,” it has to be recognized as something separate from
19

LGBT and sexuality studies, for while it is engaged in questioning those disciplines, it
cannot be relegated merely to the disruption of sexual identities. The disciplinization of
these fields within the academy is what prevents holistic engagements with queer
concepts in all areas of life.
Sara Ahmed’s Queer Phenomenology applies this logic to objects, suggesting that
the identity of the object is not a given part of its existence in the world. It is through our
relationship to the object, the gesture of knowing it that makes it seem familiar, and we
become oriented in the world through this familiarity. Yet, there are times when objects
resist familiarity, or when something we thought was familiar suddenly becomes strange.
Imagine, for example, you are at home at night and your lights go off. Knowing where
you are in the room, and remembering what furniture is around you, you are able to make
your way to a candle and box of matches. But what if, after the lights go off, all the
furniture in the room were rearranged, or you became turned around. In your state of
confusion, you can assume very little. You exist in a state of flux, of uncertainty. Slowly
you have to learn new ways of navigating the world around you. Using Ahmed’s work, I
argue that it is by allowing ourselves to literally become disoriented in the archive that
we break out of the normalized formations of identity we get stuck in, and begin to think
differently about our relation to the material world. This is a performative gesture, one
that must be embodied and experienced in relation to other things – people, objects,
documents, space, buildings, time.
This work also depends heavily on recent research in queer historiography,
particularly the work of Judith Halberstam and Scott Bravmann. Halberstam literally
20

wrote the book on queer temporalities with In a Queer Time & Place: Transgender
Bodies, Subcultural Lives. Insisting that queer theory and cultural
participation/production need not be relegated to academic institutions or traditional
research practices, Halberstam offers a challenge to (and displacement of) the
heteronormative emphasis of the youth/adult cultural binary that dominates discussions of
subculture. Her work clearly aligns with that of Lee Edelman whose No Future criticizes
the heteronormative social and political practices that are constantly asking publics to
make sacrifices for the benefit of future, unborn generations, and which marginalize
individuals who are not actively reproducing for the good of the state. Halberstam argues
that “reproductive time and family time are, above all, heteronormative time/space
constructs… [but] all kinds of people, especially in postmodernity, will and do opt to live
outside of reproductive and familial time as well as on the edges of logics of labor and
production” (10). The traditional archive depends on reproductive and familial
conceptions of time and space, and thus, I argue, thinking of histories outside these logics
allows one to begin to conceptualize the queer archive.
Scott Bravmann’s Queer Fictions of the Past: History, Culture and Difference
similarly argues the problematic ways histories are socially constructed “through
arbitrary regimes of the “normal” and the “natural,” but suggests that there are ways of
approaching history that reject the gravitational “pull” towards sameness in favor of an
approach that “acknowledges multiple socially constituted differences among gay and
lesbian subjects” (x). Drawing on queer, feminist and cultural theories, Bravmann traces
the ways gay and lesbian identity formations have been constructed through the politics
21

and poetics of historical discourse – which he calls the queer fictions of the past.
Bravmann’s vision of a multitude of complementary and conflicting historical discourses
all gesturing to similar identity formations has been a valuable way of thinking through
the queer archive as a space of encountering the unexpected and overwhelming. Such a
vision of the archive recognizes that it is not and cannot be a laboratory to test the
“truths” of history, as historical relativists have argued since at least WWI, but rather a
space where the ever-growing and ever-changing narratives we use to understand the
world around us can circulate, and continue to affect those who engage with them.
The concept of queer archiving is a relatively recent one, though queer
historiography has occasionally gestured toward the idea. A forthcoming issue of Radical
History Review due out in the fall of 2014 will be one of the first major publications to
treat the subject thoroughly. Though Ann Cvetkovich’s An Archive of Feelings is not
attempting to theorize a concept of a queer archive, she does address the queer
possibilities of reimagining the archive – not necessarily as a location filled with
documents (though she addresses these too, as I discuss in Chapter 2), but through the
shared experiences of “insidious trauma” within lesbian communities. Cvetkovich
analyzes a range of texts from psychoanalysis to literature to show how various lesbian
authors articulate similar shared experiences, which itself becomes a mode of collective
identification. If the textual expression of feelings can be seen as a public expression,
then Cvetkovich argues that understanding them can reshape how politics achieves its
aims.

22

My research into LGBT historiography and archiving also benefits from
postcolonial literature on archives. As I discuss in chapters one and two, early gay and
lesbian historians and archivists framed homosexual identity as a colonized culture. W.
Dorr Legg at the ONE Institute used the rhetoric of colonialism to align homophilia with
studies of Asian, African and Native American culture, while also using models of
education deployed by the United States when it colonized the Philippines at the turn of
the twentieth century. Joan Nestle at the Lesbian Herstory Archives began her career as a
professor largely teaching first generation immigrants from formerly colonized countries.
The postcolonial literature she taught – particularly Franz Fanon and Albert Memmi –
resonated with her personal experiences as a lesbian living in New York City, and
provided her with a framework for understanding the relationship between history and
cultural identity. Many of the underlying questions encountered by black historians in
post-apartheid South Africa or historians of post-colonial India – sites where much of
postcolonial literature on archiving have focused – were asking similar questions as early
lesbian and gay historians and archivists.4 What are our truths? What are our stories?
How do we tell them? How do we share them within our communities? Is it important to
share them with others? Should we mimic historiographic and archival methodologies
that once excluded us as a way of fitting in to dominant culture? Or should we
recognize/develop other methodologies? How do we acknowledge our oppression and the
trauma our communities have experienced, while also emphasizing that there is more to
4

See, for example, Antoinette Burton’s Archive Stories: Facts, Fictions, and the Writing of History (2006);
Wendy Walter’s Archives of the Black Atlantic: Reading Between Literature and History (2013); Richard
Roque and Kim Wagner’s Engaging Colonial Knowledge: Reading European Archives in World History
(2011); and Garth Stevens’ Race, Memory and the Apartheid Archive: Towards a Transformative
Psychosocial Praxis (2013).

23

our histories than this? Like Foucault’s History of Sexuality, which postcolonial theorists
such as Gayatri Spivak have drawn from, there is an effort to read into and across the
archive’s silences to ask whether or not the subaltern can speak.

The Performance of Identity in the Archive
My training as a performance scholar and practitioner have encouraged me to
consider the archive not as a destination, but as a performative practice of social
engagement – between archivists, objects, visitors, volunteers, artists, donors, passersby,
and the ghosts of the past that Michel de Certeau suggests are conjured through the act of
writing history. It is through these moments of encounter, these social experiences, that
communities are made and the unexpected is encountered. When an LGBT individual
visits such an archive, they encounter a wide range of material that may or may not
resonate with them. In these moments, they perform their identity in relation to what that
individual sees as reflective or not reflective of their experience. They situate themselves
in relation to the archive’s narrative of LGBT history and culture. The encounter with the
unexpected may lead to serious questioning on the part of the visitor – why is this
material here? Why does it not reflect my experience? Is there something I am missing in
my life? Or does the archive not recognize me and my experience as part of the overall
LGBT experience? These reactions to the archive are often shared with other visitors and
with archives staff, depending on the context, in reading rooms, living rooms, kitchens,
basements, and art galleries all across the country – wherever LGBT archival material
finds a home. There are agreements and disagreements, affirmations and refusals, and in
24

this process of engagement, people position themselves relationally with one another,
with the objects in the archive, and with the histories they represent.
In recent years, my home discipline of performance studies has taken a particular
interest in rethinking approaches to the archive. The perceived ephemerality of
performance has always proven a challenge to the archive: so much of what happens
through performance does not leave archivable, material traces. Most notable of recent
scholarship is Diana Taylor’s The Archive and the Repertoire. Looking at a variety of
performance traditions – spoken word, song, dance, festivals, gestures, etc. – Taylor
theorizes the concept of the repertoire as a practice of embodied memory. In her reading,
the archive and the repertoire work together to form a sense of cultural identity.
Unfortunately for this study, many of Taylor’s examples depend on a cultural memory
that is learned through the experience of being raised in a particular community. For the
majority of LGBT individuals who grow up in heterosexual households, LGBT culture is
not something one is raised with, and this unique process of “coming out” into a
community requires that an individual go out and find an experience of LGBT identity
they can relate to.
Rebecca Schneider’s Performing Remains: Art and War in Times of Theatrical
Reenactment also contributes to the growing field of performance and archiving.
Schneider finds similarities between how we understand history as a process of
representation, and the performances of history – through plays, festivals and
reenactments. Finding that what is fake and what is false in performance can also be
found in traditional written histories, Schneider focuses on what remains from
25

performance, rather than what disappears. What this requires, and what Taylor touches on
in her work, is that to some degree as a community, we collectively agree on the fictional
elements that make up our histories. What we keep and what we remember is what we
perceive as the most important parts of who we are as a culture. What we forget, or what
we collectively invent, can provide an opportunity to adjust the narrative, to think
differently about traditions, histories, and identities to offer different models and
approaches to the world we live in.

Outline
As a point of entry, I begin looking at a school, rather than an archive. The
formation of the ONE Institute of Homophile Studies in Los Angeles in 1956 would
support the simultaneous founding of an archive. This chapter explores how the
disciplining of homosexual identity as a scholarly field of study was a conscious and
well-documented gesture towards imagining a collective homosexual minority in the
United States with a historical and archivable past. Over four years, ONE developed
several programs to achieve their mission including the publication of a quarterly
scholarly journal, the formation of a school and distance-learning program, and the
acquiring and classifying of materials to form an archive. Using early texts from the
journal and from the school and through a close reading of the contents of the early ONE
archive, I argue that ONE modeled their approach after the historicist methodologies of
early 19th century European nation-states, who, following revolutions, conquests and
emerging democratic republics, were attempting to re-define their own sense of a
26

collective national identity. Under this model, the ONE Archive not only provided the
documentary field for the Institute’s research, it legitimized homophile studies by
materially proving the existence of homosexuals in history, and enforced the disciplinary
ways of thinking about homosexuality established by the ONE Institute. ONE’s
historicist approach to homophile studies offered methodological strategies for the first
histories of homosexuality published in the United States, contributed to a wave of
community-based histories and archives projects across the country, and laid the
groundwork for the later development of LGBT and sexuality studies programs at
academic institutions.
Chapter Two explores the concept of the archive as home within the context of
the Lesbian Herstory Archives (LHA) in Brooklyn, New York – teasing out the
relationships between public and private that are at the core of this archive’s radical
reimagining of the function and practice of an archive within a community. Since its
founding in the early 1970s, the LHA has distanced itself from the image of an archive as
an institution where an individual comes to conduct academic research. The homophile
model of archiving articulated by W. Dorr Legg and Jim Kepner of the ONE Institute and
Archives re-inscribed patriarchal systems of oppression by locating homosexual themes
in the dominant narratives of the various disciplines of academia. Joan Nestle and the cofounders of the LHA have always sought to use history as a way of understanding one’s
own self in relation to a larger lesbian community. As one of the country’s oldest
continually operating archives relating to sexual identity, the LHA radically reenvisioned the role of the archive in lesbian culture, serving as a literal and metaphoric
27

home space / community center. The idea of an archive-as-home also extends to the
hospitality volunteers show towards guests, and the sharing of history is regularly
described by Nestle and the LHA staff as an act of familial, inter-generational
engagement.
Chapter Three focuses on the Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies at the
University of Minnesota to explore the queer disruptive possibilities of the archive and
the ways in which these disruptions are “managed” by archivists to ensure a consistency
in the narrative of LGBT identity that archives attempt to articulate. When archives fail to
do what is expected of them – which is inevitable given the impossibility of trying to
stabilize the unstable – there exists a radical queer potentiality to question such
expectations. Where the ONE Institute began as an institutional archive attached to a
school, and the Lesbian Herstory Archives began as a grassroots archive, the Tretter
Collection is unique in how it began as a grassroots archive before being purchased by a
university. Jean Tretter’s tendency to collect anything remotely related to LGBT identity
exceeded the physical limits of the archival space. Without finding aids or an ability to
organize everything in a way that made sense in an academic archive, it was a difficult
archive to use in the traditional sense, but offered value in the ability to encounter the
unexpected. The overabundance of the archive, the collection in excess, begins to suggest
a possible framework for thinking of the queer archive.
In Chapter Four I look at a collection that is inherently queer – the Jack Smith
archive at the Gladstone Gallery in New York – and theorize how its queerness can be
kept active when the archive’s stabilizing logics of ordering normally kill it. Jack Smith
28

was an avant garde film maker and performance artist, considered by contemporary
scholars as one of the leaders of the early New York underground art movement, and an
influence on later artists like Andy Warhol, John Waters, and Richard Foreman. Smith’s
estate was sold in 2008 to an art gallery after a prolonged legal battle. Consisting of
drawings, collages, photographs, films, sound recordings, and sculpture by Smith, as well
as his personal library, papers, and ephemera collected throughout his lifetime, the Smith
estate represents the remaining physical traces of a man fascinated by the life of trash
objects. Since his death, Smith’s work has become synonymous with ‘camp’ and studies
of his films and performances have focused on his aesthetics (which Smith changed
constantly out of an aversion to creating a ‘Jack Smith style’). Smith’s commitment to
perpetual change can even be found in his film work. During screenings of his infamous
film Flaming Creatures, for example, Smith could be found in the projection booth
before the show splicing and rearranging bits of celluloid, thus creating a new film
experience each time it was shown. When Smith’s films and performance artifacts enter
into the archive, they become monuments to Smith the artist, rather than to the project of
queer disruption that Smith dedicated his life to. Using contemporary theories on queer
research, phenomenology and trash, I envision a project of queer archiving that proposes
questions of the visitor/archivist/scholar, rather than an archive that offers answers.
Again, what is at stake in this project is the knowledge that how we think about
sexual identity and LGBT communities is shaped in concrete ways through institutions
like the archive. Even though individuals who may identify as LGBT may never set foot
into an archive their entire life, the narratives the archives produce – the limitations the
29

archive imposes on how we conceive of LGBT identity – impact the ways we behave, the
ways we interact with each other, the ways we choose to participate in society. Even if a
person does not “buy in” to these narratives, they have significant consequences, as seen
in the SCOTUS decisions on sodomy, or in the ongoing debates on same-sex marriage, or
anti-discrimination legislation. Being aware of how institutions such as archives construct
the narratives of sexual identity can allow us to take greater ownership over these
narratives and build stronger communities, or to jettison narratives in order to open up
new ways of being in the world.

30

Chapter I

Disciplining Sexuality, Archiving Identity:
ONE and the Formation of Homophile Studies
“In our time, history is that which transforms documents into monuments.”
- Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, 1972
In October 1952, a small group of men and women founded an organization that
sought to publish and promote research concerning “the integration into society of such
persons whose behavior and inclinations vary from current social and moral standards”
(Cutler 72). They took the name ONE Inc., from an essay on the works of Goethe by
Thomas Carlyle in which Carlyle wrote “Of a truth, men are mystically united: a mystic
bond of brotherhood makes all men one.” Targeting “social variants” as well as the
general public, ONE Inc. tackled their mission of integration through its four main
divisions: publishing, education, research and social services. Through its magazines and
the work of their school – the ONE Institute – the organization became one of the first to
recognize homosexuality as a collective, historicized minority in the United States, and
articulated the earliest methodologies for research in homosexual culture, setting the
disciplinary limits of how homosexuality would be discussed within academia for
decades to come.
A significant amount of recent scholarship has examined the social shift from
homosexuality as a criminal behavior and medical disorder to a collective, social and
cultural identity in the post-WWII period. Allan Bérubé’s Coming Out Under Fire argues
31

that the war brought many men and women from rural, isolated areas into big cities and
same-sex barracks and field stations where they encountered others with same-sex
attraction, recognizing for the first time on a large scale that they were not alone.
Published interviews, like those of noted 1940s psychologist Evelyn Hooker, reveal the
impact of Alfred Kinsey’s reports on human sexuality in men and women that famously
reported 46% of men studied had both opposite and same-sex sexual encounters at some
point in their lives, and that 10% of men studied had predominantly homosexual
encounters. Hooker noted that while these numbers certainly suggested a wider range of
sexual experiences than society seemed to collectively believe, the reports allowed
homosexuals to feel a greater sense of presence and power in society:5
Homosexuality was thought to be a comparatively rare phenomenon until Kinsey
came along and provided very good evidence that there were… roughly 20
million gay men and women…. [That] was important because it gave great hope
to gay people and lesbians because they, for the first time, realized that they were
not the tiny minority, but actually a very sizable proportion of the population
(Hooker 2000).

5

In addition to Evelyn Hooker’s quote in reference to the surge of validation experienced by homosexuals
following the Kinsey report, I refer you also to Crompton 448; Higgins 157-159; Jennings 143; Johnson 5354; Legg 1994, 14-15; and White 2009, 2-5. Dr. Hooker was most remembered for a study she conducted
in 1957 where she gathered sixty general psychological profiles of men who identified as either exclusively
heterosexual or exclusively homosexual. The team, ultimately, was unable to distinguish the homosexuals
from the heterosexuals, concluding that, in terms of adjusting to society, there were no discernible
differences between the two groups. Hooker’s paper gained national attention with its publication in the
Journal of Projective Techniques as “The Adjustment of the Male Overt Homosexual.” Notably, Hooker
became a regular speaker at ONE’s Midwinter Institute, and her research on social adjustment among
homosexuals was central to the group’s peer counseling program. For information on the study, see Hooker
1957. For her participation in ONE, see Legg 1994, 36,44.

32

While homosexuals at the time could take comfort from Kinsey’s statistics, the numbers
fed into growing anxieties about the collapse of American values and the threat of
Communist influences. David Johnson’s 2004 book The Lavender Scare was the first
serious examination of the overwhelming hysteria sparked by McCarthy hearings that
suggested homosexuals had taken over the State Department and were selling secrets to
the Russians. Johnson’s work reveals that McCarthy’s attack on homosexuals as a
collective group of subversives helped imagine homosexuality as an organized minority
in the United States in ways homosexuals were only just beginning to imagine for
themselves. Fearful portrayals of subversive homosexual collectives paved the way for
actual homosexual collectives, like ONE, to be formed. C. Todd White’s 2009 study PreGay L.A. is a social history of the formations of these first organized collectives,
documenting the founding, run, and ultimate closure of two major homophile
organizations – the Mattachine Society and ONE, Inc..
Despite all of these histories, what hasn’t been studied – and what this chapter
seeks to address – is ONE’s systematic and methodical formation of a new field of study
that provided a framework for historians to reach back and claiming historical moments
as relating to homosexual culture. Homophile studies, as the field was called, created the
disciplinary framework that would not only allow one to establish a school – the ONE
Institute for Homophile Studies, but also an archive that would support and validate their
research agenda. Where other homophile groups such as the Mattachine Society and the
Daughters of Bilitis were focused on the homosexual subject in the present and in the
future, ONE looked to the past in order to assert that homosexuals constituted a
33

historically oppressed, collective minority, and as such, had a right to be protected under
the law.
There is an important distinction to make, however, between recognizing a history
of individuals who had same-sex desires and recognizing a collective social history of
same-sex sexuality. The former is endemic to the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century perception of the individual homosexual as mentally unstable and morally
corrupt. Thus, as a psychological and legal entity, a homosexual was a defective person
within a larger ‘normal’ society, incapable of sharing a history or culture in the same way
that thieves and schizophrenics do not share a collective past.6 The latter – a social
history of same-sex sexuality – emerged in the post-war United States with the
recognition of homosexuality as a collective minority. It is this shift towards thinking of
homosexuals as a collective, and the role of the ONE Institute of Homophile Studies and
the ONE Archive in Los Angeles in defining this collective, that forms the main inquiry
of this chapter.
The legacy of ONE’s work is immeasurable. While few have heard the term
‘homophile studies’ today, the discipline was the precursor to contemporary GLBT and
sexuality studies programs, providing the foundational framework within which the
above mentioned histories of homosexuality continue to be written.
It’s all very meta.

6

Austrian novelist Karl Maria Kertbeny coined the term ‘homosexual’ in 1869 in a pamphlet arguing
against Germany’s anti-sodomy laws. He defined the homosexual as a person who finds sexual pleasures
with members of the same sex, and that there were at least three different kinds of homosexuals; tribades,
who were either active or passive female homosexuals; mutuals, who were male homosexuals that found
pleasure in mutual masturbation; and pygists, who were male homosexuals that engaged in active or
passive sodomy. See Feray (1991) and Herzer (1985).

34

And writing metahistories of histories and archives offers certain research
challenges. One of the defining characteristics of the modern archive, I argue, is its
intentional desire to not be the focus of study. From the perspective of the modern
archivist, a scholar goes to the archive to conduct research on the social history of
farmers in 19th century rural England – for example – not to examine how the archive
came about collecting its materials or how it decided to organize them. The archive is, as
I mentioned in my discussion of objectivism and the Rankean archive in the introduction,
a laboratory, meant to validate claims of history through the objective “truth” captured by
the presence of archival material. The material in the archive is meant to speak for itself,
and the work of the archivist is meant to go unnoticed. Pay no attention to the archivist
behind the curtain. Indeed, so strong is the desire to conceal the work of the archivist so
that the documents might “speak for themselves,” most libraries and archives keep
whatever organizational records they have on themselves – memos, acquisition contracts,
internal correspondence, etc. – separate from the research collection and generally only
permit staff to access them. Studying the archive can be further complicated in the case of
community-based archives where incomplete records may be kept in the first place,
collections may frequently be moved between homes and offices, items may be
improperly stored leading to their damage, and where absent or unenforced research
policies sometimes mean items are taken and not returned. This is certainly the case with
the ONE Archive. Additionally, an internal disagreement and subsequent legal battle
between two of the founding members in 1965 led to a court ruling where the
organization was separated – the name ONE and the education division to be
35

administered by W. Dorr Legg and the archives, including the administrative records of
ONE, would be administered by Don Slater under the new auspices of the Homosexual
Information Center (HIC).7 Thus, the new ONE Archive started by Legg in 1965 lacked
the organization’s records. In the 1980s, the HIC archive was badly damaged during an
internal dispute over ownership and control of the collection. One of the board members
ransacked the archive overnight, damaging materials and disturbing the original
organization of the collection. Following the deaths of Legg and Slater in the 1990s,
many of the original ONE materials in the HIC collection were given back to the ONE
Archive, which since 2010 is run by the University of Southern California Libraries’
Special Collections Unit. Yet, while USC now holds much of what remains of the ONE’s
organizational records, the group’s in-fighting meant that many of the founding members
chose not to archive their personal collections, leaving even larger gaps in the collection’s
holdings.
And so what remains to conduct this investigation into the ONE Archive and
ONE Institute for Homophile Studies? Fortunately, the archive contains the personal
papers of the co-founder and long-time leader of the ONE Institute, W. Dorr Legg, as
well as Jim Kepner, who started the archive with materials from his personal collection
and served as its first archivist. These personal papers contain limited correspondence to
individuals interested in the work of ONE and help to understand how Legg and Kepner
understood and articulated the work they were doing.
There exists a list of 2,102 published titles that were in the ONE Archive’s
holdings at the time of the 1965 split which include Kepner’s original donations, but no
7

The separation of ONE is detailed in C. Todd White’s Pre-Gay L.A.

36

record of the archive’s original manuscript collections. What remains of these original
publications (books, magazines, and leaflets), which were part of the HIC collection, are
now held within the Vern and Bonnie Bullough Collection on Sex and Gender at the
Oviatt Library at California State University, Northridge (CSUN). It is possible to read
through these titles – as I do later in this chapter – to get a snapshot of the resources
available to the ONE Institute in its early days, and to get a sense of what the
organization felt was important to collect.
ONE’s publishing arm produced several periodicals that have been vital to my
research, particularly ONE Magazine that published many of the organization’s original
treatises and mission statements, and the ONE Institute Quarterly of Homophile Studies,
which published the institute’s radical articulations of methodology and many of the
field’s earliest research articles.
What does remain of the organizational records for the ONE Institute and Archive
focuses heavily on the organization after the 1965 split. ONE Institute records include the
organization’s articles of incorporation and other tax-related documents filed with the
state, correspondence from 1953-1985, syllabi, catalogs, class schedules, class materials,
teacher notes, tests, graded papers, attendance counts, admissions and promotional
materials, development files, and employee records. The ONE Library and Archive
records are largely limited to ascension records from the mid-1970s on, circulation data
from 1967-1984, cataloging rules and manuals developed by the staff from the 1980s,
and reports to the ONE Inc. administrative committee from the 1950s on. While limited
in scope, these documents also provide important insight into how the organization was
37

consciously defining the parameters of a new field of study, as well as the complications
involved.
Finally, W. Dorr Legg published his opus Homophile Studies in Theory and
Practice in 1994, the same year he died. The volume serves many purposes. It was an
opportunity for Legg to offer a formal history of the ONE Institute, which hadn’t been
written, an uncomplicated history that entirely omits internal conflicts in the organization,
and which – perhaps not entirely unreasonably – highlights the groundbreaking nature of
the work he did. The book also provides a broad overview of the specific disciplines of
homophile studies, in an apparent attempt to encourage its continued adoption at a time
when many schools and colleges were developing research programs in sexuality studies.
While it is important to read Legg’s work with an awareness of his intentions with the
volume – his desire to reanimate homophile studies in the context of the 1990s
emergence of sexuality studies programs, wanting to secure his own legacy in such
movements, purifying ONE’s histories of the conflicts that led to its split, etc. – what is
also remarkable about the book is the 125+ page appendix that reproduces a number of
archival documents from the Institute including syllabi, course offerings, promotional
materials, and internal memoranda.
These materials form the available archive of this chapter, and reading across the
archive illuminates the ways ONE set the terms that sexuality studies would use to carry
out its research for decades to come. They reveal the challenges encountered by the early
members of ONE in defining the limits of homophile studies – challenges that expressed
complex desires of social belonging and difference that were explicitly debated within the
38

group. To establish a new discipline, ONE looked to Rankean historicism and colonial
models of education used by the United States in the Philippines for frameworks. These
models allowed ONE to position homophile studies as a field which exists within the
power structures of academia, while simultaneously affirming an “outsider” status that
was both exotic and as-yet undiscovered. The combination of the two offered the
legitimacy of being intelligible to established academic models (Rankean historicism),
but also a seductive, unchartered field waiting for serious students and scholars to come
along and lay their claims.

ONE and the Study of the Homosexual Minority
In 1951, noted sociology professor Edward Sagarin published The Homosexual in
America under the pseudonym of Donald Webster Cory. The book was one of the first
widely available publications to characterize the homosexual as a minority culture in the
United States.8 “The homosexuals are a minority group,” wrote Sagarin,
consisting of large numbers of people who belong, participate and are constantly
aware of something that binds them to others and separates them from the larger
stream of life; yet a group without a spokesman, without a leader, without a
publication, without an organization, without a philosophy of life, without an
accepted justification for its own existence. (6)
The founding members of ONE sought to respond to the climate Sagarin eloquently
described. They believed education could be a powerful tool in transforming society's

8

Robert Duncan’s essay “The Homosexual in Society,” published in the underground magazine Politics in
1944, also argued that homosexuality should be recognized as a minority.

39

perception of homosexuality – of creating a culture, a way of being homosexual, that
would encourage leaders to emerge. If the members of ONE could prove that
homosexuals constituted a historically persecuted minority, then – and only then – would
it be possible to advocate for legal protection.
But who were these founding members? Of the seven founding members who
signed the ONE’s articles of incorporation, none had formal training in pedagogy,
philosophy, cultural studies, history, or the sciences. They came from diverse
backgrounds, and knew one another socially through mutual friends or membership in
either the Mattachine Society or Knights of the Clock.9 This, of course, meant that the
founding members were all men, and moved in the same social circles. Biographical
information on some of these members is hard to come by, particularly since some
members didn’t participate in ONE for long and have left little record. Martin Block was
a stout young writer from New York who owned The Studio Bookshop in Hollywood.
Antonio Reyes was a ceramics artist and an occasional paid dancer in Mexican night
clubs around Los Angeles. Dale Jennings was something of a Renaissance man – a
dancer briefly under Martha Graham, a child prodigy with the violin, an army soldier
during WWII who served in the South Pacific, and a novelist and screenwriter who made
much of his living as a copywriter in advertising. Bailey Whitaker (a.k.a. Guy Rousseau)
was an African American schoolteacher who specialized in developmental disabilities
and was the only member of this early group to have any training in education – though,
for reasons unknown, his work with ONE would largely be in the publications division
and not with the Institute. Don Slater graduated from the University of Southern
9

The Knights of the Clock were a small group of men involved in interracial same-sex relationships.

40

California in 1952 on the G.I. Bill with a degree in English literature and worked at a
local bookstore. W. Dorr Legg grew up in Michigan and went to school first for an
undergraduate degree in piano, and then two masters degrees – one in landscape design
and the other in urban planning. He worked for many years as an urban planner in New
York, Florida and Oregon before settling in Los Angeles, and would eventually leave that
profession in 1958 when ONE’s finances permitted him to be employed full time. Merton
Bird, an accountant, was the founder of the Knights of the Clock. At the time of ONE’s
founding, Bird and Legg were in a relationship. Writing years later, Legg described Bird
as a “brilliant young black man” who originally had the idea to publish a pocket-size
homophile periodical (Legg 1). Antonio Reyes and Don Slater were also a couple, and
would be together for over 51 years, until Slater’s death. Two additional corporate
members were added in July 1953, both women, as assistants to the all-male editorial
board. Joan Corbin was recruited as the primary artist for ONE’s publications, and her
lover, Irma "Corky" Wolf, contributed art as needed.
The core group of seven went to work drafting the Articles of Incorporation that
would become the basis for the organization’s charter.10 The Articles proposed that
ONE’s main purpose would be the publication of a magazine offering a “scientific,
historical, and critical point of view” on homosexuality. Within a year, though, members
of the group turned their attention toward starting a school where homosexuals could
learn more about themselves (historically, legally, psychologically, etc.), and also educate
the larger, non-homosexual society through research, publications and public lectures. By
10

The Articles were filed with the California Secretary of State.on February 7, 1953, with the charter
established May 27 of the same year. A copy of the Articles are reproduced in the appendix of Legg 1994:
338-342.

41

1955, ONE had formalized the Education Division, led by Legg and joined by Julian
“Woody” Underwood and Jim Kepner who had joined ONE and shared Legg’s interest in
developing a school. Underwood was a mathematician and philosopher, and Kepner was
a journalist who had been collecting books on homosexuality since the early 1940s.
A formal school of homophile studies had not been attempted before and the three
men soon became overwhelmed by the task ahead. There was little precedent for what
they were doing. The closest comparison was Magnus Hirschfeld’s Institut für
Sexualwissenschaft in Berlin, which operated from its inception in 1914 until 1933 when
it was shuttered under the Third Reich and the contents of its library were burned.11
Hirschfeld’s institute, however, was dedicated to the study of all variations of human
sexuality – not just homosexuality – and was more interested in scientific research than
history, cultural studies or educating the general public. Members of ONE anticipated
resistance to creating what they saw as a new field of study focusing on the homosexual.
Hirschfeld had been able to establish his controversial Institute for Sexual Research in the
midst of the relatively liberal environment of Weimar Germany. ONE was forming on the
tail of strong social and political conservatism in the years following World War II and
the climate of polarization and conspiracy under McCarthyism.
An early statement of the principals of the ONE Education Division addressed
their aims in changing society’s attitudes towards homosexuals and emphasized the
newness of what they were attempting to do. “Turning to educators themselves, it is quite
likely that all but a few would greet with blank incomprehension any statement that

11

Much has been written about Hirschfeld and the Institut für Sexualwissenschaft. See, for example, Wolff
1986; Grau 1995; Gordon 2000; and Mancini 2010.

42

education in the field of homosexuality concerns a great deal more than psychology,
medicine or law” (Cutler 74). Here, Legg – who took the lead on developing ONE’s
education division – writing as Marvin Cutler, challenged society’s limited perception of
the homosexual as a medical or juridical subject. Legg argued that education had failed to
recognize “that there exists an entire area of study, an area as yet practically without
resources, disciplines, and academic faculty, or even students, yet an area of vital
meaning to millions of persons” – a failure ONE would take as its mission to rectify (74).
In emphasizing the void within which ONE emerged, Legg articulated the origin story of
homophile studies as discovery. The mission of the ONE Institute and Archive would be
to address the void that failed to represent homosexuals in all areas of education by
maintaining an image of absence which confirms the minority status of the homosexual,
while also trying to fill it with new research and documentary evidence.
The narrative of discovery described here and in other documents from the ONE
Institute conceals the actions of the ONE Education Division in consciously establishing
the methodologies and limits of homophile studies. Here, Legg portrayed himself and
others participating in the ONE Institute as facilitators helping others to see this “entire
area of study” that is waiting to be discovered. In other documents describing the
formation of the ONE Institute and Archive, Legg positions himself as a creator, rather
than facilitator, stressing the newness and uniqueness of homophile studies - not as a field
waiting to be discovered, but rather a field to be invented. For example, Legg’s essay
“Homosexuality in History” posits homophile history as a new discipline, and as a new
discipline, requiring set methodological procedures that can be consistently carried out by
43

future scholars. The essay, which I explore in detail later in this chapter, continues with a
reflection on several established historiographic methods and an argument for historicism
as the most suitable method for the aims of ONE. The ability of Legg and other
participants of the ONE Institute and Archive to strategically shift their positions as
facilitators and creators of homophile studies allowed a flexibility in dealing with
audience. Depending on the need, homophile studies could, for example, be seen as a
field waiting to be discovered which suggests its presence is inevitable, whether it is
addressed or not. Such a position frames dissent against the work of ONE as ignorance
and a refusal of reality. It also suggests that the homosexual can, and needs, to come into
consciousness of their legacy – Legg concludes his statement on the early principles of
the ONE Education division by stating “the homosexual, must learn his place in history
and what has been his effect on history” (Cutler 74). Alternately, by framing homophile
studies in other instances as invention, Legg explicitly articulates questions of method
and production. Invention becomes a way for Legg to solicit interest in participating in
the work of ONE. The discourse of creation is seductive, and Legg deployed it
particularly in journal articles directed toward a homosexual audience to encourage
others to become members of ONE and help to direct the future of homophile studies
through research and participation in the ONE Institute’s classes.
ONE’s earliest ventures into education described the obscurity of homophile
studies variously as discovery or invention while also stressing ONE’s role in “raising the
homosexual’s consciousness” of him/herself. But the Education Division faced major
methodological challenges in establishing the parameters of the discipline as they
44

understood it – questions they articulated implicitly and explicitly in their first articles in
the Institute’s publication ONE Institute Quarterly of Homophile Studies. With countless
words used to describe a multitude of variations in human sexuality, how would ONE
scholars address terminology? What would form the subjects of study for the purposes of
instruction at the ONE Institute and for the purposes of acquisition and processing at the
ONE Archive? For the purposes of selecting publications for instruction, how would they
separate what they saw as legitimate, unprejudiced research from research that began
from an assumption of homosexuality as a disorder or crime? Would it ever be possible
to reach out beyond the Los Angeles community with their classes and research? Unsure
of how to tackle these challenges, the three core members of the Education Division
(Legg, Underwood and Kepner) found a mentor and supporter in Merritt M. Thompson,
Emeritus Professor of Education at the University of Southern California. According to
W. Dorr Legg, he met Thompson at ONE’s first Midwinter Institute, an annual
conference of speakers, performance and social events. Legg claimed Thompson had
attended out of “a great interest in the day’s events and offered to help the fledgling
Education Division” (Legg 1994, 20). As a student of the work of education theorist John
Dewey, and with extensive experience establishing American-style education systems in
foreign countries, Merritt Thompson had the skills and background ONE needed to
define the field of homophile studies and establish a school.

45

Merritt Thompson and the ONE Colonial Education Model
Thompson’s career began in 1905 as a teacher in a rural school in New Jersey. In
1906, he was transferred by the United States government to the Philippines to assist in
establishing a national school system. In 1896, the United States took possession of the
Philippines from Spain as part of the Treaty of Paris, which ended the Spanish-American
War. The bloody conflict was one of the United States’ first forays into international
colonialism at a time when the nascent country was attempting to assert itself as a global
power on the heels of a devastating civil war. Establishing new schools in the Philippines
afforded the United States the opportunity to spread not just the English language, but
also American Progressive ideals. The education initiatives in the Philippines drew
inspiration from the theories of progressive education developed by John Dewey, whom
Thompson greatly admired.12 These theories proposed that education could be a powerful
tool of social reformation. Dewey firmly believed that while education could instruct a
student in general content, it should also be used as a tool to teach a person how to live.
In the United States, Dewey’s theories on education were used to acculturate immigrants
with the promise of better, more wholesome lives – part of the Progressive Era reform
programs of such institutions like the Hull-House in Chicago.13 The model of education
Thompson helped to institute in the Philippines replicated the work being done in the
United States. Following the annexation of the Philippines, the U.S. government sought
to Americanize the country’s citizens. Thus, Thompson’s project of education in the
12

Thompson was an active member of the John Dewey Society in the United States and devoted a large
section of his landmark book The History of Education (1933) to describing Dewey’s theories. See
Thompson 1933, 51-54; and Legg 1994, 21.
13
See Shannon Jackson’s Lines of Activity (200) for an in-depth analysis of Dewey’s involvement with
Hull-House and the Progressive movement.

46

Philippines was not simply to spread a system of knowledge, but rather a system of
being. The small education system created by Spain during the 350 years they governed
the island focused primarily on teaching the Christian doctrine to an elite few. Merritt
Thompson and others sent by the United States created a system of education rooted in
the teaching of the English language, the development of “life-skills,” and training in
hygiene practices aimed at holistically trying to make Filipinos behave more like
Americans.14 Thompson used such practices in the Philippines, and again when he was
transferred to Peru to help reorganize the country’s national education system from 19111915 and 1919-1921.15
Thompson’s work as an architect of colonial education systems heavily
influenced the formation of the ONE Institute. To begin with, Thompson’s suggestions
on structuring the field of homophile studies were directly influenced by his interest and
experience applying Dewey’s theories in the Philippines and Peru. While the ONE
Institute was not starting a program to teach hygiene practices, they were implicitly
forming an education model that would allow ONE’s research and education practices to
be recognized and assimilated into dominant education models in the United States.
ONE’s founders were not interested in simply teaching homosexuals facts about
homosexuality – they were attempting to imagine and disseminate a different way of
being within American society. ONE’s homosexual would embrace difference only so far
14

See Alexander Calata’s essay “The Role of Education in Americanizing Filipinos” in McFerson 2002,
89-97; and Holt 2002, 71-74.
15
The Republic of Peru in the early twentieth century was heavily dependent on capital investments from
the United States, creating a form of economic colonization that, among other things, spread to the
education sector. After serving in Peru, Thompson returned to the United States in 1921 where he
eventually became a Professor of Education at the University of Southern California, leading the graduate
program in that department for many years. His History of Education, first published in 1933, was a
popular text in post-secondary education programs, with reprintings well into the 1960s.

47

as to demonstrate that the homosexual was just as normal as everyone else – and indeed
had been a part of society throughout history, only positioned at fringe of visibility. To be
un-American in the United States at this time was tantamount to an accusation of
Communism – and homosexuals were widely regarded as Communists at this time.16 The
goal in ONE’s system was not to be more American – they already saw themselves as
American, and proudly so – but to be recognized as an integral part of the American
social fabric. Following Dewey’s theory that education was a powerful tool in
transforming society, ONE hoped that assimilation and visibility would make
homosexuality more positively visible to society as a whole. In later years, this policy
meant that ONE and its affiliate organizations like the Mattachine Society and the
Daughters of Bilitis – collectively described as the ‘homophile movement’ by the early
1970s – would become negatively associated by the radical protest movements of the
1960s and 1970s with trying to assimilate homosexuals into an oppressive society.
In addition to Thompson’s use of his own experiences as an architect of colonial
education systems, early meetings and publications from the ONE Education Division
adopted the language of colonialism to describe their undertaking, positioning
homophiles as colonizers of knowledge as well as oppressed colonized subjects. As the
ONE Institute began to take shape, its founders proudly stressed what they saw as a
project comparable to, if not more dramatic than the colonial projects undertaken by
Merritt Thompson abroad. Recalling those early meetings, W. Dorr Legg wrote that
“insights which Merritt contributed from his many years of work in the Third World
added a special flavor that made the meetings endlessly fascinating and stimulating”
16

See David Johnson’s The Lavender Scare (2004).

48

(Legg 22). In a 1956 report delivered to the ONE directors, Legg (writing under the
pseudonym Marvin Cutler) compared contemporary homosexuals to “primitive or
nomadic races who find themselves suddenly thrust into the very midst of 20th century
living, while lacking institutions, traditions and standards for guidance” (Cutler 74).
Further, homosexuals could be thought of as members of a vast, universal Diaspora, “far
more numerous than the Jews, yet having no holy books (or not aware that it has them),
no synagogue, no teachings, no community life to bring it into focus” (Cutler 74). By
drawing a parallel between homosexuality and Jews in the Diaspora, Legg relates ONE’s
work explicitly to the fight to establish Israel in the years following the Holocaust. Such a
parallel suggests a similar claim to political belonging, while underlying the need to
establish some sort of social structure that will allow homosexuals to have a greater
awareness of their community – a social structure that, Legg seems to suggest, ONE
might be able to begin to provide. Legg’s earlier association of homosexuality with
“primitive or nomadic races” might seem counterintuitive given the history of negative
connotations circulating separately around homosexuals and those living in non-industrial
societies. Yet, such racially-charged rhetoric from the Education Division underscored
ONE’s position that homosexuals constituted a repressed minority in their own country.
The “primitive” reflected the image of homophile studies as rough, nascent, and waiting
to be discovered. The “special flavor” of the “Third World” that Legg noted in the early
meetings of ONE attempted to appeal to colonialism’s connotations with the exotic. The
language of colonialism allowed Thompson and Legg to create an aura of fetish around
homophile studies, and in figuring those working at the ONE Institute as both colonizers
49

and colonized, Legg and Thompson signaled homosexuals would be in a unique position
of developing and controlling their own narratives.
Drawing from Dewey, Thompson also argued that the personal experiences of the
students should be valued as an important facet of the ONE Institute’s core curriculum. In
part, experience offers a way for students to relate potentially abstract concepts to
something they could personally identify with. Legg also argued that experience was
necessary for practical reasons. Without published textbooks to draw examples from, the
experiences of students and instructors often formed the central evidence for courses
ranging from psychology to law. Recounting the first class offered by the ONE Institute,
a general Introduction to Homophile Studies course in 1956, Legg wrote that the third
session on psychology “was much more detailed in presentation, a natural result coming
from the personal experiences of everyone in the class. Several were not hesitant in citing
long lists of the sins of omission and commission from their own reading and contacts
with therapists and psychologists” (Legg 1994, 28). Here, the personal experiences of the
students can either confirm or negate what is either being taught, or what the class reads.
In placing primacy on experience, the ONE Institute positions the student as both the
source of evidence and the scholar who interprets it. The student becomes the figure of
authority of their own experience, reflecting the dual role of the homophile studies as
colonized/colonizer, and that experience becomes part of the archive. The primacy of
experience would become a central component of early research in LGBT Studies that
would ultimately become the focus of debate through much of the 1990s. In her 1991
essay “The Evidence of Experience,” Joan Scott suggested that the deployment of
50

experience as evidence has allowed historians to make universalizing claims over large,
diverse groups of people. Experience, she argued, conceals difference and normative
deviation. Instead, Scott suggested scholars should examine the ways experience is
narrated as a way of seeing how subjects – women, gays, etc. – are discursively
produced. Scott’s essay helped reframe the discussion away from projects like ONE’s
that focused on the naturalization of experience, toward projects like this dissertation,
which examine how such projects of naturalization give shape to sexual identity.
As an advisor for the ONE Education Division, Thompson’s experience as an
education reformer in the Philippines and Peru were critical to the founding of the ONE
Institute. During the spring and summer of 1956, Thompson stressed to the members of
the Education Division that what they were attempting was radical, and that the formation
of homophile studies as a new field would require patience and explicit articulations of
what this field was (and was not). “Structure the field,” Thompson repeatedly told the
group. “Define your terms, for you are setting them” (Legg 1994, 21).

Defining the Disciplinary Limits: Gaining Control of the Discourse of Sexuality
Thompson’s charge to define the terms underscores the larger importance of
ONE’s education project. Their goal was not simply to teach, but to gain larger control of
the discourse surrounding same-sex sexuality in the United States. The significance of
this control cannot be overstated. Those in control of the discourse had the ability to sway
public opinion. In The Archaeology of Knowledge, Foucault describes those who
participate in the setting of discourse as ‘authorities of delimitation’ (41). By the 1950s,
51

ONE was not the only authority of delimitation. Indeed, given major publications by
psychologists like Kinsey, Hooker, and Sagarin, or the heavily publicized discourse
surrounding homosexuality in the halls of the McCarthy-era government, ONE became a
participant in a much larger post-WWII struggle over terminology that radically altered
public opinion towards same-sex sexuality.
Thus, by the time Merritt Thompson charged the founders of the ONE Institute
with structuring the field and defining their terms, they were already engaging with a
broad range of definitions, constructed by the competing desires of those with claims to
power - in medicine, sociology and the federal government, for example. ONE’s
Education Division first confronted the challenge of structuring the field by sorting
through the numerous terms that had become linked to same-sex desire through history;
among which tribade, sodomite, fracatrice, pederast, invert, pervert, Dioning, lesbian,
fellator, catamite, sapphist, Urning, bugger, androgyne, homosexual and homophile were
cited as only a few from Western cultures (Legg 23). At some point in this process, the
members of the Education Division reached the conclusion that they would choose a
single term that would reflect all of the various terms for same-sex desire through history.
ONE ultimately decided to refer to itself as a homophile organization and formally
named their school the ONE Institute of Homophile Studies.
Why homophile as opposed to one of the many other possible options –
particularly homosexual, which was in common usage at the time? First, homophile
comes from the Greek roots homos (the same) and philos (love for). In emphasizing love
over sex, homophile challenged the public perception of same-sex activity as a sexual
52

deviation, void of the possibility of forming loving, enduring relationships. Second,
unlike homosexual, homophile was a term created by those it describes. The term
homophile had been adopted by the Dutch same-sex advocacy group Cultuur en
ontspannings Centrum (C.O.C.) in the late 1940s as an alternative to homosexual.
Homosexual, particularly by the 1950s, carried medical and juridical connotations with
mental illness, abnormality and objectionable pathology, and had become an unfavorable
term among many early activists.17
Third, and finally, settling on a single term helped ONE to firmly establish
homophile studies as legitimate within established discourses of history. Jacques
Rancière’s theories on the writing of history offer some insights into how ONE used
history to legitimize the field of homophile studies, and, in turn, the homosexual in
society. In The Names of History, Rancière attempts to reveal “the unconscious” of
historical discourse – the aspects of historical discourse that are glossed over or
suppressed in order for histories to be seen as visible and legitimate within contemporary
frameworks of history-telling (xix). For history to be seen as visible and legitimate,
Rancière argues that it engages an “impossible task of articulating three contracts in a
single discourse” which he identifies as the scientific, narrative, and political contracts
(9). The scientific contract “discovers the latent order beneath the manifest order,” and
“affirms itself as absolute,” as truth (9, 51). This latent order is hidden, and is made
visible through the narrative contract. For Rancière, the narrative contract makes the
latent order visible by layering on to it the readable forms of a story, with a beginning and
17

See Legg 1994, 25. Legg also cites Jean-Claude Féray’s historicized treatises against the term
homosexual from the French magazine Arcadie: “Un Histoire Critique du Mot Homosexualité” January
1981, 11-21; February 1981, 115-124; March 1981, 171-181; and April 1981, 246-258.

53

an end, and with characters and events. The political contract ties the scientific and
narrative contracts to what Rancière calls “the contradictory constraints of the age of the
masses,” which might be seen as major reference points in historical memory – “the
regularities of common law and the great tumults of democracy, of revolutions and
counter-revolutions” (9). When these three contracts are united within the discourses of
history, it becomes legible as history, and thus, readable and teachable to all.
When applied to the work of the ONE Institute, Rancière’s three-fold contract
illuminates the ways the organization made the history of homosexuality visible and
legitimate. A single term such as homophile offers a scientific clarity of terms, limiting
the scope of ONE’s investigation and providing a clear, knowable (though, as yet,
unknown and therefore all the more appealing to the sense of scientific discovery)
subject. The latent order of homophile studies is discovered within the manifest orders of
established disciplines (named explicitly as biology and medicine, psychology, sociology
and anthropology, law, religion, literature and the arts, and philosophy). This latent order
of homophile studies can then be filled with historical narratives – the sonnets of William
Shakespeare, the libel trials of Oscar Wilde, Joan of Arc’s suggestive wearing of male
clothing, etc. Politics provides the context to tie the scientific with the narrative. In this
case, ONE folded complex terms from the past like sodomite and sapphist under the new
umbrella of homophile, making it possible to situate homophilia throughout the grand
narratives of established history. Through this lens, for example, the contemporary
persecutions of homosexuals by the federal government could be seen as a continuation
of sodomites being burned at the stake in Medieval Europe. Bugger and pederast became
54

watch-words in historical texts for homophilia, a code of sorts to keep an eye out for
while doing research, rather than time and space specific terms with possible meanings
other than those associated with 1950s conceptions of same-sex sexual identity. With this
one move, the selection of a single term, ONE was able to, borrowing the words of
Rancière, “discover” a unified history of homophilia that could be tested against
documentary materials in an archive. In order to make homophile studies legible within
the manifest order of history – and as a result, making it readable and teachable to all –
the extensive nuances and historical diversity of the terms that fell under homophile were
suppressed. The new history of homophilia was teachable, and in setting their terms, the
ONE Institute became a significant player in the power struggle over the discourse of
same-sex sexuality in the United States.

Spreading the Word: ‘Some Problems of Method’
The next step for the ONE Institute was to begin teaching the ways of thinking
about same-sex sexuality that the Education Division had developed. The first class of the
ONE Institute of Homophile Studies was held at ONE’s Los Angeles offices on October
22, 1956. The class, an Introduction to Homophile Studies, attempted to lay the
foundation of the field that the Education Division had been carefully crafting over the
previous year. The course was separated into nine sessions, meeting once a week for two
or more hours per class, with each class covering an individual sub-discipline within the
field of Homophile Studies. They were, in order: biology and medicine, history,
psychology, sociology and anthropology, law, religion, literature and the arts, and
55

philosophy. The ninth session was set aside to “raise important questions about the
relationships of each of these [sub-disciplines] to the others” (Legg 1994, 29). Fourteen
students took this first class, all staff members of the ONE Institute. This first class
consolidated the theories and methodologies Legg and Thompson had been developing,
modeled how to conduct research in homophile studies, and created a means for
disseminating it – the staff members present in the class were being trained to become
teachers of future classes. The instructor of each class session – a staff member who
claimed an interest or specialty in a given sub-discipline – made syllabi, outlines and
bibliographies on that day’s content available to the students with the aim that they were
learning not only the theories and foundations of Homophile Studies, but also
pedagogical approaches to teaching future classes based on the material available to them
at that moment.
While the Institute would continue offering classes through the mid-1980s, the
early members of the ONE Institute recognized the need to disseminate information about
the emerging field beyond the comparatively limited walls of their Los Angeles
classroom. They needed a means to publish their research findings, and spread the new
theories they were creating. In 1958, the ONE Institute and the ONE Board of Directors
announced the publication of the ONE Institute Quarterly of Homophile Studies – a
“serious but readable journal to disseminate the results of the Institute’s studies in the
homophile side of history, religion, law, literature and the sciences, and also to print or
evaluate studies or researches by other scholars in the field” (Kepner 1959, 1). The pages
of ONE Institute Quarterly contain some of the earliest treatises on a homophile
56

historiography and reflect the conscious debates and decisions that helped establish
histories of sexuality as a unique discipline.
The first issue of the ONE Institute Quarterly, published in the spring of 1958,
included W. Dorr Legg’s essay “Homophile Studies: Some Problems of Method” which
serves as his manifesto on the value of homophile studies as a discipline, and therefore,
the value of the ONE Institute. The essay began by articulating the difference between
‘homophilia’ and ‘homosexuality.’ Legg associated homosexuality with the sciences;
specifically with the medical research of biology, the sexual studies of anthropology, the
classifications of sociology, the prejudices of law, and the classic and contemporary
research of psychology.18 Legg’s frustration with the limitations of the term is evident:
“Homosexuality, and the homosexual,” he wrote, “are viewed as narrowly specific
aspects of the field but by no means as the whole of it” (Legg 1958, 4). Further, each of
the fields of science he mentions has failed to adequately address questions of
homosexuality because of prejudices within the field, hostility from religious institutions
who sway legal opinion, a lack of training in homosexual issues among researchers, and
the inaccessibility of “objective” research published in foreign languages – particularly
the psychological studies conducted in Germany from 1898-1908.
In contrast, Legg associated ‘homophilia’ specifically with the humanities
including history, art, literature and religion. Insisting that this particular essay was not
the time to delve into “any general examination of theories of history,” he reflected with

18

Legg’s association of homosexuality with science emphasizes the trend at the time to link the term
‘homosexual’ with mental disorders and social deviance. Homosexuality was listed as a mental disorder by
the American Psychiatric Association until 1973 through the efforts of Frank Kameny, Barbara Gittings
and the newly-established National Gay Task Force. See Marcus (1992).

57

surprise that the current discipline of history has largely avoided addressing the sexual
proclivities of the major figures from the past. “What of the many homophiles who at
every stage of history have played such important roles for good or for ill? Was their
homosexuality incidental to their roles in history, as is so commonly assumed?” Legg’s
quick shift to another subject suggests he felt the role of sexuality in history was much
more important than the discipline had been treating it. For Legg, literature offers
valuable global insights into the homosexual through history. However, Legg suggests
that contemporary literary critics frequently “interpret away” a character’s
homosexuality, and translations from languages ranging from Sanskrit and Persian to
Greek and German are unreliable “because those trained in the study of literatures seldom
have enough knowledge of homophilia to properly interpret their findings, or make
accurate translations of certain words and ideas” (7).
The driving force behind the ONE Institute and the formation of homophile
studies, as articulated in this article, stems from the failings of the scientific and
humanistic disciplines to sufficiently address homosexuality and homophilia,
respectively. That the myriad of disciplines that constitute the study of human existence
could actively deny and ignore the sexual variant in their research “seems almost
incredible.” And so, in response, Legg sets forth an outline for the ONE Institute’s
mission. The first task for the ONE Institute “is the collection and classification of
whatever work the various arts and sciences may already have done in the field” (7).
Noting that such work is already underway, Legg’s description of collection and
classification refers to the library and archive organized by the ONE Institute in 1956 to
58

support research. The second task Legg outlined for the ONE Institute was to take the
collected, classified works, and separate the stronger studies from the weaker ones,
arguing that the established criteria in each respective discipline would serve as a suitable
model for judging the value of the various studies. This, Legg argued, would prevent
future scholars from needlessly replicating research that had already been conducted. The
third task would be evaluating the disciplines as a whole in order to determine whether
they indeed offer anything of value to homophile studies. “In this way,” Legg noted,
“certain fields might be found as less useful than commonly thought, others stimulated
into greater activity” (7). Finally, after careful analysis of the work relating to homophilia
that had already been conducted, Legg concluded that it is then possible for the scholars
at the ONE Institute to begin developing their own theoretical positions concerning
homosexuality and homophilia.
W. Dorr Legg’s “Homophile Studies: Some Problems of Method” consciously
articulates a distinction between the various disciplines of humanist studies and how each
of them have overwhelmingly failed to address the conditions – past and present – of the
homosexual. Legg described the goal of Homophile Studies to be righting this wrong
through rigorous, ample research on homophilia using the standards of scholarship
already established by the respective disciplines of humanistic studies. This is significant
because despite the emphasis on the newness of the field of homophile studies, Legg
seems to argue that the purpose of homophile studies is corrective – to monitor other
disciplines and encourage them to include homophiles in their research.

59

Thus, while Legg claims the newness of homophile studies, he ultimately
concludes that the field will be built on the existing disciplines that once excluded them
and, consequently, Legg reinforces the primacy of established methodologies. Regardless
of whatever new theoretical approaches could be devised by the ONE Institute, they
would exist only within the limited frameworks of previously established humanist
disciplines, which would allow homophile studies to be tested against historical
documents in established archives. It was, it seems, most important for Legg that
homophile studies be recognized by established academic scholars as a legitimate field,
rather than offer an alternative, more nuanced and diverse methodological approach.

One Seamless Web – Homosexuality in History
Even with an established historiographic methodology set, there remained a
question of where to begin. What historical projects should ONE undertake first? In the
summer 1959 issue of the ONE Institute Quarterly of Homophile Studies, W. Dorr Legg
attempted to offer a beginning path for historical research in his essay “Homosexuality in
History.”19 Interestingly, Legg largely reverts back to the use of homosexual over
homophile in this essay, perhaps reflecting ONE’s ultimate decision to work within
established disciplinary paradigms and the difficulty of changing a term that had become
so deeply imbedded in 1950s culture. Beginning with the statement “Homosexuality is
known to have occurred as far back as recorded history goes,” Legg established that the
project of homophile history will be a project of recovery – to reach into past events and

19

Legg subtitled the essay “Introductory Chapter for a Proposed Textbook.” However, Legg never
published the intended volume.

60

past histories in order to shed light on issues around homosexuality that, according to
Legg, were always there (93). Yet, with so many types of historical research projects to
choose from, a necessary first step is deciding which approach would best serve the
emerging discipline of homophile studies. Here, Legg reviewed a number of approaches
to history before turning his attention to some of the larger issues in conducting historical
research. The review is extensive. From the oldest extant historical records through the
American Civil War, Legg covered philosophies of history from ecology to economy and
from evolution to existentialism. The intention behind the theoretical review is twofold: it
offers a variety of options that could potentially be applied to the emerging field of
homophile studies, while at the same time attempting to show “how it has happened that
historians have so largely ignored homosexuality in even their most microscopic
delvings” (93). Legg broadly identifies five unique approaches to historical research:
religious/theological, humanism, histories of Great Men (and Women), historicism, and
historical relativism.
He began, first, by broadly dismissing religious and other theological approaches
to history – at first giving no detailed reason beyond their being impractical. Why does
Legg do this and how does this shape ONE’s homophile historiography? In his review of
historiographic methodologies, Legg cites the work of St. Augustine of Hippo, Paul
Tillich, Christopher Dawson, and Arnold Toynbee as examples of religious or theological
histories. These types of histories see “divine intervention in all events” (93). By
declaring the theological approach to homophile history as impractical, Legg seems to
suggest that the actions of historical figures, at least when it comes to homosexuals, were
61

not inspired by the Divine – perhaps responding to the negatively held attitudes against
homosexuality by organized religions.20 Legg may also be suggesting that the Divine is
not the only motivator of man – historians must also account for what Legg, following
Freud, calls “sexual determinism,” or a sexual-based drive that motivates humans to act.
Perhaps it is a bit of both. Regardless of the reasoning behind Legg’s dismissal of
religious or theological histories, Legg removes the possibility of dealing with the
spiritual when writing homophile histories. Thus, in the disciplinary break-down of the
ONE Institute’s programming, religion is ahistorical, relegated to its own separate
discipline.
Humanism is also seen as insufficient to Legg, along with all historical
methodologies he sees as teleological. Unlike the other methodologies he describes, Legg
gives no definition for how he understands humanism. He notes that humanism emerged
in the Italian Renaissance and can be seen in the work of such scholars as Niccolò
Machiavelli and Francesco Guicciardini. In later years, the humanist torch would be
picked up by the likes of Voltaire (François-Marie Arouet), Edward Gibbon, Immanuel
Kant, Georg Hegel, Wilhelm von Humboldt, Adam Smith, Henry Thomas Buckle, Karl
Marx, and Gordon Childe, among others. That each of these individuals tackles
historiography in such disparate ways, further begs the question of how Legg defined
humanism. If anything resembling a definition can be deduced from Legg’s description
of humanism, it is that it seems to be a methodology that examines specific, isolated

20

Founded in Los Angeles by Reverend Troy Perry in 1968, The Metropolitan Community Church was one
of the first religious fellowships in the United States to positively address the needs of LGBT people. It has
since become an international church with over 250 congregations. See Faderman & Timmons (2006), 162168.

62

aspects (or sub-disciplines) of the human experience – separated from other aspects of
historical influence. Examples of such sub-disciplines would include, for example,
economic, evolutionary, anthropological, sociological, and psychoanalytical histories.
Why would Legg see humanism as impractical to the homophile historiographic project?
Similar to theological histories, Legg argued that humanism does not account for the
importance of sexual drive when examining the actions of men. Suggesting, for example,
that economic motives for action as described by Marx, by and large, are rooted in sexual
drives (“However shocking economic determinists may find this, modern scientific views
of man may yet compel the conclusion that a theory of sexual determinism is more
realistic historiography than any devised in the nineteenth century”), Legg goes so far as
to predict that such historical studies of the battle of Austerlitz or of class struggles in the
times of Augustus will be seen as frivolous, “to be classified, alongside medieval
theological exercises, as being not relevant for one seriously seeking an understanding of
the human condition” (95). Thus, Legg’s central concern against humanist historiography
seems to be the analysis of historical events from a singular lens – focusing, for example,
only on economics rather than other possible contributing factors. Legg is clearly walking
a fine line. While not exactly advocating a historiography of sexual determinism, he is
also saying that of all the historiographies of this genre – economic, theological,
agricultural, etc. – sexual determinism is the most all encompassing of them.
Psychoanalytical research by the 1950s seemed to support the famous quote from Oscar
Wilde that “everything in the world is about sex except sex. Sex is about power.” Thus,

63

for Legg, one of the most central motivating factors in the history of humanity has been
sex.
A historical study of “Great Men (and Women)” who were homosexuals – many
of whom (such as Plato, Alexander the Great, Leonardo da Vinci, Niccolò Machiavelli, et
cetera), have become heroes of heterosexual histories – would “certainly be both readable
and racy, perhaps something of an intellectual bombshell” (95). However, Legg dismisses
the idea of writing a grand history of famous homosexuals as presumptuous, given the
nascent state of the field of homophile studies. While the general student of history “has
available to him the rich resources of many centuries of careful historiographic research,”
“beginnings have scarcely yet been made” in the field of homophile history (95). What
distinguishes this historiographic methodology from the others Legg lists is that it is the
only methodology that he approves of, but for which he argues society is not yet ready –
highlighting once again that Legg’s debate on historiographic method is not just about
practical scholarship, but about strategic politics and positionality. Homophile
historiography cannot, at least at first, dramatically challenge established,
heteronormative histories, for fear that such a historical project would further alienate
homosexuals from mainstream society. Such a statement is remarkable for the time. At a
moment in the nascent, formative stages of the homophile movement when there were
many possibilities of offering more radical and inclusive alternatives to dominant
paradigms, Legg’s intervention contributes to the shaping of what the homophile
movement would become. Here, we see him carefully eliminating certain possibilities in
favor of choices that he feels are the most politically advantageous and practically
64

manageable – choices which are ultimately directed toward encouraging the
homosexual’s assimilation into mainstream society. This project of assimilation, which
can be seen forming in Legg’s article, would become the foundational mission of the
homophile movement through the radical liberationist movements in the 1970s. The
result, of course, is that the homophile project adopts the exclusionary practices that
focus on white men of privilege. An example of this mentality can be found in Legg’s use
of the term “Great Men (and Women)” which reduces half of the population to a
parenthetical and suggests that Great Women are somehow less likely or less important to
the homophile project. As I discuss in the following chapter on the Lesbian Herstory
Archives, histories of lesbian women, lesbians and gays of color, and the economically
poor would have their own debates on historiographic methodologies – weighing whether
it is important or even desirable to participate in scholastic conversations that have
historically excluded and denigrated them.
In the last part of the article, Legg ultimately argued for what he saw as a
methodological approach somewhere between the historicism of Gottfried Herder,
Leopold von Ranke, Lord John Edward Acton, and Benedetto Croce, and the historical
relativism of José Ortega y Gasset, Wilhelm Dilthey, and John Dewey. He wrote that
these methodologies reflect an approach to history that is “nothing less than the
examination of human life in its totality and multiplicity” (historicism) through the
specific, compounding studies of particular historical periods, or “problems, principally
in the light of its own configuration, as a gestalt, or whole” (historical relativism) (94).
Legg suggested that these approaches are particularly appealing “in deference to western
65

and particularly American tastes” (95). Indeed, in the 1950s, many American historians
working at colleges and universities were engaged in a heated debate over the merits of
historical relativism over historicism – a debate deftly described in Peter Novick’s
extensive history of the American historical profession, That Noble Dream, and to which
I refer to in my introduction to this dissertation. Merritt Thompson would have certainly
been aware of this debate, and while his clear affinity for Dewey would have likely
landed Thompson squarely in the historical relativist camp, Legg’s suggestion that
homophile historiography could somehow blend these two different methodologies
suggests that once again Legg was trying to politically hedge his bets. In light of the
exclusions of religious and humanist histories, it can also be deduced that Legg found
historicism and historical relativism more appealing because they allowed for an
approach to history that could include a variety of factors beyond the Divine, the
economic, the psychoanalytical, etc. Namely, they allowed sexual determinism to be
included – and since historicism and historical relativism were, as Legg noted, the
appealing “western and particularly American tastes” in the post-war period, these two
methodologies would allow discussions of homosexuality to enter into historical
narratives without being perceived as a major threat to the academic establishment.
On the one hand, historical relativism posits that a historical event can only be
understood on its own terms. As I described earlier in the theories of John Dewey that
Thompson brought to ONE, historical relativism favors the experience of the individual –
rejecting the belief that there is one, singular truth of history in favor of a multitude of
truths that stem from the experiences of many. Such an approach applied to homophile
66

history would have to take into account, for example, that Renaissance references to
“sodomy” and “buggery” are not equivalents to homosexuality as it is understood in the
1950s, but must be examined within the specific contexts of that period. This, ultimately,
is not the route Legg would take at ONE, nor would it gain traction in the academy for a
few more decades to come. With the Cold War in full force, Americans overwhelmingly
took comfort in the absolute truths and national identity historicism could offer.
Historicism emerged in the wake of the 1789 revolution in France and the
Napoleonic conquests, when early nineteenth-century European historians sought a way
of writing and understanding history with the same sense of authority and verifiable
accuracy as the sciences. As I mentioned in the introduction, German historian Leopold
von Ranke led this movement, arguing that the job of the historian is to create a
trustworthy reconstruction of the past using objects (primarily documents) as
data/evidence. The primacy of the document gave history the legitimacy of science by
endowing it with the faith it would accurately reflect the past, and the archive – which
would house and order these important documents – would become the historian’s allimportant laboratory. As Peter Novick pointed out in That Noble Dream, Ranke’s
philosophies became the bedrock of American historicism, which would dominate the
historical profession in the United States for decades.
Ranke’s historicist approach offered homophile studies an established historical
methodology that would support its mission to create a stronger homophile identity, and
thus a stable, legitimate place in society for the homosexual. Just as historicism helped to
establish a sense of French national identity following the Revolution by giving it a
67

documented and verifiable past, historicism under ONE would establish an identity
around homosexuality by creating an archive of historical materials that would support
such an identity’s past. Yet, Legg recognized that historicism posed several challenges
for the homophile historian. How, for example, can the term homosexual equally be
attributed to Oscar Wilde, “a well-known homosexual, yet a husband and father,” Marie
Antoinette, “also married and a mother, who had considerable homosexual experience,”
and Aristotle, “whose homosexuality may have been either sporadic or short-lived” (Legg
1959; 96). Given Legg’s previously stated articulation of the challenges of terminology,
how do would-be homophile historians address questions of terminology, definitions and
translations? Legg offers no solution, suggesting that, while he recognizes these questions
as important to the field, he must “bypass the question of definitions for the time being”
and simply deal with studies of individuals and groups who are known “to have
considerable homosexual experience” (96). Still, Legg insists, the historian should be
acutely aware of “loaded” words and phrases, whose language conceals homosexual
meaning. As an example, Legg notes that the use of ‘loins’ and ‘thighs,’ when
appropriately translated, “throw much light on attitudes toward homosexuality among the
early Hebrews” (96).
Legg’s description of homophile historiography and its limitations cannot be
underestimated, as it became the dominant practice of gay and lesbian historiography for
the next three decades with even longer-lasting implications for LGBT archives. Legg
expressly understands how existing historiographic methodologies fail to capture the
nuance of human sexuality – that a historicist approach to homophile history requires
68

terms like “loins” and “thighs” to be flattened into terms like “homosexual” and “gay.”
Yet, in spite of this recognition, Legg fails to realize that the profusion of terms to
describe same-sex sexuality over history suggests a multitude of ways of understanding
human sexuality. The inability to capture an ‘essence’ of human sexuality into a single
term suggests that such an essence does not, in fact, exist - despite familiar and
unfamiliar markers of same-sex desire expressed in different times and spaces. Legg’s
articulation of a historicist homophile historiography assumes that terms like homosexual
can be applied to individuals and events through a teleological chronology of history
(what Legg refers to as ‘one great historical continuum’). It is true that Legg recognizes
homosexual is an unstable, inaccurate term, yet, in practice, he acknowledges that he
cannot imagine another way to write the histories of homophile studies. He follows
Merritt Thompson’s advice to “define your terms,” even when the terms are fluid. Legg is
also aware that having a multitude of ways of understanding human sexuality is not
politically advantageous at a time when members of ONE are seeking to create a
collective sense of identity among homosexuals by establishing a shared history.
It would be easy to simply dismiss ONE’s approach as reductive and inaccurate.
What I want to stress, though, is the central place Legg’s articulations of methodology
and approach had/has in helping to form a collective identity by stressing
homosexuality’s presence throughout history, in every culture, class, and profession,
around the world, across time and space. This was not the dominantly held belief, and at
the time of ONE’s founding, history had not seen homosexuality in this way – in the rare
instances when history had seen homosexuality at all. ONE would need to write these
69

histories themselves, with the expressed mission of revealing the homosexual’s presence
in history and, in turn, revealing the ways historians have actively concealed the
homosexual from earlier studies. Once ONE established the basic parameters, definitions
and approaches to homophile studies – history, biology, psychology, law, anthropology,
sociology, religion, philosophy, and art and literature – the ONE Institute needed an
archive to draw from. The ONE Archive would serve several purposes. It would be a
repository of sources used in the Institute’s teaching and research; it would legitimize
Homophile Studies as a discipline, materially proving that homosexuals had existed
throughout history; and it would model the way of thinking about homosexuality that the
institute was trying to teach.

Pasts and Presents: Jim Kepner and the Founding of the ONE Archive
It is no coincidence, then, that the ONE Institute and the ONE Archive were
founded simultaneously. The archive began with a few boxes of books and ONE’s
organizational records stored behind couches and in closets of the homes of ONE
committee members. In 1956, the ONE Institute’s Jim Kepner recommended ONE rent
an additional room to house the growing archive, and in return, he would donate over
four hundred books from his personal collection.
An archivist’s collection speaks volumes about the person who collected and
organized it, and vice versa. Jim Kepner was born in 1923 and was believed to be from
Galveston, Texas. In September of that year, according to his obituary, he was found
under a bush, wrapped in newspaper. He wasn’t told he was adopted until he was
70

nineteen, when his adoptive father brought him to San Francisco to live. Kepner’s
collecting began in 1942, when the 19 year-old went to the San Francisco Public Library
in search of texts that would help explain his interest in other men. He found very little
there and decided if he was going to learn anything, he’d have to start his own collection.
Searching the city’s used bookstores, Kepner found a number of volumes that directly or
indirectly related to same-sex desire, and slowly amassed a substantial collection from
money he saved working various jobs in factories, newspapers and as a taxi-driver. The
first item in his collection was the most widely-available book dealing with same-sex
relationships at the time, Radclyffe Hall’s lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness.
An avid collector of both homosexual material and science-fiction/fantasy novels,
Kepner’s interest reflected a common theme among many of ONE’s members – an
idealized, utopic vision of the future. Kepner could identify with many of the heroes of
the novels he read. Like Superman or Batman, Kepner was orphaned at a young age, had
become detached from his family/people, and had a secret identity that he had to
carefully guard. In 1951, he moved to Los Angeles where he soon became involved with
the Mattachine Society - and soon after, ONE. Kepner became a frequent contributor to
ONE magazine, and when the ONE Institute began, he became one of the school’s most
active students and teachers. In the early years, despite the size of Kepner’s collection,
the archive was run by Donald Slater, who was a librarian by training, though Kepner
remained active in building the archive’s holdings. Kepner would leave ONE in 1961 due
to political infighting that preceded the schism that separated the organization.
Disappointed in the loss of the collection, Kepner began collecting again, and by 1971,
71

when his Hollywood apartment was filled nearly to capacity, he began welcoming
researchers to his home – which he called the Western Gay Archives. He would later rent
a storefront space in Hollywood and change the name to the National Gay Archives, and
then later to the International Gay and Lesbian Archives, as the scope of his collection
grew. By 1994, following the death of W. Dorr Legg, Kepner agreed to merge his archive
with the existing ONE Institute that Legg had continued following the schism, and in that
way, Kepner’s collection once again became the cornerstone of ONE’s archive. In 2000,
the University of Southern California provided a small building to house the ONE
Archive. The archive was ultimately donated to the USC Libraries in October, 2010.
As I mentioned at the start of this chapter, what remains of the early 1950s ONE
archive is a partial list of the first five hundred books in the collection, now incorporated
into the Vern and Nancy Bullough Collection on Sex and Gender at California State
University Northridge. Kepner’s original donation to ONE in 1956 formed the core of his
non-fiction collection. Examining the list reveals what seems like a veritable hodgepodge of sources – 19th century German psychology studies, Joseph McCabe’s History of
Life and Morals in Greece and Rome, Shakespeare’s Edward II, religious tracts on the
sins of Sodom, biographies of Joan of Arc and Oscar Wilde, etc. These books were not
uncommon. Many of the recent tracts could be found in local church libraries and homes.
The classical histories and psychology studies could be checked out from public and
academic libraries. The biographies and plays could have certainly been purchased in any
major bookstore. Yet, brought together by ONE in their archive of homophile studies, the
materials are given new meaning. Thus, Edward II is claimed as a tragic homosexual, and
72

the play, when read along side some of Shakespeare’s sonnets, suggest the famous bard
himself was a homosexual. The life and morals of Greece and Roman reveal to ONE
scholars that, if read in accurate translations, some of the greatest leaders and
philosophers of antiquity – held in such high regard by Western civilization – engaged in
sexual relationships with other men or young boys, and thus could also be claimed as
homosexual. Joan of Arc – the enigmatic heroine of France – was a strong, independent,
unmarried woman with an affinity towards wearing male clothing, which was strong
enough evidence for ONE to claim her as a lesbian.21 The religious tracts against sodomy
not only proved the historical presence of homosexuals (sodomites, here, equated with
homosexuals), they also demonstrated the historical persecution of homosexuality – even
though sodomy was a broad term where, depending on the time, space, and circumstance
it was being used, it accounted for everything from bestiality to inhospitality towards
one’s neighbors.
Reflecting on both the content and the classification of the ONE Archive,
classified under the various expressed sub-disciplines of homophile studies – sociology,
history, religion, etc. – it is possible to see how ONE’s collections practices reflect
Rankian historicism and modernist methodologies. Michel de Certeau notes that
modernist histories begin “with the gesture of setting aside, of putting together, of
transforming certain classified objects into documents” (1988, 72). This gesture is a form
of cultural re-distribution, stripping objects of their original purpose and contexts to form
new sets of data, while also assigning to them the limitations of how and to what purpose
21

Kepner later wrote that his active attempts at collecting lesbian history often included documenting
“independent women even when there was no evidence they’d had sex with other women (few left such
evidence around).” (Kepner 1998, 181)

73

that data will be used. In this way, the ONE Archive became an important locus for
thinking about how a history of homosexuality could be written. Through its collection
and classification, ONE could suggest, for example, that such disparate subjects as the
kinaidos of Ancient Greece and the life of Saint Joan of Arc were connected, and helped
give meaning and legitimacy to the emergent homosexual minority.
And yet, the ONE archive also reveals the slippage that necessarily exists in every
archive. The historicist approach laid out by Legg in his essay on methodologies insists
on a Rankian concept of history as a provable, factual science. The archive is the
laboratory where evidence is tested against the weight of truth. But let us not forget the
influence of John Dewey through Merritt Thompson on this archive, which emphasizes
the importance of individual experience. The “Truth” of Rankian historicism, in any
archive, is constructed by a series of choices and available materials made by archivists
and donors over time. Histories are written using materials from an archive, and what
exists in an archive depends on the economics and personal interests of the archival staff.
The bulk of the ONE archive was, and continues to be, made from donations of personal
collections like Kepner’s, and the bulk of these donations were from gay white men.
ONE had a collections policy aimed toward representing the diversity of homosexuals
that included an attention toward gender, race and class. But faced with the constraints of
a limited staff and a small budget, the archive took what homosexual-adjacent material it
had access to. The majority of women involved with ONE in the beginning quickly
became discouraged by the sexist exclusions of the men and left the organization to form

74

separate groups.22 ONE also had policies to ensure a diverse advisory board, originally
stipulating, for example, that the nine-member board would have to have at least three
women, and at least one board member should be African-American, one should be
Asian-American and one “should be a member of another racial or ethnic group” (White
2009, 34). However, these policies were never fully realized. The board was never this
diverse. And one of the results of this is that ONE Archive’s holdings reflected the
perception of homosexual identity held by a select few gay white men who had the means
and access to procure, donate, and interpret the collection’s materials. It also meant many
of the Institute’s first students were gay white men, and many of its first research studies
focused on male homosexuality in Western society. Despite the advisory board’s
awareness that their work did not reflect the diversity of homosexuals as they saw it,
there seems to have been a belief that these were the necessary preliminary conditions of
establishing the discipline of homophile studies, and that a more nuanced collection
would come with time and, hopefully, greater resources. Meanwhile, they argued the
research and collections work that they were conducting was an important and necessary
start.
I am not interested in criticizing ONE’s lack of inclusivity, or offering
justifications for its shortcomings. What is interesting is how these shortcomings form the
foundations of homophile, and later GLBT, studies. ONE sought to construct, legitimize
and circulate the homophile as a collective, historically universal, politically and socially
constituted, cultural minority – and they did this based on their own personal

22

One of the first and most enduring of these organizations to be formed by former members of ONE was
the Daughters of Bilitis.

75

understandings of their own sexuality. The ability to see a homosexual in Ancient
Greece, for example, meant that Legg saw something of himself in that history – an
awareness of certain actions and behaviors in the past that he identified with in the
present. To suggest that ONE failed in fully representing the diversity of homosexuality
hinges on the belief that there was, or could be, a fully accurate representation of
homosexual identity that is achievable. While it is true that ONE could have more
materials that reflect more people from more backgrounds, it is possible that such a
proposition falls into the modernist trap that the more an archive acquires, the closer it is
to a knowable ‘truth.’ Thus, rather than thinking of the ONE Archive – or any archive,
for that matter – as being able to (or failing to) represent the diversity of sexual identity, I
propose that it is more productive to examine how the archive implicitly and explicitly
creates particular understandings of sexual identity through its acquisitions, classification,
and in some cases, interpretative practices. Rather than seeing archival collections as
being capable of accurately representing the past, they can be seen as reflections of the
desires and intentions of those who create and use them.

76

Chapter II

The Archive as Hospitable Home: The Lesbian
Herstory Archives
“My archival self has been formed by my experience of degradation, sexual exuberance,
and the dignity of resistance in the Greenwich Village policed bars of the ‘50s, by my
reading of Franz Fanon and Albert Memmi in the 1960s when I started teaching students
from colonized backgrounds in the first open enrollment program of the City University
of New York, by my involvement in the American civil rights movements, anti-war
movements, and gay liberation movements, and even before I learned the life-giving
existence of counter-narratives to the nationally assumed…. My home was a public
gathering place for those who needed information, solace, material for creation,
connections of all kinds, planning political actions as well as films, books, and theater.
The archival space now seems to me that place where the private becomes a public
shadow. The place of uncontained conversations.”
- Joan Nestle, Co-Founder of the LHA
In the period following the Stonewall riots in 1969, homosexuals were
increasingly recognized as a political constituency in the United States and Canada.
Major cities and even some smaller ones often had several organizations responding to
the various social and political needs and desires of the local lesbian and gay
communities. Openly gay and lesbian politicians were being elected to public office for
the first time.23 City Councils were passing local ordinances protecting the civil rights of
lesbian and gay citizens. Marches, demonstrations, and an increased presence in popular
media brought lesbian and gay life to the broader public. Social and institutional attitudes
23

When Nancy Wechsler and Jerry DeGrieck came out after being elected to the city council of Ann Arbor,
Michigan, they were considered the first openly lesbian and gay individuals to serve in a public office. A
year later, Wechsler decided not to run for re-election and was replaced by openly lesbian candidate Kathy
Kozachenko, becoming one of the first openly lesbian individuals to be elected to a public office. Allan
Spear was elected to the Minnesota State Legislature in 1972 and came out in 1974. He would go on to
serve in the state House and Senate till 2001. Elaine Noble was the first openly gay individual to be elected
to state office when she became a member of the Massachussets House of Representatives in 1974.

77

toward homosexuality were changing rapidly, and there was growing concern among
some gay and lesbian political organizations about how to document and preserve the
work they were doing. There was a realization that what they were doing was historic,
and, if not properly documented, individual organizations’ contributions would go
unrecognized. Saving materials relating to these early political movements also could be
used as a resource for future activist work. Much of the archival work being done during
this period was happening at the über-local level – people’s living rooms and closets,
filing cabinets in an individual organization’s office, etc. – without a plan for long-term
preservation or short-term accessibility. Many historians of the post-Stonewall period
frequently note the constant in-fighting among lesbian and gay activists over the various
directions the movements could take, but none have really examined the battle over
archives and the ways lesbian and gay histories would be written. While ONE had
established basic principles for understanding and claiming homosexuality within the
context of homophile studies and academic disciplines, lesbian and gay liberation
movements were generally leery of institutions and academic establishments.
Two articles in the 1979 issue of the Gay Insurgent capture two opposing views
on grassroots archiving in the gay and lesbian communities, both directed at the
individuals who were undertaking this work. The first article was by Jim Monahan, a
Chicago-based archivist, member of the Gay Academic Union, and a follower of the kind
of assimilationist model established by the ONE Archive. Articulating the most pressing
concerns for gay and lesbian archives, Monahan argued that chief among them was the
need to secure the materials and make them accessible for serious scholarship.
78

Collections were largely located in homes and small offices across the country, leaving
the materials unprotected in the long term. Monahan was particularly concerned by the
1977 police raids at the Toronto offices of The Body Politic. Founded in 1971, The Body
Politic was one of Canada’s leading gay and lesbian news magazines. In 1973, the
editorial board of The Body Politic opened what was then known as the Canadian Gay
Liberation Movement Archives (CGLMA) within their cramped offices on Temperance
Street in downtown Toronto.24 In December, 1977, members of a Toronto pornography
vice squad known as “Operation P” raided the offices and archives, removing over 12
crates of materials. Monahan felt strongly that gay and lesbian archives were not safe in
private hands. Vandalism and police raids on homes and organization offices put
collections in danger. In his article, he advocated working with established archives and
libraries to develop collections in gay and lesbian studies. Materials would be better
protected and preserved for the long-term and would allow greater accessibility to
scholars working across disciplines. Access to these collections, Monahan argued, would
have to be limited. “Vandalism, under the best of circumstances, has reached pandemic
proportions in libraries and archives in general. Gay materials would only invite angels of
retribution” (9). Access would need to be granted by the repository upon application,
with researchers giving evidence of membership in a gay organization, appointment at an
academic institution, approval from the donor of a collection, or student status at an
accredited institution if the student had a letter of support from an instructor. Ironically,
Monahan argues that in spite of these limitations, legitimate scholars would have greater

24

The archives were renamed the Canadian Gay Archives in 1975, and were renamed the Canadian
Lesbian and Gay Archives in 1993.

79

access to the material because they will be located in places where established research is
already being conducted – a point that follows W. Dorr Legg’s argument on the
legitimacy of academia. Monahan concluded his essay arguing against the ‘ghettoization’
of gay archives, saying that “to remain separate, both physically and intellectually from
general history is to cultivate parochialism” (8). Such parochialism, Monahan argued,
would leave gay studies to “faddish chance, to exist in once-in-a-while course offerings
passing from existence as the fad and instructors pass.”
Joan Nestle, founding member of the Lesbian Herstory Archives in New York,
wrote the second article in the Gay Insurgent as a direct response to Monahan. “The
Lesbian Herstory Archives contradicts almost all the main points of Jim Monahan’s
article,” she wrote, “but this is not surprising because the experience giving birth to the
conceptions is very different” (10). Calling both ‘historical understandings’ and
‘academic institutions’ failed terms, she argued in favor of lesbian and gay archives
staying within the communities they serve and represent, not out of parochialism, but out
of a sense that history is the tool that individuals can use to come into consciousness of
themselves as part of a community. Academic institutions had denied the histories and
herstories of gays and lesbians, and asking “the patriarchal destroyer to preserve is a
suicidal act” (10).
The Lesbian Herstory Archives (LHA) was born out of that desire Nestle spoke
of, to seek a sense of self through history, and since its founding in the early 1970s it
continues to serve as one of the country’s oldest continually operating archives relating to
sexual identity. For Nestle and the other founders of the LHA, the homophile model of
80

archiving articulated by W. Dorr Legg and Jim Kepner of the ONE Institute and Archives
re-inscribed patriarchal systems of oppression by locating homosexual themes in the
dominant narratives of the various disciplines of academia. ONE’s model focused on the
acceptance of homosexuality within the academy, which they hoped would expand into
acceptance by society at large. The LHA, however, focused its attention on the individual
within the context of a community. In their vision, you did not come to the institutional
archive as a scholar conducting research. You came to a home as a person hungry to
understand who you are and where you fit within a society where you do not see yourself
visibly represented.
The LHA’s understanding of the archive as home is both literal and figurative.
The archive has always been located within a residence, and the archive’s by-laws
stipulate that a lesbian must always live onsite to offer a living context for the collections.
The idea of an archive-as-home also extends to the hospitality volunteers show towards
guests, and the sharing of history is regularly described by Nestle and the LHA staff as an
act of familial, inter-generational engagement. The gesture of preserving materials in an
archive is referred to as “an act of mothering” (Nestle 1979, 11). The “home” of the
archive is both public and private, a space where secrecy, sexuality, and shame are
graciously shared with visiting strangers. “The archival space now seems to me,” said
Nestle, “that place where the private becomes a public shadow. The place of uncontained
conversations” (Nestle 2014). Within the boxes that form the archive’s collection are the
private thoughts and desires, the intimate moments of sexual expression, the secrets kept
from relatives that are now accessible in semi-public ways. This chapter explores the
81

concept of the archive as home within the context of the LHA, teasing out the
relationships between public and private that are at the core of this archive’s radical
reimagining of the function and practice of an archive within a community.
Few other LGBT archives have had the longevity and stability of the Lesbian
Herstory Archives. Since it began receiving visitors in 1975, much has been written using
the collections and much has been written about the collections. The archive has been
able to publish its own narratives through the various collected writings of Joan Nestle, as
well as the nineteen Lesbian Herstory Archives Newsletters that have been published for
free since 1975.25 The newsletters included updates on the work of the archives, new
acquisitions, extensive bibliographies of Lesbian literature, transcripts of oral histories,
letter requests from researchers seeking information they couldn’t find in the archives,
original poetry and artwork, suggestions for preserving their own archive-worthy
materials, and much more. All of this has shaped the way the LHA has been perceived by
volunteers and the visiting public. Several anthologies of literature, poetry, diaries,
letters, and news articles – such as Sonya Jones’ Gay and Lesbian Literature Since World
War II (1998), Julia Penelope’s Lesbian Culture (1993), and Arden Eversmeyer’s A Gift
of Age: Old Lesbian Life Stories (2009) – have been published using the source material
found at the LHA. Ronnie Walker (1990) and Polly Thistlethwaite (1997), both
volunteers at the archives, wrote doctoral dissertations documenting the history of the
LHA and its unique lesbian feminist approach to archiving. Thistlethwaite also
contributed a chapter about the LHA in James Carmichael’s anthology Daring to Find
Our Names: The Search for Lesbigay Library History (1998), in which she articulates
25

The LHA published its most recent newsletter in the spring of 2004.

82

some of the challenges the archive has faced when competing against larger, more visible
institutions like the New York Public Library. In An Archive of Feelings (2003), Ann
Cvetkovich uses the Lesbian Herstory Archives as one of several archival sites to
theorize trauma, and to argue the importance of archiving accounts of sexual trauma as
both ordinary and catastrophic allows for a more sex-positive approach toward moving
through the range of feelings associated with such traumas. Lisa Duggan frequently refers
to the LHA in her 1986 essay “History’s Gay Ghetto,” as an example of how gay and
lesbian archives straddle academic and community-based research practices while
existing as communities under social and political attack. The first third of the 1994 film
documentary Not Just Passing Through details the work of the LHA and, through
interviews with community members, the personal impact it has had on various
individual lives. Similarly, a film documentary on the life and work of Joan Nestle, Hand
on the Pulse (2002), articulates the central role the archives had in her life for nearly forty
years. Central to this chapter is the voice of Joan Nestle. Not only was Nestle the first and
longest residential caretaker of the archives, she wrote many of the founding documents
that still govern the archive’s management, as well as articles interpreting their work for
the general public. This chapter uses all of these sources as well as my own visit to the
Lesbian Herstory Archives in 2012, to articulate the unique ways this home to lesbian
memories blurs the boundaries between public and private space as a way of creating
social families in the present.
I begin this chapter detailing the formal founding of the archive in Nestle’s Upper
West Side apartment, unpacking the self-articulated principals of the archive. From that
83

UWS apartment to a brownstone in Brooklyn’s Park Slope neighborhood, I use feminist
theory to explain the importance of home and family within the context of 1970s lesbian
feminist discourse and explore how these concepts were implemented practically within
the public/private space of the archive/home. From my discussion on home and family, I
use recent critical theory on hospitality to describe an alternative mode of creating and
transmitting archival knowledge than the institutional mode of archives like ONE. The
institutional model approach requires a level of distance between the researcher and the
subject, which allows it to be critically studied. The LHA’s performance of hospitality
ensures that any engagement with the archive – whether as a volunteer or as a member of
the public – is a social practice. Finally, the chapter concludes with an examination of
LHA’s work today, calling into question the long-term normative expectations of a
community framed within the context of home and family at a time when lesbian and gay
youth are increasingly refusing labels of identity.

Founding the Archives
The Lesbian Herstory Archives owe many of its founding principals to the lesbian
feminist movements, which emerged from the lesbian and gay liberation movements and
1960s second wave feminism. While women’s and gay right’s movements were finding
their voice in the 1960s, lesbians struggled with exclusion on both fronts. Women who
joined gay homophile or liberation organizations confronted sexism and hostility. In
some cases, men in these organizations replicated sexist behaviors occurring in
heterosexual households across the country – expecting women to provide refreshments
84

and perhaps take meeting minutes, but otherwise leaving the “real work” to the men
(After Stonewall 1999). Lesbians also found hostility within mainstream feminist
movements. Many heterosexual feminists resented the stereotype that all feminists were
lesbians and accused them of coopting the feminist movement for their own agenda.
Betty Friedan, president of the National Organization for Women (NOW) famously
referred to lesbian activists as a “lavender menace,” and in a 1970 press statement she
accused lesbians of trying to divide the movement from within (Warner x). Without a
political “home” in either the gay rights or feminist movements, many lesbians broke
away to create a separate movement, inspired by the work of each group but focusing on
issues directly related to their own cause. For example, a group of women from NOW
responded directly to Friedan’s attacks by forming a collective the same year, originally
calling themselves the “Lavender Menace” and later renaming themselves the
“Radicalesbians.” In 1970, the group published one of the first articulations of lesbian
feminist politics in their manifesto The Woman-Identified Woman, and soon after others
followed, including Village Voice journalist Jill Johnston’s book Lesbian Nation: The
Feminist Solution and Anne Koedt’s Radical Feminism, both published in 1973. All of
these works sought to establish the centrality of sexuality within feminist theory and
practice, drawing on the movement’s politicization of domesticity and family structures.
Johnston’s book urged women to reject feminine behaviors, to be aggressive in the
pursuit of sexual pleasure, and to refuse monogamy, which she argued is a kind of
domestic slavery. Koedt contributed to the discussion of the politicization of sex by
arguing against pornography, penetrative stimulation, and other “male-stream”
85

activities.26 A set of aesthetics were adopted by lesbian feminists – particularly younger
urban women – with the intention of rejecting femininity, classism and materialist
consumption. This style was marked by short hair, second-hand clothing, jeans, work
boots, and plaid shirts. Lesbian feminists adamantly rejected butch-femme culture, a
mainstay of lesbian culture for decades, arguing that it perpetuated relationship structures
where women were placed in either feminine passive or masculine patriarchal roles
(Chenier 2004). This newly developing movement offered a coherent, visible political
movement by and for lesbian women for the first time, but such regimentation was, in
many ways, a rejection of the lesbian cultures that had developed over the previous
decades. It was a rejection that separated many older lesbian women who had come out in
the mid-1960s and earlier from women who were finding their home within lesbian
feminism.
Joan Nestle and others like her who had come out in the 1950s, now had to
contend with hostilities from younger lesbians, in addition to the hostilities from society
at large, and her frustration brought her to the Gay Academic Union. In March, 1973,
Joan Nestle met informally with seven men – college faculty, graduate students, a writer
and a director – in an apartment in Manhattan to discuss the challenges faced by gay
academics. While the exact identities of all eight individuals has never been made public,
John D’Emilio – who was one of the eight, and a graduate student in history at Columbia
University at the time – described what would become the founding of the Gay Academic

26

See her essay “The Myth of Vaginal Orgasm” in the anthology Radical Feminism (New York:
Quadrangle, 1973).

86

Union (GAU) in that organization’s published proceedings.27 Faced with similar
experiences – challenges gaining administrative approval for teaching gay-related
courses, difficulties in establishing research methodologies, trouble locating source
materials, etc. – the group agreed to pursue hosting an academic conference of gay and
lesbian academics. The first conference was held over Thanksgiving weekend in 1973 at
CUNY’s John Jay College of Criminal Justice on the theme of “Universities and the Gay
Experience.” Keynote addresses were given by activist Barbara Gittings, who had
recently helped successfully petition the American Psychological Association to remove
homosexuality from its list of mental disorders, and Martin Duberman, who was, at the
time, Distinguished Professor of History at CUNY’s Lehman College. A Women’s
Caucus was formed at this first conference of the GAU to ensure that the voices of
women would be heard and that issues directly pertaining to lesbians in academia could
be discussed. During a consciousness-raising session, the Women’s Caucus split into two
groups, and one of the groups – which included Nestle, Sahli Cavallaro, Deborah Edel,
Pamela Oline, and Julia Stanley – focused their conversation on the need to establish a
lesbian-focused archive.
These women came from a variety of backgrounds. Nestle was considered among
the group to be of the old guard – a lesbian who didn’t come out in her thirties because
there was a movement that encouraged it, but a woman who had lived as a lesbian during
the less-supportive periods of the ‘50s and 60’s. At the time, she was teaching classes on
literature and colonialism at Queens College to largely first-generation immigrants. Sahli
27

D’Emilio’s account of the founding of the GAU – one of the few such accounts ever printed – can be
found in his anthology Making Trouble: Essays on Gay History, Politics and the University (New York:
Routledge, 1992)

87

Cavallaro was an active member of the GAU Women’s Caucus, a peer counselor for
those struggling with their identity, and a graduate student in psychology and poetry.
Deborah Edel was an educational psychologist by training, and worked for many years at
a private Quaker school with children who had learning disabilities. Pamela Oline had
recently become active in the lesbian feminist movement and, like Cavallaro, worked as a
peer counselor. Julia Stanley, who along with Nestle had come out prior to 1969, was a
philosopher, linguist and author. She had been expelled as a student from Florida State
University in 1959 and the University of Miami because of her studies in lesbianism.28
Nestle and Stanley had been discussing the fragility of their own histories as
lesbian women. Not only was it difficult to find materials relating to their experiences in
mainstream libraries and archives, but the two expressed concerns about growing
hostilities toward older lesbian histories even within lesbian feminist groups. By 1973,
many lesbian feminists looked to their predecessors as victims (or worse, collaborators)
of the heterosexual patriarchal system. The group began to articulate a vision of a
lesbian-focused archive that would document the experiences of all women who
expressed a desire or love for other women, in whatever form that took. Such a policy
would begin reconciling the pre-Stonewall lesbians with the younger lesbian feminist
lesbians. The archive would demonstrate that both groups could work together, and
perhaps more importantly, could learn from one another.
Their vision became the basis of a list of “Notes on Radical Archiving from a
Lesbian Feminist Perspective,” first published several years later in 1979 by Joan Nestle
in the Gay Insurgent debate with Jim Monahan that opens this chapter. The notes are a
28

Brief biographies of the LHA founders appear in the first newsletter in June, 1975.

88

diplomatic achievement – modeling the newer lesbian feminist theories without
dismissing the lives and the labors of the women who came before. In publishing it,
Nestle uses the framework for the Lesbian Herstory Archives as a way of encouraging
others to think about archiving outside the academic model. Nestle argued that to archive
as Monahan suggested, patriarchal systems of hierarchy, exclusion and limited
accessibility would be re-inscribed on the emerging radical lesbian and gay movements.
Speaking directly to gay and lesbian historians and archivists, Nestle offered a list that
reflected the principles that the Lesbian Herstory Archives had developed over the
previous six years, and which continue to guide the archive today.
1. The archives must serve the needs of the Lesbian people
a. All lesbian women must have access to the archives: no credentials for
usage or inclusion; race and class must be no barrier.
b. The archives should be housed within the community, not on an academic
campus that is by definition closed to many women. The archives should
share the political and cultural world of its people and not be located in an
isolated building that continues to exist while the community dies. If
necessary the archives will go underground with its people to be cherished
in hidden places until the community is safe.
c. The archives should be involved in the political struggles of the Lesbian
people, a place where ideas and experiences from the past interact with the
living issues of the Lesbian community.

89

d. The archives should be staffed by Lesbians so the collection will always
have a living cultural context. Archival skills shall be taught, one
generation of Lesbians to another, breaking the elitism of traditional
archives.
e. The community should share in the work of the archives, contributing
material, indexing, mailings, creating bibliographies and other forms of
information sharing.
f. The archives will collect the prints of all our lives, not just preserve the
records of the famous or the published.
g. Its atmosphere must be nourishing, entry into our archives should be entry
into a caring home.
h. The works of all our artists must be preserved – our photographers, our
graphic designers, our scribblers, our card makers, our silversmiths.
i. The lesbian feminist archives must refuse cooption from the patriarchal
society around it even if it comes in the name of a “woman’s college.”
j. The collection must be kept intact and never be bartered or sold.
k. The archive is an act of mothering, of passing along to our daughters the
energies, the actions, the words we lived by. It is a first step in reclaiming
a place in time, our response to the colonizer who makes us live on the
periphery or not at all.

90

2. There should be regional Lesbian Herstory Archives, preserving and gathering the
records of each Lesbian community. A network can then be set up. (Nestle 1979,
11)
These notes capture many of the principals that came out of lesbian feminism: a
commitment to inclusion and accessibility regardless of race and class, a fierce belief that
lesbian separatism ensured accessibility and preservation, and a community-based model
where knowledge of history and the labor of archiving would be shared with all of the
members of the collective. These notes also introduce the concepts of family, home, and
hospitality that will be the focus of the rest of this chapter.

An Act of Mothering: The Archives as Family
Central to the Lesbian Herstory Archive’s philosophy of lesbianism is the figuring
of sexual identity as a family. The lesbian family reflected in the archive and its operation
is not an idealized, conflict-free family, but one that works through recurring
disagreements for the preservation of itself. Not surprisingly, the idealized 1950s images
of the nuclear family, with the father/husband at the head of the house – that paramount
symbol of patriarchy and domesticity – became a target for 1970s lesbian feminists.
Some theorists like Jill Johnston rejected familial bonds in favor of sexually-driven open
relationships and polygamy. But some women had children from previous relationships,
and many others appreciated the familiarity that comes from the family model.
In her book Families We Choose, Kath Weston suggests that many lesbians and
gay men develop relationships that offer alternative family-like structures of support and
91

belonging. Weston notes that anthropology formally referred to such relationships as
“fictive kinships,” before it became widely accepted that all families and kinships are, in
some sense, fictional – which is to say that they are understood through the meaning
given to it, rather than a strictly biological connection (105). Lesbian and gay literature
and social commentary are rife with personal narratives that depict biological families
that shame or disown their homosexual relative, or cases where the relative must hide this
part of their lives from their family out of fear. While Weston notes that there is a certain
functionalism within this logic that assumes people intrinsically need a family, many
accounts suggest that we seek out family-like kinships to affirm identity and receive
emotional support (106). I want to be clear, however, that such family structures do not
necessarily mimic the nuclear family. Such kinships are not necessarily hierarchical and
boundaries are extremely fluid.
In some cases, lesbians and gay men grow up in non-traditional families,
providing them with alternative conceptualizations of kinship structures that they can
model later in life. By her own accounts, Joan Nestle grew up in such a family. She was
born in 1940 to working class Jewish parents in the Bronx. Her father Jonas died shortly
before she was born, “never having seen him, never having touched his body, never
having heard his voice” (Hand on the Pulse). Her mother Regina worked a variety of jobs
to support Joan, but at the age of ten they were evicted from their apartment and she went
to live for a time with her aunt and uncle in Bay Side, Queens. When she would visit her
mother or after she returned, there were always many different men around that she
referred to as uncles. Of the many ways Regina worked to support herself and her
92

daughter, one was prostitution, and recognizing her mother’s relationship between sex
and power helped shape her own early identity and how she perceived women and
families.
In the ‘40s and ‘50s, mothers didn’t talk about liking to fuck, and I had to face the
fact that I had a mother that was a woman, and that she was a woman on her own,
and a woman that had many different men in her house. I always used to joke that
I had more uncles than aunts than anyone I knew. So it meant from a very early
age on, I was watching a woman live her life, not a mother, and while that
personally cost me some things, it opened up a woman’s life to me. (Hand on the
Pulse)
Nestle realized that her family structure was not what others considered normal. One
teacher openly criticized Nestle’s situation and those of other “latch-key children” in
front of her class at P.S. 094 in Brooklyn. Rather than feel shame, she realized that her
teacher’s broad and negative generalizations came from a lack of understanding and
compassion. She developed a distrust of authority and learned to take comfort in what she
saw as the realities of her own experiences. Increasingly, she sought kinship with others
who shared similar experiences, and was soon introduced to the blue-collar lesbian bars
of Manhattan through her friends. There she made new connections and found lovers
during intermittent police raids. She increasingly struggled to find a sense of belonging in
a world that seemingly refused to recognize that her experiences had value. The rise of
lesbian feminism brought a new kind of resistance to her experience, a resistance that
surprised her as it seemed to come from a younger generation within her community. In
93

many ways, what drove her early involvement in the founding of the archives was the
need to ensure her experiences, and the experiences of her lesbian families, would not be
silenced by the shift in lesbian politics.
To function within a culture that was increasingly finding itself at odds with one
another, Nestle and the rest of the founding group had to establish a system of
governance that would ensure all lesbian experiences would be represented in the
archives. They decided that the archives would be run as a “Lesbian collective,” with
decisions made by consensus. The term “Lesbian collective” referred to both the idea and
to a growing social experiment in the 1970s. Lesbian collectives had sprouted up across
the country, primarily in larger cities, where lesbian women lived together communally
with the aim of creating mini utopic enclaves where the responsibilities of chores,
finances, child rearing, employment, etc. were shared. These collectives generally did not
last long – one of the most famous, The Furies in Washington, D.C., lasted under a year –
but they provided a model for the LHA, rooted in family, that emphasized the importance
of lesbians living with the materials in the archive. The group defined the decisionmaking collective as “those women who have been active participants in the ongoing
functioning of the archive” – i.e. not a board of directors, donors, or an advisory
committee such as one would find at an institutional archive, but a group made up of
those who are actively participating in the creation and operation of the archive. Such a
policy ensured that those who worked closest to the collection on a regular basis and
knew first-hand of its complexities and challenges would be the ones best suited to make
any decisions relating to operations and publication permissions. The group also decided
94

that the collective would be responsible for the staffing of the Archives and hiring as
funds permitted.
The LHA collective was and is more of a family than a form of governance. Joan
and fellow co-founder Deborah Edel were lovers for many years while sharing their
home with the archives. Many of the other women became friends or romantically
involved with each other. They developed lasting connections that have lived on even
after their volunteer work with the archives had ended. Working sessions, planning
meetings, fundraising events and social gatherings frequently involved the making of a
meal, an act Kath Weston notes helps strengthen familial bonds (104). Sometimes these
were small, intimate dinners where guests who had traveled far to visit the archives could
share their stories. Other times, dinners resembled large, loud family reunions. In the
early years at her home, Nestle hosted open houses for volunteers and interested persons
to share their experiences with the collections and the visitors who had used them. New
acquisitions were presented and events announced. Time was often set aside for larger
volunteer projects – mailings, sorting, book processing, cleaning. Dinner would often be
served. In 1979, Nestle had launched a program called “At Home in the Archives”
which expanded the open house idea into a fundraising event in her home. Speakers
would be invited to present on a topic relating to lesbian history or contemporary issues,
and singers or bands would perform. Two dollars would be charged at the door and half
of the proceeds would be shared with the performer. Such programs emphasized
hospitality over formality, and relationship-building over research.

95

In many ways, the archive favored the created lesbian-identified families over
biological families. Though some of the founding members of the archive had
backgrounds in various disciplines in academia, none had any formal training in library
science. Where ONE saw this a shortcoming for themselves that needed to be remedied
to fit in with established archival practices, members of the LHA saw their lack of
training as an opportunity to rethink the way the archives could be organized. As a
gesture towards celebrating women-identified-women, they began organizing individual
records using women’s first names, rather than the traditional use of organizing by last
name. Last names represented the patriarchal practice of placing a higher value on
patrilineal heritage. Organizing by first names ensured that women’s gender identity was
foregrounded and celebrated.
False names were sometimes used by donors with LHA’s encouragement. LHA’s
archivists wanted to allow women to tell their stories without fear of persecution if
anything should happen to the records (such as what had happened at Canada’s Body
Politic). Many women also felt empowered by the opportunity to share their experiences
anonymously, allowing the experience to speak without feeling the need to develop an
entire personal narrative within the archive’s records. This allowed for a more
fragmentary approach to individual collections than most modern archives prefer, an
approach the LHA saw as an asset, rather than as a gesture of incompleteness.
LHA’s unique approach to archiving did not disappear when trained library
professionals began volunteering. Just as Nestle’s notes suggest, the methods of archiving
were passed down among the volunteers, especially to those who claimed previous
96

archiving experience. Volunteers who had, or were working towards, degrees in library
science – were expected to learn LHA’s own system. By setting their own standards and
depending on a volunteer workforce, some might look at the LHA critically and claim
this as a failure of organization. Printed finding aids are widely inconsistent in
organization and scope, making it difficult for the archive to make available online.
Inconsistent communication between volunteers sometimes means boxes and books are
moved to new locations within the house. From the perspective of a ‘professional’ or
‘institution-based’ modern archive, the Lesbian Herstory Archives might appear
disorganized and a challenge to navigate. For others, though, it is evidence that the
archive is a living entity in a constant state of flux. Researching at the LHA, in whatever
form that might take, is a collective effort.
The family structure the archive provided was not modeled after the patriarchal
nuclear family. The archives collective does not have a set hierarchy. Even with the
differences in age and experience, age did not assume power. If there was a “parent” in
this family model, it is, as Joan Nestle suggested, the archive itself as an “act of
mothering” (Nestle 1979, 11). The archives provided a kind of non-biological genealogy
for lesbian kinship in a way that bars could not. The bars could be social, and there was
the possibility that intergenerational stories would be shared, but the archives offered a
continuity – a stable home for history – that the bars lacked.

97

The Archive as Home
The image of archiving as an act of mothering imagines a radically different kind
of archive-as-home than the one figured by Jacques Derrida in Archive Fever.
Recounting the Greek etymology of archive, Derrida wrote that archive comes from the
root arkhē, which refers to both the commencement and commandment of law. In Ancient
Greece, the archon was the superior magistrate, and his home – the arkheion – was where
citizens would file and store official documents (2). This patriarchal image of the home
as the locus of commands and regulation stands in stark contrast to the Lesbian Herstory
Archive’s image of the maternal home that is nurturing and expresses love. The arkhon’s
records are commandments, bestowed from a God-like authority. The LHA records are
birthed and cared for throughout its existence.
It is critically important to the work of the Lesbian Herstory Archives that the
collection resides in a literal home-space. As Nestle writes in her notes, the archive needs
to be accessible to the community it represents and should never be sold to an academic
institution – even a woman’s college. These institutions have historically discriminated
against women and particularly lesbians – discrimination which many of the archive’s
founders experienced first-hand. The archive as home space is both public and private.
Recalling the opening epigraph, Nestle described her home/archive as “the place where
the private becomes a public shadow. The place of uncontained conversations” (Nestle
2014). Scholars often conceive of the home as a strictly private sphere, offering shelter
and in some cases security and a sense of belonging (Somerville 528). Of course this
sense of privacy and refuge can extend to lesbian and gay homes, particularly given
98

LGBT histories of social discrimination and harassment. However, for some lesbians, the
home can be a site where sexual identity is developed and made visible and create
kinships that challenge heteronormative social pressures (Rich 632). In their essay on the
performance and surveillance of lesbian identities in domestic environments, Lynda
Johnston and Gill Valentine argue that lesbian homes have the potential to challenge the
image of heterosexual family space. The home is a seemingly normative construct, a
place out of view from the prying eyes of society, but it can also be a place where sexual
identities can be explored and performed with a level of security and comfort (99).
Arguing that there is a point in feminist conceptions of home when the public and private
spheres become indistinguishable, Catherine MacKinnon noted
For women the measure of intimacy has been the measure of the oppression. This
is why feminism has had to explode the private. This is why feminism has seen
the personal as political. In this sense, there is no private, either normatively or
empirically (100).
This blending of the private and public, almost to the point where they become
inseparable, exemplifies the Lesbian Herstory Archives, where deeply personal narratives
– some never shared in life – are made publicly accessible for generations to come.
Where traditional archives are often spaces of restriction and surveillance, the
lesbian home-space, absent some of the violence and oppression associated with other
patriarchal home-spaces, can be comfortable and welcoming. When the archive began in
the Upper West Side apartment of Joan Nestle and Deb Edel, the pantry off the kitchen
held the archive’s filing cabinets and shelves, and a table provided a place for a visitor to
99

spread out. Joan, Deb or a volunteer would greet the visitor at the door and invite them in,
often offering them a beverage and pointing out the restroom. In some cases, meals
would be made for visitors, and some who had traveled long distances would even be
invited to stay over. Nestle’s pet dog Denver and her cats had free rein. It was always
clear that, when visiting the archive, one was visiting, first and foremost, a home. This
relationship between home space and hospitality ensured that the visitor’s experience was
a social one. Pressing social and political issues could be discussed. Resources would be
shared. Visitors and volunteers learned from one another and personal relationships
developed over time.
On Joan Nestle’s fiftieth birthday in 1980, she was asked what she wanted as a
gift. She responded that she wanted the archives out of her apartment and in a new home.
By this time, the collection had spread out well beyond the small pantry off the kitchen.
Each room of the apartment hosted part of the collection. Even her own bedroom had
been set-up as the audio-visual room, a room she half-jokingly claimed was where she
engaged in her best creative work (Hand on the Pulse). Over time, the archive had grown
to such an extent that she no longer had a private place to retreat. Everything – cooking,
reading, cleaning, bathing, sex, etc. – all occurred within the context of the archives. The
archives collective launched an aggressive grassroots funding campaign to raise money
for a new home, tapping into the idea of the archive as home to encourage donations. The
January, 1990 newsletter included an impassioned appeal for assistance in finding a new
home for the archive, offering suggestions for fundraisers that could be hosted by local
lesbian groups across the country. They requested lists of these events so that a calendar
100

could be sent out to the mailing list, marketing to local “branches of the Family” (4). It
was important to the archives collective that the new home be located in an area that was
accessible by public transportation and within an area densely populated by lesbians. By
July, 1991, a volunteer with the archives who was also a real estate agent helped the
group to purchase an old, three-story brownstone in the Park Slope neighborhood of
Brooklyn for $313,000. Throughout the 1980s, Park Slope had become one of the largest
neighborhoods for lesbian women anywhere in the country, as gentrification led to the
redevelopment of the area.29 Minor repairs to the building were completed before the
archive’s first caretakers – Polly Thistlethwaite (a long-time LHA volunteer and
documenter of the archive’s history) and Lucinda Zoe (a doctoral student in library
science at Columbia) – moved into the apartment on the top floor in January, 1992. Over
the next year and a half, renovations were completed throughout the first and second
floors, as well as the basement storage area. The first floor needed to become wheelchair
accessible, a security system installed, floors refinished, walls painted, a renovated
bathroom with updating plumbing and electrical wiring, a skylight installed over the main
staircase, and shelving units built to hold the collection. Re-emphasizing that the labor of
the archive should always be shouldered directly by the lesbian community, the architects
were two lesbian women who volunteered their services and volunteers completed the
majority of the restoration work.
From the street, 484 14th Street looks like any of the other residential brownstones
in Park Slope. The address is etched into the glass above the door, which is surrounded
29

See Tamar Rothenberg’s essay “’And She Told Two Friends’ Lesbians Creating Urban Social Space” in
David Bell & Gill Valentine’s Mapping Desire: Geographies of Sexualities (London: Routledge, 1995), pp.
165-181

101

by elegant stone carvings reflecting the primarily Georgian architecture of this part of
Brooklyn. Halfway down the block, the road ends in the popular green space of Prospect
Park. One would have to look closely for the small brass plaque on the door that
announces this building as the Lesbian Herstory Archives. It doesn’t feel like the building
is trying to hide itself or seem inconspicuous. It just doesn’t seem to feel the need to
announce itself to the rest of the world, and in this way it continues to blur the fine line
between public and private spheres.
Walking through two double sets of doors into the foyer, visitors are often greeted
here by a volunteer. This first encounter highlights the social importance of the archiveas-home from the very beginning. Depending on the visitor’s time and how many visitors
and volunteers are at the collection, the greeting segues into a tour of the building,
peppered with history and an explanation of the policies, which basically boil down to:
- Look around as much as you like.
- Feel free to take anything off a shelf that looks interesting, but try to keep things
in order.
- If you can’t remember where you got something, leave it out for a volunteer to
re-shelve.
- Don’t damage anything.
- Don’t mark on anything.
A large staircase in the foyer goes up to the second floor and the third floor caretaker
apartment. A bulletin board on the wall posts events and community notices, reminding

102

the visitor that this home is not just for historical research, but is a hub for the local
lesbian community.
The parlor room opens up to the left, with a large alcove of windows letting
natural light shine on several pieces of comfortable, upholstered furniture. This reading
room stands in stark contrast to the reading rooms of most institutional archives that
value function and the surveillance of visitors over comfort. The walls are lined floor-toceiling with built-in shelves, overflowing with books – fiction and non-fiction, some new
but mostly old. Half of one wall is lined with metal filing cabinets, containing the
archive’s vertical subject files and some finding aids of the various manuscript and
special collections the archive maintains. Adjoining the parlor room is the dining room.
Darkly painted, this room can be closed off from light to screen films on the large TV
cart. When not being used as the audio-visual room, a large dining table in the center of
the room hosts meetings, processing, research, and occasionally meals. The adjoining
kitchen is fully furnished, and allows volunteers and visitors to have coffee and to host
the occasional events. Visitors can bring lunches with them and eat during their visit – an
unheard of practice in most archives. A small garden in the back provides a bit of fresh
air on warmer days, and leads to a staircase down to the basement, where new
acquisitions are processed and room is set aside for overflow storage.
Coming back to the front hall, climbing the main staircase leads to the second
floor where the archive’s special collections are held. A bathroom at the top of the stairs
has a large screen frame covered in lesbian feminist and radical queer buttons, clearly
making use of every available space in the house. The rooms up here seem to be filled to
103

capacity, with desks covered in boxes and file folders and shelving encroaching on the
narrow walkways. The smaller back room is covered in vintage yellow wallpaper, and
holds individual, organizational and conference records as well as some periodicals. A
narrow passageway connects this room to the larger front room. The passageway contains
a marble counter and “Hers and Hers” sinks, recalling a time in the history of the building
when these upstairs rooms were used as bedrooms. Across from the sinks in what used to
be a series of built-in dressers are the archive’s t-shirt collection. For ease of reference
nearby binder holds photocopies of all the t-shirt designs with the number of the flat box
where the t-shirt is located.
The front two rooms hold the rest of the archive’s periodical collection, as well as
unpublished poetry and fiction, and overflow subject files that no longer fit in the
cabinets on the first floor. Back at the stairway, a sign is posted near the stairs up to the
third floor explaining that it is a private residence, and discourages the visitor from
climbing further. This clear marker of private space reminds the visitor that not only does
this archive feel like a home, it is one. The rare sign of restricted access also reminds the
visitor that there are aspects of every life that must remain off-limits.

Hospitality and the Archive
The structures of home and family espoused in the Lesbian Herstory Archives
from its inception come with a pattern of hospitality. As Joan Nestle’s notes on radical
archiving stated, “its atmosphere must be nourishing, entry into our archives should be
entry into a caring home” (Nestle 1979, 11). All lesbian women must be welcomed into
104

the archives. This welcome involves introductions, a tour of the space, an explanation of
how to use it, and at various points in the archive’s existence, an invitation to meals
and/or conversation. These gestures of hospitality are also gestures of positionality that
allow those working and visiting the archives to mark their own relationship to lesbian
identity.
In his lectures on hospitality, Jacques Derrida argues that hospitality is an
ordering activity rooted in practices associated with national identities going back to
ancient times. Hospitality establishes rules through which people can be identified as
hosts and guests, citizens and non-citizens, citizens and foreigners, those who belong and
those who do not (21). The gesture of welcoming lesbian women into the home of the
archive defines the individuals doing the welcoming as those who are in charge – they are
the caretakers and guardians. They establish the rules of engagement, even if those rules
seem more relaxed than an institutional academic archive. The host asks the visitor a
series of questions: “What is your name? Where are you from? What are you
researching? What will you do with this information? How long will you be with us?”
The hospitable gesture of welcoming allows the visitor to become intelligible to the host.
It is a sign that the host cares and is interested in the visitor, but also a means for the host
to ensure that the person they are letting into the archival home belongs there and will
handle the collection properly. In this way, hospitality establishes systems of rules and
structures of belonging that define identity just as much as the documents within the
archive.

105

To feel like one belongs in the archive, either as a host or as a visitor, one must
follow the rules of hospitality. Establishing belonging can be done in various ways. The
archive has depended almost entirely on volunteer labor. The giving of the gift of time
and labor as a volunteer defines the individual as a caretaker, a member of the LHA
collective who is able to make decisions about the direction and management of the
archive. For lesbians who are unable to donate time and labor, due to geography or other
commitments, they can demonstrate their belonging by making donations of money or
material, identifying them as valued friends and supporters of the archive. Total strangers
or first-time visitors to the archive have the most to prove. They are unknown, and have
to demonstrate their intentions during the introductions that happen prior to and/or at the
moment of arrival.
The hospitable act of introduction also defines the parameters of how a visitor is
accepted in the archive. It should be noted that while the Lesbian Herstory Archives are
expressly welcoming of lesbian women, they do not restrict access to the collections
solely to this group. Not identifying as a lesbian, however, may limit your ability to
volunteer or participate in the management of the archive. This is, after all, not your
history to tell or to preserve. A self-identified lesbian must be the residential caretaker of
the archives, not a bisexual woman or a homosexual man, or any other sexual identity.
The rules of hospitality allow the archive to define who belongs and who does not
belong to the broad category of lesbian. Identity formations are necessarily exclusionary.
To define who you are is also to define who you are not. This has become a challenge for
the archives through the years. What counts as lesbian? Do you need to have had sex with
106

a woman to be considered a lesbian? In the 1970s, when political lesbianism was at its
height – lesbianism as a political choice that did not require sexual interaction – the
archives defined the scope of their acquisitions in terms of any expression of same-sex
desire.30 Such a rule allowed for a broad acquisitions policy that accounted for materials
that pre-dated the popularity of the term lesbian, but even then, expressed same-sex
desire can be difficult to recognize or define. Most frequently, the archives have
depended on donors to self-identify as lesbian to be recognized within the collection.
Transgender identity has also posed challenges to the LHA. If you are trans man who has
had a life-long attraction to women, do you get archived for being born biologically
female? Are you recognized as a woman by the archives if you were biologically born a
man? Do you need to have had surgery to be able to claim identity as a woman? Can
transgender individuals become members of the archives collective that makes decisions
on the management and operations of the collection? These are all questions the archives
have had to tackle over the years. For example, some members of the archive collective
expressed disapproval that Brandon Teena, a transman raped and murdered in 1993, was
included among a list of lesbians who had recently died in a feature article in the January,
1995 archives newsletter. Their grievance was rooted in the belief that there needed to be
an archive that focused its attention solely on lesbian history and issues, and that to
include transgender narratives confused lesbian identity. Questions of inclusion are still
debated by the various LHA constituents, reflecting the ever-changing fluidity of identity
formations.

30

See the first issue of the Lesbian Herstory Archives Newsletter, June 1975.

107

Hospitality in the archives is also not limited to physical interactions.
Accessibility is one of the ways the LHA has been able to extend its hospitality to people
around the world, even when they are not able to visit the archive home. For example, the
first LHA newsletter contained a specific request for readers to reach out to rural
lesbians. Founding member Julia Stanley, who had moved south to rural Dowelltown, TN
in the mid-1970s, volunteered to collect the names and addresses of rural lesbians in
order “to create a large map of the United States on which we will represent the Lesbian
network by marking the small towns and villages where Lesbians are establishing
themselves on farms and communes” (3). This map could then be used as a reference for
lesbian who were traveling to connect with local communities and also alerted rural
lesbians to the possibility of archiving their materials, either with the LHA in New York,
or, as Joan Nestle suggested in her “notes on radical archiving,” in what she hoped would
be regional archives that would be established across the country. Such a horizontal
regional approach to archiving demonstrated the reach and reimagining of the function of
an archive, allowing each local community to establish their own interpretation of lesbian
identity. The archives had already become an idea, a catalyst to connect women from
across the country who might never step foot in the physical archive itself, but would be
influenced by the work the volunteers had undertaken. Women could write to the
archives in New York with research questions, and volunteers would attempt to
accommodate as best they could. Joan Nestle and other archive volunteers also assembled
a series of slide presentations that allowed them to travel all over the world to share some
of the stories and materials within the collection. These presentations were immensely
108

popular and occurred in homes, churches, bars, schools, bookstores, and meeting halls.
They became a way of publicizing the work of the archive to local and non-local
communities, and solicit both material and financial donations. Throughout this, archives
have always stated that this history belonged to all lesbian women, and encouraged
audiences to get involved.
Another way the archives expressed hospitality through accessibility was to offer
suggestions of ways to utilize the archive that would not necessarily be considered –
ways that intentionally differentiated the LHA from institutional archives. An example of
this can be found in the sixth issue of the LHA Newsletter, published in July, 1980 titled
“Archiving for Daily Survival.” Written by an anonymous author (likely Joan Nestle),
this list reemphasized that the archives were more than a center for academic research.
They could become a necessary part of daily living.
* If you are traveling to a different city or region and want to know what is
happening there, come read the area’s Lesbian newsletter or find a contact dyke in
our back issues of Lesbian Connection.
* If you are looking for alternative services in health or counseling.
* If you want to publish something but are not sure where, come look through
Lesbian journals, newsletters, and up to date publication notices on the bulletin
board.
* If your group wants to read about past collective processes to help work out
current problems or set up new structures.
* If you want ideas about conference formats come look at our conference files.
109

* If you are looking for a Lesbian group to work with, come read about their goals
and methods in our organization file.
* If you are an editor looking for material come look at what women have sent us.
* If you want to know what Lesbian businesses exist or find ideas about creating a
new one.
* If you want to prepare a bibliography on women’s issues and don’t want to
work in a patriarchal library come use the collection, the Women’s Studies
Abstracts, the Alternate Press Index.
* If you want inspiration for your writings or visual arts come see the collection
of Lesbian images we have gathered.
* If you want to read the unpublished voices of our community.
* If you are coming out and want to read and hear how the experience affected
other Lesbians.
* If you are involved in Lesbian Mothers custody work come use our file of legal
briefs, news clippings and articles.
* If you want to know where to send your mailings for an event come use our
organizational file.
* Mostly – if you want a few hours of spiritual uplift in a Lesbian place where our
voices and faces through the years can speak to you come to the Lesbian Herstory
Archives. (LHA #6, 4)
As a center for hospitality, this list demonstrates the ways the LHA positioned itself as
the primary destination for every need within the lesbian community. It was a
110

clearinghouse of information for survival (legal, and health services/advocacy), for
business (consulting, networking and travel information), a place for organizing (political
records, issues research, and contact information), a place for creative inspiration (written
and visual collections, publisher contacts and calls), as well as a place to just be present,
and to connect with strangers who shared similar interests. This list alone demonstrates
how the group had reenvisioned the archive within the framework of lesbian feminism, a
framework that expanded the ways of connecting the community outside bars, political
rallies and isolated social events. It means not requiring an application process to access
the archives. An optional guest book replaces lengthy forms given by some archives to
issue a research card. The LHA advertises collection holdings as well as alternative
approaches to using an archive that would encourage non-academic audiences to visit.
While visitors are encouraged to contact the archives ahead of time to let them know
what they are interested in so items can be pulled in advance, a trained volunteer is
always on hand to give visitors a tour of the collection, and explain where to find items.
Unlike visitors in traditional archives who are escorted to sterile reading rooms, where
personal items are checked into a locker and where specifically requested materials are
brought to them, visitors to the LHA are encouraged to explore the archive, with the
expectation that they will handle the history with care and respect, and that any items
pulled from shelves, closets or filing cabinets be left out so that a volunteer can ensure
they are returned to the appropriate location.
Ultimately, the hospitality extended the reach of the archive’s narratives into
every aspect of daily life. In an interview commemorating the work of the Lesbian
111

Herstory Archives, Nancy Bereano, publisher of the lesbian feminist publishers Firebrand
Press, recalled her first experiences with the archive:
My guess is I would have heard about the archives through friends in New York,
through friends in bookstores – Womankind Books in New York – maybe through
reading a women’s publication, and when I got there my experience was of
enormous relief because it was neither a bar or a softball field, both of which were
places I was learning I was supposed to feel comfortable at, but I didn’t feel very
comfortable at. (Hands on the Pulse)
Bereano’s statement was a common narrative. Women discovered the archives in a
variety of ways, but once there, many found a space that was welcoming, affirming, and a
respite from other more isolating spaces of lesbian encounter. Yet, the existence of the
list of ways the archive could be used on a daily basis also highlights one of the primary
challenges the group encountered in this work. While volunteers had put into practice a
theoretical reimagining of an archive, the public image of an archive as a cold, dusty,
restrictive space for serious research was an image that had to be constantly worked
against. Like other archives, those who worked at the LHA had to advertise the presence
and availability of their own collection and services, but the LHA also had to
simultaneously explain the ways their archive was not like other archives, and that, most
importantly, their archive was useful to the average person.

112

Coming Back Home: An Intergenerational Call to Return to Radical Lesbianism
Despite the radical reimagining of the archive through lesbian feminist principles,
the archive still fundamentally operates under the Foucauldian framework that the
archive is both the law and the place where the law is housed – the archive’s holdings
define the parameters of how lesbian identity is understood. But the archive’s hospitality
allows for an ever-growing number of narratives which challenge and re-shape the
archive’s understanding of what lesbian identity is and can be, and the reach of the
archive’s narratives can extend into every aspect of daily life. In many of her early talks
on the work of the archives, Joan Nestle would point out to a crowd of lesbian women
and say, “yes, yes, you are the Lesbian the archives exists for, to tell and share your
story” (Thistlethwaite 156). While the vision of the LHA began with a small group of
women at the Gay Academic Union, it became a reality and developed because many
members of the community supported and invested in it – through their manual labor,
monetary contributions, material donations, emotional encouragement, and active use.
But who is this “you” Nestle speaks to? She frequently reuses this material in speeches
and the audience’s understanding of lesbian identity has changed significantly since the
1970s.
The vast discrepancies of lesbian identity amongst the range of generations of
volunteers was captured by Emily Millay Haddad, herself a volunteer, in an open letter to
the archive’s mailing list. The “Letter to My Sisters” was sent in January, 2004 and was
reprinted in the LHA’s most recent newsletter, which appeared in the spring of that year.

113

I am a 23-year-old volunteer at the Lesbian Herstory Archives, where I had a
conversation with another young woman. She and her friend were joking around
about how she would have really thrived in the 1970s with all the consciousness
raising and the lesbian feminism. “I should have grown up then,” she said. “That
time would have really suited me.” “Yes,” I said. “But we need you now. We
need all that passionate conviction and energy for the fight now.” (13)
Haddad goes on to lament the absence of the radical energy in contemporary politics, a
radical energy she encountered through the records in the archive. In many ways her
letter responds to the increasing absorption of gay and lesbian identities into mainstream
culture. She begs for the return of those “who long for the consciousness raising of the
1970s, for the passion, for the arguments, for the separatism, for the pure innocence (to
our jaded postmodern eyes) and the noble naiveté” (13). For those who lived through it
and have grown comfortable, and for those who didn’t but who yearn for alternatives, her
letter is a call to come home – back to the archive, and back to the radical political work
that inspired its founding. Unlike some of her peers who now choose to disidentify with
terms like gay or lesbian, because they see them as increasingly participatory in
heteronormative assimilationism, Haddad found inspiration in the archive. She found,
amid the dusty records, a possibility of lesbianism that was radical once again,
performing itself differently, driven partly by nostalgia and partly out of her own desire
for alternative models of being.
It is possible to see older archives of LGBT histories as outdated, capturing a kind
of sexual identity that no longer seems relevant to the present. Yet, in that, there is the
114

possibility to tap back into that energy of radical reimagining. It is as if the kind of
lesbian identity that the LHA was documenting had become so different and so far
removed from the present, that it became new again. A kind of queer renaissance of
radical lesbian politics.
The living cultural context of the archive ensures, to a degree, that such narratives
can be expressed in person, rather than just reading about it through newspapers and
journals. On one of my own visits to the archive in 2012, I was invited to examine the
entire t-shirt collection with the archive’s volunteer that day – a sixty-something woman
who had been volunteering with the archives since the 1980s – and an artist who was
using the images on the t-shirts as inspiration for a project she was working on. Both
women self-identifed themselves as lesbians to me, and while there was at least a thirty
year age gap between the two, as they discussed the t-shirts and the rallies that they were
worn in, it became clear to me the ways this archive experience made history present.
“Oh, I remember this image,” said the volunteer, holding up a t-shirt. “This was
from 1986 Pride.”
“That must have been a hell of a year,” responded the artist. “Right in the middle
of the AIDS crisis.”
“Yeah, but it was also exciting. We’d just gotten the Gay Rights Bill passed
through city council.”
The volunteer went on to share her experiences of the 1986 Pride parade.
Moments the artist and I had read about in LGBT history books, she was describing from
first-hand accounts, pulling out photo albums and pins to help visualize her story. She
115

was a solid thirty years younger than my grandmother, but I couldn’t help recall the times
sitting in my grandmother’s kitchen while she told me stories of family, and pulled out
various items from closets that helped her remember and make the story come alive. This
was the kind of context volunteers like Joan Nestle and Mabel Hampton could give to
visitors about pre-1970s lesbian life.
Obviously this “living cultural context” changes from generation to generation.
There is a steady and growing stream of people using the collection – particularly for
academic research. The archives are open five days a week or less for about three to four
hours each day. But despite its efforts and some exceptions, like that of Emily Millay
Haddad, the archive has had difficulty appealing to a younger generation of women who
might identity as lesbian or queer and who might benefit from the coming-out narratives
and political organizing accounts the archives maintain. This is partly due to the difficulty
in putting finding aids online and the lack of a developed social media presence. On the
one hand, the LHA is one of the global leaders in documenting the lesbian experience
from the pre-1970s period to the late 1980s. But with dwindling labor and financial
resources, one of the clear challenges of participation in the coming decades will be
figuring out how the principles of the LHA can be adapted for a new generation.

116

Chapter III

Encountering the Unexpected: The Tretter
Collection in Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and
Transgender Studies
“There is no place that is not haunted by many different spirits hidden there in
silence, spirits one can ‘invoke’ or not” (108).
- Michel de Certeau, “Walking in the City”
“Time past and time future
What might have been and what has been
Point to one end, which is always present” (14).
- T. S. Eliot, “Burnt Norton”
Behind a key-card access door in the center of Andersen Library is an elevator
which travels over eighty-three feet below ground into the caverns of a bluff overlooking
the Mississippi River. Protected by concrete, sandstone and limestone, these caverns were
excavated in 2000 to store the University of Minnesota’s special collections and rare
books archives. Out of sight, and accessible only to archive staff, these collections
include a wide variety of materials from the library’s different archival divisions.31
Descending in the elevator, cool, dry air rushes into the steel-walled chamber. The doors
open to a small antechamber with two hallways branching off to the sides. Turning to the

31

Andersen Library houses 11 special collections units: the Charles Babbage Institute of information
technology, the Children’s Literature Collection, the Givens Collection of African American Literature, the
Immigration History Research Center, the Kautz Family YMCA Archives, the Social Welfate History
Archives, the University Archives, the Upper Midwest Jewish Archives, the Tretter Collection in GLBT
Studies, the Manuscripts Division, and the Special Collections and Rare Books Unit. The Manuscripts
Division has three sub-collections: the Performing Arts Archives, the Northwest Architectual Archives and
the Literary Manuscripts Collections. Similarly, the Special Collections and Rare Books unit houses several
sub-collections including the Sherlock Holmes archive, the Collection of Cuneiform Inscriptions, the
Dahllof Collection of Swedish Americana, the Mertle Collection on the History of Photomechanics, the
Kann Collection of Austrian History and Culture, the Kleiner Collection of Silent Movie Music and the
Laourdas Modern Greek Collection.

117

left, a set of red double doors can be entered with another swipe with a key-card. Beyond
this door is a long, narrow hallway leading to the room which houses the bulk of the
Tretter Collection of GLBT Studies.
If you were to enter into this archive in 2010, any fantasy that archives are a place
of order and logic would be quickly eradicated upon turning into this hallway. Unmarked
boxes line the side of the length of the hallway. A few open boxes give quick glimpses at
the contents – back issues of Playgirl magazine, yellowing copies of the Bay Area
Reporter, stacks of videotapes labeled “RSVP Vacations” and a suitcase with a tag
hanging on it reading “Greg Louganis.”
At the very end of the long hallway is another red door with a key card. The door
is unmarked with the exception of a small rainbow flag sticker on the lower corner of a
window that looks into a dark room. On entering, a flick of the light switch reveals
several rows of floor-to-ceiling shelves, each nearly filled with books and boxes. While
the room has several rows of shelves, the bulk of the materials in this room belong to
other collections. The Tretter archive takes up only the last three rows – the first for
processed papers and personal collections, the second for books, and the last for objects.
The rest of the collection spills out into the aisles and is stacked along the walls. Some of
these books and magazines appear to be waiting for processing. Some are marked for
deaccessioning, likely because the archive already owns a copy. Some rarely used
materials are waiting to be packed and sent to an off-site storage facility. Boxes of RSVP
Vacation videos are such an example. RSVP Vacations, one of the oldest travel
companies to focus exclusively on an LGBT clientele, has been videotaping their cruises
118

and tours for decades so that they can be sold to customers as a memento of their journey.
The company has donated the master copies to the Tretter Collection, but with space at a
premium, and a perceived lack of interest from scholars, the decision was made to send
them to off-site storage. Other materials are simply sitting on the floor because there is
currently no other place to put them. Within the limited space of the archive, every item
has a purpose, and every inch of space must count.
Digging through boxes one day as a temporary paid member of the archive’s staff,
I came across a green plastic flyswatter in a box of unsorted papers simply labeled “Jean
Tretter.” The box was on a shelf with the processed materials. In a manner of speaking, I
was struck by the flyswatter. What is it doing down here? It is not in the archive to be
functional – the storage conditions in the caverns are designed to limit bug and rodent
infestations. The flyswatter is also boxed with other materials – not sitting on a shelf
where it can be readily used. There is a moment where I am surprised, where my
expectations of what I would find in this box are thrown into question. With little
information to go by, I’m tempted to ignore it and move on to more interesting and
culturally relevant material that is literally tumbling off the shelves and into the aisles.
Yet part of me does not want to quickly dismiss the object as an unintended intruder in
the space. Its presence is somehow queer. I begin to wonder what a flyswatter has to do
with LGBT history or culture. I realize that to understand how a flyswatter fits into
LGBT history or culture, I must first have an understanding about what LGBT history or
culture is. There is no easy answer for this, of course, as my previous chapters should
reveal. Trying to figure out how the flyswatter relates to LGBT history or culture reveals
119

the discursive operations that construct LGBT identity. Somebody, somewhere (often an
unnamed, unknown archivist) has some idea what LGBT identity is, and they are
collecting materials which help support this interpretation. The flyswatter is the anomaly,
an object that proposes questions, that throws this entire interpretation of LGBT identity
into question, undermining the perception of the archive as the arbiter of discourse and
guardian of history. If we allow ourselves to be stopped by the flyswatter’s presence, to
be surprised even for a moment, it has the potential to shift our focus from LGBT identity
to queer historiography.
Of course, the presence of the flyswatter in the archive is entirely accidental. The
papers around it suggest that this was one of the boxes the archive’s founder, Jean
Tretter, took out of his home to begin the collection at the university. It likely got
shuffled into the box along with the papers, and at the time of this visit into the caverns –
closed to the general public – nobody had sat down to sort through the box and inevitably
remove the errant item. I would like, however, to advocate for its continued presence in
the archive. Its accidental presence does not mean it does not have value. Unlike many of
the other objects in the room, selected to help answer the question of what LGBT identity
is, the flyswatter does not answer the question – it poses one. It is an object that is both
provocative and queer – its very presence disrupts the archive’s project of making
meaning.
Typically, archivists consciously or unconsciously re-narrate or remove disruptive
objects, order is imposed, and narratives that do not seem to fit are discretely ignored.
This is the work of the archivist – work that makes the archive recognizably useful within
120

the expectations and conventions of academia. So then why would disruption be desirable
and queer? Scholars such as Pierre Bourdieu and Judith Butler have written extensively
on the subject of habitus, the values, expectations, and dispositions of particular social
groups that dictate the ways we behave, becoming seemingly naturalized parts of our
existence, and which are acquired through the experiences of everyday life. 32 Queer
theory recognizes that habitus is behind the naturalization of all identity formations –
race, sexuality, class, nationality, etc. The archive is one of the places where habitus
becomes naturalized. The LGBT archive becomes a site for homonormativity, where
specific understandings of sexual and gender identity are affirmed and transmitted. But to
recognize habitus in our lives is to begin to become aware that there are other possible
ways of seeing ourselves and our relationships to one another. Disruption is a necessary
part of this exploration. Moments of surprise, shock, and delay can reveal the personal
and social expectations that influence the ways people behave or the ways in which they
see the world.
The sheer volume of materials in an archive make moments of surprise and shock
an inevitable component of archival research, so much so that “archive stories” where
scholars have begun documenting their experiences engaging with archives has become a
popular subject within cultural studies.33 The imposition of a seemingly ‘natural’ logic
often encounters counter-narratives, absences, lost/misplaced items, and occasionally – in
such cases as the flyswatter – the unexpected object. The archivist’s desire for the archive
to be useful and “truthful,” and a scholar’s desire to find answers that validate their
32

See Butler’s “Performativity’s Social Magic,” in Bourdieu: A Critical Reader, ed. Richard Shusterman
(Blackwell: 1998).
33
See Burton (2005), Johnson (2011), Steedman (2002)

121

research claims means that these queer disruptions are often glossed over. Such moments
are more than anecdotes or quickly forgotten aberrations. They gesture towards a deeper
complexity of the human experience that the archive cannot fully comprehend or
encapsulate. The Foucauldian and Derridian conceptions of the archive focus on the
archive as the institution of law, or the actual ordering of logic (a kind of habitus). In this
chapter, I argue that the moments in an archive that surprise – even as simple as finding a
flyswatter where one does not expect – disrupts the perception of the archive as an
infallible authority on the human experience, and instead reasserts that everything that
has been collected, and even the very ordering logic of an archive, is itself an expression
of human desires, desires that are messy, spontaneous, illogical, sexual, and above all,
inspiring.
By attending to specific objects within the Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies,
this chapter focuses on the queer disruptive possibilities of the archive (if attention is paid
to them), and the ways in which these disruptions are “managed” by archivists to ensure a
consistency in the narrative of LGBT identity the archive is attempting to articulate.
When archives fail to do what is expected of them, when they become impossible, there
exists a radical queer potentiality to question such expectations. The first section explores
the role of desire in the creation of personal collections, and how this desire poses a
challenge to the archive. The second section looks at the queerness of an over-abundant
archive. Tretter’s tendency to collect anything remotely related to LGBT identity
exceeded the physical limits of the archival space. Without finding aids or an ability to
organize everything in a way that made sense in an academic archive, it was a difficult
122

archive to use in the traditional sense, but offered value in the ability to encounter the
unexpected. The third section examines the shame and discomfort that can occur when
archivists deal with objects of a sexual nature, and how these feelings become embedded
in the archive’s narratives of sexual identity. Finally, the last section looks at specific
objects within the collection that resist easy classification, and which encourage archival
participants – archivists, scholars, volunteers, visitors – to dream.
The Tretter Collection is a unique site to conduct these investigations. Tretter’s
archiving began in 1972 when, as a linguistics specialist during the Vietnam War, he
started taking classes at the University of Minnesota through the benefit of the G.I. Bill.
He became active in organizing the first Twin Cities Pride Festival, which began as a
picnic in 1972, and he was also a participant in F.R.E.E. (Fight Repression of Erotic
Expression), the country’s first university-sanctioned student organization advocating
civil rights for homosexuals. Tretter’s participation in gay activism led him to the
university’s anthropology program, where he intended to study gay and lesbian cultures
in different regions of the world. According to Tretter, the faculty and staff insisted no
such thing as gay culture exists, and Tretter dropped out to pursue his studies on his own.
The archive was originally a personal collection focusing almost exclusively on gay
material and was housed entirely in Tretter’s Saint Paul apartment. He developed a local
reputation as a gay historian, and those who knew of him and his collection could contact
him with questions or to see materials. In the 1980s, he met Jim Kepner from the ONE
Archive, who shared his insights on historiography and validated Tretter’s grassrootsstyle, never-say-no, dig-in-the-dumpsters-if-needed collecting habits. The collection was
123

ultimately purchased by the University of Minnesota in 2001 as the seed of a larger,
broader LGBT archive that would support their new sexuality studies minor, and it has
been something of an anomaly in their archival holdings for over a decade. Tretter retired
for health reasons in 2010, and since then an interim curator, Stewart Van Cleve, and a
new full-time curator, Lisa Vecoli, have worked to trim down and organize the archive to
make it a usable academic resource. All archives exist in some state of flux, but each new
incarnation of the Tretter Collection has dramatically demonstrated the ways in which the
institutional academic archive organizes material in the effort to make meaning. The
impact of the changes to the Tretter Collection are not always readily visible to the casual
researcher. The once-overflowing storage room for the collection is off-limits to the
public. Archivists also rarely intend to be the center of attention, and the work of ordering
a collection is seen as secondary to most scholars who come to see the archival materials,
not to study archival logics. More than any other chapter, I draw on ethnographic
interviews and my own personal involvement with the Tretter Collection, where I have
been a resident scholar, the performing arts collections specialist, cataloguer, advisory
committee member and chair, and an exhibit curator at various times over the past six
years.

“Giving a Hoot”: Legacy, Desire and the Personal Collection
In a box marked “Dean Goodman” there are a number of file folders containing
photographs sorted by year. In one of the earlier folders is a photograph of a young man
in a suit. With sandy blond hair, lacquered to show the streaks of a comb that once ran
124

through it, the man looks pensively out to the left of the camera. The back of the photo
has two separate and contradictory inscriptions, written at different times judging by the
penmanship and color of the ink. The first inscription reads: “Don’t remember when this
was - I’ve shed some tears destroying and giving some pictures away - but I’d rather do
this now. No one I know would think or give a hoot what happened to some things except
ones concerned – like you.” The second: “My high school senior year book 1937.”
Born in 1920, Goodman was an actor, writer, and director who lived much of his
life on the west coast. He was an active reformer within the Actor’s Equity Union, and
was briefly married to Maria Seiber, daughter of Marlene Dietrich – the subject of his
1993 book Maria, Marlene, & Me: Intimate Recollections of a Life in Theatre and Film.
Diagnosed with cancer in 2004, he began preparing for his death by penning his own
obituary and organizing his papers. In 2005, Goodman donated the bulk of his theatre
memorabilia to the San Francisco Performing Arts Museum, his gay-related books to the
San Francisco Public Library’s GLBT collection, and the rest of his personal papers went
to the Tretter Collection. He died on July 4, 2006 at the age of 86.
By sorting the photographs chronologically, the archive values chronology over
sentiment, data over emotion. The photograph is valuable because it captures the subject
of this personal collection when he was in high school in 1937. Filed along with a host of
other photographs from the period – some unlabeled – this particular photograph is easily
overlooked, and the desire it articulates to be cared for, to be remembered, left
unremarked. The encounter with such personal appeals, expressions of remembrance
directed specifically to you, the reader, are jarring moments that remind the archival
125

visitor that behind the grand narratives being told through various collections of materials
was a whole person who lived a complex life only barely captured in the papers and
photographs that fill the Hollinger box before you. To respond to Goodman’s call to
“give a hoot,” you have to see him as more than a disembodied voice that gives shape to
contemporary understandings of gay American history.
The inscription on Goodman’s youthful photograph speaks of an often unspoken
characteristic of the personal collection in the LGBT archive. The “you” the inscription
refers to is no longer known, but its personal appeal to be remembered – for someone to
“give a hoot” – is passed along to the archive, and to the scholar/archivist who reads it in
the present. Like many LGBT archives, the vast majority of the Tretter Collection’s
holdings are unsolicited personal collections like the Goodman papers – donated to the
archive towards the end of the person’s life, or donated to the archive through a deed of
gift after they have passed away. The expressed mission of the Tretter Collection is to be
an “archival repository for the personal papers of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and
Transgender (GLBT) persons and the archives of GLBT organizations, and related
documents of historical and cultural value” (Tretter Statement). By arguing that the
collections reflect the important historical and cultural experiences of individual LGBT
lives, the archive masks the intention behind the gift of the personal collection. When a
photo such as this enters an LGBT archive, it no longer serves the purposes of its
previous owners. The object is shrouded in an epistemology of importance by archivists
and scholars, where it is made to speak on behalf of the collective LGBT community.
The photograph, for example, is not valued for what it says about Goodman as a person,
126

but rather as a representation of early 20th century young gay men and an affirmation that
gay men existed in 1937. Details of a person’s life are only as important as they speak to
a larger social claim. The donor’s personal desires, the reason for their collecting and
eventual donation, are all erased from view through various archival maneuverings.
Finding aids, for example, often include information regarding a collection’s acquisition,
but they are often brief and vague. Goodman’s simply states “Donated by Dean Goodman
in 2005” – nothing about his desire to leave a legacy, nothing about his hopes that he
would be remembered as a contributor to west coast theatre, and certainly nothing about
his fear of being forgotten, even though these are the primary reasons this material is in
the collection. Also, it is accepted practice in archives across the country that the
documents relating to acquisition – correspondence between an archive and a donor,
deeds of gift, etc. – are kept separately from the donated collection in the archive’s
private organizational files, and are rarely made available to scholars. This action
discourages researchers from asking “How did this get here?” or “Why did this person
donate their collection?” To the archive, such questions are quickly dismissed, as they
might call into question the presumed objectivity of the archive and distract from the
grand epistemological narrative, in this case of LGBT identity.
Such desires - the need to be remembered, to leave a legacy that will allow the life
of a person to have meaning after they are gone – are especially palpable in LGBT
archives. According to the National Resource Center on LGBT Aging, when compared to
heterosexual counterparts, LGBT seniors are twice as likely to age as a single person,
twice as likely to live alone, and three-to-four times less likely to have children to support
127

them (NRCLGBTA, April 2011). Often without children to carry on the legacies and
memories of the parent, some LGBT individuals experience anxiety and fear at the end of
their lives, believing they will not be remembered, that their life lacked a greater purpose,
or a feeling that they are leaving a limited impact on the world. For some, the archive
becomes a way for LGBT elders to create a legacy that lives beyond them.
While perhaps heightened within the LGBT community, the concern over futurity
is not exclusive to LGBT elders. In recent years, queer studies scholars have examined
some of the ways questions of futurity and progeny drive American society. In his book
No Future, Lee Edelman defines repro-futurity as a kind of political orientation that
depends on constant sacrifice and awareness of a proto-Child that is always not yet born
or not yet grown up. Under this model, social and political actions promise a better
tomorrow, but Edelman points out that tomorrow is unattainable – always a day away
(30). This is captured in such movements as the “It Gets Better” anti-bullying campaign,
which frames the present in terms of pain and invisibility, with a future full of hope and
equality. Under the repro-futurity model, history is the narrative of the always “betteryet-to-come.” In a roundtable discussion on queer temporality, Annamarie Jagose asked
“how queer scholarship might best imagine modes of being lesbian that refuse the
consequential promise of ‘history,’” noting that while origin stories had been widely
critiqued, few scholars have questioned the progressivist doctrine of the improved
tomorrow.34 In the book, In a Queer Time and Place, Judith Halberstam offers examples
of responses to actions of violence and performances of art that have offered alternative
34

See Freeman, 165, and Dinshaw, C., Edelman, L., Ferguson, R., Freccero, C., Freeman, E., Halberstam,
J., Jagose, A., Nealon, C., Nguyen, H. (2007). Theorizing Queer Temporalities: A Roundtable Discussion.
G L Q: a journal of lesbian and gay studies, 13(2-3), 177-195.

128

ways of conceiving of a queer history that goes beyond a heterosexually-based
reproduction/kinship model. One example Halberstam offers is a concert where
folksinger Ferron performed on stage with Kaia Wilson of the postpunk dyke band The
Butchies, creating a moment of intergenerationality where separate generations connected
through a moment of untimeliness, rather than a passing down of a cultural tradition
(180-187). Such theories suggest that the desire for legacy and the anxiety around its
absence are endemic of a neoliberal heteronormative society. It is part of cultural habitus
to desire offspring that will live in our image after we die. Rather than focusing on
whether or not this desire is useful or not in the LGBT community, the anxieties
produced out of the desire for legacy are real and experienced by many LGBT seniors,
and they remain a significant motivating factor for the donation of personal collections to
LGBT archives. In this way, the archive is a surrogate for never-conceived children.
For over a year, I processed the 87 boxes of personal papers belonging to Charles
Nolte. A long-time professor of theatre at the University of Minnesota and an actor on
Broadway and European stages, as well as television and Hollywood films of the 1950s,
Charles Nolte’s collection documents the 86 years of his life through personal journals,
newspaper clippings, photographs, films, lecture notes and playbills. Also in the
collection are recordings of the weekly interviews I conducted with Nolte, which discuss
his life, the materials in the collection, and the reasons he donated his papers to the
archive. Nolte began “courting” – his word – the Tretter Collection as soon as the
university founded the archive in 2001. For years, Nolte attended events at the library and
made small monetary donations with the hope that one day Jean Tretter would express an
129

interest in his papers. In 2008, he was performing in Exit Strategy in the semiautobiographical role of an aging gay theatre professor and former actor when he was
diagnosed with cancer. His health declined rapidly and by February 2009, he explained,
he thought he was going to die and wanted to quickly find a home for his papers before it
was too late. Frustrated that nobody from the Tretter Collection or University Libraries
had expressed an interest in his papers, he called Tretter and said “I’m dying. Do you
want this stuff or not?” I asked Nolte why he chose the Tretter Collection, specifically an
LGBT archive, over the University Archives or the Performing Arts Archive, either of
which would have also been thrilled to have his papers. Nolte stated that he felt his
experiences would be most interesting to scholars of gay history and believed that his
papers would be accessed more in the Tretter Collection than in other units. “These
papers, the journals in particular, are my children,” Nolte explained. “This is what will
live beyond me. I just hope that somebody someday might find something of value in
there. Do you think they will?”
The question seeks reassurance just as much as Dean Goodman’s photograph
begs the reader to “give a hoot.” These impassioned pleas can be seen as an outright
refusal to die, and the life of the person is projected onto the objects in the collection. He
frames the material in his collection as his children, and like children he conceived it
through labor, and cared for and protected it over many years. A lot of time and energy
was exerted in his lifetime in the care of his collection. For it to be “lost” after his death
would have meant that labor was all for nothing, and without the material traces to be
remembered by future generations, he feared his life would have meant nothing as well.
130

As I said before, in the absence of offspring to pass on one’s legacy, the archive becomes
a surrogate for the never-conceived child. But in Charles’ case, he continued to worry
that his life’s work would not be cared for. It was not enough simply that the papers be
protected in the archive. Charles needed to believe they would be accessed. He needed to
feel like his life had a purpose and that it would continue to have purpose after he died.
He also needed to be able to participate in how his life was being archived – in some
way, to be in control of the narrative as his body became less and less controllable from
the cancer. Of course, no guarantee can be made that the papers will get used, nor can any
prediction be made about how they will be interpreted if they are. Indeed, some of the
personal papers at the Tretter Collection have not been accessed since they were
processed and put into storage, due to the lack of availability of staff and volunteers to
process the collection’s massive backlog of materials.
It was also not enough for Charles to simply trust that the archive would care. As
far as surrogate children go, it should already be clear that the archive is entirely
disinterested in the subjects of its collections, except in so far as they contribute to the
archive’s grand narratives on LGBT identity, in which the Tretter Collection is not alone.
Charles not only feared that his collection wouldn’t be accessed, or that he would be
forgotten. He feared that nobody would care if it did. And this is where I came in, as the
face of the archive and as a friend. I had never met Charles before his work with the
archive, but we immediately bonded over our shared interests in theatre and gay histories.
My weekly meetings with him were not typical of the archive’s acquisition process –
once the deed of gift is signed, a truck comes in, picks up the boxes, and brings them to
131

the archive. If, by chance, the collection is quickly processed and the donor is still
reachable, they may be contacted for brief clarifications or if materials were picked up
that are unwanted by the archive (eg. financial or medical records, commercial materials
not related to LGBT identity like books or films, etc.). My meetings with Charles made
me, the defacto archivist, his surrogate child – a role I gladly played. I did and do care
about him, and through the archive, he knew that as long as I was alive, someone would
know about his life and the materials he left behind.
In her book Destination Cultures, Barbra Kirshenblatt-Gimblett suggests that
when objects are removed from their context to be studied – in her case, ethonographic
objects destined for various types of museums – there is a gesture of detachment. A vase,
for example, is detached from its context as a vessel sitting on a particular mantelpiece, in
a particular house, holding particular flowers that might mean something to particular
people, and instead is categorized within genres of art, or used as an example to describe
vase-making techniques, or is made to speak to a particular culture or social practice. But
in this detachment, there can also be a refusal for objects and their context to die, because
they continue to perform their existence (35). Somewhere between Dean Goodman’s
inscription to “give a hoot” and my own memories of Charles Nolte, these materials resist
death, at least for now, and this resistance – the insistence that we recognize a whole,
complex human being that had unknown secrets and desires and whose life is only barely
captured in the material remains filling the boxes – disrupts the archive’s ability to
dismiss the individual person in favor of larger grand narratives. This gesture of resisting
death, or at least living on through material remains, is a particularly queer one,
132

especially within the context of Edelmann’s No Future which critiques the
heteronormative cultural insistence of living on through children. Here, the archive can
potentially offer an alternative means of satisfying the human desire for legacy that
doesn’t depend on sexual reproduction.

The Queerness of Abundance
A cursory rummage through the artifacts shelves of the Tretter Collection will
reveal several items that cause one to pause. On the top shelf of the back wall, for
example, are cheap plastic and ceramic busts of William Shakespeare and Winston
Churchill, along with a white plaster bookend of a seated Egyptian pharaoh with a price
tag from TJ MAXX for $19.99. A brassy coin in a nearby bag is labeled “Tetricus I, 270273 A.D.” Beside it is a rectangular archival storage box, over a foot in length, labeled
“Fertility Fetish, Shipibo Tribe, Peruvian Amazon.” Nearby on a table of books waiting
to be shelved are biographies of Emily Dickinson, Abraham Lincoln and Joan of Arc –
nothing old or rare, but the kinds of books you’d find in bulk in the discount nonfiction
section of your local Barnes and Noble. There is no clear logic that connects all of these
objects, though it can be assumed that their presence in the archive suggests that they
speak to LGBT history or culture. However, lacking any sort of interpretation beyond the
brief (if any) label, I’m left standing in the middle of an aisle with a sense of confusion,
overwhelmed by the abundance of material. I am not unfamiliar with traditional LGBT
histories, but, like many who visit the archive’s storage area, I cannot make the links
between a lot of the materials I see and the histories I feel like I understand. And there is
133

nobody and nothing here to interpret it for me. There is only the abundance of material,
overflowing from the shelves into the aisles and down the length of the cavern’s hallway.
When Jean Tretter was still the curator of the collection, none of these materials
on the artifact shelves were catalogued in a finding aid. In fact, the bulk of the materials
in the collection, even those that have been sorted and filed in archival boxes, are not
included in a finding aid or in the university’s library catalogue. “It’s a matter of money
and time,” Tretter acknowledged to me when I interviewed him in 2010. He explained
that each book that gets sent to the library’s cataloguing system costs over $30 to process,
limiting the archive to sending 24 books a month. At present, Tretter’s ‘priority’ list of
books to be sent to cataloguing would take over two years to complete, and still wouldn’t
begin to scratch the surface of the backlog. The collection depends largely on volunteers
to process its collections and create finding aids. The process is slow, and materials can
spend years sitting on shelves before processing, and sometimes even longer before a
finding aid will be created. This meant that scholars using the Tretter Collection were
greatly limited in their ability to access the archive. They had to either hope that the
materials they wanted were among the 23 finding aids posted on the collection’s website
- covering only a small fraction of the 30,000+ materials in the collection – or the scholar
had to somehow know in advance that the material they were looking for is held in the
archive. Alternatively they could contact Jean Tretter directly, describe their project, and
Tretter would pull:
1) all of the materials he was able to remember are in the collection
2) all of those materials which he was able to find
134

3) all of those materials which he believed the researcher would find relevant based
on his understanding of their project
When asked about this paradox of accessibility in a public collection, Tretter was
clearly frustrated about his limitations. He no longer had the time to actively collect
materials due to his duties as a collections specialist for the archive (the vast majority of
the collection’s current acquisitions are unsolicited personal collections). At the same
time, Tretter’s fervor for collecting everything even remotely related to LGBT people had
exceeded his ability to properly archive it. “In a perfect world, I would have the money to
hire two people full time and we’d probably be able to get everything finished.” In the
field of museum studies, Tretter’s dilemma is a difficult one faced by many smaller
institutions, particularly in times of economic distress. Archives must balance their
mission of making materials available to the public with their mission to preserve
materials for the public trust. Both are not always possible at the same time. Yet even
given a larger budget and a bigger space, it is not difficult to believe that the same
conditions would exist for Tretter, who cannot say “no” to any item even remotely related
LGBT culture. Rather than seeing this overwhelming abundance as a problem, though, I
argue that it offers another productive opportunity for queer disruption.
As an avid collector of stamps and other various odds and ends since he was
seven, Tretter turned his attention to materials with a gay focus that related to his own
personal interests. From pornography to Scandinavian records of early gay organizations,
Tretter collected with the zeal of a hoarder – purchasing items, rummaging through trash
bins, and soliciting donations of items from friends and community members. The
135

collection quickly grew to fill his entire apartment, and Tretter became something of a
cult figure in the community. Scholars and students would occasionally ask to visit his
home to conduct research, and if someone in the community had a question about gay or
lesbian history, they would often be referred to Jean.
By the late 1990s, the collection had completely taken over Tretter’s St. Paul
apartment. With books, periodicals, artwork and manuscripts piled floor to ceiling, there
was just enough room for Tretter to unroll a sleeping bag on the floor each night.
Meanwhile, the University of Minnesota’s attitudes towards gay culture had changed
with the growth of GLBT studies programs in American colleges and universities. By
2000, the university was expanding its cultural studies programs and was seeking to
expand its American Indian Studies department, create a Department of Asian American
Studies, and establish GLBTA Studies Office that would administer a minor in the
subject. At this same time, Jean Tretter was working as a registered nurse in a psychiatric
hospital. One day, a patient at the hospital punched Tretter in the face, knocking him
down. Concerned over the health of the aging archivist, community members lobbied the
University of Minnesota to consider purchasing the collection as a supplement to their
GLBT Studies program and as a sign of commitment to the community. Arguing the
collection would also need to be administered by someone familiar with the materials and
history, they also persuaded the university to hire Tretter as a part-time collections
specialist. If a student went into the library asking for information about the Stonewall
Riots, the community members argued, they would likely be directed to information
about Stonewall Jackson and the Civil War, rather than the Greenwich Village riots that
136

sparked the modern gay rights movement. The university named the collection after
Tretter, and gave him largely unrestricted and unmonitored access to the collection for
the next decade, where he has used the resources of the university to shape the archive
and its programming into one of the largest collections of its kind in the Midwest, and
indeed the world. Jean Tretter’s archive represents his ongoing attempt to demonstrate
the existence and persistence of LGBT people around the world and throughout history.
Its intended mission, like the ONE and Lesbian Herstory Archives, is to document and
promote the history and culture of non-heterosexual sexual identities, and preserve the
collection for years to come.
Post-modern and queer criticism questions the archive’s ability to ‘preserve for
the public trust,’ because, as Foucault writes for example, the archive is not a space of
preservation, but a space of limitation, defining at the outset what can be known about
any given event (129). Thus, there is something particularly fascinating about the
overwhelming abundance of materials in the Tretter Collection, materials which spill out
of the semi-organized shelves and stacks on the floor and in the hallways. Beyond the
general principle that acquisitions contribute to the understanding of LGBT identity, the
vast majority of the archive is largely undefined, lacking any interpretation from a finding
aid, a catalogue description, an acquisition statement, or sometimes even an identification
label. The absence of interpretation and the abundance of material opens the archive to
the queer possibility to encounter anything in this space. Liberated from an ordering
logic, the archive poses more questions than it answers. What do you have? How do I
know what to ask to see if I don’t know what you have? Where can I find such-and-such
137

box? What is this doing down here? Where did it come from? What does it mean? What
does it do? How does it change my understanding of sexual identity? How does it change
me? Is it immediately recognizable as an object speaking to LGBT identity? Does it need
to? It is true that these questions can be asked of any archive, but an archive that fails to
be functional in the traditional sense – an archive that is impossible – insists that any
engagement begin by provoking questions that may not be answerable. In this way, the
impossible archive – the archive of queer possibility – provokes questions rather than
answering them.
This is not an archival model that institutions tend to find valuable. Tretter’s
zealous approach to acquiring and his inability to organize it intelligibly for visitors to the
collection means that, from a traditional archival perspective, the collection is doing a
great disservice to the public. The only individual who might know why these items are
in the collection and where they come from is the 68-year old retired collections
specialist, Jean Tretter, who is currently suffering from health problems. Tretter
recognized the problems this may cause to whoever will take over from him in the future.
In my interview with him in 2010, he expressed his desire to do more to document what
is in the collection, but that he is unable to do as much as he’d like due to his schedule.
“In the last years of Jim Kepner’s life, I’ve heard they sat him down in front of a
computer and said ‘type out everything you know so we don’t lose it when you’re gone,’”
Tretter recalled, adding he hoped to be able to spend more time on new acquisitions once
his health allows him to return to the collection as a volunteer. “Then I won’t have the emails, or the meetings, or the reading room duties to worry about.”
138

Then everything changed. In the months following my interview with Tretter, his
health worsened and a recent graduate in urban planning, Stewart Van Cleve, who had
been hired with donated money to catalogue an organizational collection, stepped in as a
semi-official temporary replacement until a more permanent replacement could be found.
After a few months, Lisa Vecoli, a long-time member of the Tretter Community
Advisory Committee and former Director of Community Relations with the Minneapolis
Institute of Art, was hired first as a temporary then permanent curator for the collection.
The library staff all cared immensely about Tretter and his health, and yet, it was not a
secret – least of all to Jean – that they were eager for him to step aside, both for the sake
of his health and also for the good of the collection. The difficulty using the collection,
the disorganization of the cavern, the lack of visibility on what was actually in the
collection – all of this posed a problem for the University of Minnesota Libraries. Like
most institutions that run archives, the value of an archival collection is primarily
measured by the frequency with which it is used, the amount of donations it is able to
bring in, and, to a degree, the extent to which the archives are cited within academic
works. The Tretter Collection was not reaching its potential. It is true that Jean had
amassed one of the largest collections of LGBT materials in the world with a truly
international scope, and yet nobody, including the libraries staff, was entirely sure what
was there. Tretter did not have receipts or deeds of gift for all of the materials – which he
would have had to run by his supervisors for approval. They knew that, to some extent,
Jean was sneaking material into the collection because he couldn’t bear the thought of it
being thrown away or lost to the archive. To a degree, the libraries permitted this because
139

they didn’t want to upset Jean, who, even after many years at the university, was still
used to grassroots archival practices that rarely considered details like deeds of gift.
Given time, Jean would retire, and the “problem” of the archive could be dealt with then.
Over the past couple of years, order and logic have slowly found there way into
the chaos of the archive - first through Stewart Van Cleve, but largely under Lisa Vecoli.
New acquisitions have been dramatically scaled back while much of the backlog is
processed under Vecoli’s supervision. Some items which do not have a clear connection
to LGBT history or culture, or which take up valuable space with limited perceived
research value, are quietly removed. In many archives, this would require a formal
deaccessioning process, but because much of the collection lacks deeds of gift, the
libraries can argue that there was never a formal agreement to hold the materials. Now
the collection has over a hundred finding aids published on their website with more
coming on a monthly basis, compared to the less than ten that existed through much of
Tretter’s tenure. The hallways outside the cavern have been cleared. Vecoli has even
created an extensive spreadsheet database that has begun to document everything in
storage, including boxes that have been sitting untouched off-site for years. Recently,
Vecoli applied for and received a $256,000 grant to conduct a series of oral history
interviews with the trans* community, in an effort to address a large gap in the
collection’s holdings.35 Archivable trans* materials can be difficult to find, as there isn’t
the same volume of printed records – newspapers, magazines, etc. – that exist in gay and

35

Trans* is currently the umbrella term that refers to all identities within the gender identity spectrum. It is
meant to include such terms as transgender, transvestite, transsexual, trans man, trans woman, genderfuck,
genderless, non-gendered, bigender, genderfluid, third gender, and others. See Sam Killermann’s The
Social Justice Advocate’s Handbook: A Guide to Gender (2013).

140

lesbian communities. In the coming year, Vecoli also hopes to expand the collection’s
bi/pan/omni-sexual holdings. The results of this reorganization and new approach are
immediately visible and calculable. Use of the archive has increased dramatically, and
Vecoli has applied for and received substantial grants that build off of her work to make
the entire collection available for scholars. In many ways, she has begun to fulfill
Tretter’s vision of creating a massive, internationally-recognized collection of LGBTrelated material, and he seems pleased by the work she is doing and the direction the
archive is taking.
In several early meetings of the advisory committee – made up of Jean, Lisa,
library staff, and members of the university and non-academic LGBT communities –
Vecoli sought advice on whether to keep or discard some items, and she would bring
materials in for discussion and debate. Once, for example, she brought samples of the
collection’s extensive run of International Male clothing catalogues. Between 1987 and
2007, the mail-order catalogue featured scantily-clad models hawking mesh shirts,
stringy thongs, and other clothing. The company targeted men broadly, but it was
particularly popular within the gay community. “Do we really need to keep the full run of
catalogues?” Vecoli asked, having previously reminded the committee of the limited
available shelf space. Arguing on their behalf, Tretter replied that company was very
popular among gay men, and that the mailing was also a subject of erotic gaze for
closeted men. Flipping through a catalogue in public or having one on your coffee table
could be a signal to other gay men that you were one of them. “But do we really need all
of them?” Vecoli asked again, with the familiar look of the overwhelmed archivist.
141

“There are boxes of these. What kind of research value do they have? Could we maybe
just keep a few from each year?” I’ve never personally been much help in these
discussions, and have privately mentioned to Vecoli how grateful I am not to have to
make such decisions on a day-to-day basis. It is not an easy task, particularly in an
archive as abundant as this one. I always find myself remarking that there are reasons to
keep and reasons to discard nearly all of the objects Vecoli brings to the meetings. The
archive is indeed short on space and there isn’t currently a wide amount of scholarship
focusing on such businesses as International Male. But sitting in the meeting, I could, off
the top of my head, think of several research papers that could be written using them, to
say nothing of a paper about what makes them so archivally interesting. This is not the
stuff of typical archives. These catalogues appeared in my own mailbox at home so often
that I would frequently throw them away without even glancing at them. For the majority
of people, they are garbage, and yet for at least one person, they were important enough
to keep, to organize chronologically, and to file away in acid-free archive-quality
Hollinger boxes.
Even the act of trying to manage the archive’s abundance provokes useful
questions about the practice of archiving. Should material only ever be archived if an
archivist can perceive a research project that might use them? How can an archivist
account for research projects that are, as yet, unimaginable? Can there be value in
disorder? Is it possible to archive for a queer future as well as an LGBT past? How are
the decisions about what is kept or discarded (or what is even acquired in the first place)
concealed or made visible?
142

Knowing such decisions are made in archives everywhere, my goal is not to
validate one approach over another. This is the ever-changing dynamic of archival
organization playing itself out – two different forms of archival imagination chafing
against one another. The newly organized archive has become a remarkable resource in
my teaching and in my scholarship in LGBT theatre and performance. I have a better
sense of what is available in the collection, and when requests are made to see the
material, more often than not that material can actually be located and brought to the
reading room. The logical narratives of LGBT histories and culture that I came to the
archive with are affirmed by the ordering logic of the collections. Now more than ever,
the archive is able to give shape to LGBT identity. What is lost in this, though, is that
sense of being able to understand sexual identity in ways that weren’t familiar – in ways
that I hadn’t considered before coming to the archive. I confess that I miss the chaos and
impossibility of the way the archive was. It is more difficult, though not impossible, to
take the elevators down into the caverns and to be overwhelmed and disturbed. The
burden of being surprised has shifted from the archive onto the visitor. Now, to find
queer moments where logic and order are disrupted, you have to seek them out.

When the Archive’s A’Rockin’… Keeping the Sex in the Sexuality
Further along the shelf – past the busts of Shakespeare and Churchill, beyond the
box of Dean Goodman papers – is another gray archival storage box. Blending in with the
other boxes on the shelf, my eye caught sight of the label as I took it down from its perch.
“Anal Self-Stimulation Materials,” the label on the box reads. “Anonymous Donation.”
143

Inside the box is a black butt plug, an open, partially used jar of Elbow Grease brand
personal lubricant, an unopened jar of Men’s Cream brand personal lubricant, and a
receipt from Castro Gulch (a San Francisco adult novelty store) for 3 adult DVDs and a
jar of Elbow Grease lubricant, totaling $214.80. Though the box is labeled as an
anonymous donation, the receipt was paid with a credit card, and bears the name of its
owner.
“What the hell does that have to do with gay culture?” a gay friend asked when I
told him about the box later that evening. Having been down into the archive once before,
and having seen a comparatively small amount of the collection’s vast gay male porn
collection sitting on the floor, my friend had already questioned me about the significance
of different items housed in the archive.
“Well, perhaps it’s keeping the sex in sexuality,” I answered – unsure myself why
the box was there or where it came from. “Years from now, somebody may find it
interesting to know what kind of sex toys people used.”
“Maybe,” he admitted, though clearly skeptical. “But people are going to look at
this stuff and think that sex is the only thing gay men cared about.”
Though I didn’t see the need to feel ashamed about the abundance of sexually
explicit material in the collection, he did have a point. The archive holds fairly extensive,
if not complete, collections of gay erotic publications from Playgirl to Honcho to Latin
Inches. Interspersed with gay-themed films like Philadelphia and Milk, are erotic films
like Black Balled and Fantasy Fuckers which significantly outnumber non-erotic films in
the collection. The presence of some erotic material that includes under-age children has
144

been a hotly debated inclusion to the collection among those who are aware that it is in
the archive. Often donated to the collection along with personal papers, erotica makes up
one of the largest genres of material in the Tretter holdings. What does this say about
LGBT identity?
Jean Tretter acknowledged that the porn collection is a subject he has had to
regularly fight about with the Tretter Collection Advisory Committee. In the past,
committee members have questioned why the erotica is there, why they are still
collecting it, why erotica makes up such a large percentage of the collection, why the
erotica focuses mainly on gay men, and why, when faced with limited space in the
archive, is it not sent to the off-site storage facility. Tretter is adamant, however, that the
erotica not be separated from the rest of the collection.36 “The idea behind this collection
is still to prove that history and culture in the GLBT society exists. To that end, you have
to have a certain amount of erotica in it, because that’s the basis on which culture in this
society existed because it’s a same-sex attraction.” To state that erotica is the basis on
which GLBT culture exists is an interesting claim. For Tretter, it is erotica – the material
production of sex and not sex itself – which is the basis for GLBT culture, and clearly
this is reflected by the amount within the collection.
When asked how often the erotic materials get used, Jean insists that there is a
demand, though he is not able or willing to estimate how often. He often tells of a young
male student researching gay gangs in major metropolitan cities. Gang members could be
identified by specific kinds of tattoos on their bodies. To be able to see who was in a

36

The porn magazines, for example, are filed alphabetically along with other periodicals in the collection.
Honcho is archived near the newsletters from the Human Rights Campaign.

145

gang and track them through different times, the student used the erotica in the collection
coupled with internet databases of porn stars to get information about gang members. He
reminds the advisory committee of such requests whenever they suggest moving some or
all of the erotic materials off-site.
I had to ask about the “Anal Self-Stimulation Materials” box. What, I ask him, do
these materials say about gay identity?
“Well, it also says something about how we got it,” he says with a laugh. “That
was part of a donation from a funeral home. What happened was this poor guy…this
elderly gentleman was on his way home from an adult video store, had a heart attack, and
died. He was delivered to the funeral home with this bag of stuff. The funeral home asked
his relatives if they wanted it, and they said ‘No, just get rid of it’ or ‘throw it away’ or
whatever, but being a conscientious group – these were unopened DVDs and the one jar
hadn’t been used, and one hopes, at least that the butt plug was never used…”
“…although the other jar leaves that a little suspect,” I interjected.
“Yeah. But one day I get a phone call saying they’ve got this stuff and do we want
it, and we said sure…. And so that’s how we got it. So I just thought it needs to be kept
together. The DVDs and the magazines can go in with the rest of the stuff, but this whole
little thing should be kept together in honor of some poor little guy who never quite made
it home.”
Like the International Male catalogues mentioned earlier, the relevance of this
box to an LGBT archive has been called into questions. After all, what research value
could it have, especially without the story to explain its provenance? As I stated
146

previously, such materials as this box are transformed and given life through its
interpretation. Yet without interpretation, its randomness and overt sexuality – had it
really been up some guy’s ass? - is provocative. Its value – if such economically-laden
terms must be used – is not in whether it can be the subject of extensive research, but
rather in appearing where it was not expected. Perhaps it would incite laughter, anger, or
lust. Perhaps it is a monument to a forgotten man, or to the archive’s founder who
delighted in finding heroism in stories such as this. This box suggests a nonhomonormative queerness that is socially vulgar, and not what many want associated
with the LGBT individual of moral repute. The inability for this object to exist in a
“proper archive” is a reminder of the limited predetermination of archival materials,
where cleanliness is a virtue and the unexpected is frowned upon.
As I mentioned, following Tretter’s retirement, Stewart Van Cleve began the
work of imposing a logic onto the collection. Digging through boxes of unprocessed
materials tucked away in storage, he unexpectedly found a series of twenty-one boxes
filled with underwear. Each pair of underwear had been carefully folded and placed into
separate zip-loc bags – some with dates, names and/or locations written on them. Stewart
was perplexed. As he described it, he had spent days going through boxes and kept
running into random stuff that he couldn’t explain. Twenty-one boxes, though,
represented not a small amount of storage area. He called Jean who explained that they
had been donated by a man who had an underwear fetish. Most of the collection was
from the 1970s and 1980s, and included used underwear the man had purchased, had
acquired as sexual trophies, and in some cases, underwear that the man had stolen from
147

gym lockers. It was clear all the underwear had been used, but it wasn’t clear if they were
clean.
I happened to be processing Charles Nolte’s personal papers at the archive when
Stewart made this discovery. “I don’t want to touch them,” he told me. “This is really
disgusting. I’m also offended that this is even there. I don’t want people thinking this is
what it means to be a gay man. This isn’t who I am.”
“Twenty-one boxes, did you say?” I couldn’t conceal my fascination. “That’s a
LOT of underwear!”
Stewart’s initial reaction of disgust and shame provided him with the productive
opportunity to be able to express something about his own experience of his sexual
identity in opposition to the material he had found. The underwear fetish was not
connected with him, was not part of his experience, and his expressed desire to not be
associated with it offered a nuanced expression of male homosexuality – both men,
Stewart and the unnamed donor, identified as gay, but clearly had different experiences
and expectations of what this meant.
Where Stewart reacted to the unexpected with disgust, I reacted with awe. I loved
the idea that this collection was down there, but then, as a performance studies scholar
I’m particularly drawn to the archive’s non-textual holdings. I delighted in the queerness
of erotic discovery and in Jean’s transgression of hiding these boxes in the collection.
The underwear reminded me of a recently published biography called Secret Historian
about Samuel Steward, a latter-day gay Renaissance man born in 1909 and who had
written the name, date, physical attributes, and description of his sexual exploits for most
148

of his adult life on index cards. The cards include famous celebrities and unknown
workers, describing in erotic detail their tattoos and body markings, as well as the details
of their sexual trysts. Such records are rarely kept, and even more rarely found in an
archive. Encountering the unexpected is a queer reminder of the diversity of human
experience, and that even in spite of an abundance of documentation, there is always
more to any story. Stewart eventually brought the boxes to the head of the library
archives, who then consulted with the chair of the collection’s advisory committee, a
scholar of Lesbian literature. It was decided that, since the collection did not have a deed
of gift where the libraries would then be obligated to care for it, they would keep a
“representative selection” and explain in some future finding aid that it was part of a
larger collection. Stewart was left to figure out what a representative selection meant –
Color? Style? Date? Not wanting to paw through them, he kept a few that immediately
stood out and discarded the rest.
Where some objects are removed because of questions of research value or space,
objects such as these are removed, at least to some degree, because of shame. Queer
theorists such as Eve Sedgwick have argued that shame is part of the process of identity
formation that should not be quickly dismissed (142). The moment that shame is
experienced is the moment when a desired connection is refused. Encountering shame
through sex toys and pornography in the LGBT archive can be a moment that defines a
limit on how an individual recognizes their identity or there sense of belonging – “I
identify with the Gertrude Stein and Truman Capote parts of this archive, not with
Honcho and International Male.” Such moments, when reflected on, can be helpful in
149

understanding how a person perceives their own identity and the idea of LGBT
community. It is a revelation of habitus, expressing the social patterns – morality, value,
economy, etc – that they personally relate to and operate within, and, if desired, can
provide the possibility for challenging these perceptions.

Encountering the Unexpected: Towards the Queer Archive
What happens when you don’t see yourself or your vision of the world affirmed
within the archive? What if, instead, you encounter disorder, several boxes of used
underwear, Winston Churchill and a flyswatter? The effect can be unsettling. By and
large, archives are organized to avoid unsettling moments. Its organization is carefully
determined and expressed through mission statements, catalogues, and finding aids. You
should, in theory, always be able to find what you are looking for.
LGBT archives seek to document the experiences of men who love men, women
who love women, and those who historically deviate from gender norms. Yet, the
histories that often emerge from these archives situate the homosexual-as-citizen within
the framework of neoliberal economies. Corporations participate in Pride festivals and
donate to LGBT causes to appeal to a market that is believed to have a larger disposable
income than families with children. Discussions of ‘marriage equality’ are frequently
framed within the context of the significant boost to individual state economies by
allowing same-sex partners to marry. The LGBT person achieves acceptance in
neoliberal society by marking the ways they contribute to and participate in the economy.
Queer histories, which do not have acceptance as an ultimate aim, attempt to disrupt the
150

habitus of this framework. The Tretter Collection is not a queer archive, but the moments
when it fails to fit into the established concept of what an LGBT archive is, what it
collects, or how it operates, offer a sense of queer possibility. The archive’s burgeoning
shelves of the unexpected, of trash or the academically useless, call into question the
objects that do seem to belong. When Tretter curated the collection, there was no system
of inclusion or exclusion, only a system of attachment. Everything had value. Research
agendas, storage limitations, and organization be damned.
Even after the flyswatter, butt plugs, and boxes of underwear have been removed,
the queer possibilities of encountering the unexpected still remain. Sometimes this can be
seen through the intense expressions of desire embedded in the archive’s various personal
collections. Other times it can be seen in the sheer abundance of materials and the
inability to make an ordered logic out of it. And sometimes they can be seen in the
moments where the unexpected is encountered, and all the reactions we go through when
it happens. The queerness of the archive operates in the objects that are difficult to
explain – that surprise and confuse. Archival problems allow for moments of queer
possibility. In my next chapter, I will dig further into this concept, to see in what ways
archives can not only offer moments of queer possibility, but can be queer themselves.

151

Chapter IV

Toward the Queer Archive: The Jack Smith
Archive
“Art must not be used anymore as another elaborate means of fleeing from thinking
because of the multiplying amount of information each person needs to process in order
to come to any kind of decision about what kind of planet one wants to live on before
business, religion, and government succeed in blowing it out of the solar system.”
- Jack Smith, LAICA Journal #19, June/July 1978
“Juvenile does not equal shameful and trash is the material of creators.”
- Jack Smith, Film Culture #27, Winter 1962/1963
Queer filmmaker and performance artist Jack Smith died from complications
relating to AIDS on September 25,1989. He left no will or directive for the management
of his estate. Smith has been cited as an inspiration by a litany of celebrated artists
including Lou Reed, Laurie Anderson, Andy Warhol, Richard Foreman and John Waters,
yet, at the time of his death, few but his closest friends remembered him. All his life,
Smith was committed to creating provocative art that both seduced and challenged
audiences. He resisted labels to such extremes that when the New York Police
Department vilified his highly sexual film Flaming Creatures (1962) and noted cultural
critic Susan Sontag widely celebrated it, Smith disavowed both and withdrew his first and
only “popular” work from circulation. Smith’s approach to art made it necessarily
difficult for people to understand what he was doing – necessary because he was
intentionally creating work that resisted interpretation – and so few people outside of
underground art circles took notice of him. During his career, Smith passed on a number
152

of commercial projects that would have likely led to great fame and fortune – Smith was
often scraping by on meager bits of food, discarded items and odd jobs – but he felt that
taking those projects on would be selling out.37 It is not a stretch to state that he died in
economic poverty and relative obscurity. It is also not a stretch to state that since Smith’s
death, the collection of work he left behind has brought him an ever-growing iconic
status that was never realized during his lifetime.
After Smith died, his close friend Penny Arcade – a Warhol superstar and
performance artist in her own right – went to Smith’s sixth-floor walk-up to salvage what
she could before the landlord got to it. For over a decade prior to his death, Smith had
been slowly and meticulously transforming his apartment into a film set, Sinbad in the
Rented World, which was never completed. The bathroom had been converted into a
Tahitian garden of plastic plants. Squared doorframes were transformed into Moorish
arches, and a large painting of a three-breasted Scheherazade – complete with custommade brassiere – adorned the living room wall (Arcade 2010). Much of Smith’s work had
a decidedly orientalist style to it, gesturing to the lush Hollywood B-movies made in the
1940s, which performance scholar José Muñoz has argued reflected a critique of
Hollywood cultural consumption, rather than an uncritical perpetuation of stereotypes
(Muñoz x). Arcade took what she could from the apartment, filling the storage space in
her own apartment’s basement where Smith’s collection would remain for much of the
1990s. With the help of Village Voice film critic J. Hoberman, Arcade established The
Plaster Foundation to promote and preserve Smith’s work. In 1998, she helped coordinate
37

Smith was highly critical of the commercial art that made people like Warhol and Waters household
names. When beatnik poet and photographer Allan Ginsburg visited Smith in the hospital, Smith referred to
him as a “walking career.” (Arcade 2010)

153

retrospectives of his art at P.S. 1 in New York and the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh in
1998, with profits going toward the preservation of the film negatives in the collection.
After a widely-reported legal battle over Smith’s estate between Arcade and Smith’s
estranged sister in the early 2000s, a judge ruled that the entire collection be sold or
donated to an institution as a whole to promote and preserve the late artist’s work.38
Arcade had been trying to do this for over a decade with little luck – the film archives she
approached were only interested in the film prints and negatives, but were not interested
in the vast amount of props, costumes, sculptural pieces, or his writings. Libraries and
archives tended to only want the written material – letters, journals, scripts, random
musings – but did not have the space to take the rest. Even in death, Smith’s art was
resisting easy classification. Following the judge’s ruling, the Gladstone Gallery – a
private art gallery in New York specializing in mid-to-late 20th century avant garde art –
expressed an interest in purchasing the entire collection outright. In June 2008, Smith’s
sister sold the collection to the Gladstone Gallery for an undisclosed sum. In a press
release, the gallery proclaimed Jack Smith a “visionary” of the “New York underground
avant-garde,” demonstrated by the 1998 retrospectives Arcade had organized at P.S. 1
and the Warhol Museum. “Gladstone Gallery will seek the guidance and insight of
curators, scholars, friends, colleagues, and artists to present this important oeuvre in a
manner respecting the fascinating and singular life of Jack Smith.”
In March, 2012, prior to a research trip for this dissertation, I reached out to
Daniel Feinberg, the Artist Liaison at the Gladstone Gallery who oversees the Smith
archive. I explained that I was interested in Smith’s work as a scholar of queer
38

See Carr (2004), Arcade (2010), Hoberman (2011) for details of the legal dispute.

154

performance and art, and asked if it would be possible to see what was in the collection.
“The Jack Smith Archive exists as a resource for curators to preview work for possible
loan to exhibitions,” Feinberg replied in an e-mail, “as well as an internal Archive for the
gallery’s own research, restoration, and presentation of the material, of course, but it is
not set-up for academic or scholastic research” (Feinberg Email Feb 10, 2012). After
explaining that I wasn’t interested in conducting “traditional research” at the archive, but
rather just wanted to get a sense of what was there and how it was organized, I was
invited to send a lengthy description of my research project which would then be
reviewed by the gallery’s owner Barbara Gladstone. The proposal was reviewed, but the
response reaffirmed that the gallery was not set-up for academic research.
“We are in the process of preparing all of the non-art object material to present to
the Fales Library at NYU, where hopefully the Jack Smith papers,
correspondence, notes, scripts, and other material that is not art work, can be
viewed and studied in depth. As we are a commercial art gallery, our ability and
context does not allow us to properly, which is to say, academically, prepare this
material for students and professors. We are working thoroughly and quickly to
have this important aspect of the Archive available to present to NYU” (Feinberg
Email Feb 16, 2012).
Feinberg could confirm generally that the collection housed a number of Smith’s
writings, photographs, films, props, and costumes, but that there was no complete finding
aid or inventory of the contents of the collection.

155

Without being able to physically see the collection, Feinberg hinted at how the
Gallery has been able to cope with the challenge of classifying the difficult-to-classify.
The entire collection has been separated into at least two distinct categories – items with
artistic merit that could be used for art exhibits, and items with academic research value
that fit within the expected parameters of an academic research archive such as the found
at New York University. Since the Gladstone Gallery is a private collection and is not
obligated to maintain the archive as a whole, items that fall out of either category can be
discarded.
When approaching Smith’s work from an archival standpoint, there are at least
three ways to proceed. One is to burn it all, which was originally Smith’s desire (Arcade
2010). He feared the thought of “ending up in a vault,” was convinced that his collection
would have little meaning without his ability to engage with the material, and argued that
if the world could not appreciate his work while he was alive, they didn’t deserve it after
he was dead. A second approach is to create an archive that figures Smith as the
genealogical father figure of American underground cinema and queer performance art.
This has been Arcade’s (and now Gladstone’s) project since the beginning, and through
the interpretation of the collection and its various exhibitions, Smith stands as the central
branch of a queer performance family tree, a precursor to Warhol and Waters and a
citational reference for artists like Carmelita Tropicana and Ron Vawter. A third
approach to archiving Smith’s collection is to see the objects not as a monument to
Smith, but to engage with them in the kind of queer artistic practice of disruption that has
been Smith’s life work.
156

While the Gladstone Gallery has chosen their route, I want to explore what the
third approach might have looked like as a way of thinking about and through the concept
of queer archiving and queer research. In other words, rather than look at how Smith’s
collection can serve as an example of cultural production (creating an archival monument
to Jack Smith), I am interested in the archive as an interruption in the very possibility of
cultural (re)production. For an artist like Smith who resisted interpretation and
classification, finding him in a modern archive whose primary aims include interpretation
and classification seems counterintuitive, to put it mildly.
Smith sought to provoke through his work, to find the beauty in the unexpected,
to question norms he saw as stagnant and decaying, and to resist capitalism, landlordism
and the camp-as-consumption gay culture. The details of his art works are necessarily
difficult to describe. Scripts served as mere guidelines to performances where entire
sections of dialogue and action would be created, re-worked and destroyed on the spot.
Smith was so committed to the disruptive nature of art, he ensured his work was always
alterable at any given moment. If one attended a performance of his two nights in a row,
the only constant might be the title. Spontaneity trumped structure, and it was not
uncommon for Smith to replay a scene a dozen times during the performance, making
adjustments until it worked. Even his films were dynamically different with each
screening. Smith could often be found in the back room of film houses shortly before
showing his films. There, he would re-edit the entire film – splicing negatives, adding
frames and connecting it all with thin strips of tape.

157

Just as it is difficult to describe Smith’s work, his ongoing commitment to
disruption also makes it difficult to analyze it – to ever have a moment where it is
possible to say: “Aha! This is what happened in the performance. This is what Smith was
trying to do.” Not wanting to be limited by labels, he would choose that moment where
he sensed an audience becoming comfortable and familiar with his work to radically
change it. Thus, I am aware of the irony in claiming that Smith’s work was a queer
challenge to the stabilizing force of identity, allowing audiences to see the world in everchanging ways. I believe it was doing that. I also believe it was about beauty, intentional
escapism, exoticism and fetish. It was about Hollywood B-movies and gay life in the
Lower East Side. It was about garbage and drugs; Christmas and fucking. It was all of
these things and more, and that is exactly the point. It was many things in any given
moment, and in the next it would be something entirely different. This is a concept
anathema to the archive, where to catalogue requires a gesture of stillness.
Take, for example, Smith’s 1963 film that made Smith publicly known and
notorious - Flaming Creatures. Featuring billowing fabric, gender ambiguity, vampirism,
orgasmic earthquakes that destroy mountain villages, undead dancing and graphic sex
scenes, the film was screened at the Senate confirmation hearings for Supreme Court
Chief Justice nominee Abe Fortas as an example of the kind of material Fortas had
upheld as not constituting obscenity. The original reel was seized by police at its premier
in New York City, and was officially banned in the state by a New York Criminal Court
for indecency. The controversial film established Smith nationwide as a serious member

158

of the underground alternative film scene. A copy of Flaming Creatures still exists,
edited by Smith for a final time before its current, ultimate state.
In one scene, for example, a wooden coffin lies on the ground. The lid slowly
slides off from the inside by a hand with long fingers and manicured nails. Inside is a
beautiful blonde transvestite vampire, wearing a formal evening gown that may be made
from a sheet and clutching a bouquet of plastic lilies. She sits up slowly in the coffin with
her eyes rolled back in her head while a song reminiscent of Patsy Cline and flea markets
underscores the action. The camera pans down to reveal a man - dead? passed out?
asleep? - at the foot of the coffin. Sitting up, the transvestite vampire starts wildly
shaking the upper half of her body - limbs, head, breasts. She gets up, steps over the
curled up body of the man, and starts to dance with her bouquet to the country music,
which sings of Honkey Tonk Angels. Gauzy, billowing fabric in the background gives
the setting a dream-like quality. A church bell starts to toll as the transvestite vampire
starts rubbing her body with the lilies. She throws herself onto the body of the man and
starts sucking or biting his neck while petting the other side of his face with the long,
bejeweled fingers wrapped around the man's head. The man is unresponsive. Rolling
away from the man in ecstasy, the transvestite vampire stares up into the sky, mouth open
wide. The camera shifts to show the man's eyes suddenly open. Pulling back, we see the
transvestite vampire lying beside the man, twisting her body to reach over and grab the
breast of the man, which she massages. Some kind of large glass lantern, like one found
in an old church - sits on the man's torso, preventing the transvestite vampire's leg from
wrapping around the man's lower half. Church bells continue to ring as the camera
159

reveals the two still lying next to each other, but now the dress of the transvestite vampire
has been pulled up, and her nylons pulled down. S/he starts masturbating his/her penis.
The camera cuts away and a new song starts to play - sounding like a polka version of
Cole Porter. The man and the transvestite vampire are now seen dancing, shot with the
camera from above. They waltz and spin while looking up into the camera in either
ecstasy or agony - or both.
It is difficult to say anything of this scene, or the film for that matter, which is
made up of scenarios equally challenging to explain. And that’s the point. There is
certainly something happening in this film – action, characters, emotional subtext,
soundscapes, beauty, sex, trash, beautiful sexy trash – though the moment anything
resembling Aristotealian narrative emerges, something wildly different interrupts and
refuses a comfortable plot, and the previous scene and characters never reappear. The
rough editing of the film, often causing distortions in the soundscore, is a reminder that
the various scenes of the film would have been shown in different orders, with different
images and actions spliced in or taken out. The film plays on many familiar elements –
vampires, the exotic, country music, beauty – and twists them around to make them
unfamiliar. Queer.
In my previous chapter on the University of Minnesota’s Tretter Collection, I
explored how a modern archive can be ‘accidentally’ queer through various encounters
with the unexpected and uncontainable – emotion, abundance, sexuality, dreams. In this
chapter, I want to look at a collection that is inherently queer and theorize how its
queerness can be kept active when the archive’s stabilizing logics of ordering normally
160

kill it. At stake here is the belief that there can be a place an individual can go to where,
instead of having their vision of the world constructed and affirmed through the material
they encounter, the individual can experience a transformation of their world view. We
live in a culture where it seems increasingly difficult to see ourselves, our society, our
politics, etc. in different ways. We get locked into static understandings of the world that
make us complacent, and limit our ability to act. In the recent debates around same-sex
marriage in the United States, the political conversation was largely limited to those who
were for or against marriage. Rarely were other alternatives considered – for example, at
no point in the mainstream media did anyone ask what role governments have in
sanctioning romantic relationships in the first place, homosexual or otherwise. Within the
LGBT community, it was expected that people would support same-sex marriage, and
those who didn’t were either self-hating or homophobic. It became increasingly
impossible for people to think outside the binary of either having marriage or not having
marriage – being with us, or against us. We need to queer, as a verb, as a practice that
seeks to open up other ways of thinking/being in the world. Smith was invested in queer
practices throughout his career and the sale of his collection to the Gladstone Gallery
offers an opportunity to rethink the ways we approach the archive.
This chapter begins with an explanation of how I am conceiving the term queer
and the concept of queer research. Then I look at what about Smith’s work is specifically
queer, particularly by examining his relationship to the objects he used in his films and
performances. Smith salvaged many of these objects from dumpsters, and I use
contemporary critical theory on the vitality of objects and trash to explain how these
161

objects resist the stabilizing gesture of the modern archive. From these acts of resistance,
I propose the project of queer archiving.

On Queer Research
Queer is a loaded term. It is important to mark the parameters of how I’m using
the word at time when it is commonly deployed as an identity marker. At a recent
meeting at a local college for “Queer Students,” everyone was asked to introduce
themselves. “My name is Alex,” one individual said. “I am a queer cisgendered male and
I use the pronouns he/him/his.” In such situations, queer can be seen as an umbrella term
referring to what is colloquially known as alphabet soup: LGBTQIA…. Queer is also
used, particularly by younger generations, as an identity term for those who wish to
acknowledge that there is more to them than what existing terms suggest. I am using the
term queer as a verb that directly challenges the stable identity of nouns. Following the
work of José Muñoz, William Haver and others, to queer is to transform, a performative
action that is simultaneously destructive and creative. It is an interruption in the status
quo. Queer is an action against normalcy. It makes the familiar strange. Because it is the
act of transformation, queer is an ongoing process, rather than the end result. Even when
I use queer as a noun or adjective, its verb-ness (its doing) is implied.
To that end, it is important to understand that what I am doing in this chapter is
not queer research or queer theory, per se. I am trying to make sense of concepts that
could lead to queer research and an understanding of a queer archive. The requirements
of a doctorate in academia require descriptions, logics, and understandable
162

argumentation. My aim must be to engage with bodies of knowledge and explain them,
not disrupt them. Here, I can only gesture to queer performance and queer research with
the hope that it might inspire queer doings elsewhere. Disruption is anathema to
educational institutions, which operate through the disciplinization of various fields.
Queer work is safely housed in cultural studies programs and sexuality studies
departments where it can be contained, and talked about ad nauseum. There is a danger
that queer research is used as a method for the reproduction of LGBT cultures, rather than
an opportunity to interrupt the (re)production of culture altogether. For queer theory and
queer archiving to “work,” it has to be recognized as something separate from LGBT and
sexuality studies, for while it is engaged in questioning those disciplines, it cannot be
relegated merely to the disruption of sexual identities. The disciplinization of these fields
within the academy is what prevents holistic engagements with queer concepts in all
areas of life.
In his essay “Queer Research; Or, How to Practice Invention to the Brink of
Intelligibility,” William Haver suggests that queer research is “characterized by the
process of rendering intellectual life uncanny” and that it “does not make the world
familiar or comfortable for the student or reader, but rather defamiliarizes or makes
strange, queer or even cruel what we had thought to be a world” (291). This is key,
because queering is not the act of replacing one identity formation with another. I argue
that to exist in queer space is to exist in a state of perpetual transformation. The reality, of
course, is that we do exist in a state of perpetual transformation, but we use concepts like
identity to pin things down and to impose an artificial logic on an illogical world. Thus,
163

the “work” of queering is the expansion of individual thought and perception to recognize
the instability of reality, rather than in the transformation of the material reality itself. An
essay by Michel de Certeau recounts how fellow French philosopher Michel Foucault
was once asked at a conference to identify himself and his positionality within the vast
field of disciplines he wrote about. “In what capacity do you speak?” he was asked.
“What is your specialty? Where are you coming from?” (193) Foucault refused to
answer, insisting in his introduction to the Archaeology of Knowledge “Do not ask me
who I am and do not ask me to remain the same: leave it to our bureaucrats and our
police to see that our papers in order” (Foucault 17). De Certeau goes on to argue that it
is identity itself which “freezes the gesture of thinking” and “pays homage to an order”
(194). It is our ability to question that order, he suggests, which allows us to realize how
and to what extent it may be possible to think otherwise. Queering is this gesture of
thinking otherwise. It is a gesture of opening up, of recognizing the world and ourselves
in its utter instability – frightening but full of limitless possibilities. Recognizing the
world as unstable does not necessarily guarantee it is better, but as Haver points out, “it
could not but be more interesting… than the worlds with which we are currently
afflicted” (285). Even if it is not better – if we must place value in terms of good and bad
– emphasizing queer transformation in daily life opens up at least the possibility of
becoming unstuck.

164

On the Queerness of Objects
The previous chapters should make clear the ways in which archives contribute to
the formation of various identity structures. The traditional archive depends on objects to
be able to make claims about identities, and does so by interpreting them as static
representations of historical events. But what about objects that resist such interpretation?
In the few times I have given lectures to undergraduates on the queerness of
objects, I go to my office and unplug my coffee maker. Setting the machine next to the
lectern, I ask the students what it is. “A coffee maker,” they reply. “What does it make
you think of?” I ask. They reply with a varying list of images: work, caffeine, mornings,
waking up, bitterness, offices, headaches, salvation, to name a few. I point out that when
we see the object in front of us, it is immediately recognizable to us as a coffee maker.
We know what it is. We know what it does. We have strong associations and memories
attached to it based on our own experiences of coffee and making it, though few beyond
myself have any direct connection to this coffee maker. Our mind is so quick to identify
the material world around us and to organize it into associations that it is hard to conceive
of this particular object outside of our recognition of it as a coffee maker. It is at this
point in our discussion that I usually ask the students to follow me outside. Once
collected, I ask a student to take the coffee maker and throw it against the ground.
Usually with a bit of a reluctance, a student volunteers and proceeds to shatter the object
into hundreds of pieces. I suggest to the students that what is left is no longer a coffee
maker – there is no possibility that what is scattered along the ground could make coffee.
Rather than rushing to name it as a broken coffee maker, I ask the students to consider the
165

pieces as objects liberated of any name or any conceivable usefulness. It just exists. In
this moment of disorientation, when our minds have not yet rushed forward to make
sense of the object in front of us, we recognize that the object has the possibility of being
anything and nothing at the same time. Indeed, this was the case even before we broke
the object, but we generally do not notice it. In the destructive act of breaking the coffee
maker, we can begin to liberate it from the identity that we imposed.
In her book Queer Phenomenology, Sara Ahmed suggests that the process of
coming to understanding is a process of orientation that begins from a place of
disorientation. Citing Kant’s classic essay “What Does it Mean to Orient Oneself in
Thought?,” Ahmed offers the image of walking blindfolded into an unfamiliar room. You
don’t know where you are, or how where you are relates to the contours of the room.
Kant proposes that, to begin understanding how to find your way around the room, you
have to first understand the difference between the left and right sides of your body. It is
only then, by feeling about, that an individual can understanding which way the body is
turning and where objects are located within the space. “Space,” Ahmed concludes,
“becomes a question of turning, of directions taken, which not only allow things to
appear, but also enable us to find our way through the world by situating ourselves in
relation to such things” (6, emphasis added). We do not come to an object and seek to
understand it on its own terms. The identity of the object is not a given part of its
existence in the world. It is through our relationship to the object, the gesture of knowing
it that makes it seem familiar, that we become oriented.

166

What if, at least for a time, we embrace disorientation? What if we allow
ourselves to become lost? What if, instead of seeing something and rushing to name it,
we allow ourselves to wonder at the possibility of its being? This is particularly
challenging in archives, where objects are named and classified in excess. An archival
object’s very presence within an archive burdens it with identity. In the previous chapter
on the Tretter Collection, I pointed toward moments when encountering unexpected
objects can potentially become queer moments of possibility. Allowing ourselves to be
become disoriented in the archive, rather than rushing to “fix it,” can say more about how
the archive speaks to LGBT identity than the objects themselves. How did this get here?
What does it mean? As we ask such questions and begin to reorient ourselves and
discover the boundaries of what belongs and what doesn’t, we can critically observe the
ways we understand LGBT identity in our mind. In such cases as this, queering can be
seen as a practice that one can get better at over time. You do not stay in a place of
disorientation, but each time you become reoriented you return with a greater level of
critical awareness.
Disorientation was central to Smith’s work, and I argue that one of the ways he
accomplished this was by making familiar objects unfamiliar. The closest Smith came to
writing a manifesto was “The Perfect Filmic Appositeness of Maria Montez.” This
rambling document published in the Winter 1962/1963 issue of Film Culture is
deliberately obtuse, and I would argue that it exists itself as a disorienting object. Given
the title of the article and that the issue is devoted to reviews of the works of various
filmmakers, a reader could expect a treatise on the work of Hollywood B-movie star
167

Maria Montez. Smith isn’t interested in making absolute statements, and yet he speaks
volumes – disjointedly – about film and art. He writes of the power of “thoughts via
images” which “always give rise to a complex of feelings, thots [sic], conjectures,
speculations, etc.” (32). At several points he references the power of child-like
imagination, that “juvenile doesn’t equal shameful,” and that we become embarrassed
about “trashy” films like those of Maria Montez as we grow older because we can no
longer imagine ourselves in the absurd realities of those films (28). These films offered
Smith years of inspiration. All of his films and performances were citational, in some
way, to the crumbling plaster paradises of what he referred to as “MONTEZLAND.”39
Smith suggests that as children become adults, we become embarrassed about our sense
of imagination. He does not develop this argument, of course, but I would like to take it
further by proposing that a child’s imagination is always seeing objects in an everchanging multitude of ways. How often have children been given a large and expensive
toy, only to become enraptured by the cardboard box it came in? In such a moment, the
packaging destined for the trash is more valuable to the child than the manufactured toy.
It can be a fort, a spaceship, a castle. Children recognize that the box can be all of these
things and more, while also recognizing that it is also still a cardboard box. In their
reality, the identity of the object can shift seamlessly from one moment to the next
without issue and without question.
One possible reading of Smith’s work is to suggest that his films and
performances were an effort to reignite this imagination that allowed an individual to see
the world in all of its possibilities, miraculous and horrifying. An example of this was the
39

Such a description is used in many of his writings. See, for example, Smith 1962, p. 29.	  

168

trash heap that was central to Smith’s living/performance space. The two-story apartment
where Smith lived and worked had a large hole in the ceiling. A mountain of plaster,
concrete and twisted girders had fallen to the main floor, becoming the central focal point
for Smith’s scenographic innovations. Village Voice film critic J. Hoberman described it
in his essay “The Theatre of Jack Smith”:
This assemblage surrounded a simulated lagoon, made from an inflatable pool
with plastic tubing providing a small waterfall. Further back was an upright
victrola, encased in a coffin, from which issued a steady selection of scratchy,
Latin, Hawaiian, and exotic mood music, Hollywood scores, occasional pop
songs, or educational records. Behind this a few flats stood propped against each
other to create a murky backstage area. (6)
The mountain of debris would change constantly. Sometimes, fragments of plastic
Christmas trees would emerge from the concrete like a landscape of mini-trees on an
industrial mountain. The visual environments Smith created from familiar bits of detritus
drew on the audience’s affective connections. The inflatable pool might remind you of a
childhood spent splashing in the yard, or a television program where they were washing
dogs outside. At the same time as an audience member makes a personal connection to
the pool, they also recognize its new deployment – a lagoon in an exotic fantasy-land of
beauty and destruction. Props and set pieces exist on stage or in film as objects that were
both familiar and unfamiliar, recognizable and strange. Lest you think Smith would allow
only two visions of an object, he frequently brought his painstakingly long productions to
a screeching halt, stepped into the performance area, and physically altered its
169

composition – sets, actors, text, music, everything. In his published journals, Stefan
Brecht – a flaneur of 1970s New York queer theatre and sometime actor – documented
how Smith would change lines and specify new blocking for his actors (who were
sometimes recruited from the audience). Sometimes he would disappear to another part
of the apartment and return with new bits of trash repurposed as props and set pieces that
were not part of the original “script.” Sometimes he would demand a performer repeat a
gesture over again, as slow as possible, until the movement was nearly imperceptible. He
would also draw attention to the objects on stage by making small adjustments to tangled
Christmas lights or rearranging road signs. In at least once instance, he wrapped himself
in a shawl and pretended to vacuum the debris heap (Hoberman 6). No two performances
of a production were ever the same. Again, I argue that this repeated interruption,
restaging, and reimagining of objects – which Smith did by changing his and the
audience’s relationship to them – was a gesture towards queering reality. “The more rules
broken,” Smith wrote in his manifesto, “the more enriched becomes the activity as it has
had to expand to include what a human view of the activity won’t allow it to not include”
(32).
Smith was not always successful in creating radical moments of queer
disorientation for others, and perhaps he wasn’t always able to do it for himself. Brecht
notes on several occasions that fellow audience members fell asleep, or were too high to
notice anything happening, or walked out within minutes of the show beginning. Failure
is a necessary component of queering. Success is relative. If you expect to create a work
of art that is disorienting only to find yourself without an audience, or that you were
170

unsuccessful, failure can be its own act of disorientation. Smith seemed genuinely
disinterested in whether people liked his work or not, or whether they understood it. The
effort to try to visualize the previously unimaginable seemed to be paramount.

Trash as Queer Objects
From the examples I’ve given of Smith’s work, it should be clear that the objects
Smith used in his performances and films were trash. Practically speaking, Smith
salvaged from the dumpsters and alleys of Manhattan because he couldn’t afford to buy
anything new. But trash was also central to his vision of art for what it could do. Trash
was the material detritus of capitalism, a subject he railed against in much of his
performance work. He abhorred the concept of renting, where money was spent to exist
without getting anything tangible in return. In the Smith bestiary of characters,
moneygrubbing landlords were represented as lobsters. Ken Jacobs, a friend and early
collaborator with Smith, claimed that Smith’s investment in cultural and commercial
trash was conditioned by “his horror of life, a deep disgust with existence. Jack indulged
in it spitefully, he would plunge himself into the garbage of life [with] a hilarious and
horrifying willingness to ‘revel in the dumps’” (Rowe 39). Trash, Smith proclaimed, was
the “material of creators” (1962 28). He imagined a disjointed anti-Capitalist utopia made
of trash. In a 1978 interview for Semiotexte, Smith was asked if he ever thought of other
types of societies. He replied:
I can think of billions of ways for the world to be completely different… I can
think of other types of societies…. Like in the middle of the city should be a
171

repository of objects that people don’t want anymore, which they would take to
this giant junkyard. That would form an organization, a way that the city could be
organized… the city organized around that. I think this center of unused objects
and unwanted objects would become a center of intellectual activity. Things
would grow up around it…. You take anything that you don’t want and don’t
want to throw out and just take it to this giant place, and just leaving it and
looking for something that you need… (Smith “Uncle Fishook…” 115)
Here, one of Smith’s utopias envisions the center of a city as a junkyard where trash and
other unwanted objects could be brought and exchanged, and that this hub would become
a center of intellectual activity. He is drawn to trash because of its perceived uselessness,
because it is unwanted and undesired by others. In her book, Down in the Dumps: Place,
Modernity and American Depression, Jani Scandura notes that 1960s marketing
encouraged a throwaway economy, where increasingly companies were producing
products that could be used once, or briefly, then discarded. The abundance of garbage
and the ability to have unneeded space in the form of landfills was even considered a sign
of a healthy capitalist society (19). Consumers became producers of trash, and trash cost
Smith nothing to acquire. Smith was particularly disturbed by gay culture’s passionate
consumption of upper-class heterosexuality. Grand opera and expensive fashion, for
example, provided gay men with the opportunity to demonstrate their class and social
standing to a society that looked down on them as psychologically disturbed. Rather than
holding up the grand diva of opera Maria Callas as his role model like so many gay men,

172

Smith celebrated the other Maria – the trashy, rejected star of Technicolor, Maria
Montez.
Smith was not alone in his use of trash in 1960s and 70s performance art. Other
artists of the period saw the political potential of trash, including Richard Foreman, Claes
Oldenburg, and Maria Irene Fornes. Reflecting on the sixties, pop artist Andy Warhol
recalled
…trashing was a skill. Knowing how to use what somebody else didn’t was a
trick you could really be proud of. In other decades people had sneaked into
Salvation Armies or Goodwills, embarrassed that somebody might see them, but
in the sixties people weren’t embarrassed at all, they bragged about what they
could scavenge here and there. (64)
Smith, however, felt that what he was doing was different than artists like Warhol. Smith
was not creating art for commercial purposes. He felt artists like Warhol repurposed trash
as art and resold it at a higher price and referred to him as a “walking career” (Arcade).
Smith was not interested in making art for money. Throughout his career, he passed on a
number of commercial projects that would have likely led to great fame and fortune.
Recall that at the height of Flaming Creatures’ popularity, he withdrew the film from
circulation. Where some artists saw the repurposing of trash-as-art as a cheeky
commentary on consumerism, Smith saw trash as a means for reconceiving the world
around him.
I argue that trash objects are particularly queer objects. Trash is both familiar and
unfamiliar. If we see trash at all, we recognize it as waste, but we either pass by it or it is
173

taken away to landfills out of sight and out of mind. In his book Rubbish Theory: The
Creation and Destruction of Value, Michael Thompson notes that trash is never a stable
category, and that “what is refused may be recuperated into existent systems of value,
even as a system of what has gone wrong” (Scandura 12). Trash’s mutability of being
both simultaneously valuable and worthless makes it particularly difficult to identify. In
Refuse Archaeology, Dietmar Schmidt goes further to argue that trash exists at the border
of what is culturally and psychologically possible to see. Trash is “matter out of place” in
the most radical sense – it has no purpose anywhere (211). At the liminal threshold of
what we are able to see, trash gestures toward what is invisible or otherwise not-yetthinkable.

Trash in the Archive / Toward the Queer Archive
Trash poses a variety of problems and opportunities for the modern archive. The
example of the Tretter Collection in the previous chapter is a classic case of one person’s
treasure being another person’s trash. Value is one of the many-shifting facets of the trash
object. It should be noted, however, that every archive I’ve examined in this dissertation
has materials in its collection that have been salvaged from dumpsters – materials which
careless or ashamed families and friends discarded, creating refuse from the refusal of
their loved-one’s homosexual identity. Sometimes objects enter the archive as a last-ditch
effort to be spared the fate of the landfill – the Dean Goodman and Charles Nolte papers,
the butt plug, etc. Sometimes they end up in the landfill anyway – the underwear
collection, the International Male catalogues, etc. The archival act of acquisition ensures,
174

at least temporarily, that an object has value. Much like the objects in his own collection,
the art world has, at various times, seen Smith himself variously as an object of trash or
value.
In 1857, the German historian Johann Gustav Droysen put a twist on Leopold von
Ranke’s vision of the archive by putting forward an approach to history that he referred
to as “a theory of remains.” This theory distinguished materials that were intentionally
preserved for posterity, and those “more truthful” fragments that had been accidentally or
unconsciously preserved from the past (Scandura 22). Droysen’s theory, which can
perhaps be seen through the work of present-day archaeology – suggested that a more
accurate depiction of history could be seen through the objects society discarded, rather
than the ones they kept; a vision of how they were, not how they wanted to present
themselves, or how they understood themselves to be. An archive of remains – an archive
of trash – would be an archive of abundance. Without scope and limitation beyond
collecting what others are not, the archive would fill to capacity and exceed, like the early
Tretter Collection, in its ability to interpret the objects. Free of interpretation, they exist at
that threshold of our awareness, present but unintelligible. A problem. An interruption in
the order of things.
If we take Smith’s collection and value it as art, it becomes a monument to Smith
the artist. The trash-as-art(ifact) has a clear purpose. Its presence in the Gladstone Gallery
assures its identity as art - expensive, exclusive art to be consumed during the occasional
showing along with glasses of wine and hand-held canapes. Smith’s worst fears of his
work have been realized.
175

The institutional archive depends on a perception of the object as stable. It is
always there, in a box or on a shelf, preserved in such a way as to ensure that the object
appears nearly identical with each limited scrutiny. This stability allows for the scientific
history of testing that von Ranke originally proposed – the archival objects are the
scientific control that hypotheses can be tested against. The acquisition of an object into
the archive is a gesture of death, of creating stability and stasis in the object. Queer
archives insist on objects’ fluidity. Preservation is not a consideration. Destruction, which
is a kind of transformation, is both preferable and necessary at either the level of our
perception of the object, or in the destruction of the material object itself.
Rather than going to the archive for answers to predetermined questions, the
queer archive provokes questions, destabilizes what is thought to be known, and
discourages the visitor from leaving with a comfortable sense of being. Where the
modernist LGBT archive constructs and affirms identity, the queer archive encourages a
constant reimagining of the many ways one can exist in relationship to the world around
them, and thus the engagement with the queer archive is always a personal one.
The work of a queer archive does not solely rest with the archivist. Just as Smith
began his performances with various kinds of participation, the queer archive requires
willing participants. Also like Smith’s work, “getting it” or even liking the work is not
required, nor should it even be a concern. However, a willingness to engage is needed.
The queer archive resists the kinds of classification and structure found at a traditional
archive, but at the same time, it should be changing enough and perhaps even strange

176

enough to resist the imposition of classification from those who visit it. Again, the
emphasis here is on posing questions, rather than offering answers.
What might such an archive look like? Much like Smith’s junk heap, the archive
could be a constantly changing, purposefully organized, ordered chaos. As Smith would
alter the appearance and action of his performances and films based on a recognition that
the moment needed to change so that ideas wouldn’t become static, the queer archive
would need a curator/archivist (or many) who would constantly change the order,
contents and experience of the space. Far from a “rotating exhibit” of holdings so popular
in traditional archives, the intention behind these changes in a queer archive is for the
sake of change and challenge, not to offer yet another narrative. I offer such a scenario as
a possibility, but a singular practice of queer archiving cannot be described. It should be
clear to the reader that queering cannot be prescriptive. It must be responsive. I hope that
the cases of the Tretter and the Jack Smith Collections offer some insights into ways such
projects already exist in the world. It is possible that queer archives and queer research
are not located within formal institutions, as it tends to be such institutions which would
benefit the most from a disruption of order, but which resist it the most.
Not every archive can be a queer archive, but every archive – regardless of how it
is ordered and what it contains – can be approached in a queer way, by the archivist and
the visitor alike. If an archive is approached with a kind of openness and questioning that
recognizes and challenges the imposed order found there, then any collection of objects
have the power to provoke new ways of thinking and imagining the world in which we
live.
177

Conclusion

Tracing the Archival Threads
“So now then we begin again this history of us...”
- Gertrude Stein, The Making of Americans

Beyond the Closet has, I hope, addressed some of the ways LGBT identity has
been produced, shaped, molded, and circulated through the archive, as well as offered
some ways of thinking about how the archival form can help reimagine structures and
practices of identity. In addition to discussing some of the practical approaches and
challenges to archival practices, I have tried to show the ways in which failure and the
impossibility of fully capturing any historical moment or cultural experience can reveal
observable moments of the formation of identity in the moment of its production.
To understand the archive as a practice is to understand it through the lens of
performance. It is about engagement and encounter, discipline and excess, the illusion of
narrative with the possibility of the unexpected at any moment. My investigation
provokes several questions that remain. Should material only ever be archived if an
archivist can perceive a research project that might use them? How can an archivist
account for research projects that are, as yet, unimaginable? Can there be value in
disorder? How can the decisions about what is kept or discarded (or what is even
acquired in the first place) be made visible? In what ways can it be possible to think of
the archive outside of the Rankean model? To embrace the queerness of collecting? Is it
possible to archive for a queer future as well as an LGBT past?
178

Even the largest of institutional archives can be intimate places; places where
people can come to mark their identities in relation to the material that has been collected
and organized there; places where the private thoughts, actions, and desires never
publicly expressed by some during their life find a kind of semi-public visibility; places
where the hopes and ambitions of previous generations are documented and potentially
become inspiration for new movements in the future; places where meaningful
relationships can be formed between people, objects, and people with objects. Far from a
purely utopic or disciplinary place, the archive is, rather, a subjunctive place – a place of
possibility that is neither good or bad, but full of potential.
Each of the sites that I explored in these pages have offered different ways of
thinking about archives and sexual identity, and each archive comes with its own politics
of archival practice and protocols of public engagement. The founders of the ONE
Institute and early archive sought to “reveal” suppressed homophile content within every
major academic discipline, as part of the larger homophile movement’s efforts to fit into
dominant heterosexual culture. The homophile could only be understood within the
established frameworks of academic and archival practices. In defining the terms and the
scope of their research in this manner, ONE established the language and limitations that
continue to direct a substantial amount of research in sexuality studies even today.
The collective behind the Lesbian Herstory Archives radically reconceived the
function and organization of an archive. Rather than being /an institution for academic
research, they created a home-space where lesbians from the community could come
during their evenings and lunch breaks to learn about themselves in the context of lesbian
179

herstory and culture, and attempted to model this structure for a decentralized network of
similar regional archives. However, while subverting some of the troubling patriarchal
practices of the institutional archives imagined by organizations like ONE, they
continued many of those practices within the less visible rules imposed through
seemingly innocuous acts of hospitality. By limiting participation in the archive’s
management to lesbians, but being unable to achieve consensus on who can be
considered a lesbian, the LHA’s home-space can be just as restrictive and limiting as the
institutional archives they fought against. However, despite their challenges in continuing
new acquisitions and appealing to younger generations, their preservation of so much
radical 1970s political material offers the possibility of a queer renaissance by inspiring
new political possibilities in the imaginations of today’s activists.
Jean Tretter originally created his collection in response to the antagonisms of the
University of Minnesota, which insisted that gays and lesbians did not constitute a social
identity and therefore did not have a history or culture. Without a system of inclusion or
exclusion to dictate what he collected, Tretter created a system of attachment where
everything had value. When the academy began to change its understanding of the culture
of sexual identity and the University of Minnesota acquired the Tretter Collection, Tretter
continued his grassroots, all-inclusive acquisitions strategy. To engage with the Tretter
Collection meant to engage directly with Jean, who alone had the best – though not an
infallibly complete – understanding of what was in the archive and its connection to
LGBT culture. In its abundance, and through Tretter’s inability to make the archive
‘useful’ in a way that the university expected, the archive became a powerful landscape
180

where the fortunate few who could go down into the storage rooms could encounter the
unexpected in queer and productive ways.
Jack Smith’s queer performance practices attempted to challenge stable, singular
notions of sexual identity and inspire other ways of thinking about the self in relation to
the world. His commitment to this practice and his use of junk has proven a challenge to
the art gallery that holds his collection and the archive that hopes to receive the materials
with “research value.” Collections like Smith’s require a radically different approach to
thinking about the archive and its stabilizing gestures. In theorizing a queer archival
practice, I envision a deeply personal engagement with a curated collection of objects and
space that evoke confusion and disorientation as a means to become more critically aware
of social habitus. In the process of becoming oriented again, it is possible to imagine
alternative approaches to social and political challenges and potentially reframe once
static notions of identity. If, as Michel de Certeau argues, identity freezes the gesture of
thinking, a queer archive can provide a thaw that encourages movement once again.

181

Bibliography
After Stonewall: From the Riots to the Millenium. New York: First Run Features, 1999.
Film.
Ahmed, Sara. Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham: Duke
University Press, 2006.
Arcade, Penny. “The Last Days and Moments of Jack Smith.” Penny Arcade. Accessed:
8 August, 2010.
<http://www.pennyarcade.tv/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=12%3Aj
ack-smith&catid=1&Itemid=9>
Aristotle, and Christopher Kirwan. Metaphysics: Books Gamma, Delta, and Epsilon.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993.
Bernstein, Robin. Cast Out: Queer Lives in Theater. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 2006.
Bérubé, Allan. Coming Out Under Fire: The History of Gay Men and Women in World
War Two. New York: Free Press, 1990.
Bowers v. Hardwick. Supreme Court of the United States. 30 June 1986.
Brooks, Georgia. “At Home With the Archives.” Lesbian Herstory Archives Newsletter.
Issue 6 (July 1980): 5.
Bravmann, Scott. Queer Fictions of the Past: History, Culture, and Difference.
Cambridge, U.K: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Bullough, Vern L. Before Stonewall: Activists for Gay and Lesbian Rights in Historical
Context. New York: Harrington Park Press, 2002.
Burton, Antoinette M. Archive Stories: Facts, Fictions, and the Writing of History.
Durham, N.C: Duke University Press, 2005.
Butler, Judith. “Performativity’s Social Magic.” In Bourdieu: A Critical Reader. Ed
Richard Shusterman. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1999.
Calhoun, Cheshire. Feminism, the Family, and the Politics of the Closet: Lesbian and
Gay Displacement. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
182

Carter, Susan B. Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Chandler, James, Arnold I. Davidson, and Harry D. Harootunian. Questions of Evidence:
Proof, Practice, and Persuasion Across the Disciplines. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1994.
Chenier, Elise. “Lesbian Feminism.” glbtq: an Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual,
Transgender, and Queer Culture. Chicago: glbtq, Inc., 2004.
Cory, Donald Webster. The Homosexual in America: A Subjective Approach. New York:
Greenberg, 1951.
Crompton, Louis. Homosexuality & Civilization. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press, 2003.
Cutler, Marvin. Homosexuals Today: A Handbook of Organizations and Publications.
Los Angeles: ONE, Inc., 1956.
Cvetkovich, Ann. An Archive of Feelings: Trauma, Sexuality, and Lesbian Public
Cultures. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
D’Emilio, John. “Capitalism and Gay Identity.” In Abelove, Henry, Michèle A. Barale,
and David M. Halperin, Eds. The Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader. New York:
Routledge, 1993.
--. Making Trouble: Essays on Gay History, Politics, and the University. New York:
Routledge, 1992.
--. Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities: The Making of a Homosexual Minority in the
United States, 1940-1970. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
De Certeau, Michel. The Writing of History. New York: Columbia University Press,
1988.
Derrida, Jacques, and Eric Prenowitz. Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Derrida, Jacques, and Anne Dufourmantelle. Of Hospitality. Stanford, Calif: Stanford
University Press, 2000.
Duberman, Martin. Stonewall. New York: Dutton, 1993.

183

Duchein, Michel. “The History of European Archives and the Development of the
Archival Profession in Europe.” American Archivist. 55:1 (Winter 1992): 14-25.
Duggan, Lisa. “History's gay ghetto : the contradictions of growth in lesbian and gay
history” In Presenting the Past: Essays on History and the Public. Eds. Benson, Susan P,
Stephen Brier, and Roy Rosenzweig. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986.
Duncan, Robert. “The Homosexual in Society.” Politics I (1944): 209-211.
“E-Harmony Lawsuit.” The O’Reilly Factor. FOX News. 12 June, 2007.
Elwood, Sarah. “Lesbian Living Spaces: Multiple Meanings of Home.” Journal of
Lesbian Studies. 4.1 (2000): 11-27.
Eskildsen, Kasper Risbjerg. "Leopold Ranke's Archival Turn: Location and Evidence in
Modern Historiography." Modern Intellectual History. 5.3 (2008): 425-453.
Eversmeyer, Arden, and Margaret Purcell. A Gift of Age: A Collection of Stories Based
on Interview Transcripts in the Old Lesbian Oral Herstory Project. Houston, TX: Old
Lesbian Oral Herstory Project, 2009.
Faderman, Lillian. Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of Lesbian Life in
Twentieth-Century America. New York: Columbia University Press, 1991.
Faderman, Lillian and Stuart Timmons. Gay L.A.: A History of Sexual Outlaws, Power
Politics and Lipstick Lesbians. New York: Perseus, 2006.
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality, Volume I: An Introduction. New York:
Vintage Books, 1990.
Foucault, Michel, and Alan Sheridan. The Archaeology of Knowledge. New York:
Pantheon Books, 1972.
Goodman, Dean. Maria, Marlene, & Me: Intimate Recollections of a Life in Theatre and
Film. San Francisco: Shadbolt Press, 1993.
Gordon, Mel. Voluptuous Panic: The Erotic World of Weimar Berlin. Los Angeles: Feral
House, 2000.
Grau, Günter, Claudia Schoppmann, and Patrick Camiller. Hidden Holocaust?: Gay and
Lesbian Persecution in Germany, 1933-45. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1995.
Haddad, Emily Millay. “Letter to my sisters.” Lesbian Herstory Archives Newsletter.
Spring (2014): 13.
184

Halberstam, Judith. In a Queer Time and Place: Transgender Bodies, Subcultural Lives.
New York: New York University Press, 2005.
Hand on the Pulse. San Francisco, CA: Frameline, 2002. Film.
Healy, Patrick. “More to the Story: A History of Gay America.” The New York Times. 28
Sept, 2010. <http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/09/28/more-to-the-story-a-historyof-gay-america/>
Higgins, Patrick. A Queer Reader. New York: New Press, 1993.
Holt, Elizabeth Mary. Colonizing Filipinas: Nineteenth-Century Representations of the
Philippines in Western Historiography. Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press,
2002.
Hooker, Evelyn. "The Adjustment of the Overt Male Homosexual." Journal of Projective
Techniques XXI (1957): 18-31.
--. Interview. Before Stonewall: The Making of a Gay and Lesbian Community. Dir.
Greta Schiller. New York, NY: First Run Features, 2000.
Hyde, H. Montgomery. The Trials of Oscar Wilde. New York: Dover Publications, 1973.
Hymowitz, Carol, and Michaele Weissman. A History of Women in America. New York:
Bantam Books, 1978.
Iggers, Georg G. "The Image of Ranke in American and German Historical Thought."
History and Theory. 2.1 (1962): 17-40.
Iggers, Georg G, and Q. Edward Wang. A Global History of Modern Historiography.
Harlow, England: Pearson Longman, 2008.
Jackson, Shannon. Lines of Activity: Performance, Historiography, Hull-House
Domesticity. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000.
Jay, Karla, and Allen Young. Out of the Closets: Voices of Gay Liberation. New York:
Jove Publications, 1977.
Jennings, Kevin. Becoming Visible: A Reader in Gay & Lesbian History for High School
& College Students. Boston: Alyson Publications, 1994.
Johnson, David K. The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians
in the Federal Government. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
185

Johnson, Stephen. A Tyranny of Documents: The Performing Arts Historian As Film Noir
Detective. New York: Theatre Library Association, 2011.
Johnston, Jill. Lesbian Nation: The Feminist Solution. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1973.
Jones, Sonya L. Gay and Lesbian Literature Since World War II: History and Memory.
New York: Harrington Park Press, 1998.
Kaiser, Charles. “Larry Kramer’s Case Against ‘Queer.’” The Advocate. 29 April, 2009.
<http://www.advocate.com/News/Daily_News/2009/04/29/Larry_Kramer_s_Case_Again
st__Queer_/>
Katz, Jonathan. Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the U.S.A. : a
Documentary History. New York: Penguin, 1992.
Kepner, Jim. “ONE Institute Quarterly Report.” 30 Jan, 1959. ONE Institute papers,
Jean-Nickolaus Tretter Collection in Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Studies,
Special Collections and Rare Books, University of Minnesota Libraries, Minneapolis.
--. “An Accidental Institution: How and Why a Gay and Lesbian Archives?” In Daring to
Find Our Names: The Search for Lesbigay Library History. Ed. James Carmichael, Jr.
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1998.
Killermann, Sam. The Social Justice Advocate's Handbook: A Guide to Gender. Austin,
Tx: Impetus Books, 2013.
Kinsey, Alfred C, Wardell B. Pomeroy, and Clyde E. Martin. Sexual Behavior in the
Human Male. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co, 1948.
Koedt, Anne, Ellen Levine, and Anita Rapone. Radical Feminism. New York:
Quadrangle Books, 1973.
Krieger, Leonard. Ranke: The Meaning of History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1977.
Kunzel, Regina G. Criminal Intimacy: Prison and the Uneven History of Modern
American Sexuality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Lawrence v. Texas. Supreme Court of the United States. 26 June 2003.
Legg, W. Dorr. Homophile Studies in Theory and Practice. San Francisco: GLB
Publishers, 1994.
186

--. “Homosexuality in History.” ONE Institute Quarterly of Homophile Studies. 2:3
(1959), 93-98.
--. “Some Problems of Method.” ONE Institute Quarterly of Homophile Studies. 1:1
(1958), 4-7.
MacKinnon, Catharine. “Privacy v. Equality.” In Feminism Unmodified: Discourses on
Life and Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.
Mancini, Elena. Magnus Hirschfeld and the Quest for Sexual Freedom: A History of the
First International Sexual Freedom Movement. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
Marcus, Eric. Making Gay History: The Half-Century Fight for Lesbian and Gay Equal
Rights. New York: HarperCollins, 2002.
McFerson, Hazel. Mixed Blessing: The Impact of the American Colonial Experience on
Politics and Society in the Philippines. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 2002.
Monahan, Jim. “Considerations in the organization of gay archives.” Gay Insurgent.
Spring (1979): 9-10.
Muñoz, José E. Disidentifications: Queers of Color and the Performance of Politics.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999.
Nardi, Peter, David Sanders and Judd Marmor. Growing Up Before Stonewall: Life
Stories of Some Gay Men. London: Routledge, 1994.
Nestle, Joan. A Restricted Country. Ithaca, N.Y: Firebrand Books, 1987.
--. “Joan Nestle – Lesbian Herstory Archives (Skype-Lecture).” Online Video Clip.
YouTube, 2 June 2014. Web. 5 June 2014.
--. “Notes on radical archiving from a lesbian feminist perspective.” Gay Insurgent.
Spring (1979): 11-13.
Not Just Passing Through. New York, N.Y: Not Just Passing Through Productions, 1994.
Film.
Novick, Peter. That Noble Dream: The “Objectivity Question” and the American
Historical Profession. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Oosterhuis, Harry. Stepchildren of Nature: Krafft-Ebing, Psychiatry, and the Making of
Sexual Identity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
187

Penelope, Julia, and Susan J. Wolfe. Lesbian Culture: An Anthology : the Lives, Work,
Ideas, Art and Visions of Lesbians Past and Present. Freedom, Calif: Crossing Press,
1993.
Radicalesbians. The Woman-Identified Woman. Pittsburgh: Know, Inc., 1970.
Rancière, Jacques. The Names of History: On the Poetics of Knowledge. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1994.
Ranke, Leopold von. The Theory and Practice of History. New York: Bobbs-Merrill,
1973.
Rich, Adrienne. “Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence.” Signs: Journal of
Women in Culture and Society. 5.4 (1989): 631-659.
Robison, Jennifer. “What Percentage of the Population is Gay?” Gallup. 8 Oct. 2002. 13
Sept. 2010. < http://www.gallup.com/poll/6961/what-percentage-population-gay.aspx>
Schneider, Rebecca. Performing Remains: Art and War in Times of Theatrical
Reenactment. London: Routledge, 2011.
Scott, Joan W. "The Evidence of Experience." Critical Inquiry. 17.4 (1991): 773-797.
Somerville, Peter. “Homelessness and the meaning of home: rooflessness or
rootlessness?” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research. 16.4 (1992): 527539.
Steedman, Carolyn. Dust: The Archive and Cultural History. New Brunswick, N.J:
Rutgers University Press, 2002.
Taylor, Diana. The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the
Americas. Durham: Duke University Press, 2003.
Thistlethwaite, Polly. Becoming Invisible: Lesbian Historical Record in American
Libraries and Archives. Dissertation. City University of New York, 1996.
--. “Building "A Home of Our Own": The Construction of the Lesbian Herstory
Archives” In Daring to Find Our Names: The Search for Lesbigay Library History. Ed.
James Carmichael, Jr. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1998.
Thompson, Merritt. An Outline of the History of Education. New York: Barnes & Noble,
1934.

188

Walker, Ronnie E. The Lesbian Herstory Archives of New York City: Its Founders and
Their Contribution to Contemporary History. Dissertation. Sarah Lawrence College.
1990.
Warner, Sara. Acts of Gaiety: LGBT Performance and the Politics of Pleasure. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2012.
Weston, Kath. Families We Choose: Lesbians, Gays, Kinship. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1991.
White, C. Todd. Pre-Gay L.A: A Social History of the Movement for Homosexual Rights.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009.
White, Hayden. Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University, 1973.
Wolff, Charlotte. Magnus Hirschfeld: A Portrait of a Pioneer in Sexology. London:
Quartet Books, 1986.

189

