THE MANAGEMENT AND ROLE OF
LIBRARY E-PRESENCE:
A STUDY INTO BRITISH ACADEMIC
LIBRARY WEB SITES.

I ZORBA

PhD

2013

THE MANAGEMENT AND ROLE OF
LIBRARY E-PRESENCE:
A STUDY INTO BRITISH ACADEMIC
LIBRARY WEB SITES.

IOANNA ZORBA

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the
requirements of the
Manchester Metropolitan University for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy

Department of Information and Communications
in the Faculty of Humanities, Law and Social Science
Manchester Metropolitan University
June 2013

Declaration

This is a declaration to state that this thesis is the candidate’s own work and has not been
previously published or submitted in support of any other degree or diploma.

Date:

Signed:

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my supervisory team, Dick Hartley and Sheila French, for their
advice and guidance throughout the development and completion of the research.

It is honour that my supervisor in my MA dissertation Margaret Kendall was one member
of my supervisory team later for the initial stage of my PhD project.

I want to express my respect to the Greek employees’ vested right to educational leave.

Thank you those who believed to my undertaking and those who have not believe, but
they supported me.

Abstract
This thesis sought to undertake a primary, holistic and contextual investigation of the
management and the role of academic library Web presence as it has evolved since its
beginnings in the early 1990s. Most of the data collection took place in 2008 and it
focused on the practice in British universities. Previous research on this topic was limited
and published studies reported only limited investigations which had explored only some
elements of the issue. Furthermore Web technologies have become crucial and integral
part of library’s Web presence and activity.

The study reviewed, analysed and determined the range of library web site role. It
examined the library web site management within its context. Relations between the roles
and management approaches were examined and factors, which affected both, were
investigated. A mixed methods approach was used; four data collection methods were
used (descriptive survey, content analysis and desk research, interviews) to collect both
quantitative and qualitative data. Data was examined and analysed structurally and
“triangulation” was used.

The study has provided evidence for the general understanding of the phenomenon and it
has identified crucial factors and issues for further investigation; for instance the factor of
authority over the library web site management and the issue of understanding of the web
publishing by the library web managers. Unlike the wide and increasing potential of Web
technologies, the web site for the academic libraries operated only as a simple provider of
information about the library and its electronic services to library users. Moreover, an
interesting finding was that when the parent institution was involved in the management
of the library web site, two parallel and not so co-ordinated management procedures took
place; one by the library and one by other(s) university unit(s). In addition, the
development and completeness of LWS management processes undertaken by libraries
was affected also by a trend for the LWS publishing as a project; rather than as a
continuous library activity.

List of acronyms & abbreviations
ACRL

Association of College and Research Libraries

ALA

American Library Association

approx.

Approximately

ARL

Association of Research Libraries

CMS

Content Management System

DK

Don’t know

DNER

Distributed National Electronic Resource

eLib

Electronic Libraries Programme

FE

Further Education Colleges that offer Higher Education courses

FT

Full-time

FTE

Full-time equivalence

HBCUs

Historically Black Colleges and Universities

HEFCE

Higher Education Funding Council for England

HEFCW

Higher Education Funding Council for Wales

HEI

Higher Education Institution

HERO

Higher Education & Research Opportunities in the United Kingdom

HRM

Human Resources Management

HTML

HyperText Markup Language

ICTs

Information Communication Technologies

ID

Identification

IP

Internet Protocol

IS

Information Systems

ISP

Internet Service Provider

IT

Information Technology

JANET

Joint Academic Network

LWS

Library web site

n.d.

‘no date’ is placed instead of the date

NA

Not Applicable

NIHEC

Northern Ireland Higher Education Council

OPAC

Online Public Access Catalogue

PT

Part-time

SCONUL

Standing Conference of National and University Libraries

SFC

Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council

UICS

University Information & Computing Services

UK

United Kingdom

UK

United kingdom

URL

Uniform Resource Locator

USA

United States of America

VLE

Virtual Learning Environment

WWW or Web

Wide World Web

Contents
Declaration
Acknowledgements
Abstract
List of acronyms & abbreviations
Contents

i

List of tables

iii

List of figures

viii

List of chart

ix

Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1

Introduction

1

1.2

Statement of the research question

1

1.3

Context of study

5

1.4

Library web site publishing

10

1.5

Overview of the study

13

Chapter 2: Background of the study
2.1

Introduction

15

2.2

Role of library web site

15

2.3

Library web site management

29

2.4

Summary

52

Chapter 3: Research design
3.1

Introduction

55

3.2

Aim and objectives

56

3.3

Methodology

56

3.4

Methods

66

3.5

Summary

119

Chapter 4: Results of data analysis
4.1

Introduction

121

4.2

Analysis of quantitative data

123

4.3

Analysis of qualitative data

168

4.4

Summary

182

i

Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1

Introduction

193

5.2

Library web site role

195

5.3

Library web site’s role & its management

199

5.4

Library web site management

205

5.5

Anti-summary

220

Chapter 6: Conclusions, limitations, contribution to knowledge &
recommendations
6.1

Conclusions

221

6.2

Limitations

224

6.3

Contribution to knowledge

224

6.4

Recommendations

226

Bibliography

229

Appendices
I.

Descriptive survey

II

Interviews

III

Quantitative data collection methods: results

ii

1-44 | Appendix
45-78 | Appendix
79-123 | Appendix

List of tables
Line item status of library web site budget, broken out by webmaster
staffing arrangement (Academic library website benchmarks 2008, p.
85)

p. 48

Table 3.1

Pilot content analysis design – Recording coding categories (example)

p.73

Table 3.2

Pilot content analysis design – Analysis and interpretation of the results
(example)

p.76

Table 3.3

Sampling units of the UK academic institutions

p.83

Table 3.4

Core questions for exploration of LWS management

p.91

Table 3.5

Sampling selection for interviews

p.115

Table 4.1

Time-range of LWS publishing

p.124

Table 4.2

Types of Library organisations

p.124

Table 4.3

Regular staffing for the LWS development and maintenance (LWS staff)

p.125

Table 4.4

Regular staffing for the LWS development and maintenance (LWS staff):
staff belonged to other unit within the university than the library

p.126

Table 4.5

LWS staffing and time-range of LWS practice

p.126

Table 4.6

Library staff worked the LWS development and maintenance (Library
web staff)

p.127

Average of the percentage of Library web staff within the total library
staff

p.128

Library web staffing (FT occupation), LWS staffing, library type & timerange of LWS practice – detailed cases examination

p.129

Table 4.9

LWS hosting & time-range of LWS practice

p.131

Table 4.10

LWS hosting & Library type

p.131

Table 4.11

LWS hosting & LWS staffing

p.132

Table 4.12

LWS uses (categories)

p.134

Table 4.13

Patterns of categories of LWS uses & target groups

p.135

Table 4.14

Library web staffing (FT occupation) & LWS uses – detailed cases
examination

p.135

Table 4.15

LWS uses & geographical regions

p.136

Table 4.16

Patterns of library’s involvement in decision making areas

p.139

Table 2.1

Table 4.7

Table 4.8

iii

Library’s involvement in decision making areas & LWS uses (groups of
categories)

p.139

Table 4.18

Library’s involvement in decision making areas & geographical regions

p.140

Table 4.19

Managerial activities undertaken by library

p.141

Table 4.20

Completion coding - details provided about staff involved in managerial
processes

p.142

Table 4.21

Staff involved in the LWS planning process

p.143

Table 4.22

Library staff involved in the LWS organising process

p.144

Table 4.23

LWS organising & LWS staffing

p.145

Table 4.24

Staff involved in the LWS performance measurement and monitoring
processes

p.146

Table 4.25

Staff involved in the LWS marketing processes

p.147

Table 4.26

Patterns of subject areas covered by specialised policies for the LWS

p.148

Table 4.27

LWS management patterns

p.149

Table 4.28

LWS management & LWS uses (groups of categories)

p.150

Table 4.29

LWS management patterns & geographical regions

p.150

Table 4.30

Other LWS managerial activities undertaken by libraries

p.151

Table 4.31

Other managerial & planning procedures

p.152

Table 4.32

Other managerial activities (patterns)

p.152

Table 4.33

Cases developed LWS mission statement – detailed cases examination

p.154

Table 4.34

Cases undertaken external funded projects – detailed cases
examination

p.155

Table 4.35

Cases developed LWS work procedures – detailed cases examination

p.156

Table 4.36

University’s policies/guidelines affected LWS

p.157

Table 4.37

Library’s web policies and university’s policies / guidelines affected LWS

p.158

Table 4.38

Authority over LWS management (patterns)

p.159

Table 4.39

Authority over LWS management & time-range of LWS practice

p.160

Table 4.40

Authority over LWS management & LWS uses (groups of categories

p.160

Table 4.41

Authority over LWS management & geographical regions of sample

p.160

Table 4.17

iv

Authority over LWS management, Library type & involved university
unit(s)

p.161

Authority over LWS management & library’s involvement in decisionmaking

p.162

Table 4.44

Authority over LWS management and LWS management patterns

p.163

Table 4.45

Authority over LWS management & LWS sources aspects

p.165

Table A1.1

Survey; Questionnaire dispatch, reminders and responses

p.21|Appendix

Table A1.2

Survey response

p.22|Appendix

Table A1.3

Survey respondent Libraries’ geographical profile

p.22|Appendix

Table A1.4

Survey respondents’ position within library

p.23|Appendix

Table A1.5

Survey respondents and “LWS managers”

p.24|Appendix

Table A1.6

Survey; Questionnaire – Control of completion patterns

p.26|Appendix

Table A1.7

Survey; Questionnaire – Lack of data per case (not
answered questions)

p.28|Appendix

Survey; Questionnaire – Frequency of “Don’t know”
statements per case

p.29 |Appendix

Table A1.9

Cases’ profile control – Q13 & Q14

p.32 |Appendix

Table A1.10

Cases’ profile control – Q12 & Q14

p.34 |Appendix

Table A1.11

Cases’ profile control – Q12.c & Q22

p.35 |Appendix

Table A1.12

Cases’ profile control – Q13 & Q22

p.36 |Appendix

Table A1.13

Cases’ profile control – Q7 & Q22

p.37 |Appendix

Table A1.14

Cases’ profile control – Q16 & Q22.a

p.38 |Appendix

Table A1.15

Cases’ profile control – Q12.b & Q18.a

p.39 |Appendix

Table A1.16

Cases’ profile control – Q8 & Q15

p.40 |Appendix

Table A1.17

Cases’ profile control – Q20 & Q12.d

p.41 |Appendix

Table A1.18

Research sample and its geographical profile

p.42 |Appendix

Table A1.19

Research sample: grouping of parent institutions

p.42 |Appendix

Table A3.1

Survey; Question 1b – Library title analysis

p.80|Appendix

Table A3.2

Survey; Question 2 – completion coding

p. 81|Appendix

Table A3.3

Survey; Question 3 – Library sites

p. 81|Appendix

Table 4.42

Table 4.43

Table A1.8

v

Table A3.4

Survey; Question 4 – Library staff

p. 82|Appendix

Table A3.5

Survey; Question 6 – completion coding

p.83|Appendix

Table A3.6

Survey; Question 6 – First year of LWS publication

p.83|Appendix

Table A3.7

Survey; Question 7 – Hosting of LWS

p.84|Appendix

Table A3.8

Survey; Question 8 – Existence of mission statement for LWS

p.84|Appendix

Table A3.9

Survey; Question 9 – LWS uses

p.86|Appendix

Table A3.10

Survey; Question 9 – Patterns of LWS uses

p.87|Appendix

Table A3.11

Survey; Question 10 – Library web site uses’ diversification
since the first LWS was available.

p.88|Appendix

Table A3.12

Survey; Question 11 – Future plans affected the LWS role

p.89|Appendix

Table A3.13

Survey; Question 12 – Library’s involvement in managerial
aspects

p.90|Appendix

Survey; Questions 13 & 13.1 – Involvement in LWS
management by others

p.91|Appendix

Table A3.15

Survey; Question 13.1 – Coding of university units

p.91|Appendix

Table A3.16

Survey; Question 14 – completion coding

p.93|Appendix

Table A3.17

Survey; Question 15 – completion coding

p.94|Appendix

Table A3.18

Survey; Question 16 – completion coding

p.95|Appendix

Table A3.19

Survey; Question 17 – completion coding

p.96|Appendix

Table A3.20

Survey; Question 18 – completion coding

p.97|Appendix

Table A3.21

Survey; Question 19 – completion coding

p.98|Appendix

Table A3.22

Survey; Question 20 – completion coding

p.99|Appendix

Table A3.23

Survey; Question 21 – completion coding

p.99|Appendix

Table A3.24

Survey; Question 22.b – coding of titles of other units within the
university

p.100|Appendix

Survey; Question 23 – Sum of members of library staff, which
worked solely on the LWS development and maintenance [Fulltime]

p.101|Appendix

Survey; Question 24 – Sum of members of library staff, which
worked on the LWS development and maintenance having
additional duties as well [Part-time]

p.102|Appendix

Table A3.27

Survey; Question 25 – completion coding

p.104|Appendix

Table A3.28

Survey; Question 26 – completion coding

p.105|Appendix

Table A3.14

Table A3.25

Table A3.26

vi

Table A3.29

Survey; Question 27 – completion coding

p.105|Appendix

Table A3.30

Survey; Question 28 – completion coding

p.106|Appendix

Table A3.31

Desk research (Internet Archive) – First year of LWS
publication

p.107|Appendix

Table A3.32

LWS content analysis – Patterns of LWS uses

p.109|Appendix

Table A3.33

First year of LWS publishing - comparison of results

p.110|Appendix

Table A3.34

LWS uses - data comparison

p.112|Appendix

Table A3.35

Library site status – Library type – Library staff scale

p.113|Appendix

Table A3.36

Library type – Geographical region

p.113|Appendix

Table A3.37

Percentage (%) of Library web staff within total library staff
taking into account the elements of library sites status, library
staff scale and existence of full-time Library web staff

p.114|Appendix

Table A3.38

LWS uses & time-range of LWS practice

p.115|Appendix

Table A3.39

LWS uses & Library type

p.115|Appendix

Table A3.40

LWS organising & Library web staff scale

p.116|Appendix

Table A3.41

LWS management & time-range of LWS practice

p.117|Appendix

Table A3.42

LWS management & Library type

p.117|Appendix

Table A3.43

LWS management & Library’s involvement in decision-making

p.118|Appendix

Table A3.44

LWS management & organising arrangement

p.118|Appendix

Table A3.45

Authority over LWS management, LWS uses & university
unit(s) involved

p.119|Appendix

Authority over LWS management, Involvement in LWS
management by other university unit(s) & library’s involvement
in decision-making

p.120|Appendix

Authority over LWS management, LWS management patterns
& LWS uses (groups of categories)

p.121|Appendix

Authority over LWS management & library’s organising
arrangements

p.121|Appendix

Table A3.49

Authority over LWS management & LWS staffing

p.122|Appendix

Table A3.50

Authority over LWS management & cases undertaken external
funded projects – detailed cases examination

p.122|Appendix

Authority over the LWS management & cases developed LWS
mission statement – detailed cases examination

p.123|Appendix

Table A3.46

Table A3.47

Table A3.48

Table A3.51

vii

List of figures

Team Structure the roles that can constitute a large web development
team – source: Friedlein 2001, p. 21

p.12

Figure 1.2

Library web site publishing

p.13

Figure 2.1

General models of “Virtual Library” by Travica (1999, p. 179)

p.26

Figure 2.2

Interrelations of the library web site’s role with library management &
aspects of LWS publishing

p.28

Organisational structure for an academic information service by Roberts
& Rowley (2004, p. 23)

p.34

Figure 2.4

Strategic planning/development cycle for a Web site (Clyde 2000, p. 98)

p.36

Figure 3.1

Relations between research objectives (3.2.1- 3.2.4) & methods (3.4.13.4.6)

p.62

Figure 3.2

Study’s research instruments

p.66

Figure 3.3

Internet Archive Wayback Machine – results (example)

p.78

Figure 3.4

“Single element & Cross-tabulation” examination (demonstration)

p.103

Figure 3.5

Main study elements and subjects analysed in the terms of the method
3.4.5 and presented within the framework of the interrelations of the LWS
role with library management & aspects of LWS publishing

p.106

Figure 3.6

Components of the qualitative data analysis

p.119

Figure 6.1

Interrelations of the library web site’s role with library management &
aspects of LWS publishing, taking into account the factor of authority
over LWS management and its practice as at least another one
concurrent management process undertaken by another university
unit(s).

Figure 1.1

Figure 2.3

Figure A1.1

Elements used for the questionnaires’ control for contradictory
statements

p. 223

p.31|Appendix

viii

List of charts
Chart 3.1

Research Sample: English & Scottish HEI

Chart 4.1

Host of library web site

Chart 4.2

Main role in LWS management by Library

Chart 4.3

LWS managerial aspects & Library’s involvement

Chart 4.4

Subject areas included in LWS policies

Chart 4.5

LWS subject areas affected by university’s policies &
guidelines

Chart 4.6

Chart A1.1

Involvement in LWS management by other units within the
university
Self-administered Questionnaire: flow chart of completion

p.84
p.130
p.137
p.138
p.148

p.157

p.158
p.25|Appendix

ix

Chapter 1.

Introduction
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5

Introduction
Statement of the research question
Context of study
Library web site publishing
Overview of the study

1
1
5
10
13

pp. 1-14

1. Introduction

1.1 Introduction
The introductory chapter aims to set the research question by placing it within the context
of its wider research field and identifying the driving forces and limitations for its design
and implementation (section 1.2). The overview of the study (section 1.5) closes this
chapter guiding the reader to the following chapters and giving a panoramic view of the
development of the thesis. This introductory chapter includes another two sections: firstly,
one placing the library web site (LWS) publishing within the political, social and
technological context of the study (section 1.3) and secondly, setting elementary
definitions of the LWS publishing (section 1.4), in order to, on the one hand, familiarise
the reader with the research topic and, on the other hand, support the development of the
review on the background of the study in the following chapter, which was designed to be
focused exclusively on the subject areas which are directly related to the study.

1.2 Statement of the research question
‘…academic library Web sites are such an integral part of their libraries,
it is important to know more about the people, tools, and methods
used to create these Web sites.’ (Connell 2008, p. 121)

This study sought to investigate the library web site (LWS) management undertaken by
British university libraries taking into account the LWS role as one of its crucial aspects.
The study’s objectives pursued, in order to meet the needs of the above aim, were:
•

to review, analyse and determine the range of LWS role;

•

to examine the application of the managerial processes for the LWS development
and maintenance undertaken by the libraries within their context;

•

to examine the relation between the LWS roles and the LWS management
approaches which were identified;

•

to investigate factors, which affected the formation of the management approaches
and the LWS roles

The study contributes to knowledge about the evolution of ICTs in library practice. The
LWS is one of the major applications of the library’s Web presence; the wide and universal
1

electronic environment for library’s ICTs practice. The study investigated the core of that
practice; the LWS management which can provide explanations for the practice’s outcome
- in essence the LWS. The investigation of the management of that web publication, taking
into account - as a serious basis for explanations - always the role that the LWS plays, is
going to bring out gradually:
-

the position of that library function – web publishing - within the library
organisation;

-

the position of the LWS role within the library management;

-

the role of the library web presence in the management of the library organization.

Additionally, this study contributes to the library science providing organised knowledge,
tools and criterions for investigation about the library web publishing as library procedure
in general and in particular regarding its management and its role.

Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) have evolved into one of the crucial
drivers of change in the era of Information Society. Already in 1982 Baker described the
phenomenon as ‘computers and telecommunications are converging very rapidly, huge
investments are being made, and the impact of information technology will be felt at every
level in our society; in industry, in commerce, in our offices and in our homes’ (Baker
1982, p. 77). In particular, the World Wide Web (WWW) has become a universally used,
dynamic and flexible platform for the development of integrated ICTs environments. The
inventor of Web, Tim Berners-Lee (2010) pointed out:
“The simple setup demonstrated a profound concept: that any person could
share information with anyone else, anywhere. In this spirit, the Web
spread quickly from the grassroots up. Today, at its 20th anniversary, the
Web is thoroughly integrated into our daily lives. We take it for granted,
expecting it to “be there” at any instant, like electricity... The primary design
principle underlying the Web’s usefulness and growth is universality.
(Berners-Lee 2010)

The E-presence of academic libraries has become common practice almost since the
introduction of the WWW in the early 1990s, as they operated within parent institutions
with developed network infrastructures (Poulter et al. 1999). After more or less fifteen
years, the management of library web site (LWS) by the academic libraries cannot be
considered as experimental or on trial, but as an established and shaped practice. However,
the research interest concerning the LWS management was limited, as it is discussed in
detail in section 2.3; there were a few studies investigating the topic and even then only a
part of the topic has been explored in any one study in areas such as the development of

2

LWS policies. In addition, the majority of these studies were conducted in the United
States of America (USA) during the early years of the LWS practice.

The investigation of LWS management is part of the discussion about the management of
the ICTs by the academic libraries and therefore part of a wider discussion about the
management of change, as technology has become a crucial driver of change. The LWS is
- at least one - of the fields where libraries apply the new technologies. As an electronic
environment, the LWS has all pre-conditions and technological capabilities to integrate the
library’s automation playing an essential role in the entire library management. Its role, as
determined by its management, affects the extent of LWS’s impacts upon library
organisation and the implementation of the defined role affects the extent and the quality of
these impacts.

Moreover, the LWS differs from all the other library functions – as it primarily is a web
publication - and its management can affect the organisational recruitment and
organisational structure, to a greater or lesser extent according to the role which the LWS
plays. The multi-thematic coverage of LWS’s content draws the cross-library interest and
causes the involvement of library staff working in various tasks across the library. The
LWS as a publication requires a range of special skills for the tasks in management,
development and maintenance; in particular these last tasks must be continually upgraded
within the terms of the rapidly changing nature of the Web. In addition, the long duration
of the web presence and its permanent prospect for the future showed that this library
function differs from the library’s other intersectional undertakings with a defined duration,
like the digitisation of a special collection or the library collection re-classification.

Nevertheless, a high research interest has been developed in aspects of outcome of LWS
management; for example, LWS’s design issues, like accessibility and usability, provision
of electronic information services, like portals and document repositories, and use of web
functions, like Web2.0 tools. These topics – as outcome of practice under investigation derive from the management of the LWS’s development. Therefore, the investigation of
LWS management can bring out pivotal factors and vital elements on the generating and
final shaping of this practice. These factors or elements, finally, could be taken into
account as requirements and standards for the recommended practice in development of
library web services.
3

The limited volume and narrowly focused research on the management of LWS has left a
wide area for study. Studies in aspects of management have focused mainly on the
exploration of library web master’s professional identity and duties and on an examination
of web policies’ development (see, section 2.3). Moreover the role of LWS was examined
within a more or less a priori concept; as a medium for library services delivery and
provision of information about the library (see, section 2.2). Consequently basic questions
about what libraries wanted and what they have achieved through developing a web site
and how they managed its production and sustainability had not been set as research
questions and they have still remained without answers.

Initial understanding of the phenomenon, as it has been established, is a prerequisite for indepth investigations in issues raised above, especially about the LWS’s impacts upon the
library’s management of change. For example, the selection of a case or multiple cases for
an in-depth study and its results would have to take into account whether the sample refers
to the common practice or not. In addition, a preliminary, wide and holistic investigation
can indicate trends and exceptional practices contributing to the existing discussion and
raising crucial issues for further studies on the LWS management. Therefore, the scope of
this study was shaped to provide answers to basic, but overall, questions about the web site
management undertaken by libraries, exploring and mapping the practice and responding
to the need for initial understanding of the phenomenon. Moreover, this study for the first
time examined the management, taking into account the role of LWS; a crucial aspect for
its management and its impact.

Nevertheless, the initial research project planning included also objectives for examination
of the aspect of “management of change”. However, the results of the first stage required
re-orientation of the study in that part (see, section 3.3), adapting the framework of the
study as it was presented above. This framework identified libraries’ decisions on
exploiting web publishing, showed the wide range of managerial processes for the LWS
development and maintenance and their application in practice. In addition, it discussed the
findings of the application of the managerial processes and the organisational status of
LWS function in the terms of its role within the library.

The research field selected was British university libraries. They serve organisations,
which were very early adopters of a networked environment via the nationally-funded Joint
4

Academic Network (JANET)1. Moreover, this library sector has been supported since 1993
for development of web-based services by funded programmes. Therefore, the topic was
studied within a mature environment, during a period that the management of LWS was no
longer a new undertaking for libraries and the continually changing technological status
had become an accepted factor in LWS management.

The study was designed based on the “mixed methods research” paradigm, developing a
preliminary, holistic and contextual investigation of the practice. The exploratory character
of the study approached the topic more in breadth rather than in-depth, mapping
abstractedly the practice within its context. “Triangulation” was used as a methodological
process applying four methods. Quantitative data collected firstly and mainly via
descriptive survey and via content analysis and desk research. Qualitative data collected
via key informant interviews supporting the explanatory part of the study. The overview as a methodological approach - achieved to provide evidence for the general understanding
of the phenomenon. It also brought out crucial issues for further investigation related with
the role of the LWS in the terms of library’s ICTs management, the authority of the LWS
management, the status of LWS management within the general library’s management, the
understanding of web publication as procedure by libraries.

1.3 Context of study
‘Planning assumptions
…
- The operating environment will become
increasingly standardised around Internet/Intranet
technologies.’ (Corrall, S. 1998, p. 3)

Academic libraries in the UK were supported, but as well were pressured by political and
economic factors, to enter and to take part in the new educational and training economy of
“distance learning” and “life-long learning”, which were interwoven with the wide use of
the Internet and WWW. They had already been working in a well-established networked
environment, as academic institutions since the late 1970s had developed several regional
networks and later in the mid-1980s with the nationally-funded Joint Academic Network
(JANET) expanded and enhanced their network facilities (Joint Academic NETwork n.d.).
1

Joint Academic Network (JANET) has existed since the 1980s.

5

Since 1991 the academic community has started to be connected to the WWW and
therefore, ‘academic libraries were amongst the first wave of institutions to pioneer the
development of Web pages’ (Poulter et al. 1999, p. 41). Furthermore, as a result of the
Follett Report in 1993 the funded programmes the Electronic Libraries Programme (eLib)
and the Distributed National Electronic Resource (DNER) development programme
exploited the development of substructure for the electronic information diffusion and
delivery through the academic libraries and the use of these electronic resources in
teaching, learning and research (Brophy 2007). In addition, academic libraries since the
mid-1990s have been encouraged to support the higher education taking its place in the
frame of lifelong learning, which has been derived from a range of government initiatives
(Brophy 2005). Corrall and Brewerton (1999) summarised that situation writing:
‘In the UK higher education sector, various government-funded
initiatives have promoted the use of IT management and administration
in teaching and learning, and also in libraries...The new Labour
Government has given further impetus to such developments by
promoting technology-assisted learning in the context of its lifelong
learning and social inclusion policies...’ (Corrall & Brewerton 1999, p.
132)

The decade of the 1990s saw a new status for the UK library sector in general and for
academic libraries in particular. Libraries entered a rapid, substantial and continually
changing environment, affected by changing networking requirements, the new digital
information marketplace and other environmental pressures, like governmental and
institutional directives, but as well new cultural attitudes. In the early years, Griffiths (1995)
discussed the future directions and challenges that libraries were called to cope with,
especially with regard to ICTs, which have become the main medium and source of change.
Moreover, he warned about issues of librarians’ IT literacy and their preparedness to cope
with new social aspects of technologies, like freedom of information. Morgan (1996) also
highlighted within the core skills - essential for academic librarians - the IT & management
skills, the teaching & training and the credibility with academic staff. Lancaster & Sandore
(1997, p. 15) discussed that new or enhanced skills implied by the automated library
environment, like that ‘librarians of today may need to understand the principles of
marketing in order to develop new user-responsive services and to promote them within
the community’.

6

Makin & Craven (1999) studied the impacts of political, social and economic factors in the
UK on academic and public library services in the late 1990s and they pointed out that this
changing environment for the libraries may be beneficial or harmful, providing both
opportunities and threats. UK academic librarians and researchers were surveyed for
drivers of new developments in library services; both groups identified as the major driver
the high request by the academic community for availability of digital information sources
(Brown & Swan 2007). However, Brophy (2007) indicated some threats for libraries from
this changing environment and wondered whether libraries were [still] unprepared for the
change. He argued (Brophy 2007, pp. 17-18) that ‘technology is complex and librarians
have not developed the skills to understand it…’. Moreover, he pointed out that ‘libraries
are expensive and becoming more expensive…’ [because of the high cost of electronic
services delivery].

Organisational restructuring and revision of strategic priorities have been reported in
American academic libraries which operated within a similarly changing environment. For
example the Association of Research Libraries (Eustis & Kenney 1996), in the mid-1990s,
carried out a survey about the library reorganisation and restructuring indentifying - as
some of the major influential factors - the information technology, the availability of
networked information and the new patterns of scholarly communication. Sennyey et al.
(2009) discussed recently the future of academic libraries and highlighted the need for
substantive reorganisations if they choose to emphasise digital services. Moreover, the
ACRL2 Research Planning and Review Committee (2012) continued highlighting the role
of Information Technology and digital services in the academic libraries’ evolution.
Nevertheless, Crawford (2000) suggested that in order for libraries to cope with change
they need to keep alive the library’s mission related to their collection and services. In
addition to the continuing discussion on the refining of the academic library role and
therefore of the library organisational model, Dillon (2008) criticised academic libraries for
their understanding of the changing processes and their trend to a business-oriented model.
He claimed that:
‘Shifts in technology cannot be treated as isolated vectors, divorced
from the human and social practices in which they are embedded. No
matter how much pressure there is to conceive them as so, students are
not customers, and academic libraries are not businesses. The
explosion in digital resources reflects the rapid embracing of new tools
2

The Association of College and Research Libraries

7

and new techniques for knowledge production that have not followed the
predicted paths. One need only read anything from the past 20 years of
speculative writings on library and technology futures to recognize how
narrow our understanding of this process can be…Yet we are not
helpless. We can control our destiny in some, though definitely not all
ways, if we conceive the challenges correctly.’ (Dillon 2008, p. 53)

Within this changing environment the LWS has been developed and established. The first
web sites provided more information about the library as an organisation and its locally
provided services, like circulation and reference services. Later they have started hosting
electronic resources as well, like references/links to other web pages, and online services
like OPAC 3 (Poulter et al. 1999). Gradually, the capabilities of web technology were
identified and used by libraries via their LWS. Cox (1996) wrote about the advantages and
problems of producing an “electronic library guide” using Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML). Since then there has been a plethora of literature about web-based services
developed or provided via subscription by libraries, like library catalogues, selective
dissemination of information services, instructional and information literacy tools,
bibliographic databases, current awareness services and full-text databases. Moreover,
libraries, apart from visualisation and delivery of library services, have taken part in
projects for institutional repositories, institutional electronic journals and digital libraries of
rare collections. In addition, in SCONUL’s (Standing Conference of National and
University Libraries) briefing papers for the vision of the academic library in year 2002
(Corrall 1998) and 2005 (Corrall 2001) pointed out that the increasing importance and
standardising on the Web is included in the planning assumptions as Web has become an
operating environment.

Many major web-based services of academic libraries have been developed within the
terms of national programmes, like eLib. However, their ongoing maintenance and
upgrading remain pivotal issues for libraries and the employment of appropriate and
sufficient staff working in well-managed structures is one of the key points (Pinfield 2001).
At the same time, web technology tools have not only replaced pre-WWW tools, like CDROM servers, but they have been and are continually changing and upgrading.
Consequently, libraries have remained alert to requirements and opportunities to upgrade
their web site and develop or finding solutions, like library portals and Web 2.0 tools, for
the achievement of technological compatibility and of meeting changing user needs.
3

8

Online Public Access Catalogue

Nevertheless, the application of newer technologies, like Web 2.0 and mobile web
technology, probably upgrading the “static” first generation of web services in the 1990s,
does not represent a new paradigm for UK academic librarians since their libraries have a
long history of adopting technology (Shoniwa & Hall 2007). However, adoption by
libraries of ICTs’ evolution, on the one hand, it is not an end in itself and, on the other
hand, it is not certain that academic libraries are able to apply new tools, as Breeding (2006,
p. 32) contended ‘while I wholeheartedly agree that we need to be think about Web 2.0
concepts, I worry that we haven’t yet fully achieved Web 1.0’. Nevertheless, Nesta & Mi
(2011) sustained that “Library 2.0” applications do not contribute to the core mission of
libraries, as
Libraries are research networks, not social networks and the proper
relationship of academic libraries to their users is professional and
collegial. (Nesta & Mi 2011, p. 95)

The selection and the application of new Web tools should to be tied to the library’s
strategic goals, taking into account the library users’ needs, otherwise Library 2.0 services
often fail to have the expected impact (Cvetkovic 2009). Epperson & Leffler (2009)
examined the application of social software programmes, such as Facebook and MySpace,
by American academic libraries, discovering that the majority of the library users, who
used this type of social software programmes, were apathetic about using them for library
questions or research. The study of Kim & Abbas (2010) on the adoption of Library 2.0
functionalities by academic libraries and users’ utilisation of them showed that even if
some tools were adopted by libraries, like RSS feeds (73%) and blogs (65%), users utilized
them in low percentages (e.g. RSS feeds in 10.8%); whilst 42.5% of users utilized the
bookmark function, the libraries which offered it were 22%. Nonetheless, the study of
Partridge (2011, p. 262) highlighted that the provision of Library 2.0 services are ‘less to
do with technology and more about quality transferable skills and interpersonal abilities’
on behalf of librarians. The findings of Sun et al. (2011) were in the same direction about
the role of academic librarians in the new ICTs era; one of the major roles may have
become teaching students and faculty to use new information technologies.

9

1.4 Library web site publishing
“A newer service is that of the librarian
as publisher, specifically, publishing
information on the WWW.” (Cisler 1995)

The LWS has become the main and the official e-presence of the academic libraries. It is a
sub-site of the parent organisation’s web site. There is always at least a semantic
interrelation derived from the organisational relationship between an academic institution
and its library. Middleton et al. (1999) analysing UK higher education institution web sites
studied the concept of the university web site as one web presence, without making a
distinction between the university web site and other possible institutional sub-sites.
Usually, in UK academic universities the organisational unit of Information Technology
(IT) or Marketing has had the broad or central responsibility for the institution’s web site
(Cox 2007a; Cox 2007b).

The LWS hosts a digital library branch (King 2009), which is built on a Web publication.
Its information architecture is related with the role that that digital branch plays for the
library or for the parent institution. Moreover, its publication form/substance is related with
the decision derived from the LWS management and therefore the library management and
the university management; as regards the academic libraries. Therefore, the LWS can
consist of one web page or a body of web pages, whose content is related to the library. It
can have its own domain name (e.g. www.library.uni.ac.uk) or it can be part of the
university’s web site (e.g. www.uni.ac.uk/library/). Moreover, it can be hosted on server(s)
of the library or it can be hosted outsourced; either by another unit within the university or
a private company operating as outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP). Nevertheless,
components of LWS’s content can be also inter-linked web functions, like the OPAC or
subscription-based commercial information services, but as well other web tools, like blogs
and other social network environments, which are hosted in different domain. Peterson
(2006) pointed out that the variety of different types of LWS’s content, such as library
catalogue, databases, tutorials and forms, differentiates the LWS from the university web
site and other university sub-sites. This particularity of LWS is a primary concern when a
common or shared template is going to be used to control the formatting of whole
university web presence, as ‘it can be very difficult to modify the template effectively for
the library’s purposes’ (Peterson 2006, p. 218).

10

The LWS has been named in literature as well as with alternative titles, for example
“virtual library”, “portal” and “library workstation” (Diaz 1998; Leigh 2000; Moen &
Murray 2002; Stielow c1999), indicating perspectives about its role (see, section 2.2).
Nevertheless, the LWS basically is a web publication; a dynamic and flexible platform
capable for development of integrated electronic environment, having all advantages and
disadvantages, all capabilities and limitations of a web site production and maintenance. It
is a complex process, in which all stages and all components of this undertaking interact
and affect the currently launched outcome; in that case, each one launched version of the
LWS. The web publishing procedure consists of the work stages of preproduction
(planning and site information architecture), production (development of content, design
and construction), promotion, maintenance and evaluation (Friedlein 2001). This
undertaking requires expertise in various areas such as ‘in marketing, information
architecture, graphic design, writing and editing, programming, and project management’
(Rosenfield & Morville 1998, p. 20).

The work tasks of web site publishing are specific more or less and they are divided
broadly in four, five or six categories. According to Rosenfield and Morville (1998), the
categories were: marketing, information architecture, graphic design, editorial, technical
and project management. Friedlein (2001) identified main work tasks as the project
management,

the

architecture

and

design,

the

programming,

the

3D/Animation/Video/Audio and the content. Moreover, Griffiths (2004) identified four
categories of web work: editorial, managerial, technical and design. For the multiple work
tasks and roles that a web publication requires, it may be the responsibility of one person
or a team depending upon the environment within which it is undertaken. Friedlein (2001)
developed a team structure showing the roles that can constitute a large web development
team (see below, Figure 1.1), which the work tasks are distributed among specialised job
positions.

11

Figure 1.1: Team Structure the roles that can constitute a large web
development team – source: Friedlein 2001, p. 21

Any web site as a final, entire and complete product consists of the editorial elements and
the content components. The “edition” or the “web design style” is about the publication
form or media of the web site and its web pages, including aspects like site structure, site
and page elements, interface design, typography, editorial style and coding in markup
language; including decision-making for tools/software like the Content Management
System (CMS) - as King (2009) discussed in his paper with title “Building the Branch”
meaning the LWS. In actual fact, the key points for the quality of the web edition are the
information architecture, the editorial and design standards and the use of appropriate
technology (Lynch & Horton c2001; W3 Wide World Web Consortium). Within this frame
of the web edition, the “content” is organised and provided and is the
information/resources in any Type or Format; in any ‘nature or genre of the resource’, like
text, dataset and image, or ‘file format, physical medium, or dimensions of the resource’,
like html, xml and gif (DCMI 2008). Rosenfeld & Morville (1998) explained with simple
words that ‘we define content broadly as “the stuff in your Web site”. This may include
documents, data, applications, e-services, images, audio and video files, personal Web
pages, archived e-mail messages, and more’ (Rosenfeld & Morville 1998, p. 219). For the

12

case of the LWS, the content, for example, could consist of information about the library,
electronic library services and networked functions for the members of library staff.

Summarising, the LWS as a publication is composed of the interlinking elements of
“content” and edition’s web environment or “design” as practitioners participated in this
study had named it. Its publishing broadly consists of its management (see, section 2.3)
and its development & maintenance, which refer to the implementation processes of
“content” and “design” (see below, Figure 1.2).

Library Web Site publishing
LWS management

LWS Development & maintenance

LWS publication
Content

Edition’s web
environment (design)

Figure 1.2 Library web site (LWS) publishing

1.5 Overview of the study
This study sought to investigate the practice in LWS management undertaken by British
university libraries taking into account the LWS role as one of its crucial aspects. The first
chapter of the thesis set the research question by placing it within the context of its wider
research field and identifying the driving forces and limitations for its design and
implementation. It also placed the LWS publishing within its context and defined
elementary principles of the LWS publishing in order the literature review following to be

13

focused exclusively on the research topics. In overview, the thesis develops into the
following chapters:
•

Chapter 2 reviews the literature in order to present and discuss the background to
the study and to allocate materials and identify stepping-off points needed for the
present research. Therefore, the literature review is focused on the role of the LWS
and the management of LWS.

•

Chapter 3 takes into account issues raised from the investigation of the study’s
background and develops a suitable research design in order to answer the research
question, noted in the section 1.2. The research aim and the objectives are presented,
the methodological stance chosen is discussed, limitations considered, and the
research methods selected are described.

•

The results of the data analysis are organised in chapter 4 into three sections,
reflecting the methodological approach of “triangulation” which was used
collecting quantitative and qualitative data through four research instruments. Thus,
the results of quantitative and qualitative data analysis are presented separately and
then they are summarised into a third section.

•

Finally, the results of the study are discussed (see, Chapter 5) taking into account
the overall background introduced in chapter 2, so that conclusions may be drawn
in chapter 6.

14

Chapter 2.

Background of the study
2.1
2.2
2.2.1
2.2.2
2.2.3
2.2.4
2.3
2.3.1
2.3.2
2.3.3
2.3.4
2.4

Introduction
Role of library web site
Role of LWS and mission statement of LWS
Role of LWS and content of LWS
Role of LWS and library management
Facets and approaches of LWS role
Library web site management
Processes of LWS management
Management and the function of LWS publishing
LWS management and webmaster’s role
Studies in aspects of LWS management
Summary

15
15
16
21
24
27
29
30
32
37
40
52

pp. 15-54

2. Background of the study
2.1 Introduction
The study aimed to investigate the topic of LWS management taking into account the
LWS role as one of its crucial aspects. This chapter aims to review the literature in order
to place the study in its context and identify stepping-off points needed for the present
research. Consequently, the literature review was focused on the two main research areas;
the LWS management and the LWS role. The LWS management as a process has been
already identified (see, section 1.4) within the terms of LWS publishing and in the third
section of this chapter (section 2.3) the investigation of LWS management is going to
establish the general web site management’s framework, placing within its issues,
approaches and studies found in literature. The examination of LWS role (section 2.2)
opens the chapter of literature review identifying its content and placing this study aspect
within the context of the LWS publishing, as it has been already drawn in section 1.4.

2.2 Role of library web site
In literature, the LWS has been named with alternative titles; “virtual library”, “portal”
and “library workstation” are some examples (Diaz 1998; Leigh 2000; Moen & Murray
2002; Stielow c1999). However, these titles indicate perspectives about LWS’s role
within a library, whose presence appears in a local and an electronic environment. The
review and the analysis of the evidence of literature revealed that the concept of the
LWS’s role has more than one facet and starting point for its approach. In addition,
questions were identified which addressed the role that LWS plays or could play or
should play. These questions were formatted by the researcher as:
-

What a library wants to achieve through the launch of its LWS?

-

For what functions a library can use a web publication such as its LWS?

-

How a LWS can impact upon the library organisation which develops and
manages it?

Therefore, the three following sub-sections (2.2.1-2.2.3) have been developed to present
and discuss the LWS role related to:
a) the mission statement of LWS;
b) the content of LWS and;

15

c) the library management.
Finally, in the fourth sub-section (2.2.4), all these three facets and approaches of LWS
role are placed within the terms of LWS publishing.

2.2.1 Role of LWS and mission statement of LWS

What does a library want to achieve through the launch of its LWS?

Griffiths (2004) pointed out that libraries have to develop web presence in response to the
eagerness of the audience - including academic communities - for web-based information.
Corrall & Brewerton (1999) also noted several advantages in developing web site by
libraries, like the support of large audience and the opportunity to utilise ICTs. However,
they underlined the fact that before the LWS development libraries need to define clearly
LWS’s audience and its purposes. From this perspective, the content of LWS’s role is
defined through the answers to the question “What do we want to achieve through the
launch of our LWS?” and it needs to be determined through the planning process in terms
of setting aims and objectives with a clear sense of the target-groups (mission statement
development).
‘We need to ask why we are adding services [in our LWS]’ (Corrall &
Brewerton 1999, p. 135)
‘Many website owners undertake or commission considerable
amounts of design and content collection work before they address
this simple question, but if you do not know what audience you have
in mind when you develop your site, it will lack purpose and
cohesion … You need to know from the outset who the intended
users of the site will be, because you need to design with them in
mind’ (Griffiths 2004, p. 27)

The audience for the LWS of an academic library could be selected from the range of
library’s stakeholders. Bryson & Alston (1996, p. 43) defined a stakeholder in general as
‘any person, group or organisation that can place a claim on an organisation’s resources,
attention or output, or is affected by its output’. Focusing on the library practice, Kuchi
(2006, p. 150) described that USA ‘academic library stakeholders typically include
students; faculty and staff members; university administration; donors or friends of library;
and state, regional, and national library partners, associations, and collaborators’. For the
UK academic libraries broadened the definition of stakeholders further by identifying

16

‘student, academic staff, university support staff, library managers, library support staff,
university managers, the government, society: internationally, nationally, regionally and
locally, international research communities and posterity’ (Brophy & Coulling 1996, p.
41). Nonetheless, for the case of a LWS the general wide web public can be also included
in the groups of stakeholders because of the technical capabilities for unlimited time and
place accessibility which are derived from the web publishing nature.

However, from the whole range of stakeholder groups, two in particular seemed to be
singled out as target-groups for the LWS: the academic community - as library services
users - and the general web public. Griffiths (2004, p. 29) referred indirectly to those
main categories of target-groups through his list of probable LWS’ purposes: ‘publicizing
the library organisation’, ‘providing information’ and ‘communicating with customers
and other stakeholders’. In other words, the LWS role is based on serving perspective or
on both perspectives; the serving perspective and marketing one. According to this
approach the LWS is designed for information provision about library and its services
and/or provision of electronic library services (serving perspective) and it could be also
designed for promoting library through LWS (marketing perspective).

Alison (2001), having as her starting point that the purpose of LWS is the information
delivery (serving perspective), identified as the target-group the users of library services
and therefore the LWS as a library’s virtual front-desk. This conclusion derives from the
range of elements for the core content of the LWS (objectives), which she suggested and
in particular these were:
• to promote a product or service
• to deliver a product or service
• to provide service information
• to offer curriculum support
• to collect orders or enquiries
• to deliver printed materials
• to provide database access
• to act as a print depository
• to deliver training and support
• to provide a communications link
• to recruitment
• to a launch pad to wider resources
• to host community discussions.
(Alison 2001, p. 434)

17

This serving perspective for the role of LWS was identified too in the survey of Traw
(2000)1. Librarians of the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) were
asked whether the library considered their LWS as a separate “service” or an “extension
of existing services”; in other words, the study had set a priori the role of LWS based on
that serving perspective. Consequently, the results were guided by this perspective; the
majority of the respondents ‘believe[d] their library’s web site [was] an extension of
existing services, primarily: reference, library instruction, interlibrary loan, and reserves’
(Traw comp. 2000, p. 4).

Nevertheless, Stielow (c1999) added as target group the library staff. He extended the use
of LWS beyond the serving & marketing perspective as basis for the aims of LWS; the
LWS could be used as an alternative source for delivery of supportive materials for
library staff work tasks. In particular, in his book addressed to librarians he suggested to
them to consider the answers of the following three questions in order to define the
LWS’s objective:
•
•
•

Is the purpose to have an electronic sign proclaiming or marketing
the institution?
Is the project a new work product or supplemental resource – such
as a virtual library?
Is the purpose to provide staff with alternative sources of
information for their job?
(Stielow c1999, p. 25)

Clyde identified the importance of clear determination of purpose and users’ needs in
successful LWS publishing. Based on that principle she explored the status of LWSs
during the period 1996-2002, carrying out three studies and comparing their results.
These studies in literature were the only investigations of the LWS’ role as it is defined in
its mission statement. For the first project (Clyde 1996) the examined web sites were from
public and school libraries in 13 countries. For the two later research projects (Clyde 1999
& 2004) she used only school library web sites. Content analysis was applied as a data
collection method for all these studies. One of the research components was the
identification of the LWS’ aims and target-groups via analysis of statements and other
written evidence located within the examined web sites.

The results (Clyde 2004) indicated that the LWSs served multiple purposes, like provision
of information & instructional services and information about the library; the audience
1

In section 2.3 there are more details about this study.

18

served, was students and teachers primarily, parents and people outside the school, like
parents of prospective students. However, especially in the results of the 1996 analysis
there were some cases that did not have a clearly stated aim or purpose or did not clarify
the intended audience (Clyde 1999) and Clyde - pointing out the planning process as a
key factor for the web site publishing - concluded that the ‘most effective of the library
Web sites or home pages appeared to be those that had a clear sense of purpose and a
clear sense of the needs of users’ (Clyde 1996, p. 556).

These studies, however, were limited regarding their examination and discussion about
the LWS’s role. Apart from the examination of the aims and target-groups, they also
analysed the design (edition’s elements) and the content (e.g. services provided) of the
LWS. Regarding the LWS role, Clyde examined what compilers of school LWS wanted
to achieve through their web site without though comparing these aims (mission
statement - outcome of LWS planning process) with the implemented LWS’s functions
(LWS contents – outcome of LWS management); whilst the data about the LWS’ content
had been collected. This analysis could have enhanced the results about the LWS role
approaching it through two facets: the role aimed and the role implemented; as the LWS’s
content is developed according to the role that it is going to play (mission statement) and
the LWS content, which had been developed, eventually shapes the applied/real role of
LWS.

Furthermore, Stover (1997) approached the LWS’s role having as his starting point the
mission of the library – as an information organisation. He discussed the role of the LWS
in relation to the library’s mission. In particular he clearly claimed that the LWS content
should support the purpose of the library, writing that the ‘role of Web site is … to make
information available’ (Stover 1997, p. 56) and he sets:
‘a key question for those of us who create and maintain library web
sites is this: How can we continue to function in our transitional role of
selection, organisation, and dissemination (and perhaps also
preservation) within the context of the new Web environment?’ (Stover
1997, p. 56)

This perspective was expressed also by Von Elm & Trump (2001) who defined the role of
academic LWS within the “hybrid library” which provides both print and electronic
resources. They noted that LWS has to host user-centred services ‘keeping pace with
evolving technology and directing technology toward services that are relevant to the

19

users; and maintaining the library’s mission in a continually evolving environment’ (Von
Elm & Trump 2001, p. 35).

This approach, on the one hand, concludes, like Alison’s (2001) perspective, for the
exclusive use of LWS for provision of information to users excluding other roles for the
LWS, like ‘publicizing the library organisation’ as Griffiths (2004) claimed, and reducing
consequently the target-groups of LWS to the library services users. On the other hand,
this perspective limits the role of LWS to a library’s virtual front-desk where users can
have access to information delivery services – similar to Alison’s (2001) approach. Whilst,
the LWS - technically at least - is able to support additional functions addressed to library
staff, which in the end serve the library mission.

For example, an intranet can be used as the main method of library staff communication
and primary source of information (Corrall & Brewerton 1999, p. 136) and the library
staff are mentioned as users of an intranet section of the LWS which can support them ‘to
develop document delivery services’ (Griffiths 2004, p. 186) using functions running
within intranet for work-tasks related to searching, retrieving and providing documents; in
other words the intranet for library staff can be used as their electronic working
environment. Therefore, the LWS as mean of ICTs utilisation can be designed to be used
as well as by library staff serving the mission of library because its functions can
beneficially support the internal work tasks for the foundation of the traditional library
mission to provide information.

Moen & Murray (2002) supported this alternative perspective including the library staff
as users of LWS. They approached the LWS’s role as a library’s function for a virtual
front-desk; as a system of a functional integrated virtual environment which, on the one
hand, provides information and library services for the library’s users and, on the other
hand, provides services for the library staff in order to support these services addressed to
users. They named the LWS as a “virtual library” which is built as a system of web-based
services and focuses on serving library’s patrons according the general mission of library.
However, they added in the LWS content - apart from the services addressed to library’s
patrons (“external or patron-oriented services”) - the ‘internal or foundation services, that
are the behind-the-scenes services without which the patron-oriented services would be

20

jeopardized’ (Moen & Murray 2002, p. 97); these internal services address to the library
staff and consequently they are included in the LWS users.

2.2.2 Role of LWS and content of LWS

For what functions can a library use a web publication, like its LWS?

The literature review brought out another approach to the content of LWS role; a usesbased approach. Uses of LWS compose the content of the LWS role and the content of
LWS operates as the source for the identification of these uses. Leigh (2000) approached
the academic LWS’ role based on the content that a LWS has to provide and discussed
the evolution of the LWS from a “static” web site to a “portal”. She adopted this term
from Connolly’s (2000) paper where the “portal Web sites” ‘serve as a starting point for
people when they connect to the Web or that they tend to visit as an anchor site…is a
gateway to the Web that allows the plethora of information … to be organized and
customized through a single entry point’ (Connolly 2000, p. 39). Leigh also indicated that
‘more than ever, the Library web site is the gateway to the breadth of information that a
library has to offer …’ (Leigh 2000). In a similar vein, Liu (2008, p. 6) identified the
‘academic library Web sites [as] … gateways to information that supports faculty and
student research and educational needs.’ This framework defines the role of LWS as a
library’s services virtual access point; a library’s virtual front-desk addressed to library’s
services users operating as an organised provider of electronic library resources and
referential information about the library and its in-house library services.

The perspective that LWS role is to operate as a library’s virtual front-desk was used by
Chisenga (1998) and Agingu (2000) as de facto principle in their studies in academic web
presence examining elements of the LWS publications. However, any study that presets
unfounded content for the LWS role possibly limits the breadth of its real content and at
the same time this limitation is not identified and then it is not stated in the research
design. Chisenga conducted content analysis of 13 university LWSs of 11 Sub-Saharan
African countries in 1997 taking into account that the ‘World Wide Web offers libraries
the opportunity to provide library and information services for both local and
international communities, and to gain access to various electronic information sources on
21

the Internet’ (Chisenga 1998, p. 49). The aim of the study was to examine the provision of
access to electronic information services and the provision of general information about
the library and its in-house services. The major results showed that LWSs mainly
provided information about the library and in-house services, rather than electronic
services. Agingu (2000) carried out in 1998 a comparative content analysis of the LWSs
of Historically Black Colleges to Universities (HBCUs) and other institutions in the
Southeast USA in order to determine how useful the LWSs were as tools for
disseminating information and providing services for users. An assessed checklist of
twelve (12) questions was used for the document examination. According to the results,
‘most HBCU libraries used their Web sites mainly to provide information about the
library and its collections’ (Agingu 2000, p. 30).

Diaz (1998) defined multiple roles that academic LWS can play, remaining in the terms
of the library’s virtual front-desk perspective for provision of information services
(serving perspective) and publicising library organisation (marketing perspective).
According to Diaz the LWS can be considered as a tool for multiple uses (a multiuses/multifunctional tool); it can operate as a ‘library workstation both for the users and
for the librarians serving them’. Moreover, members of library staff are considered as
users of LWS, such as library’s users; they can use services provided via LWS in order to
serve library’s users, for example answering questions about library collection. In
addition, for the needs of library management the LWS is a ‘communication tool’
providing information about the organisation, like organisational structures and missions,
and about the in-house services and facilities provided in-house/locally, like interlibrary
loans and research workshops.

This uses-based approach of categorises components of LWS’s content according to their
uses and the LWS’ role can be determined in a more analytical level. Another example of
this approach is given by Xiao et al. (1997), who described the LWS’s role of specific
USA academic libraries at an early point in LWS publishing as:
-

a “public relations tool” providing ‘an avenue for one-way communications out of
the library’;

-

an “instruction tool”, providing materials related with an ‘instructional program in
the library’;

22

-

a “search platform”, providing a common access point for all different databases
and catalogues;

-

a “communication tool”, providing ‘interactive services between library users and
the library staff … for customer feedback on library services’;

-

a “museum/virtual library”, providing special materials in digital format, like ‘rare
books, manuscript, research collection, and archive repository of … University’.

This uses-based approach of the role of LWS was used in studies of Cohen & Still (1999),
and Sapa (2005). In these studies the researchers set a list of possible LWS roles whose
application they examined via content analysis of the academic LWS publications
grouping located elements of content and design. Nonetheless, all perspectives about the
role of LWSs expressed through these lists indicated that basically they had as their
starting point the library’s virtual front-desk perspective for provision of information
services and publicising library organisation addressed to library users and the general
web public. However, the methodological approach for the investigation of the LWS’ role
using assessed list of LWS roles under examination provokes questions about the wide
coverage of the investigation of the LWS role and the content elements supporting it (see
more, in section 3.4.1).

Cohen & Still (1999) conducted in 1998 a comparative content analysis of 100 academic
LWSs of fifty American research degree granting universities to fifty “two-year colleges”.
The aim of the study was the determination of purposes of the web sites ‘as manifested by
their content and its placement within the structure of the site’ (Cohen & Still 1999, p.
275). The researchers systematically collected data about three LWS elements; ‘content,
functionality and structure’. For the identification of the web site purpose, a set of four
LWS uses were set in the format of questions:
a) “Is the library Web site an information tool?”
b) “Is the library Web site a reference tool?”
c) “Is the library Web site a research tool?”
d) “Is the library Web site an instructional tool?”
Each of them was examined with a checklist compiled of specific elements located or not
within the publications; the web pages of LWS. The results showed that all the web sites
examined could serve all of the four purposes.

23

Sapa (2005) surveyed basic conceptions and possible roles of academic library web sites
as they derived from a literature review. The examined roles as they were formatted were:
1. Provider of online information about printed resources of the library
and a tool for handling processes connected with accessing such
resources.
2. Gateway to online resources not fully integrated with World Wide
Web.
3. Access point to digital resources integrated with World Wide Web.
4. Provider of information and reference services online.
5. Tool for educating library and information users.
6. Space for communication with various groups of library users,
supporters and collaborators as well as for e-publishing.
7. Tool for promoting the library (as well as its online services),
creating its image and realising public relations tasks.
8. Keystone for a given university local Web environment.
(Sapa 2005, p. 5)

The researcher for the purposes of his investigation carried out a comparative study of
fifty American and fifty Polish academic library web sites in the period of 2002-2003
focusing on the aspects of content and usability. The data collection method applied was a
questionnaire of 237 elements regarding their contents and 38 regarding their usability.
The differences found in the LWSs’ content between the two groups of library web sites
guided Sapa to summarise that ‘while the users of Polish Web sites are only informed
about the services offered in “real life”, those who use American Web sites – “virtual
versions of libraries” – can complete their tasks and satisfy many of their information
needs wholly on the Web’ (Sapa 2005, p. 1). In other words, Sapa pointed out a crucial
difference between the use of LWS by Polish and American libraries; the American LWS
were designed to provide beyond informative content, like information about library
collection, as well functioning content, like electronic/online information services,
covering directly users’ needs.
‘While American academic libraries tend to perform all their functions
wholly on the Web and to move as many services and resources as
they can to the new online and digital information environment, Polish
ones seem to treat their Web sites mainly as a means of passing
information about themselves to the users.’ (Sapa 2005, p. 12)

2.2.3 Role of LWS and library management

How can a LWS impact upon the library organisation which develops and manages it?

Different facets of LWS’s role related to the above approaches are brought out through
Downing’s (2001) analysis. He discussed the role of LWS as part of ICTs’ management
24

from the library management point of view. Specifically, he reviewed influences of the
Internet and impacts of LWS on the management areas of ‘management of facilities, the
mission of the library, the presentation of the image of the library, the internal
organisation of the library, staff recruitment and development, budgeting, fund-raising,
interlibrary cooperation, and legal issues’ (Downing 2001, pp. 25-26). The LWS as a
publication and as a publishing procedure can be used by library management for the
achievement of its strategic goals, but at the same time decisions about the management
and development of LWS may affect other library functions too.

The investigation of the LWS’s role, in the terms of this perspective sets the following
question: “How does the LWS impact or could it impact upon library organisation?” For
example, the management of physical library space may be impacted from decisions
about the web space as regards collection, facilities and functions. Marketing goals and
establishment of policies may be achieved through development of appropriate
informative and functional LWS’s content. Library budget, recruitment and organisational
structure may be affected by decisions related to LWS publishing. In addition, internal
library functions may be impacted by decisions about their automation hosted in an
intranet section of LWS.

Travica (1999) conducted a study about the impact of LWS on library’s organisational
aspects. He took into account the changing environment, into which academic libraries
have been entered during the 1990s, and the crucial role of technology as driver of change.
Within this context, he considered the relationship between library organisation and
“virtual library” (VL), as an organisational entity built on ICTs focused on information
resource delivery functions. He selected this the term VL because it ‘may be more
capable of capturing both technological and organisational aspects’ (Travica 1999, p. 177).
He developed four proposed library organisation models with possible relationships
between the library and VL. He used them during his survey of library directors from 300
academic libraries randomly selected from the American Library Directory aiming to
investigate how the VL had involved in library organisation, shaping the new
contemporary library.

25

These four models captured different levels of virtualisation of information service
functions related to the library organisation (see below, Figure 2.1). Downing (2001, p. 34)
made a synopsis of these models:
(1) Subsystem model: The VL may be treated as a system of a library
organization, crossing the boundaries of departments but anchored
to a set of technologies.
(2) Inter-organizational model: The VL may serve as the focal point
around which new networks of libraries emerge.
(3) System model: The virtual library may transcend its associated
technologies and represent a new form of virtual organization that
redefines the relationship between the library and its users, as well
as relationships within the organization itself.
(4) Disintermediation model: As the Internet enables publishers to
communicate directly with information seekers and provides
everyone with the potential to become a global information
provider, the VL may reflect the elimination of the role of the library
as intermediary in the traditional chain of information delivery.

Figure 2.1: General models of “Virtual Library” by Travica (1999, p. 179)

The results of the survey showed that there was a valid orientation toward the concept of
VL as ‘a subsystem in the existing libraries, built around appropriate technologies which
are couched in appropriate organisational arrangements’ (Travica 1999, p. 178). However,
library directors approached the VL’s concept mostly from a technological perspective
and they did not identify crucial impacts on organisational aspects, like in the
management of human resources.

26

Travica (1999) discussed the involvement and the impacts of LWS on library organisation
having although for his starting point his approach for the LWS’s role as provider of
electronic library resources. Consequently, he determined that the web presence of
libraries refers to the utilisation of ICTs regarding electronic information delivery services
exclusively. Therefore, the “System Model” seems similar to the approach of Moen &
Murray (2002) for a LWS as a system of a functional integrated virtual environment for
library users and library staff (see above, p. 20), focusing on the provision of library and
information services – a virtual library front-desk function. In addition, the “Subsystem
Model” seems similar to the perspective of library’s virtual front-desk identified above in
most literature documents.

Nevertheless, some issues rise from this study:
-

The perspectives about new technologies by library management affect essentially
the utilisation of ICTs, therefore the development of LWS.

-

The possibility that a LWS focused on provision of electronic information
delivery services to become a collection of links to commercial information
services subscribed by library (see for example, the Disintermediation model)
affecting decisively the management of LWS publishing, as the content produced
by the library would be limited, and the role of LWS within library management.

2.2.4 Facets and approaches of LWS role

The major perspective about the role of LWS found in the literature was the LWS as
provider of information about library (organisation & in-house library services and
facility) and electronic information/library services operating mostly as a library’s virtual
front-desk addressed to library users and general web public, but as well as including in
the target-groups part of library staff as users. In other words, the LWS role was based on
a serving perspective or on a serving & marketing perspective Nevertheless, additional
uses of LWS were also mentioned, which addressed to library staff, as users of the
information services provided via LWS or as users of specialised section (intranet for
library staff) for communication functions and delivery of support materials for their
work tasks. However, according to an organisational approach the LWS seems that it
covered a part of utilisation of ICTs in library hosting mostly content related to the
27

provision of library and information services, whilst a library organisation has a range of
other functions too for its management, administration and production-line which can be
automated and could become part of the LWS content too.

The approaches to definition or investigation of LWS role identified were:
a) the mission statement (purposes) of LWS, answering the question “What does the
library want to achieve through the LWS development?”;
b) the uses of LWS, answering the question the question “For what functions is the
library using the web publication?”
c) the impacts of LWS, answering the question the question “Which are the
interrelations between LWS publishing and library management?”

The research projects for the investigation of LWS role usually approached the topic
examining the uses of LWS, conducting content analysis of LWS publications; less
through the examination of mission statements or impacts of LWSs upon library
organisation. However, a strong methodological influence identified in the results of these
studies was that researchers had a priori a specific perspective about what was the broad
role of LWS and usually they examined aspects of that broad role.
Library management

Impacts

Role of LWS

Uses

Mission statement

Impacts
Library Web Site publishing
LWS management

LWS Development & maintenance

LWS publication
Content

Edition’s web
environment (design)

Figure 2.2: Interrelations of the library web site’s role with library management & aspects of
LWS publishing

28

Regardless of any particular perspective about the LWS role, its facets remain strongly
related to the library management and naturally with the LWS web publishing, especially
with the LWS management and its content (see, Figure 2.2). It is defined through the
mission statement in the terms of planning process of LWS management affecting the
development of LWS content. Moreover, the LWS role is identified through the uses of
LWS publication and the impacts upon library management.

2.3 Library web site management
Already in section 1.4, the LWS management has been placed within LWS publishing as
one of its core components. The LWS management is central to the launch and the
sustainability of a LWS. The aspect of LWS role - as it was identified in the previous
section (2.2) - is strongly related to and affects the whole LWS publishing and is closely
related to LWS management and its outputs; the LWS content. However, research had not
focused on this relationship. Previous studies in the whole area of LWS management
examined only few aspects, like the development of LWS policies and guidelines and the
human resources management, focusing especially on the role and the professional
identity of a library webmaster. Moreover, literature on LWS management does not
provide a clear and complete frame of the work tasks and roles. Therefore, there is a
question about the components which constitute the LWS management. In addition, there
are issues related to the LWS management about the type of LWS publishing as library
function and the position of this function within library organisation.

This section is developed in four sub-sections. The first one (2.3.1) aims to provide a
basic management framework for a LWS derived from the literature of management and
web development in order to define the components of the LWS management. The
second section (2.3.2) presents and discusses the perspectives about the LWS publishing
as a process within the library organisation and its management approaches. The third
section (2.3.3) places the webmaster’s role within the terms of the LWS management.
Finally, the fourth section (2.3.4) presents and discusses the studied in the area of LWS
management.

29

2.3.1 Processes of LWS management

The LWS management cannot be considered as a process outside of the general
framework of management. Cole (2004), reviewing literature, noticed that there is not a
generally accepted definition of management and pointed out a broad definition which
was used by Roberts & Rowley (2004) too as the basis of their further review of how
modern management approaches affected information services; for example, the
approaches of Mintzberg and Drucker which tended to be a

more

detailed

and

behaviour-oriented analysis of what managers actually do. Basically, management is:
‘a process that enables organisations to set and achieve their
objectives by planning, organizing and controlling their resources,
including gaining the commitment of their employees (motivation)’.
(Cole 2004, p. 7)
‘Management is not an activity that exists in its own right. It is rather a
description of a variety of activities carried out by those members of
organisations whose role is that of a “manager” [is] someone who
either has formal responsibility for the work of one or more persons in
the organisation or who is accountable for specialist advisory duties in
support of key management activities. These activities have generally
been grouped in terms of planning, organising, motivating, and
controlling activities. These grouping describe activities which indicate
broadly what managers do in practice, primarily as well as to middle
and senior management roles. ’ (Cole 2004, pp. 9-10)

The description of the managerial activities is usually based on the roles or tasks of
managers, in so far as the management has been considered as a function, rather than as
an exclusively controlling element in work. Regardless of the approaches, like the
strategic management and their historical evolution, the management is composed of
specific broad managerial areas of activities. An abstractive framework for most of the
key aspects of the work of managers in practice consists of four groups of management
activities (Cole 2004, pp. 10-11):
-

“Planning”: an activity which involves decisions about ends (aims/objectives),
means (plans), conduct (policies) and results taking into account the external
environment and the internal strengths and weaknesses;

-

“Organising”: an activity which involves detailed organisation and coordination of
tasks and the human and material resources needed to carry them out;

-

“Motivating”: an activity which involves managers’ gain of commitment of the
employees;

-

“Controlling”: an activity which involves monitoring and evaluating processes
providing corrective mechanisms.

30

In handbooks and guides about LWSs, authors referred briefly to the management
activities for the LWS, highlighting planning processes and including development of
policies and financial planning. Moreover, marketing activities were pointed out,
especially because web publishing requires current and detailed awareness of the potential
audience’s needs and promotion of information services provided. In addition,
education/training activities were considered pivotal for web staff motivation. Garlock &
Piontek (1996) included in their handbook for building a LWS – apart from development
and maintenance activities – the managerial aspects of planning processes, with
development of “project timeline” and policies. They also highlighted activities for
educating staff, promotion and evaluation of LWS. Moreover, Griffiths (2004, p. 17)
mentioned as skills needed for management those related to ‘disciplines … focused on
adding value for the customer…project and financial management’. Specifically, the
managerial staff, who can be called “corporate web manager”, “web project manager” or
“site production manager”, need to work in financial planning and people management
having an overall picture of the undertaking and understanding of all the development and
maintenance procedures. Further, Johnson (1998) considered that training activities, as a
tool of motivation, play a critical role in supporting library’s web team in a rapidly
changing environment with development of necessary skills which can be conducive to an
increased productivity; an increase in employee confidence within the team and within
organisation and to the improvement of communication and collaboration between the
staff with different specialities. In addition, he considered training as an investment and
pointed out that budget is important for the reservation of adequate time in training.

In addition, Stielow (c1999) referred to the management aspects of:
-

planning, defining the purposes of the LWS, its audience and developing policies;

-

selection and organisation of human resources, developing work schedules and
work tasks;

-

marketing;

-

training staff

Other handbooks about web site publishing also referred to the planning and marketing
processes and in addition to the evaluation/controlling activities. However, detailed,
organised and complete information about the management of the development and
31

maintenance of a web site was given only by Friedlein (2001). Guidelines by UNESCO
(2005) for publishing a web site referred in particular to the planning stage, which
includes clarification of aims and objectives, marketing strategies and selection of
appropriate tools and other resources for development, update and evaluation.

Nevertheless, Rosenfeld & Morville (1998, p. 20) defined the “project manager” as the
person who ‘keeps the project on schedule and within budget. He or she facilitates
communication between the other teams and the clients or internal stakeholders’.
However, Friedlein (2001) described in detail the managerial work tasks grouping them in
two main teams/categories: the “strategy/consulting team” and “project management
team” (see, Figure 1.1, p. 12). The work tasks of these teams correspond to Cole’s (2004)
broad framework of management including aspects related to ICTs and issues like data
protection and copyright. The work tasks both teams refer to:
-

planning activities, including definition of aims and objectives, development of
information and technical architecture, use of marketing tools and provision of
help for overcoming hurdles;

-

organising the implementation of work according to schedule and budget;

-

motivating the team;

-

controlling the results and evaluating their functionality and quality

2.3.2 Management and the function of LWS publishing

The perspective about the LWS publishing as process and the LWS as function within
library organisation affects the LWS management, as regards its activities undertaken, but
as well its official status. Friedlein (2001, p. 10) contends that a web site ‘is a living and
evolving “creature”, with no end and, once born, living, we should hope, longer than any
of those who initially created it’. This perspective requires strategic planning, wellorganised and skilled team and change control, as is pointed out many times in Friedlein’s
book. However, evidence in the literature showed that LWS started as an unofficial
experiment undertaken by an individual or a small team of members of library staff
interested in creating web pages, and its evolution seems to be an alternate and irregular
function consisted of redesign projects and in-between periods of maintenance without

32

clarified organisational status; a one-off life cycle approach. Close to Friedlein’s
perspective there are suggestions for a strategic planning approach to LWS.

During the mid 1990s, Lester and Oaks considered LWS publishing as a simple procedure;
they regarded that ‘creating a Web page is simple. Once you get the hang of HTML, it’s
basically a matter of creating a bibliography of Internet resources, and playing with the
page format’ (Bell 1995, p. 29). McLeod & White (1995, p. 47) also reported that in 1994
‘librarians [from their academic library] began experimenting with writing in HTML and
creating actual Web home pages…this small group formed an information Web
Team…[which] quickly broke itself down into three subcommittees: technical, graphics,
and policy and content’. Moreover, Mach & Kutzik (2001, p. 32) set the issue of LWS’s
place in the organisation suggesting that ‘it is no longer possible for many library web
sites to be maintained by an individual or small group’.

Shucha (2003) presented an example of an approach to academic LWS management
based on a one-off life cycle approach about the version of the LWS launched each time.
The LWS publishing consists of periodical redesign projects with periods of mainly
content maintenance. She described the steps of redesign as:
-

“designing”, setting policies about the content and the design of the new version
of LWS;

-

“implementing”, working according to the plan for the development of the new
LWS’s version;

-

“reviewing”, testing the new version before its launch;

-

“marketing”, attracting users to the new version;

-

“maintaining”, keeping updating content and repairing problems of the new
version, until the new redesign project

This approach set the LWS as an occasionally repeat project, with little effort during the
intervening period, debasing the activities of marketing, motivating and controlling. In
addition, the characterisation of the LWS publishing as an irregular function can affect
the decisions about the financial and resources planning, which cannot be on an annual
basis, and the visibility of organisational status for the library staff working in the LWS
during the redesign period or/and the maintenance period, who very possibly have other
regular duties. An example of this practice is given by the North Carolina University
33

Libraries (Fullington Ballard & Teague-Rector 2011), who developed a redesign project
in order to launch a new version of their LWS. However, once more they composed a
library committee in order to set the aims and the objectives of the LWS; they hired a
project manager and they created a core implementation team for the period of the
redesign project. The last LWS redesign project was five years ago and some questions
have been raised:
-

Were the aims and the objectives of the LWS (the LWS role) different five years
ago?

-

Where were the people who were supporting the LWS operation all these years?

-

Why the LWS publication cannot be a ‘corporate’ library function, but it operates
as a periodical library project?

Guenther (2000) identified three LWS’s evolution stages in academic libraries. The first
stage was a period of ‘Web discovery and exploration by an individual or small interested
group’ within the library, who were already employed on some technical work. However,
the work for the LWS was not yet formally recognised by the organisation. Whilst,
Garlock & Piontek (1996) pointed out the need for the LWS function to become part of
the library organisation gaining the general staff support. In the second stage, the LWS’s
effort has started to be recognised because of its valued role, but there was a question
about ‘who and how the Web will be managed within the organisation’ usually raised
between the marketing and the IT section of the library. Related to this conflict, Roberts
& Rowley (2004, p. 22) allocated the “Web Development” in a hierarchical structure
under the “ICT & Media services” library section (Figure 2.3) showing an example of a

Figure 2.3: Organisational structure for an academic information service by Roberts &
Rowley (2004, p. 23)

34

typical organisation structure for an academic library. Finally, in the third stage where the
LWS was recognised as a “corporate” function within the library, the need for “overall
management” was raised. About this need, Griffiths (2004, p. 65) noted that within the
whole range of web work - editorial, managerial, technical and design – ‘the days of the
all-singing, all-dancing webmaster are largely gone from all but the smallest sites because
of the depth of skills that are now needed to make sites perform at their best’.
Nevertheless, the one-off life cycle approach for the LWS development and management
does not support the establishment of this third stage.

Ryan (2003, p. 208) suggested - in answer to the limitations and hurdles encountered by
LWS evolution described by Guenther (2000) - the adoption of a strategic planning
process in order to be ‘ensure[d] a dynamic, properly maintained web site’. She suggested
‘administrators [of small academic libraries to] consider following a strategic planning
process that encompasses a mission statement, a purpose statement, web site
administration, structure and organisation, content, maintenance and updates, and
evaluation and assessment’. This management approach is able to create one “alive” and
well-maintained LWS publication, of which the content is developed and updated
regularly according to an agreed schedule, regardless of possible programmed changes in
the LWS’s lay-out (design). Furthermore, especially for the development of LWS policies,
which has already been mentioned (see, McLeod & White 1995; Garlock & Piontek 1996;
Stielow c1999), Ryan (2003) pointed out that policies developed independently of a
planning process risk to be arbitrary.
‘Out of the strategic planning process will come web site policies and
procedures. In effect, the ultimate goal of the strategic planning
process is to be able to create effective policies and procedures;
those developed outside a planning process are often arbitrary or
contradictory to institutional missions and goals.’ (Ryan 2003, p. 209)

Furthermore, Clyde (2000) suggested a strategic planning approach to LWS management
because the ‘web site development and maintenance are ongoing activities (not a “one-off
project”) for which resources and personnel (time) are needed on a continuing basis’
(Clyde 2000, p. 107). The “strategic planning/development cycle for a web site” that she
suggested does not refer to a one-off life cycle LWS publishing such as Shucha (2003)
does; Clyde presented the interrelations between managerial activities with the whole
publishing procedure and its evolution taking into account the context of the library

35

organisation which undertakes it. She used as example the web site of the International
Association of School Librarianship.

Taking into account that this twelve page paper is not a strategic management handbook
or a manual for web sites, it is not expected that its content is to detailed in the strategic
planning process and accurate to the web development tasks and required skills. The
strength of this paper can be identified in the following points. Firstly, the author
provided a clear and easily understood picture of basic management aspects connected
with development tasks (Figure, 2.4) symbolising at the same time the ongoing procedure
of LWS publishing always taking into account the library’s purposes for the LWS as
library function. Secondly, she referred to the need for the library to develop all
management areas identified above (see, Friedlein 2001; Cole 2004) and discussed how
decision making affects and is impacted by library management and availability of
appropriate resources.

Figure 2.4: Strategic planning/development cycle for a Web site (Clyde 2000, p.
98)

Almost a decade later, King (2009) approached the LWS as “the digital branch” of a
library. He focused on issues of decision-making related with the LWS development;
whilst he made clear that the product of any management tool chosen to be used - like a
Content Management System (CMS) or the back-end custom coding - is not the library’s
36

product; the product of the LWS management is the ‘front end of [library’s] site that users
interact with’ (Kink 2009, p. 19). However, he discussed the importance of the decisionmaking for the selection of a CMS, which operates as the heart of the digital branch, as it
formulates operations, roles and the whole work-flow of the LWS development during the
design period and later during the regular life-term. In addition, the choice of a CMS
affects the information architecture of the LWS. In other words, King identified indirectly
two issues about the LWS; the LWS as an entire library function, which is more than a
periodical library project (see, “the digital library branch”) and the impacts of the
technological tools in the management of the LWS development, whose selection must be
a crucial part of the planning process and the decision-making about the LWS
development.

2.3.3 LWS management and webmaster’s role

In the literature on librarianship the role of “webmaster” or “web manager” was usually
mentioned relating to the LWS management (Church & Felker 2005; Corrall &
Brewerton 1999; Dowling 2003; Griffiths 2004; Wilson 2004). However, the content of
this role was not clearly defined and it was not common within the various sources. In the
wider literature the term “webmaster” was also defined with various contents which were
not always related to or exclusively related to the management of a web publishing
(Friedlein 2001; Richmond n.d.; Spainhour & Eckstein 2003; Van Der Walt & Van
Brakel 2000; World Organization of Webmasters n.d.). This variation in the webmaster’s
duties related also to the size of the organisation which indicated that the examination of
the webmaster’s role could not be an exclusive, accurate, precise and complete source for
the identification and examination of the work tasks for the LWS management and
development.

In the literature on the librarianship, Corrall & Brewerton (1999, pp. 146-148) identified
the “webmaster” or “web manager” as a new IT-related role, as the only one, which was
related to the LWS, and the suggested duties were developing and maintaining web pages,
providing technical support for users, assisting library staff providing them with the
technical tools for their work and leading a team for development of an intranet and
administering local web-based databases. Dowling (2003, p. 4) in his report, “Web
37

manager’s handbook” addressed to libraries, defined the role of “web manager” as the
person who ‘is responsible for establishing, configuring, maintaining, and upgrading a
website’. Griffiths (2004) reviewing related literature concluded that there has been not a
common content for the webmaster’s role and he noticed that the role variety is related to
the size of the organisation that the webmaster works within. Church & Felker (2005)
pointed out that, because of the greater complexity of an academic LWS, one person
cannot do all the work. Therefore,
‘the traditional Web master is now more of a manager than a
technical person, coordinating the work and assisting the Web
Administrator who is responsible for the technical aspects. The focus
is increasingly on planning and goal setting and making critical
decisions. This still requires familiarity with many of the technical
processes but from a much less “hands-on” vantage point’. (Church
& Felker 2005, p. 553)

Wilson (2004) identified the role of “web manager” with duties related to the LWS
management; but distinctively with the development and maintenance tasks. She, also,
pointed out that in small organisations one person may be in charge of the development
and maintenance of the LWS, although without that person having management
responsibilities too. Moreover, Wilson (2004, pp. 3-4) referred to the need for committees
consisting of library staff to support the work-tasks of the LWS development, but only
during the period of the LWS creation or redesign and during the period of LWS
maintenance only one person, the web designer, upload information following either a
centralised or a decentralised model. In the centralised model the web designer uploads
the new/updated information and in the decentralised model staff from various
departments of the library is permitted to upload information too. However, this staffing
approach is very close to the perspective of the one-off life cycle approach of LWS
publishing, as the LWS is designed once, with the assistance of a project library team
which stops working on the LWS after the first launch period and then the maintenance
aims to keep the LWS updated, until the next redesign project.

In the wider literature, the World Organization of Webmasters (n.d.) answering the
question of “what is the web professional?” declared on its web site that:
‘Essentially, webmaster is a term that can be used to describe
almost any web professional. A webmaster can be:
• one person interfacing with Net-based communication, back-end
technology, and business management
• a general contractor/team leader for the creation and
management of websites

38

•

a person who authors and creates HTML, CGI, XML, Graphics
and more
a web project manager
an individual who markets and promotes web sites’

•
•

In 1996, Richmond (cited in Van Der Walt & Van Brakel 1997, p. 20) defined the
webmaster as a ‘person who manages a web; mediator between web authors and system
administrator – ensures that applicable standards such as HTML validity and link
liveliness are met; optimises the web architecture for navigability; takes editorial
responsibility for the content, quality and style of the site; finds, creates and installs tools
to create web content; check consistency, develops and enforces the house style; liases
with graphic artists; provides first level user support.’ Richmond kept this definition after
all these years, but he pointed out that ‘"Webmaster" is currently an amorphous title,
describing everything from a beginning programmer to a management-level marketing
professional, depending on whom you talk to’ (Richmond n.d.). In addition, Spainhour &
Eckstein (2003, p. 3) wrote that ‘when you examine what webmasters actually do, there
are different definitions’ and they grouped his/her responsibilities into four general roles,
which have common basis; the technical support within the procedure of the web
publishing :
-

content provider

-

lay-out designer

-

programmer

-

server administrator

Van Der Walt & Van Brakel (2000) discovered this unevenness in job title, descriptiontasks, specification-human skills of webmasters via their research during the 1998. The
source for the list of the research sample was Fortune Magazine’s Global 500 list of
organisations. 100 organisations were selected randomly and 63 respondents took part
finally in the survey. The results showed that:
‘A large proportion of respondents were employed at a technical (or
IT) level (in this case, 21 respondents or 33%). On the other hand,
17 respondents (27%) had middle management positions and 18
(29%) were undefined or mentioned in the category ‘other’, as
defined within the questionnaire. These ‘other’ positions included
posts such as individual consultants. In some cases, the webmaster
was not employed fulltime. An important finding was that 11% of the
respondents held positions within the top management structure of
their organisations.’ (Van Der Walt & Van Brakel 2000, pp. 22-23)

39

Friedlein (2001) described the work tasks for the web site publishing grouping them in
roles undertaken by members of a team, covering the activities for the management,
development and maintenance. The example he used refers to a large team in order to
bring out the variety of the work tasks required for this complex undertaking. The role of
“Webmaster” is not included in the management teams, but it is related to the
development and maintenance of the web site after the main development (see also,
Figure 1.1, p. 12). The “Webmaster” was described:
‘as a job description [that he/she] is used to cover a wide range of
tasks and skills…The Webmaster’s role really comes into play after
the main development effort, when the site needs maintenance,
administration, monitoring, and updating…The Webmaster is usually
responsible for ensuring the correct functioning and uptime of the
site once it is running. She is often the first line of support regarding
user interaction and issues with the site’. (Friedlein 2001, p. 25)

King (2012), having as a starting point the approach that the LWS is a “digital branch” of
the library, discussed a variety of “digital branch teams”, instead of the staffing
perspective of the one person/webmaster. The role of the “Webmaster”, as it was
described by Friedlein (2001), was titled by King as the “branch manager” or “digital
services director”, who acts ‘as editor-in-chief of digital branch content and direction’
(King 2012, p. 16) and he/she meets with the other web teams, which have to achieve
their specific goals for the LWS development.
‘The digital services director is a system-wide, long range planning
role’ (King 2012, p. 16)

Among the web teams operating for the LWS development King mentioned also teams
related with the relatively new technologies, which supports social media networking, like
blogs, Twitter/Facebook, Youtube, Flickr and Pinterest. This is an indicative practice for
the LWS, evolution; it can include/utilise new web technologies in the terms of its web
publication as far they meet/support the LWS roles.

2.3.4 Studies in aspects of LWS management

Thirteen studies located in the literature treated only a few aspects of LWS management’s
processes and activities. Almost all studies investigated Northern American academic
libraries between 1996 and 2008 and most of them in the end of 1990s and the beginning
of 2000s. Only one was carried out for the UK academic library sector in 2008. Most of

40

them focused on the human resources management and policy development and usually
researchers examined the selected aspects separately from their context of LWS
management, LWS publishing and organisation. The studies are presented in
chronological order, as there is not any other reasonable basis for grouping them, such as
thematically because usually the studies covered more than one aspect. In addition,
methodological issues of these studies are going to be mentioned in particular because it
was important for the study to consider how other researchers approached their topics and
some of those cases are going to be discussed in the following chapter about the research
methods.

The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) carried out a comprehensive survey in 1996
and repeated it in 1998 (Liu 1999) about the management and development of LWS
aiming to identify patterns and trends in the design and the content of LWS. The
questionnaires covered mainly developmental aspects focusing mostly on the design and
less on the content of LWS. The aspects related to the management referred to the
organising of resources (staff, servers and software), financial planning, future plans for
further LWS’s evolution and development of guidelines. Indicative results showed that in
1996, 84% of the libraries solely managed their LWS and 13% of them managed it jointly
with other university units. In 1998 there were guidelines for web site development
developed by the library in 67% of the sample and by the university in 70% of the sample
and guidelines for electronic collections development developed by the library in 37% of
the sample. Both in 1996 and 1998 in about 86% of the libraries examined, at least one
member of library staff was working on the LWS and most of them had the professional
title of “librarian”; whilst in the results of 1998 it was noted that ‘the web development
responsibilities were spread much more broadly across the library staff’ (Liu 1999, p. 3).
Especially regarding the position of the “Library Web Master”, where it was reported, it
was occupied by a librarian in 76% of the cases in 1996 and in 90% of the cases in 1998.
His/her primary duties as identified in the 1998 survey were:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Provide overall direction for development and maintenance of
website(s) – 87%
Develop web content – 83%
Respond to web email – 81%
Handle HTML programming and technical training – 70%
Recommend web hardware and software – 69%
Manage web development staff – 59%
(Liu 1999, p. 14)

41

Evans (1999) carried out a survey in January 1997 of “authors of academic library home
pages” from 124 American college and university libraries. The aim of the study was to
identify the professional identity and skills of the web page compilers and the methods of
their training in web page construction. The general professional profile of web page
compilers drawn from the results was that about 78% were librarians and about 20% were
“non-librarians”; they were recently hired employees, working only part-time in this
responsibility and most of them (83%) worked in web page construction with
collaborators. Their job titles varied with more frequent “systems/programming”,
“electronic services/media”, “technical services”, “reference” and “webmaster”, but there
were about 23% of librarians and 8% of non-librarians who worked in more than one job
in the library. In addition, in regards to the training for technological skills development,
respondents stated that this took place through formal training and self-instruction and
Evans concluded that skills need to be continually upgraded in both ways, but always
with the organisation’s support, and she pointed out that:
‘the investment in training has its payoff … Institutional support for
training will allow those … both to create a more attractive, useful and
functional presence for the library on the World Wide Web and to
develop a larger pool of human resources for continuing to work in the
virtual environment’ (Evans 1999, p. 318).

Taylor (2000) studied solely the role of the “webmaster” in library web sites in 1998 via a
survey of the library webmasters of Association of Research Libraries (ARL) institutions.
The research explored webmasters’ role, job tasks, educational profile and their job
satisfaction and dissatisfaction. For the purposes of this survey, the term “webmaster”
was described/defined as ‘someone whose responsibilities may have included, but were
not limited to, Web site policy development, editorial oversight of content and graphics,
organisation of files and directories, page maintenance, and user support’ (Taylor 2000, p.
116). This description of the webmaster’s role affected the results, reducing their source
of data; as the author mentioned, some respondents stated that they could not match one
specific person with this job task description and they did not fill out the questionnaire.
The results showed that the work tasks of a webmaster were undertaken by more than one
person in 52% of cases. 1/3 of the webmasters had job titles related to
“Systems/IT/networked resources or services” and the majority of them (about 80%) had
more responsibilities for design and content development work tasks, like HTML coding,
designing graphics and layouts and adding content, and less responsibilities in the

42

management processes, like participating in the decision making about the content and the
design.
‘More than 80 percent of the respondents performed HTML coding,
designed graphics and layouts, wrote material for their Web pages,
and participated in editorial decisions including deciding what content
should be provided…The webmaster role was shared at many
institutions. Just over half of the respondents shared their positions
with others, with almost this entire group sharing it with one other
person…Two respondents stated that the Web committee served as
the webmaster … Although almost 85 percent of the respondents were
responsible for decision making about Web content and layout, there
responsibilities were often shared with managerial librarians, other
librarians, and Web committees [teams]’ (Taylor 2000, p. 118)

The Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL), division of the American
Library Association (ALA), studied the features of library web site policies by small
college and university libraries (Traw 2000). 224 libraries were surveyed, but the time
period is not reported. The response rate was 73%, however only 25% responded to all
the policy questions. The questionnaire covered five areas:
a) general information about the library;
b) general information about LWS;
c) information about the authority of LWS publishing;
d) information about the development of policies for LWS and
e) characteristics of the LWS policies.
This structure provided a context within which the research topic was studied. A synopsis
of the results about the development of LWS policies is that 21% of the libraries had
developed specialised policies for their LWS covering mostly design and content
development issues; whilst 52% of them used the policies developed by university
management to govern the institutional web presence and about 36% of the libraries had
only informal/non-written policies. ‘The most common reason given for not having
policies [was] that library needs [were] currently being met by their institution’s policies’
(Traw 2000, p. 3). The low percentage of LWS policies development by libraries was
explained by that the ‘library web site policies [were] a relatively new idea for most small
college and university libraries’ (Traw 2000, p. 5). In addition, about the development
process of the 21% of the libraries, in 45% of them a web team/committee was involved;
most of them (67%) were derived from a LWS redesign project and the evaluation and
revision of policies took place in an irregular basis.

43

In the summer of 2001 ARL (Ragsdale 2001) conducted a questionnaire survey of its
member libraries. The study explored the human resource management needs for the
LWS development and maintenance. The study examined the application of three models
of staffing:
a) one webmaster;
b) a web team or committee
c) distributed web work across the library staff.
The results showed that, in addition to those three models which described some libraries,
other models were identified containing elements of the two or even all three of these
models. It was not clearly presented either how many of the libraries were matched to the
three models or to the other ones. Ragsdale (2001, pp. 9-10) mentioned only that
‘responses show that libraries use elements of all three models…Some libraries have
mixed and matched combinations of these staffing models. A few libraries even report
coming back to a once-abandoned model after experimenting with another’. Additional
results of the survey were that 79% of the libraries developed guidelines for LWS
development and that only a few libraries developed training programmes in technical
issues for their web staff. However more training and workshops were provided either at
the institutional level or outsourced to external providers. Moreover, the staff working in
the LWS development and maintenance was not solely library staff, but in some cases
“institutional systems staff”, “graphic designers” and “consultants” who were used for
assisting the LWS development.

Shropshire (2003) carried out a literature review of LWS management and located some
documents that ‘do examine selected aspects of Web site management, but the authors’
interpretations of the concept “management” is too narrow to provide real assistance to
beginning Web manager’ (Shropshire 2003, p. 95). The researcher tested concepts and
theories identified through literature in practice conducting a multiple cases study of four
American academic libraries during the fall and winter of 2001/2002. Comprehensive
data was selected by examination of their websites and interviews of library directors and
other staff members involved with the management, development and maintenance of the
library web site. However, further details of the methodology are not given.

Shropshire (2003) identified that the recruitment of a library web team was mainly from
the existing library staff and the new staff did not take up posts in LWS management, but
44

they worked in LWS development and maintenance. She also pointed out that for the
successful web manager the technological competence was not the most important ability,
rather ‘the sense of the big picture, his or her clear vision for the Web site’ (Shropshire
2003, p. 99). However, she discovered that library ‘web site managers may find
themselves in a position of having responsibility, but not authority’ (Shropshire 2003, p.
98). Finally, she concluded that for the LWS ‘such an entity should have the strong
backing of library administration and should be to divest itself of any (library)
departmental loyalties to cultivate a broad perspective that reflects in an understanding of
how parts of the site interrelate’ (Shropshire 2003, p. 100).

In the middle of 2000s, Kneip (2007) focused on the role of webmaster in the American
medium-sized academic libraries, examining issues like Evans (1999) and Taylor (2000),
but without developing a deep discussion revealing reasons and key issues. The term
“webmaster” was determined as ‘an individual who has a significant level of oversight for
a library’s Web site and is actively involved in consistent updates and maintenance for the
library’s Web site.’ Kneip (2007, p. 6). The study surveyed 63 individuals and it aimed to
identify the identity of the academic webmaster, via their education, the criteria used for
their employment, their duties and their training in web publishing issues.

The results did not reveal a reality different from previous similar studies. The “library
webmasters” had other duties in addition to the maintenance of the LWS; whilst for 24%
of them the duties of the webmaster took precedence over other duties. They were chosen
for these duties usually because of their interest in web publishing, their previous
experience in web design or programming tasks. Their educational background usually
was Master in library science with undergraduate degree in humanities & social science.
Finally, their web development skills were mostly via self-taught.
‘The majority, 92 percent, indicated they had used Internet sites to teach
themselves Web development skills, with 89 percent using instructional
books. Professional development workshops were used by 73 percent of
respondents. Finally, 37 percent indicated taking a computer science
course while pursuing a degree.’ (Kneip 2007, p. 12)

During the Autumn of 2006, Connell (2008) surveyed library Web team leaders in 110
academic institutions in the USA, having as starting point that ‘academic library Web
sites are such an integral part of their libraries, it is important to know more about the
people, tools, and methods used to create these Web sites’ (Connell 2008, p. 121). This
45

study examined some managerial aspects taking into account the type of institution
according to the Carnegie classification (e.g. community college, PhD-level granting
institution and research university2) and being built on the ‘assumption that most libraries
operated with a multiple person team model’ (Connell 2008, p. 128). The issues examined
were largely focused on human resources; about the profiling of the staff who were
responsible for the LWS, the Web team’s size, selection, responsibilities and training, the
centralised or decentralised3 LWS development within an institution with many library
locations. The operation of LWS design was examined covering the areas of the
responsibility for the LWS design implementation, the duration of design process, the
tools/software and scientific design specifications for accessibility and usability.

The results showed that the type of institution could not be associated with the formation
of the practices on the examined managerial aspects, such as the size and the training of
the Web team and the design resources/tools. Nor was the library size or its type
associated with particular patterns of LWS staffing and other resources. The size of Web
team showed that about half of the cases (49%) had only one person working in the LWS
and the Web teams were based on two or three people in approximately 28% of cases.
Moreover, the work in the LWS was only one of the components of their job and only
almost 5% of the Web team members indicated that Web designing was their primary
(but not exclusive) job. Therefore, the results about job title of the “Web Editor” or in
other words the “person responsible for the Web site or Web design team at their library”
were reasonably that he/she had many job titles, as usually only one person worked in the
LWS and the LWS tasks were not his/her exclusive/full-time occupation.

Furthermore, the selection for Web library staff was usually from existing staff and it was
based on the personal interest of the staff for the Web design (approx. 42%) and only
about 15% of the Web team members were hired for Web work. The relevant knowledge
and skills of the Web staff was usually based on self-training. In the cases of institutions
with multiple libraries (about 31%), usually the libraries shared a Web team (71%).
According to almost all respondents (approx. 94%) the LWS design was an in-house
operation; the six library cases, which used an outsourcing firm for that, did not have the

2

The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching (http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/)
Regarding the centralised or decentralised model in LWS development, see in section 2.3.3 Wilson (2004).
Briefly, in the centralised model a library web designer uploads the new/updated information and in the
decentralised model staff from various library departments is permitted to upload information too.
3

46

needed resources for creating their LWS and accordingly in their decision-making logic it
was not cost effective to train someone to do it. The design process usually took place
within two to four months; for about 21% accessibility requirements were mandatory and
for about 47% usability test adopters were used during the LWS design phase.
The researcher supported indirectly the approach of the one-off life cycle LWS publishing
(see, section 2.3.3), as she focused on the creation phase of a LWS publishing and in the
conclusion suggested for further investigation the subject of the LWS redesigning raising
questions about whether the results about the staffing were during or after the period of
redesign. Moreover, the issue of the authority over the LWS publishing was raised
indirectly, although without being supported by collected data. Connell (2008) - only in
the discussion (paper’s section) - was mentioned the aspect of “campus Web committees”,
without making clear their role in LWS publishing and whether the LWSs examined were
designed as part of the institutional web site or they were a separate and self-authorised
web site. She reported mandates addressed to library Web designers derived from
“campus Web committees” and the need for more autonomy on behalf of library Web
designers, because ‘a library Web site is complicated and needs to be regularly updated;
requiring more autonomy and control than most other campus departments, but this is not
always understood by campus Web committees.’ (Connell 2008, p. 128)

Hendricks (2007) examined the aspect of LWS policies development and the involvement
of the library webmaster in that process. He conducted a survey of “library webmasters”
in American academic libraries. However, further details about the period of survey and
its sample were not given. The results showed that almost 55% of libraries had developed
a web policy with the note that the majority of respondents indicated that libraries should
follow their university’s policy. Respondents, who identified themselves as “webmasters”,
had usually as job title the “web services librarian”, “reference librarian”, “electronic
resources librarian” or “systems staff”. Their main work tasks for the LWS were on LWS
maintenance and only close to 2% of them were solely occupied with duties related to
LWS. In addition, their involvement in LWS policies development was low (about 9%);
‘most respondents indicated that this responsibility [was] carried out by a web
committee4’ (Hendricks 2007, p. 143).

4

The “web committee” referred to a team of library staff.
47

A survey of 80 Northern American academic libraries was conducted (Academic library
website benchmarks 2008) examining a wide range of aspects of academic LWS
publishing. Details about the survey’s period and other methodological information were
not provided. The results for each study element/question were presented separately and
for the analysis of some elements it was also taken into account figures like the enrolment
size, the status of the institutions (public-private), the Carnegie classification and the
“webmaster staffing arrangement”; for example, while the results showed that no library
had a separate line item in the library budget for the LWS, more than half of the cases
(about 65%) considered LWS budget as part of the library IT budget; in addition,
approximately 70% of these cases employed a library webmaster or library web staff (see,
Table 2.1). However, the fact that more than 1/3 of the cases did not occupy staff for the
needs of the LWS publishing indicated that after more than fifteen years of library web
presence the LWS has not become a de facto an accepted function of library organisation.
Table 2.1: Line item status of library web site budget, broken out by webmaster staffing
arrangement (Academic library website benchmarks 2008, p. 85)
Webmaster Staffing
Arrangement

A separate line item in
the library budget

Considered part of the
library information
technology budget and
not separately broken
out

Considered to be
mostly part of the
college information
technology budget

Employs webmaster or
web staff separate from
college’s website staff

0.00%

70.83%

29.17%

No webmaster or web
staff of its own

0.00%

53.85%

46.15%

The aspects related to LWS management were web policies development, re-design
planning, financial planning, hiring of consultants and resources management (staff and
software). Indicated relevant results showed that a high percentage of libraries (more than
40%) used content editing system provided by the central university web staff. Libraries
did not have a separate line for their LWS in the library budget; most of them (about 65%)
considered the budget about LWS as part of the library IT budget, whilst approx. 35%
considered it mostly as part of university IT budget. The majority of libraries (almost 80%)
had not hired a consultant or consulting firm to advise on LWS development, although
about 16% of them had done it and for about 4% of them the university administration
paid for the consultancy. Moreover, there were “website policy committees” for
overseeing website policy on content, IT, graphics, and other topics in which library staff
participated. Over half of the libraries (about 56%) had launched a major redesign of
48

LWS and about 71% of them planned to do a major redesign project within next two
years. In addition, more than half of the libraries (about 65) employed a webmaster or
web staff separate from college’s website staff (belonged to the IT unit). For 1/3 of this
65% of the libraries, staff from the university IT unit worked as well in the LWS
development and maintenance. The professional identity of library’s web staff was
identified as either as “library IT staff” or as “library staff”.
‘The majority of respondents (75.3%) answered that the library IT staff
handles both web content and most web-related technical work. The
remaining 25% reported that the college IT division does most of the
technical work and that library staff handles the content.’ (Academic
library website benchmarks 2008, p. 30)

Definition of the “webmaster” position was not provided in the report. However, a
secondary reading of the options provided for the question ‘Dimensions of the College
Library Web Staff’ showed that the “webmaster” position referred more to the staff
whose main duty was the development and maintenance of the web site and not its
management. The choices given to the respondent and the results for that question were:
1. We do some content editing but don’t really have a full time web
master (30.86%);
2. We are pretty much a one person show with a webmaster and
perhaps a bit of help from others (43.21%);
3. We have a webmaster plus a small staff equal to about 2-5 FTE
positions (20.99%);
4. We have a webmaster plus a staff of more than five FTE (0.00%);
5. We have multiple library websites many of which have their own
webmaster and/or staffs (4.94%).
(Academic library website benchmarks 2008, p. 72)

Almost in the same period that the research reported here took place, another study
carried out in the UK, sought to understand the approaches used by a group of academic
libraries to manage, maintain and develop their web sites. Manuel et al. (2010) designed a
pilot study with six university libraries in the East Midlands. This pilot study took place
during June-November 2008 and used an online survey and four semi-structured
subsequent follow-up interviews. This exploratory research also aimed to develop a
survey instrument for a national survey of a broader range of the UK academic libraries.
The respondents were chosen for having a primary role in decision making or
responsibility for the development and maintenance of the library website; having a role
similar to that of web administrator/web master. The areas covered were website
management, maintenance practices, usability study methods and links with library
strategy; although the paper did not give details about the content of these areas and the
49

questions that were set to cover them. In addition, the study did not take into account
influential factors and considerations with practical applications, like staff from other
departments, LWS hosting (hardware-software) and domain (whether the LWS is
separated web site from the institutional web site or it is departmental sub-site within the
university web site).

According to the findings, the area of LWS management examined the influential role of
the university policy, about which five of the six libraries pointed out that the LWS
management was affected by the university policy. Moreover, university control was
found in the areas of the LWS design, as a web template was provided in three cases. All
the cases had full control only in the area of website maintenance. In five out of six cases
the library had total control of the content and the website development and in only three
out of six cases the library had full control of decisions about design and budget.
Decisions about the LWS tended to be made by a web group or committee in four cases
and in one case by another library group and by an individual. About the qualifications of
the staff involved with the LWS, but without being clear in which activities about the
LWS and how many of them in the same library case, the findings showed people ‘having
a library qualification (six), being self-taught (five), having a computer science
qualifications (four), being a marketing professional (one) or having a design
qualification (one)’ (Manuel et al. 2010, p. 151).

The researchers (Manuel et al. 2010) discussed during interviews four influential
dimensions: the university, the library (change management and site management), and
the sector and site users. University policy was pointed out as an influential factor in
decision making, in design and maintaining system with guidelines and standards. The
university marketing was also indicated as a key driver in delivering a web presence; an
area that the sample libraries could not cover as they did not have professionals with
marketing qualifications. Finally, the monitoring activities, in order to gather information
about visitors’ activity on their web site, were analysis of web analytic data, user survey,
focus groups, task setting and anecdotal evidence.

In the same period during 2008, Fagan & Keach (2011) conducted an anonymous survey
distributed to several American library e-mail lists, like the list of the ALA (lita-l). This
survey was addressed to academic libraries and to those who “ever tried to coordinate a
50

web-related project’ in academic libraries, which was defined as ‘taking more than 2
weeks and/or involving more than 3 people’ (Fagan & Keach 2011, p. 4). From the 121
responses 81 questionnaires were filled in completely. The survey covered issues about
the qualifications and the job title and the job responsibilities of the “Web project
managers”, the departments that those web managers worked for, project management
techniques and the organisational status of those web project groups of staff.

The results showed that most of the respondents (84%) held a masters degree in library
science. The job title varied greatly, but from the 29 job titles the word “Web” was used
in almost half of them (15). Usually, these web project managers were staff of
Web/Technical/System department or Public Service department and in small percentages
they belonged to Administration and Collections. However, job responsibilities related
with web and digital topics were common place for the majority of the respondents; whist
about half of them spent less than 25% of their time managing web projects. From the
given list of project management techniques, respondents indicated as most frequently
used the “Documenting project requirements and documenting project specifications” and
more than half of them marked as frequent activities the “archiving documents for future
project teams, identifying milestones, submitting project status reports, writing a
statement of scope or statement of work, creating a work breakdown structure, and
identifying a project sponsor”. Finally, the results showed that the web projects usually
were staffed by a temporarily organisational team, with fewer cases where there were
standing committees or organisational units.

Researchers concluded that web project management in academic libraries continued to
be informally defined, without a consistent home within organisational charts,
encountering challenges, like shifting/unclear priorities and inadequate staff/budget and
resources. However, there is a question about the methodological approach of this
research undertaking; the clearly focused and direct approach of the LWS management as
"web project" radically affected the sample and therefore the results. The survey was
addressed to “web project managers” and not to managers of the academic library web
site, collecting data even from people who worked occasionally on a web based project.
In addition, the list about the management techniques was limited and it did not cover
even representatively all management area (see, section 2.3.1).

51

Finally, during 2008, Bundza et al. (2009) conducted another study in American
academic libraries about library web development, including some management issues.
They carried out a web-based survey at 149 academic institutions and finally 118
responses took place. The research was addressed to the staff responsible for coordinating
the LWS tasks and those who most closely fit the description of head of reference
services. The management issues were included were: LWS redesign, human resources
and their organisation and the relationship with the parent institution. The results showed
that the number of the staff working on the LWS tasks was limited (one to twelve),
considering that none had them as primary responsibility, and the LWS management was
distributed in the library organisation. The involvement of the parent institution seemed to
be limited to the assistance in technical and marketing issues. In addition, the issue of
frequent/periodical LWS redesign was common place for about half of the half of the
cases.

2.4 Summary
The study aimed to investigate the LWS management undertaken by British university
libraries taking into account the LWS role as one of its crucial aspects. The literature
review has focused on those two research aspects; the role and management of the LWS
publishing. The aims of this chapter were to place the study in its context and to identify
stepping-off points needed for the present research.

Literature review highlighted that the previous studies and theoretical approaches had not
investigated the topic of LWS publishing in its details, identifying or examining
interrelations between its components. On the contrary, most studies seem to be small
scale and concerned with a single aspect or a few separate aspects of the LWS
management. Nevertheless, almost no exploratory investigation on the LWS role was
taking place as literature revealed that there were strong assumptions/perspectives for the
content of the LWS role. Clyde’s (1996; 1999; 2004) approaches regarding the LWS role
and the management were exceptions, providing prospects for further, deeper and more
tabulated investigations on LWS publishing. However, no study included the interrelation
between the LWS role and management. Consequently, the researcher examined,
analysed and presented both research aspects (role and management), placing them
52

additionally within the terms of LWS publishing and showing the multiple interrelations
between those two aspects, which were taken into account in the design of the current
study.

Evidence derived from some studies raise issues for further discussion related to the
factual support of the importance of library’s web presence. The fact that it was found
that a limited number of library staff worked in it and it was not an exclusive occupation
for them and the lack of any clear line in the budget for the needs of LWS publishing
seemed to not support the idea of an importance of LWS. In addition, the literature seems
to imply a lack of integration of the management and operation of the LWS with the
operation of the library. Nonetheless, the literature did not examine the aspect of the
perspective on the LWS publishing as procedure (e.g. one-off life cycle approach,
strategic planning approach, etc.), which could affect too the institution of the LWS
publishing as library function.

The issue of the influence, even control, exerted over the LWS by the institution was
reported only very much later via the UK study (Manuel et al. 2010) almost in the same
period that the current research was undertaken. In all the previous studies or papers the
aspect of the authority over the LWS management was not examined or even discussed.
Therefore, during the procedure of the study’s design this aspect was downgraded and the
study focused almost exclusively on the management of LWS undertaken by the library,
recording only the cases for which there was strong and broad institutional involvement in
LWS publication (see, section 3.4.2.4).

Discussion in the literature brought out methodological issues which were taken into
account during the research design (see, in particular the sections 3.4.1, 3.4.2, 3.4.4 and
3.4.5). The data collection about the LWS role was guided from the identification of the
three facets and their appropriate data sources. However, practices in research design of
some previous studies, like the use of a particular starting point for the content of LWS
role as basis of the study design, were discussed in order to the current study to achieve
accurate and thorough results (see, section 3.4.1). Related to the investigation of LWS
management, the argument about the approach of LWS management using work tasks
rather than roles, like the role of “webmaster”, was used for the design of the survey on
the LWS management (see, section 3.4.2). In addition, studies in LWS management
53

issues used to analyse solely each research element, presenting their results separately
without taking into account possible correlation of them with other research elements (see,
for example the Academic library website benchmarks 2008). This issue was taken into
account in the research of the analysis (see, section 3.4.5) in order the analysis to ensure
export of rich and enhanced results.

54

Chapter 3.

Research design
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.4.1
3.4.1.1
3.4.1.2
3.4.1.3
3.4.1.3.1
3.4.1.3.2
3.4.1.3.3
3.4.1.3.4
3.4.1.3.5
3.4.1.3.6
3.4.1.4
3.4.1.4.1
3.4.1.4.2
3.4.1.4.3
3.4.1.4.4
3.4.2
3.4.2.1
3.4.2.2
3.4.2.3
3.4.2.4
3.4.2.4.1
3.4.2.4.2
3.4.2.4.3
3.4.2.5
3.4.3
3.4.3.1
3.4.3.2
3.4.3.3
3.4.3.4
3.4.3.5
3.4.4
3.4.5
3.4.6
3.4.6.1
3.4.6.2
3.4.6.3
3.4.6.4
3.4.6.5
3.4.6.6
3.4.6.7
3.4.6.8
3.4.6.9
3.4.6.10
3.5

Introduction
Aim and objectives
Methodology
Methods
Pilot content analysis
Framework
Content analysis as method for the library web site role
Pilot content analysis design
Research Question
Unitizing
Sampling
Recording
Analysis and interpretation of the results
Outcomes of the pilot content analysis
Internet Archive test
Aims and objectives
Internet Archive Wayback Machine
Data availability
Data completeness
Descriptive Survey
Aim, objectives and framework
Data source and sampling
Survey method: questionnaire
Questionnaire: content
LWS management by the Library
Role of library web site
Elements from the context of LWS
Survey response
Desk research
Desk research: an “invisible” method
Aims and objectives
Objective 1: Type of Library organisation
Objective 2: Year of the first publication of the library web site
Objective 3: Use of VLE systems
Content Analysis
Analysis
Interviews
Aims & objectives
Content of interviews
Data source
Interview schedules
Interview length
Interview modes
Pretesting the interview
Selecting sample
Conducting interviews
Analysis of interviews
Summary

55
56
56
66
67
67
68
71
71
72
72
73
74
75
77
77
77
78
80
81
81
81
86
88
89
91
92
95
97
97
97
98
98
100
101
101
107
107
107
109
111
112
113
113
115
116
117
119
pp. 55-120

3. Research design
3.1 Introduction

The LWS management, as a body of processes in the terms of LWS publishing, is applied
in order to implement the LWS role within the library’s organisational context. Literature
review, regarding the LWS role, showed that studies had not aim to explore the content of
LWS role, but to rather examined the application of a particular perspective about the
LWS role, limiting from the beginning the breadth of the potential content of LWS role.
Moreover, the LWS role was examined mostly based on data derived from the LWS
content. Therefore, the concept of LWS role was approached mostly through one of its
facets; the uses of LWS. Regarding the LWS management, the lack of a theoretical
background was identified and studies explored only aspects of this topic, without taking
into account the LWS management’s context or the aspect of LWS role or other
considerations derived from the library’s organisational context. Moreover, some studies
– in approaching the LWS management as a research topic – used roles, like the role of
“webmaster”, instead of work tasks. In addition, many studies analysed the data of each
research element solely, without investigating possible correlation between the research
elements.
This study took into account either the results or the design of previous studies and it
sought to explore and to give answers to the basic – but still unanswered – question of
how libraries managed their LWS publishing taking into account what they wanted to
achieve and eventually achieved in developing a web site. The research focused on the
British academic libraries; this was chosen as the research field because of its relatively
long history in library web presence, its geographical accessibility and the lack of relevant
research.
This chapter presents the research design. It is divided into three sections:
-

Section 3.2: summarises the research aim and its objectives, as they defined for
meeting its needs;

55

-

Section 3.3: presents and discusses the chosen methodological stance, which was
selected in order to achieve the research aim and objectives within a framework of
good research practice and to acquire new knowledge based upon the data,
considering limitations;

-

Section 3.4: presents and discusses of the research instruments (methods) applied
to accomplish the study.

3.2 Aims & Objectives

This study sought to investigate the library web site (LWS) management undertaken by
British university libraries taking into account the LWS role as one of its crucial aspects.
The study’s objectives pursued in order to meet the needs of the above aim, were:
3.2.1 To review, analyse and determine the range of LWS role;
3.2.2 To examine the application of the managerial processes for the LWS development
and maintenance undertaken by the libraries within their context;
3.2.3 To examine the relation between the LWS roles and the LWS management
approaches which were identified (see, 3.2.1 & 3.2.2 respectively);
3.2.4 To investigate factors, which affected the formation of the management approaches
and the LWS roles.

3.3 Methodology

The literature review concerning studies on LWS management did not provide sufficient
materials, upon which any hypothesis about the LWS management by the academic
libraries could be developed – as assessed pattern(s) - and be tested through new research.
Consequently, the valid research question was not if something was applied in practice or
not, but which management approaches were applied in practice. Mapping and
understanding the phenomenon, as it was developed through more or less 15 years of

56

practice, responded to the lack of research and it could provide the prerequisite basis for
further in-depth investigations on LWS management. This logic and argument supported
and built the research question in section 1.2, explaining and locating the topic within its
context.
The study was designed based on the research paradigm of “mixed methods”, as the third
research paradigm with the other two: the qualitative or quantitative paradigm (Flick 2002;
Robson 2002; Strauss & Corbin c1998). As Creswell (1998, p. 74) wrote, the paradigm
may be best defined as a “worldview” and it is a ‘basic set of beliefs or assumptions that
guide’ a researcher’s inquiry. Therefore, every researcher brings to his or her research a
‘set of interlocking philosophical assumptions and stances’ (Greene & Caracelli 1997, p.
6) including ontological beliefs; those about the nature of reality. In this case, the
researcher did not explicitly identify herself philosophically compatible with either the
quantitative or qualitative paradigm. In other words, no single perspective can always be
the most suitable and the orthodox approach for each study case; neither the positivist
(and post-positivist) perspective expressed through the quantitative paradigm, nor the
constructivist nor interpretivist perspective expressed through the qualitative paradigm.
On the contrary, the researcher finds more suited to reality the approach of the “dialectical
position” (Greene & Caracelli 1997; Maxwell & Loomis c2003) of the “mixed methods
research” paradigm whose underlying assumption is that research can be stronger when it
mixes research paradigms because a fuller understanding of human phenomena is gained.
Ma (2012) positioned herself in the same philosophical direction for library and
information science research:
‘Mixed methods research that combines large-scale data analyses
and a detailed description of community practice may provide us
with a richer understanding of information and information-related
phenomena.’ Ma (2012, p. 1866

In this particular study, the quantitative paradigm could not be applied because there was
no theoretical background to support the development of a hypothesis or norms, which
could be tested. The qualitative paradigm in a first reading could be ontologically more
closed to the nature of the study, supporting the need for constructing realities – as this
study was seeking for approaches applied on the LWS management by the British
academic libraries. However only qualitative methodological instruments alone could not

57

collect all the needed comprehensive types and wide amount of data for the study (see,
below). Therefore, the “mixed methods research” paradigm responded to the needs of a
methodologically strong study, free from ritualistic restrictions derived from the
qualitative or quantitative paradigm. In addition, this last point refers to the other position
of the “mixed methods research” paradigm, the “pragmatist position” (Patton 1988;
Tashakkori & Teddlie 1998) which calls for using “whatever methodological tool are
required to answer the research question under study” (Tashakkori & Teddlie c2009, p. 7).
This study was designed to be a primary, holistic and contextual investigation of the
practice; an overview. This starting point enforced the exploratory orientation of the study,
related to the explanatory one. In other words, the study could not be developed more indepth, but more in-breadth, focusing on the identification of management approaches
within their context, covering a very wide and unknown area, and then to understand the
reasons affected the formation of these approaches, examining relations and factors,
identified through the previous procedure. Therefore, the objectives were developed upon
this approach, starting with the exploratory part of the study (see, objectives 3.2.1 & 3.2.2)
and then covering the explanatory (see, objectives 3.2.3 & 3.2.4).
Comprehensive data collection was required for the support of the investigated field’s
composition and understanding, transcribing the practice in LWS management within its
context and the range the LWS role and examining and identifying relations and
influential factors. The literature review showed that criteria for the examination of both
topics could be developed; regardless of the absence of the related theoretical background.
Therefore, the investigation could be designed to provide systematic, measurable and
verifiable results. Indicatively, the examination of the three facets of LWS role’s concept,
which were identified, could be approached through the analysis of the mission statement
and the contents of the web pages and the study of the library organisation related to the
undertaking of the LWS publishing (see, section 2.2 & in particular section 2.2.4). In
addition, the examination of the LWS management could be approached through the
definition of its processes and its context, based on theoretical sources of literature about
management and the management of web site development, and then through a variety of
data collection instruments dependent on the type of information would be needed (see,
section 2.3.1).

58

The wide range of aspects under investigation and their comprehensive content, which
were required for the composition of the profiling of each examined case of LWS, raised
a critical question about the methodological approach of the research. Case study or
multiple case studies theoretically could serve the needs of the wide and deep data
collection. However, criteria for the selection of the case or cases did not exist and could
not be developed because there was no previous primary, holistic relevant research.
Consequently, an arbitrary selection of sample-cases for study without criteria could not
guarantee that the findings could produce generalisations. On the contrary, a survey-based
approach could map the general situation, collecting a basic and wide range of
quantitative data about the LWS role, the LWS management and aspects of the LWS
context. Moreover, the findings of this primary survey could provide the source for
development of criteria for case selection useful either in the current study or in other
future studies.
Naturally, the exclusive use of a survey could not be the only data source for the needs of
this investigation because it could not guarantee data’s sufficiency. The comprehensive
nature of the information needed required additional and supplementary quantitative and
qualitative data, which was collected through a combination of research instruments in
order for both the exploratory and explanatory parts of the study to be supported within
the terms of a valid study. As Busha & Harter (1980, p. 145) write ‘the type of
information sought in a particular project has guided the application of appropriate
research techniques’. Therefore, the “mixed methodology” stance was selected, applying
“triangulation” design as the process of the use of two or more methods requiring
consistent findings among the different data collection techniques in order for the findings
to be reasonably valid (Powell 2004). In addition, the selection of the “triangulation” was
based on its advantage that ‘it can…capture a more complete, holistic, and contextual
portrayal of the unit(s) under study’ (Jick c2008, p. 109), answering to the needs of this
study.
The combined quantitative and qualitative methods for collection and analysis of data
could strengthen and benefit the study, where the research design’s rationale of the mixed
methods aimed ‘to obtain … quantitative results from a sample and then follow up with a

59

few individuals to probe or explore those results in more depth’ (Creswell 2002, p. 100).
Patton (1990, p. 187) also writes about the use of triangulation that ‘one important way to
strengthen a study design is through triangulation, or the combination of methodologies in
the study of the same phenomena’. Nevertheless, an essential requirement is the
achievement of a balanced and effective “marriage” of research aims and objectives with
the methods selected in order for the ‘method and subject of enquiry … to be in harmony,
not conflict, to obtain optimal information and insight’ (Slater, 1990, p. 109). For this
study this approach was selected because it was validated as suitable for the topic, taking
into account its limitations; Patton (1990, p. 24) wrote that ‘all approaches have their
limitations and that there is no perfect approach’. However, the research design aimed to
ensure the justifiable collection of precise and valid data in order for generalisations to be
produced from the findings
The wide range of information needed worked as one crucial factor in the design of the
study; especially because it should consist of more than one data source. Therefore, the
range of some aspects of the study’s chronological period and the sample selection should
be reduced in order for differential factors to be controlled and then data credibility or
homogeneity is not be affected. For example, data collection for a historical review on the
topic would be in danger of lacking sufficient and reliable information as current library
staff - as potential data source - were not expected to be same in the same post during the
10-15 years of the LWS presence. Moreover, the period of LWS publishing varied
between the libraries. In addition, the evolution of ICTs application in library practice was
not the same or similar within different countries and different library sectors.
Specifically, the study investigated the current practice in a specific period (first semester
of 2008) within the time terms of the research project. In addition, the university libraries
were selected with purposive sampling, as the most developed sector of British academic
librarianship on ICTs issues and their utilisation (see, section 3.4.2.2-c).
The investigation of the approaches in the LWS management, taking into account the
LWS role as one of its crucial aspects, aimed to gradually compose LWS case profiles
and to identify interrelations between components and factors affecting the formation of
practices (see, study’s aim & objectives; 3.2). The collection of information was built on
the body of LWS cases, about which respondents in the descriptive survey participated.

60

Thus, all the additional and supplementary quantitative and qualitative data was collected
through the other methods were directly matched to each LWS examined case; these
LWS cases composed the final research sample. Probably this sampling approach could
limit the extent of the data derived from LWS cases, as the LWS cases, for which there
was no response to the survey, could not be used further in the study as data sources.
However, this decision to build LWS case profiles aimed to provide clear, rich and
relevant data, which could be analysed via triangulation and “cross-tabulation
examination”, investigating interrelations, providing added value in the quality of the
research results. (see also, section 3.4.5).
The descriptive survey aimed to collect the major part of the quantitative data about
managerial processes for the LWS development and maintenance, contextual elements of
the LWS management and information about the LWS role (see, section 3.4.2). The other
research instruments for quantitative data collection were desk research for collection of
supplementary information about contextual factors (see, section 3.4.3) and content
analysis for data collection about one facet of the LWS role; the LWS uses (see, section
3.4.4). Both methods were conducted chronologically after the survey in order to collect
data only for the LWS cases, which composed the final research sample. In addition, but
also prior to all the above methods, pilot content analysis was carried out in order to
support the design of the survey, desk research and the content analysis (see, section
3.4.1).
The analysis as the fourth1 research instrument aimed to bring together all the quantitative
data from the different methods and to conduct an integrated and thematically structured
analysis (see, section 3.4.5). All this different data was compatible for analysis and it did
not cause conflict during its integrated analysis because, firstly, the data derived from the
different methods had the same key/identity for each one LWS case and, secondly,
because it was not used for the findings data about the same information, derived from
more than one method. In other words, the data derived from different research
instruments added identified and unique information for each case of the research sample
and this united data was analysed.

1

The pilot content analysis (see, section 3.4.1) is included as the first research instrument.

61

The outcome of this method supported the first three research objectives, composing
profiles, identifying groups and examining relations (see below, Figure 3.1). Specifically,
the analysis (method 3.4.5) provided answers about the range of LWS role (objective
3.2.1), about the application of the LWS management undertaken by the libraries within
their context (objective 3.2.2) and the relation between the aspect of LWS role and the
LWS management approaches (see, objective 3.2.3). The data, which were analysed for
the method 3.4.5, derived from the descriptive survey (method 3.4.2), desk research
(method 3.4.3) and the content analysis (method 3.4.4); the pilot content analysis (method
3.4.1) supported the design of the desk research and content analysis. Finally, the
interviews (method 3.4.6) provided answers about factors, which affected the formation
of the LWS management and the LWS roles (see, objective 3.2.4).

3.4.2
3.2.1

3.4.1

3.2.2

3.4.5

3.4.4
3.4.2
3.4.3
3.2.3

3.2.4

3.4.6

Figure 3.1: Relations between research objectives (3.2.13.2.4) & methods (3.4.1-3.4.6)

The pilot content analysis (method 3.4.1) probably seemed that it supported only the
methods of the descriptive survey (method 3.4.2), the desk research (method 3.4.3) and
the content analysis (method 3.4.4), but its place in the research design was crucial and
for that it opens the sections of the methodological instruments. In that first section about
the pilot content analysis is going to explain the establishment of the theoretical
background and the documentation about the content analysis, which was used for first
time in a research; only later in 2010 Aharony (2012) carried out content analysis of
American academic library web sites via Internet Archive as data source (see, section
3.4.1.2). Moreover, the pilot content analysis also tested the use of Internet Archive

62

Wayback Machine (http://www.archive.org/web/web.php) as a data collection source for
documentary data, which was used possibly for first time in a library science study (see,
desk research 3.4.3 and content analysis 3.4.4); see, also Aharony’s (2012) study. In
addition, the results of the pilot content analysis were used for the design of a section of
the descriptive survey (see, 3.4.2).
The integrated and structured analysis (method 3.4.5) of the quantitative data directly
supported the needs of the first three objectives. Therefore, the results of the analysis
were presented in the chapter of the results (see, section 4.2). Consequently, the primary
results of the quantitative data collection methods (e.g. questionnaire) and further - but
detailed - data analysis of them were presented in Appendix III for documentation
purposes.
The exploratory part of the study was based on quantitative data. The survey was selected
as the main data source especially for the mapping of the LWS management practice.
These relevant questions were mainly closed questions, examining the application, or not,
of core managerial processes undertaken by libraries for the needs of their LWS
development and maintenance. The list of these main areas of the LWS management was
compiled based on literature sources. Moreover, the review of the LWS role, in the terms
of the quantitative data collection and analysis, was limited to the examination of two of
the three facets of LWS role’s concept; the purposes of libraries for the LWS as they
defined it through the mission statement of LWS (see, survey; question 8.1) and the uses
of LWS publication by libraries, as these were identified through the content analysis of
their web sites (see, 3.4.4). In other words, this first stage of the study was designed to
support a broad, rather than an in-depth, investigation.
The initial research project planning included, as the second part, the examination of the
aspect of “management of change”2, investigating in-depth the management approaches
related to the impact of LWS role within the context of management of change in libraries.
Specifically the second part of the study, based on the results of the previous stage, would
have consisted of a multiple cases study. It would have investigated in-depth the third
facet of LWS role’s concept – as impact – in library organisations’ management and
2

There is related reference in the cover letter of the survey (see, Appendix I).

63

operation focusing on which ways and to what extent the LWS was used for management
of change purposes.
However, the results of the first stage (see, section 4.3) required re-orientation of the
study. Firstly, the aspect of the authority of the LWS management brought out an
additional area for further study as it could operate as determinant of the entire topic,
raising questions about the value of the research questions regarding in which ways and to
what the LWS was used for management of change purposes, when only 20% of the
university libraries examined had sole authority of their LWS. Secondly, the results about
the LWS role, which were limited to the facet of uses - as only 7% of the libraries had
mission statement for their LWS - showed a limited range of uses indicating a
respectively limited role as impact in library organisations’ management and operation,
impoverishing as well the value of the research questions about which ways and what
extent the LWS was used for management of change purposes.
Consequently, the aims and objectives of the study have been changed partly after the
completion of the first stage. The aspect of management of change was excluded and the
investigation of the LWS role was confined to within the facet of LWS uses. Furthermore,
the second and explanatory part of the study changed orientation, focusing on the
understanding of practice and investigating the reasons which formed it (see, objective
3.2.4).
Therefore, the research strategy was diversified partly. As Patton (c1997, p. 201)
discussed the difference between the implementation process and the ideal program plans,
he pointed out that ‘the implementation process always contains unknowns that change
the ideal’. McTavish et al. (1975, p. 56) - as quoted by Patton (c1997) – also recognised
the fact that ‘initial plans usually have to be altered once the realities of data or
opportunities and limitations become known. Typically, detailed plans for analysis and
reporting are postponed and revised’.
This change of the study’s orientation probably reduced the breadth and the depth of the
investigation, which on the one hand could ensure a complete research project within the
required time-frame, with research questions addressing the current wide practice

64

highlighting issues such as the authority over LWS management, which have not been
studied before. On the other hand, the discussion about the limitations identified can
contribute to the discussion of alternative studies and methodological stances, but also of
the impacts derived from those limitations upon the historical and future development of
the practice.
The research instrument, which was chosen for the main data collection and analysis in
order to meet the needs of the last research objective, was semi-structured interviews (see,
method 3.4.6) with practitioners, who completed the survey’s questionnaire; this was
selected to collect the needed qualitative data (see above, Figure 3.1). The qualitative data
collection aimed to increase the level of understanding of the large scale of quantitative
data which was collected in the previous stages, investigating factors which affected the
formation of the management approaches and the LWS role (see, objective 3.2.4). As
Cohen & Manion (1997) pointed out, interviews can be used to follow up issues in
conjunction with other research techniques. Τhe type of interviews was chosen to be the
“key informant interviews” in which ‘the interviewer collects data from individuals who
have special knowledge or perceptions that would not otherwise be available to the
researcher’ (Gall et al 1996, p. 306).
The analysis of the quantitative data did not reveal significant interrelations, which could
support sufficient assumptions about reasoning for the development of the practice.
Otherwise, the type of interviews would probably be used would be the “confirmation
survey interview”; ‘a structured interview that produces evidence to confirm earlier
findings’ (Gall et al 1996, p. 307). However, this data produced sufficient information for
mapping the LWS management practice undertaken by libraries and further enhanced,
with additional questions, this qualitative data collection stage of the research, which
aimed to investigate factors, affected the formation of the LWS management approaches
and the LWS uses. The aspect of authority over the LWS management was raised as one
key issue.

65

3.4 Methods

This section presents the six research instruments used for data collection and analysis.
The documentation of each method is presented in separate sub-sections; the six sections
are developed according to the chronological order of the research instruments’
implementation. Specifically (see also Figure 3.2):
Methods for quantitative data collection & analysis
3.4.1 Pilot Content Analysis

3.4.2 Descriptive Survey

3.4.3 Desk Research

3.4.4 Content Analysis

3.4.5 Analysis

Method for qualitative data collection & analysis
3.4.6 Interviews

Figure 3.2: Study’s research instruments

for the collection and analysis of the quantitative data:
3.4.1 Pilot content analysis of academic library web sites in current and archived
versions, which aimed to support the procedures of the descriptive survey
(3.4.2), the desk research (3.4.3) and the content analysis (3.4.4);
3.4.2 Descriptive survey via questionnaire of English & Scottish university libraries,
which aimed to collect quantitative data for the procedure of the integrated
and structured analysis (3.4.5);
3.4.3 Desk research of data on the Internet for secondary research data collection,
which aimed to collect quantitative data for the procedure of the integrated
and structured analysis (3.4.5);

66

3.4.4 Content analysis of archived LWS versions, which aimed to collect
quantitative data for the procedure of the integrated and structured analysis
(3.4.5);
3.4.5 Integrated and structured analysis of the data collection methods 3.4.2-3.4.4.
Part of these results was used for the needs of the interviews’ design (3.4.6);
for the collection and analysis of the qualitative data:
3.4.6 Semi-structured interviews with experienced professionals in the management
of LWS.

3.4.1 Pilot content analysis
3.4.1.1 Framework
The aims of the pilot content analysis were a) to develop a core list of categories for LWS
uses, which were used for the needs of the survey questionnaire (3.4.2.4.2; survey –
Question 9), b) to develop and test a classification analysis method for identification of
LWS uses for and the needs of the content analysis (3.4.4) and c) to test the Internet
Archive Wayback Machine as a data collection source for documentary data, which could
be used for the content analysis of LWS archival versions (3.4.4) and for desk research
(3.4.3). Pilot content analysis was undertaken during November of 2007 for six cases of
UK academic library web sites randomly selected. Three versions of each site were
examined: the current version, the first archived version and one archived version chosen
from the middle of the archived period. Therefore, 18 versions of library web sites were
located in the WWW with the use of the Internet browser “Internet Explorer” and their
content was analysed. The six current versions were retrieved directly from their hosting
servers and the 12 archived versions were retrieved from the Internet Archive Wayback
Machine.

67

3.4.1.2 Content analysis as a method for LWS role examination
Content analysis, as a research method, has been used since the 1600s, even if the term
“content analysis” has only been listed in Webster’s Dictionary of the English Language
since 1961 (Krippendorff 1980). Content analysis is ‘a research technique for making
replicable and valid inferences from texts (or other meaningful matter) to the contexts of
their use (Krippendorff 2004, p. 18). Other definitions are by Berelson as ‘a research
technique for the objective, systematic and quantitative description of the manifest
content of communication’ (Krippendorff 1980, p. 21) and by Stone et al. as ‘a research
technique for making inferences by systematically and objectively identifying specified
characteristics within a text’ (Krippendorff 1980, p. 23). This method has been developed
over the time and it has been applied to variety of forms of communication, like written
documents and visual or audio media. Holsti (1969) presented selectively some other
definitions by Kaplan, Berelson, Cartwright, Barcus and Paisley, pointing out that the
differences between the definitions indicate that content analysis can be ‘a basic research
tool which may be useful in various disciplines and for many classes of research
problems’ (Holsti 1969, p. 3). Gall et al. (1996) wrote about the use of this method in
both the quantitative and qualitative studies.
Content analysis has already been used in library and information science research before
web documents were included in the materials under analysis. Allen & Reser (1990)
surveyed how content analysis was used, taking into account the theoretical background
of the above resources. They found that the documents analysed were varied, such as
‘library

tools,

including

book

reviews,

entries

in

indexes,

and

scientific

abstracts, …academic library standards, and manuals for online systems’ (Allen & Reser
1990, p. 254). Moreover, they identified that both basic approaches of content analysis
were used:
a) “classification analysis”, which ‘assigns documents (or other means of
communication) to class or categories to quantify one or more of their
characteristics’, using either a pre-existing classification scheme or a novel one;
b) “elemental analysis”, which ‘is based on the identification of word or word group
frequencies’

68

The World Wide Web as a documentary data source for research purposes was
investigated by McMillan (2000). He examined the ways that researchers had started to
apply content analysis to the web documents, adapting principles of content analysis:
specification of research questions and/or hypotheses, selection of samples of documents,
development

of

a

category-coding

procedure,

coders’

training

for

research

reliability/replication and analysis – interpretation of data. It is noticed that one of the 11
studies examined was Clyde’s research (1996) for the identification of the purposes for
which a library might create a home page. McMillan found that the principles of content
analysis can be applied to web documentary sources, but the dynamic communication
environment of the Web raises potential problems for the researchers, especially in the
sampling, coding and analysis of the data. In other words, the researchers need to
understand the special characteristics of the web documents as communication means for
analysis in all stages of the study design. Some of those special characteristics are the
frequency of the content update/upgrade, which is reported by McMillan, and the
distinction between the editorial elements and the content components, which all together
compose the web documents (see, section 1.4). McMillan did not make any note of the
latter characteristic, although it can be an essential issue for the process of unitizing ‘decision of what is to be observed, recorded, and thereafter considered a datum’
(Krippendorff 1980, p. 57) -, which is the ‘first task in any empirical study’ (Krippendorff
2004, p. 97) and McMillan (2000) did not include in his study.
The literature review identified three methodological issues, which this study intended to
avoid, in studies which applied content analysis for the examination of LWS role:
a) use of a particular starting point for the content of LWS role as basis for the
design of the content analysis;
b) use of an assessed list of units and classification scheme;
c) counting of editorial elements of LWS in the process of unitizing
All studies (Chisenga 1998; Cohen & Still 1999; Agingu 2000; Sapa 2005) had as a
starting point that the fact that LWS was used as a library’s virtual front desk (see, section
2.2), which could have reduced the range of LWS role content as the investigations were
focused only on related aspects. In other words, these studies aimed more to test the
application of the specific LWS role in practice – testing assessed classification schemata

69

- rather than to identify what was the LWS role in practice – identifying classes.
Moreover, Cohen & Still (1999) and Agingu (2000) compiled a list of specific elements units (e.g. from Agingu’s study “Is the library’s online catalog accessible via library’s
Web site?”), which would testify to the existence of assessed categories – classification
scheme (e.g. from Cohen & Still “provider of information and reference service online”).
The use of checklists limits from the beginning of the study the possible findings
regarding the recording process (what elements/units are recording).
In addition, a common characteristic of these studies was that there was no distinction
between the editorial elements and content components. For example, Agingu’s (2000)
list included “Site shows date of last update”, which is an editorial element, and “Site
provides links to other sites may be relevant to users’ needs”, which is a content
component. Likewise, in Cohen’s and Still’s (1999) study there were in their list of
findings the “Update date” and “Links to own OPAC”. Similarly, Detlor & Lewis (2006)
and later Aharony (2012) recorded mixed (editorial & content) elements for the content
analysis of LWS pages. Upon this point, a methodological question was raised: are the
editorial elements of the library web sites appropriate data for the examination of the
LWS role? In other words, in terms of the content analysis method are the editorial
elements of the library web sites, as documentary sources, relevant data for using them
for the needs of unitizing?
The editorial elements provide relevant data for studies on the design of the library web
sites, for example, evaluation studies about usability or accessibility. However, for the
research question “Is the Library Web Site an information tool?” (Cohen & Still 1999, p.
277), the data of the existence or not-existence of the element “Update date”, which was
included in the checklist, does not provide in essence relevant information about its
particular type of LWS use. The data is about the editorial quality as a documentation
element and usually it is used for the evaluation of the “Information Integrity”; the value
of the information content over time (Place et al. 2006). This methodological error was
derived from the initial definition by the researchers of how a LWS can be “information
tool”. Specifically, they write:
‘A Web site can provide a library with an opportunity to disseminate
information about itself. This can include items such as physical
address, (…). A Web Site also might provide information about itself.

70

This may take the form of an update date, (…).’ (Cohen & Still 1999, p.
277)

The above definition aimed to support the investigation of ‘the purposes these Web Sites
serve as manifested by their content’ (Cohen & Still 1999, p. 276). However, the
researchers, with this definition, in essence referred to two research questions, rather than
to the proposed one presented above taking into account the units they recorded. The
second research question could have been “Does the Library Web Sites provide
documentary evidence for qualitative design?”. This is only an example of how important
is the understanding of the special characteristics of the web publications, which can raise
potential problems for the researchers using them as data resources.

3.4.1.3 Pilot content analysis design
The content analysis was designed as a “classification analysis”, developing - as an
outcome - a novel classification based on criteria of a classification schema (see, 3.4.1.2).
Krippendorff’s processes were used for the design of the content analysis (Krippendorff
1980 & 2004).
3.4.1.3.1 Research Question: “What broad uses of the library web sites can be identified
from their content components?” The term “uses” referred to categories, which would be
derived from the analysis of LWS content and be in the same level of categorisation with
those identified already in literature review; see, section 2.2 about “the provision of
access to electronic information services” and “the provision of information about the
library and its in-house services”. In addition, basic limitation elements of the study were:
-

the editorial elements (see, 1.4) of the library web sites examined were not
counted as units and they were excluded from the analysis process (see below,
unitizing);

-

the study did not aim to count the frequency of appearance of these categories
within one LWS version or within the sample;

-

the study did not aim to evaluate the quality of the contents or to identify the
authority of them (who was the creator/compiler; e.g. library, other unit within

71

university or a commercial product bought by the library or of which the library is
a subscriber ).
3.4.1.3.2 Unitizing: ‘decision of what is to be observed, recorded, and thereafter
considered a datum’ (Krippendorff 1980, p. 57). As a unit was defined, every component
of LWS content consisted of one independent, complete and separate thematic item (e.g.
“opening hours”, “photocopying”, “library catalogue – OPAC”, “training program”,
“electronic information resources delivery service”, “regulations” and “mailing list”),
placed within one or more web pages or accessed secondarily from a web page via linking
to information in a non-hypertext format, like Acrobat Reader file, or via linking to an
external electronic environment from the LWS publication, such as electronic journals
accessed from the web site of a commercial supplier.
The framework described above can be closest to the thematic “sampling units”, as
Krippendorff (1980) described, or alternatively it approaches the technique of unit
definition based on thematic distinctions (Krippendorff 2004). Specifically, ‘sampling
units are those parts of observed reality or of the stream of source language expressions
that are regarded independent of each other’ (Krippendorff 1980, p. 57) and the thematic
way of defining and identifying these units is based on ‘their correspondence to a
particular structural definition of the content of narratives, explanations, or
interpretations’ (Krippendorff 1980, p. 62). Nevertheless, Krippendorff pointed out that
an issue of the thematic units is that the coder(s) need to be very familiar with the
meaning and the context of the information analysed in order for reliability to be achieved.
In the case of the present study, the researcher (and the only coder) had the relevant
familiarity through a relevant higher degree within the discipline and practical skills and
experience in an academic library in order to recognise the themes efficiently and reliably.
3.4.1.3.3 Sampling: For the needs of the pilot content analysis, six LWS cases 3 were
randomly selected from the compiled list of 149 English and Scottish university libraries
(see below, 3.4.2.2.c and Appendix I.2) and in total 18 versions of them were analysed;
three versions of each LWS case (see, framework of pilot content analysis; 3.4.1.1).
3

University of Bristol, University College for the Creative Arts, Leeds College of Music, University of
Cambridge, The College of St Mark & St John, Manchester Metropolitan University.

72

3.4.1.3.4 Recording:
For the formation of the categories of LWS uses (see, next stage) four coding categories,
which were defined, referred to characteristics of each content component (unit), which
were recorded in additional to the title of each unit and its Uniform Resource Locator(s) URL(s) 4 , as reference element (see, Table 3.1 for a demonstration of the recording
system):
Table 3.1: Pilot content analysis design – Recording coding categories per unit (example)
Coding categories per unit
Outcome
Access

Stakeholders
Academic community /
General web public
Academic community
(students – academics)

Informative

Free

Informative

Free

Functioning

Free

Informative/referential
and/or
Functional

Restricted

Informative

Academic community
(students – academics)
Members of Library
staff
Academic community
(students – academics)
Members of Library
staff
Academic community
(students – academics)

Subject
Library organisation
In-house library
facilities/services
Electronic
library/information
services

Unit
Projects
undertaken
Photocopying
Online help desk

Intranet workstation

Unknown content

Free

In-house library
facilities/services

Special collections

Informative

Free

Professional interests

Functioning

Restricted

Electronic
library/information
services

Training
programmes
Electronic
information
resources delivery
service

a) the stakeholders being addressed to (e.g. members of the academic community,
general web public, vendors and library staff);
b) the type of outcome: the end-user accessing the unit can be informed about
something (informative/referential) or is be able to act related to something
(functioning)5;
c) the access type: free and restricted;
d) the broad subject area (e.g. electronic library/information services, commercial
activities, professional interests), which referred to the widest possible subject
coding of the unit. For example, information about a training program about
copyright issues addressed to library users and provided in-house would not be
categorised in “In-house information literacy services”, but in “In-house library
4

The elements of Unit and URL(s) - Uniform Resource Locators - were recorded as control data, ensuring
the reliability of the recording process.
5
see, Sapa’s (2005) study.

73

facilities/services”. This broad and abstract subject coding could support an
investigation of LWS uses beyond those already identified in literature review
related to provision of access to electronic information services and provision of
information about the library and its in-house services (see, section 2.2). The word
“workstation”, which was used for the description of the access-protected sections
of a LWS, like a library staff’s intranet, derived from the papers of Diaz (1998)
and Moen & Murray (2002), in which the LWS is referred to as “workstation” (a
working environment) for both users and librarians.
Having as a basis the aspects of the research question (see above, 3.4.1.3.1), the coding
process recorded only each unique combination of the four coding categories regardless
of within which LWS version it was first located. Finally, the recording process carried
out by the researcher used MSExcel worksheets for data storage and administration. Thus
further training of other coders was not required.
Nevertheless, the restricted access, usually with password protection, was found in some
parts of the library web sites content, like in cases of “intranet workstation” for library
staff or in “Electronic library/information services”; this caused only minor limitation
during the recording process because of the highly abstract coding of the subjects.
Specifically, sufficient free access information was always provided for the coding of the
units of the subject area “Electronic library/information services”, whose access was
protected. Only in the cases of “Intranet workstation” addressed to library staff almost no
information was given about their content. Consequently, the type of outcome in those
cases was coded as “Informative/referential and/or Functional” because of the undue
expectation for utilisation of the advantages of intranets by a library, especially when it
has already developed one. Griffiths (2004) enumerates a variety of applications through
Intranets from library and information services, like access to electronic facilities,
establishment

of

electronic

collaborative

working

environment

and

internal

communications.
3.4.1.3.5 Analysis and interpretation of the results: Statistical approaches for the analysis
of the coding categories recorded are common place in the books of Krippendorff (1980
& 2004) and Gall et al. (1996). However, the analysis aimed to identify patterns within

74

the unique combinations of coding categories recorded in order to develop a novel
classification schema, which can be flexible enough to classify any unit that could appear
in LWS content of this pilot sample and any other LWS cases would be analysed with
objectivity, especially since it is based on very abstract subject coding. Table 3.2 below
shows a demonstration of the procedure of analysis and interpretation of the results
procedure, using the same data recorded in Table 3.1. From the patterns identified the
categories of LWS uses were formatted in sentences started with “The LWS was used for
provision of…”. In the process of the categories formation emphasis was given to the
elements of outcome and subject. The elements of stakeholders and access were noticed
when they added special characteristics to the element subject, distinguishing most of the
expected target-groups (based on the related literature) of students, academics and the
general web public.
3.4.1.3.6 Outcome of the pilot content analysis: The final outcome was five categories of
LWS uses, which were used as the core list for the design of question no. 9 of the survey
questionnaire (see, section 3.4.2 & Appendix I.3):
a. The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.
b. The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted
locally in the building/s of the library.
c. The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the
operation of the library as an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the
staff, undertaken projects).
d. The LWS is used for provision of information for the professional interests of the
library staff.
e. The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff (e.g.
Intranet for the library staff).

75

Table 3.2: Pilot content analysis design – Analysis and interpretation of the results (example)
Coding categories per unit
Stakeholders

Type of outcome

Access

Subject

Free

Electronic
library/information
services

Functional
Restricted
Academic community
(students – academics)

Members of Library staff

Academic community
(students – academics)
/
General web public

76

In-house library
facilities/services

Unit

LWS use (category)

Online help desk

The LWS is used for provision of
electronic library and information services to library
services users

Electronic library
Photocopying

Informative/
referential

Free

Informative/
referential

Free

Professional
interests

Training
programmes

Informative/referential
and/or
Functional

Restricted

Intranet facilities

Unknown content

Informative/
referential

Free

Library

Projects undertaken

Special collections

The LWS is used for provision of
information about services and facilities hosted locally
in the building/s of the library to library services users
The LWS is used for provision
of information for the professional interests of the
library staff
The LWS is used for provision of
an online intranet-based “workstation” for the library
staff
The LWS is used for provision of
information about the character and the operation of the
library as an organisation to library services users and/or
the general web public

3.4.1.4 Internet Archive test

3.4.1.4.1 Aims and objectives
The third aim of the pilot content analysis was to test the Internet Archive Wayback
Machine

(http://www.archive.org/web/web.php)

as

data

collection

source

for

documentary data, which could be used for the content analysis of archival versions of
library web sites (see, section 3.4.4) and for the desk research (see, section 3.4.3). The
objectives of the test were to verify whether the Internet Archive satisfies the criterion a)
of data availability and b) of data completeness. The objectives were focused on two
types of limitations; the first one was derived from the archive documents as a method of
data collection and the second one from the reported documents about access limitations
in Web archiving. Finally, the results of this study showed that the Internet Archive could
be an appropriate and sufficient source of data for the needs of the content analysis.

3.4.1.4.2 Internet Archive Wayback Machine
The Internet Archive Wayback Machine (http://www.archive.org/web/web.php) is a
service provided by the “Internet Archive” and it gives access to archived versions of web
sites which is one part of the archival collection. The Internet Archive is a non-profit
organisation, founded in 1996, which aims ‘to build an Internet library, with the purpose
of offering permanent access for researchers, historians, and scholars to historical
collections that exist in digital format’ and its collection includes texts, audio, moving
images, and software as well as archived web pages’ (About the Internet Archive).
Through the environment of the Internet Archive Wayback Machine, the web site
versions can be retrieved via URL search. The results of the archived versions of the
specific URL are presented chronologically and for each version there is an active link for
browsing within it (see below, Figure 3.3). The coverage of the archival collection of web
sites starts from 1996. The frequency of crawling was every few months and each version
is stored, indexed and provided within six months. The archiving system provided for
each archived web page, regardless of the version owned belonged, a unique URL address,
which can be used for bookmarking and reference.

77

Figure 3.3: Internet Archive Wayback Machine – results (example)

3.4.1.4.3 Data availability
The factor of availability is crucial for archival documents as a method of data collection.
The researchers have limited control on data collection as they can collect data from those
sources which already exist. Sapsford & Jupp write that the data derived from archival
documents ‘are limited by what is available’ (Sapsford & Jupp 2006, p. 157). The Internet
and especially the WWW has not only changed the ways of production, publishing and
exchange of information, but raises consideration for web archiving; for example the
78

selection of what is archived, the scale of archiving as regards to the quantity and
coverage with the time, authority and access of archiving. The researchers using archived
web sources encounter the potential limitation of the availability. The Access Tools
Working Group of the International Internet Preservation Consortium (2006) reports that
‘archives of material published on the Internet are still in their infancy; the oldest archive
(www.archive.org) is a more 10 years old’.
The web pages collection of the Internet Archive does not have topic restrictions; beyond
the fact that it was freely accessed by public and it was the oldest archival collection,
beginning three years after the free use of WWW technology. Other web archiving
services, which have started archiving later, were topic or file format oriented. For
example the National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program
(http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/) by Library of Congress started in 2000. The
WebCity (http://www.webcitation.org/) started in 2005 and it was a service that provided
archiving

systems

only

on-demand.

The

UK

Web

Archiving

Consortium

(http://www.webarchive.org.uk/) started in 2004 and it focused on specific subject areas.
Finally, PANDORA, Australia's Web Archive (http://pandora.nla.gov.au/), even if it
started collecting web sites in 1996; collection was selective and only those sites deemed
of interest for research were archived.
The coverage of the Internet Archive as a data source was tested, by the researcher twice;
once on a large scale and a second time on a small scale. During December 2006 –
February 2007 the researcher carried out a test on coverage of UK academic library web
sites. 190 British academic library web sites were searched through the Internet Archive
Wayback Machine and for 185 (97%) of them archived versions were retrieved. During
the pilot content analysis (November 2007) of all six selected cases of UK academic
library web sites archived versions were located within the collection of the Internet
Archive. Therefore, limitations on sources’ availability exists using the web sites Internet
Archive’s collection, but even though it is the only source with a large scale collection.
The 97% of the cased were examined were found in the Internet Archive’s collection;
therefore the Internet Archive as a data source can reduce the coverage limitations to a
very low percentage, at least for the specific sample of web sites in English language.

79

3.4.1.4.4 Data completeness
The Internet Archive was found to be influenced by two types of limitations affecting its
data completeness regarding the versions of web sites archived: a) technical limitations of
web crawling and b) intellectual property limitations. The documentation of Internet
Archive gave the following relevant information. Some types of dynamic pages were not
easily archived because of the compilation technique used; ‘When a dynamic page
contains forms, JavaScript, or other elements that require interaction with the originating
host, the archive will not contain the original site's functionality’ (Frequently Asked
Questions). Moreover, the Internet Archive stored, indexed and provided only free access
web pages and respected robot exclusion headers; in other words, the automate
commands of web site owners for blocking the procedure of archiving (robot exclusion
headers).
The pilot content analysis showed that the functionality problems, which could occur in
some cases of archived versions, were not a serious threat as the study analysed the
content and not the design component of the web sites (see, section 3.4.1.3). Accessibility
limitations were also found, when web pages appeared with a note either about robot
exclusion or about other access restrictions (e.g. via password or Internet Protocol - IP
protection). However, similar accessibility limitations occurred as well as in the current
(“live”) web site versions, regarding electronic information and communication services,
like digital libraries, e-mail lists and intranet web sections and systems. Consequently, the
completeness limitations did not arise from the characteristics of the archival data, but
from the general accessibility to the documentary data controlled by the owners
regardless of the reasons caused that, for example, special commercial agreements and
personal data protection or intranet policies. The process of analysis showed that this data
limitation affected further the cases of the library staff intranet, as discussed above (see,
section 3.4.1.3.4).

80

3.4.2 Descriptive Survey

3.4.2.1 Aim and objectives
The descriptive survey aimed to collect primary current data via questionnaire from
British university libraries about the managerial processes they undertook for the LWS
development and maintenance, also taking into account contextual aspects of the LWS
and the library organisation. The objectives of the survey were:
•

•

to explore:
-

the LWS managerial processes

-

the LWS role

to collect basic contextual information about:
-

the LWS publication

-

the library organisation

3.4.2.2 Data source and sampling
a) Data source
The determination of data source was a crucial element of the survey’s design because of
the comprehensive and, at the same time, specialised content of the questionnaire. The
academic library directors and key-members of the library management team were set as
the primary and the secondary target-group respectively; as the contact points, who would
either be able to be the primary data source or would be in the position to decide and
forward the questionnaire to the appropriate member(s) of library staff. This decision was
also enforced by the relatively higher possibility of retrieval position and contact details
for the above target-groups instead of the whole range of libraries’ staff. Nevertheless, the
possibility of the risk of a low response rate was considered as these target-groups might
not give priority to questionnaire completion given their high workloads and
responsibilities (see, section 3.4.2.5).

81

b) Sample population
The sample population consisted of the libraries of British academic institutions.
However, there was not a single complete, update and accurate list of the academic
libraries, which could be used for sampling. Therefore the sources examined were: a)
online directories, b) the member list of the Society of College, National and University
Libraries (SCONUL) (http://www.sconul.ac.uk/) and c) the printed directory “Libraries in
academic institutions in the United Kingdom” in the Libraries and information services in
the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland 2007-2008 (2007) 6 . The quality of
available online directories could be open to dispute because their coverage was usually
based on self-submission and in the information controlled directories there was a
relevant statement by the compilers that they were not able to secure total coverage7. In
addition, the function of categorisation either was not specified or it was missed8. The list
of SCONUL members did not provide classification of the institution type and
geographical location. This information was important as members of SCONUL were not
only academic libraries, but national, research and museum libraries. Moreover, members
from Southern Ireland were included, too. Finally, the printed directory could not be used
as a source for the definition of the population because it did not provide documentation
about the libraries including to which type of academic institution they belonged and it
did not provide geographical distinction between the countries of United Kingdom.
Therefore, the population was defined through the institutions of UK higher education
according to official lists of the institutions funded by the councils of Higher Education
Funding Council for England (HEFCE), Higher Education Funding Council for Wales
(HEFCW), Northern Ireland Higher Education Council (NIHEC) and Scottish Further and
6

Libraries in academic institutions in the United Kingdom. In: Libraries and information services in the
United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland 2007-2008. London: Facet, 2007, pp. 213-316.
7
The directory for “UK Higher Education & Research Libraries”
(http://www.library.ex.ac.uk/internet/uklibs.html) by University of Exeter library web site was an example
notifying that only currently the list included those links: “Currently there are over 150 libraries and
information services listed, including those of universities, university colleges, and institutes and colleges of
higher education.”
8
The Libweb: library servers via WWW (http://lists.webjunction.org/libweb/) was an example for directory
of UK libraries on Web without any further classification (see, Great Britain and Ireland directory:
http://lists.webjunction.org/libweb/brit.html).
Another example was the “UNESCO Libraries portal” for academic and research libraries in UK
(http://www.unesco.org/webworld/portal_bib/pages/Libraries/Academic_and_Research/Europe/United_Kin
gdom/index.shtml).
82

Higher Education Funding Council (SFC). Other sources had also been examined for the
definition of the population, for example the “Universities UK”, but they provided
different figures or they did not provided a detailed list of the institutions (see, Appendix
I.1). Consequently, the decision on defining the population based on the above lists was
the only available found in order for the “coverage error” to be reduced.
‘Coverage error results from every unit in the survey population not
having a known, non-zero chance of being included in the sample’
(Dillman 2000, p. 196)

c) Sample selection based on the libraries’ parent institutions
The sampling units of the academic institutions were: a) the academic institutions
divisions and b) the geographical regions. (Table 3.3)
The UK academic institutions divisions were:
-

Higher Education Institutions (HEI)

-

Further Education Colleges that offer Higher Education courses (FE).

The geographical regions in the country level were:
-

England

-

Scotland

-

Wales

-

Northern Ireland
Table 3.3 Sampling units of the UK academic institutions

COUNTRY
England
N. Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Grand Total

FE
135
6
43
7
191

HEI
131
4
18
13
1661

Grand Total
266
10
61
20
357

Date of data: 25-01-2008
Notes:
1. The three branches of Open University in the regions of Scotland, Wales and
N. Ireland were excluded.

The sample selected with non-probability sampling method consisted of the academic
libraries of the English and Scottish HEI (149 cases; see, Appendix I.2). In other words,
the primary sample selected was the 42% of the total population (UK academic
institutions) and the 90% of the total UK HEI (Chart 3.1). The sampling was purposive,

83

aiming mainly at the qualitative value of data collection rather than to ensure the
representation of each sampling unit. The HEI was selected because their libraries
supported usually large academic communities from broad scientific and research subject
areas. This attribute of the university libraries, instead of the college libraries which
served mostly smaller academic communities focused on few specialised subject areas,
would provide a sample which worked within a highly demanding academic environment.
Therefore the investigation into the practice of that sample would likely produce the most
valuable data, unaffected by the possible differences between HEI and FE institutions.
The sampling units of Wales and N. Ireland (geographical regions) were excluded,
reducing only by a little percentage (10%) the number of the selected sampling unit of the
university libraries because many of the Welsh library web sites would have bilingual
content causing an access problem for the researcher and the library cases in N. Ireland
would increase the cost and the time needed for the researcher to visit them during the
interviews procedure (see, section 3.4.6).

Chart 3.1 Research Sample: English & Scottish HEI

Research Sample: English & Scottish HEI

Within
population; 42%

Within sampling
unit (HEI); 90%

Sample selected

COUNTRIES
England & Scotland
N. Ireland & Wales
Grand Total
Sample coverage
(English & Scottish HEI)

84

Excluded sample

FE
178
13
191

HEI
149
17
166

Grand Total
327
30
357

NA

90%

42%

d) Sample: compilation of libraries’ list
The sampling list of the academic libraries was based on the list of the 149 universities, as
determined above. For the needs of the study the following terms was defined as:
-

Universities was the term given to the higher education institutions (HEI) funded
by the HEFCE and SFC respectively for England and Scotland;

-

Libraries was the term given to any organisational unit providing library services
for the particular university (e.g. Library, Information Services, Learner Support
Services, Library and Learning Resource etc);

-

Library web site, with the abbreviation LWS, was the term given to the official
web presence of/for the Library.

The list of the academic libraries was compiled by the researcher within January-February
of 2008 via searching secondary documentary data sources, reporting and cross-checking
the data. The list consisted of the following elementary data per library case:
a) Country (England – Scotland);
b) Title of university;
c) Uniform Resource Locator (URL) of the university web site;
d) URL of LWS;
e) Contact details of library director (e-mail, tel. name) [primary contact point]
f) Contact details of members of library management team (e-mail) [secondary
contact point]
The data sources were:
a) The online directory “British universities and colleges finder” by Higher Education &
Research Opportunities in the United Kingdom (HERO); the official gateway to UK
universities, colleges and research organizations. This directory provided for 148 of the
149 examined HEI information about the institutions needed for the research
(geographical location, title of university, university web site). – [web published source];
b) The printed directory “Libraries in academic institutions in the United Kingdom” in the
Libraries and information services in the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland
2007-2008 (2007). In this directory reference for all examined academic libraries was

85

located, collecting for most of these cases contact details, but the information about the
URL of the LWS either it was not updated or not included – [print published source];
c) The web sites of the universities – [web published source];
d) The web sites of the libraries – [web published source].
The data gathered from all the above sources were entered into an MSAccess database in
order to be cross-checked in the common data fields and to eliminate duplicates and
errors. The investigation of the 149 university cases had as a result the collection of
complete and valid data for 149 academic libraries, which belonged to 148 universities.
For one university case there was no LWS, but only a reference in a university web page
to the existence of the library. Nevertheless, in the list of universities there was one case,
established in 2005, by the merging of two institutions both of whom still maintained
their web sites, within which a LWS was located. Consequently, two LWS cases were
recorded for one university case.
The limitations for the compilation of the academic libraries’ list were:
a) for the cases of the University of Cambridge and University of Oxford, which consist
of many colleges and therefore with one main library and many departmental libraries,
only the main library was counted and examined;
b) for the library cases, for which personal contact details (data collection elements),
either for the library directors or the members of library management teams, could not
located, the library’s general contact e-mail addresses (e.g. library@xxx.ac.uk) and
telephone numbers were reported instead.

3.4.2.3 Survey method: questionnaire
The instrument used for the descriptive survey was a self-administered questionnaire of
28 main questions developed within seven sections (Appendix I.3). The questionnaire was
in electronic format (MSWord document file in format type .doc) and it was sent via email as a file attached to the e-mail list developed by the researcher in the previous
research stage. It was accompanied with a covering letter with information about the
researcher, the research project, the university ethical policy for the research projects

86

ensuring the confidentiality, basic instructions and information about the questionnaire
and contact details of the researcher.
The main type of questions, which was used, was closed questions, collecting data at the
current point of time. Nevertheless, open-ended (micro-qualitative) questions and
retrospective and future measurements were used for a few points. Moreover, throughout
the body of the questionnaire clear and detailed instructions were provided for usability
purposes and to seek to minimize the chance for errors caused by misunderstanding, with
the exception of one case described below (see, section 3.4.2.4 Questionnaire: content). In
addition, an introductory sentence opened every section, explaining the subject examined
each time, and clarifying the meaning of the terms “Library” and the “Library web site
(LWS)”.
The researcher tested three electronic types of format for the questionnaire. The electronic
format could provide time- and cost-saving options compared to the paper-postal survey
for the researcher and for the participants (Dillman 2000). The first format was an online
(web-based) survey, connected with networked database. The main criteria for the
rejection of this option were the cost for the subscription to the commercial providers, as
the free version permitted only a small number of questions (±10), and the limitations
inflicted on the design and on the data storage and export. In addition, the sub-option for
an online survey designed and hosted by the researcher needed more time than was
available for this project task. The second format was MSAccess file (version 2003) with
secure interactive environment, developed by the researcher, but the risk of
incompatibility was high. The third format was MSWord file (.doc) form-based and
protected, allowing only the filling within the forms’ fields, keeping the overall document
format unaffected.
The last mentioned format MSWord was selected to be sent via e-mail because it was, on
the one hand, compatible and usable and, on the other hand, it did not require excessive
time for its development and editing. In addition, the e-mail delivery status could be
checked via the function of the “Mail Delivery System”, informing whether or not the
messages were successfully delivered. However, during the survey period, technical
problems appeared regarding the delivery of attached files in some cases, usually because

87

of institutions’ restrictions in document dispatch and delivery via e-mail. This problem
was solved with the provision of an additional access option to the questionnaire from a
secure web address used for that specific purpose and only during the survey period. This
practice demonstrated that it should be part of the initial survey design taking into account
this potential problem.
The questionnaire as content and as format was pre-tested during March 2008 with a pilot
survey to a group of seven recipients (responded six) living and working in UK (five) and
in Greece (two). The group consisted of professional librarians, researchers and academic
staff in library and information science. The feedback was useful but focused more on the
design and format issues of the questionnaire rather than on the subject coverage, as the
recipients were not specialist in the research subject. This weak point of the pre-test was
known and it had been taken into account, but it was ineluctable because the researcher
was not able to ask directors or senior staff of UK academic libraries working on the
LWS management from libraries, which were not included in the research sample, to pretesting the questionnaire.

3.4.2.4 Questionnaire: content
The questionnaire aimed to collect data per LWS case about the LWS management
undertaken by the library (see, section 3.4.2.4.1), the LWS role (see, section 3.4.2.4.2)
and contextual information about the LWS and the library organisation (see, section
3.4.2.4.3). Nevertheless, the final formation of the questionnaire (questions’ order and
grouping within sections) was not followed absolutely in the design logic as presented
below, but it aimed to provide for the recipients a structured and logically-ordered list of
questions from the beginning until the end (see, Appendix I.3). The questions were
mainly closed-ended questions in order for an abstract approach to be achieved, and the
use of open-ended questions, which was not extended, served to gather extra information
in support of the understanding of the abstract concepts. Moreover, the wording of the
questions - with only very few exceptional cases mentioned below - was not ambiguous
or poor. It was also more descriptive in order for confusion or guiding to be avoided
respectively; for example phrases like “web master”, “librarian web master” or title

88

positions like “web site manager” were not used, as in previous studies reviewed (Liu
1999; Taylor 2000; Hendricks 2007; Academic library website benchmarks 2008).

3.4.2.4.1 LWS management by the Library
The researcher compiled an abstract framework on the managerial processes and tasks
derived from the literature review (see, section 2.3) and particularly from the works of
Cole (2004) and Friedlein (2001). This schema was built upon the four broad categories
suggested by Cole (2004), which are referred to in this study as “POMC”. This schema
was not based on roles (personal-centred), but on work tasks; as work tasks can be carried
out by more than person and one person having a job title (role) can work on multiple
work tasks. Moreover, this framework was free of any reference to particular theoretical
perspective or issue; such as strategic planning, developing culture, managing change and
risk management.
Planning activities were determined as: 1) Decision making about the LWS’s aims and
the objectives, plans, policies, content of the LWS, development (design) specifications
for its publication mean, sources required in human, hardware and software, budget,
working structuring and 2) Marketing. Cole (2004) places marketing among functions of
management, beyond the main four categories of POMC, but for Friedlein marketing is
one of the main components of “strategy/consulting team”.
Organising activities were determined as organisation and coordination of tasks and the
sources needed to carry them out, according to the planning specifications.
Motivating activities were determined as leading, according to any management style, the
members of library staff, who work for the LWS development and maintenance. One
relevant aspect, which arose from literature about the library staff, is the training and
skills development involving in this field of work; for example, in Evans’s (1999) study.
Controlling activities were determined as measuring progress and performance, reporting
errors and correcting deviations.

89

The examination of the LWS management was developed mainly within three of the
seven questionnaire’s sections:
-

section 4 “Management of the LWS”;

-

section 5 “LWS planning, controlling and achieving”;

-

section 7 “Organising and leading LWS development”

The design and organisation of those questions aimed to investigate primarily the
involvement of libraries in the management of LWS and then to continue with further
exploration only for the library cases, which had a main role in their web site
management (see, Appendix I.12 for control in questionnaire’s completion patterns). The
type of the main questions was close-ended, but open-ended questions were also used for
investigation of the type-position of Library staff involved in the procedures examined in
order to support the understanding on the LWS management arrangements (e.g. “If YES,
which Library staff (position titles) are involved in this process?”). Principal basis for the
design of the questions was the managerial processes and not the work tasks of the library
web staff, who were possibly involved in both in LWS management and development in
order to avoid the methodological issues identified in literature in studies examining the
identity and duties of “librarian Web Master” (Liu 1999), “authors of academic library
home pages” (Evans 1999), “webmaster” (Taylor 2000; Ragsdale 2001; Hendricks 2007)
Design error was identified in two of the sub-questions of Question 26. The respondents who would have stated that there was one member of library staff responsible for
organising the work for the LWS development and maintenance - were asked further to
provide some additional details. Two of those details were about the professional
speciality of that person and whether his/her occupation consisted solely of those duties or
additional others. The fact that those sub-questions were not completed by almost all the
respondents indicated that the wording was not appropriate.
The table 3.4 below presents a general picture of the distribution of questions within
managerial categories and questionnaire’s sections.

90

Table 3.4: Core questions for exploration of LWS management
Managerial categories

Questions1

Questionnaire’s Section

Planning

Q8

3rd

Planning

Q12a

Planning

Q12b

Organising

Q12c

Planning

Q12d

Planning

Q15

Controlling

Q16

Planning

Q17

Planning

Q18

Planning

Q20

Organising

Q25

Organising

Q26

Planning

Q27

Motivating

Q28

th

4

5th

7th

Notes:
1. For the questions, see Appendix I.3

3.4.2.4.2 Role of library web site
Section 3 of the questionnaire consisted of questions about the LWS role, which was
examined through two sources:
a) its aims and objectives as could be stated within its mission statement (Q8.1);
b) its uses as could be identified via LWS’s contents (Q9).
Moreover, a brief exploration of the change of LWS uses over time (Q10; the past and
Q11 the future) aimed to build a general frame of the LWS evolution. In this point, there
was a case of ambiguity about how the word “role” was used in question 11 (“Are there
any future plans that will affect the role of LWS?”) and whether it efficiently served the
aim of the question. An alternative wording could be: “Are there any future plans that will
change the current uses of LWS as they are stated in Question 9 above?”
Especially, for Question 9, the respondents were asked to select more than one of the
provided categories of uses, having the capability to add more with the option of “other”.
The list of five categories was derived from the results of the pilot content analysis (see,

91

section 3.4.1). However, the results of this question were not used for further analysis;
instead of them the results of the content analysis (see, section 3.4.4) were used for the
LWS uses review. The decision for asking for this information from the respondents had
two purposes:
-

to test the convenience of the LWS uses’ coding (How easily practitioners could
understand it?);

-

to make the practitioners, who participated in this survey, familiar with this
classification schema and for which they are going to provide relevant data and
about which - some of them - would be called to discuss during interviews (see,
section 3.4.6);

-

to provide to respondents a standard level of coding regarding the LWS uses,
giving to them the needed reference point for answering the following questions
(Q10 & Q11) in the same frame.

The comparison of the results derived from the survey to the content analysis (see,
Appendix III.5) showed that the coding (classification schema) for the LWS uses was
easily understandable by the survey’s respondents. The differences identified between the
results of those different methods were minor and they did not cause conflict during the
discussion with the respondents, who also participated in the interviews (see, section
3.4.6).

3.4.2.4.3 Contextual information
Most of the previous studies approaching aspects of the LWS management and
development did not take into account elements of the LWS’s context – with the
exception the study of Traw (2000) -, as discussed in section 2.3 of the literature review.
The elements, for which data was collected and examined with the main body of data
described above (3.4.2.4.1 & 3.4.2.4.2), were related mainly to:
a) Non-library involvement in aspects of LWS management. The exploration of the LWS
management was focused on the involvement of the Library in it; on the contrary the
involvement of other units within the university or other external stakeholders was

92

examined only as a factor for understanding the level of the Library’s involvement.
Consequently, the respondents were asked to skip most of the sections after negative
statements in pivotal questions (see, Appendix I.12 for control in questionnaire’s
completion patterns). Information on external involvement could be reached through the
answers to five questions: Q7, Q13, Q19, Q21 and Q22.
b) Time-range of LWS publishing. The exploration of this consideration aimed to review
the range of LWS publishing experience. This element was examined with other facets of
practice in LWS management in order to find whether this element could affect their
evolution during the integrated and structural analysis (see, section 3.4.5). For the
exploration of the time-range in LWS publishing, the respondents were asked to record
the year in which the LWS was launched for first time (Q6). Related with this aspect, see
also Desk research; section 3.4.3.4.
c) Sources for the needs of LWS development and maintenance. Two related aspects were
selected to be examined; the LWS hosting and LWS staffing. Both aspects were
examined, in the terms of the integrated and structural analysis (see, section 3.4.5), with
other related data about the LWS management. Most of the previous studies in LWS
publishing focused on the identity of the library web master/web manager’s post
(professional specialities and duties) and the aspects of servers and software were studied
focusing on actual technical specifications (see, section 2.3.4). This study aimed to
include peripheral elements related to the sources for the needs of LWS development and
maintenance, but it focused mainly on the identification of their management, rather than
on their specification. Therefore, the study excluded the element of software because it
would be difficult to collect complete and accurate data about their source regarding their
acquisition and application.
The aspect of servers was examined in the terms of the LWS hosting (Q7), looking on
whose servers within the university, the LWS was hosted (e.g. of library or other unit
within university). In other words, the question wanted to find out who was responsible
for that aspect of the LWS development and maintenance. However, the answers to this
question also indicated the existence of specialist staff that was responsible for the

93

maintenance at least of the hardware, software and files (e.g. web pages and database; if
the last one was applicable).
The aspect of LWS staffing (human resources) was examined through three main aspects:
i.

the organisational source – to whom (e.g. the library and/or other unit with
university) the staff working regularly for the LWS belonged (Q22);

ii.

only about the library’s staff, when it was applicable, the type of occupation, the
number and the speciality (Q23-Q24);

iii.

only for the library staff working solely for the LWS development & maintenance,
the organisational position within library (Q23.1)

d. Library organisation profile. Information about the library was asked through questions
Q1b (title of the library) and Q2 (mission statement of the library). These data were used
for the analysis of the aspect “type of library organisation” (see, section 3.4.3.3).
e. The overall library staffing. The study, in order to increase the understanding of the
results of the library web staff (see above), collected data about the library staffing (total
number & classification by speciality) (Q4). In addition, the range of the total number of
library staff was examined taking also into account the aspect of the total number of
library sites (Q3).
Nevertheless, the present study, in order to keep the length of the questionnaire relatively
short, excluded contextual questions related to the library management, the level of
automation within the library for service production and provision, the financial sources,
technological sources, the number and/or the type of in-house services provided and
additionally the size of the parent institution based on the students’ enrolment annually,
which was used in the Academic library website benchmarks (2008) as one main aspect
for the results analysis.
Two design errors were identified which affected the results about staffing as regards the
whole library staff and the library staff working for the LWS development and
maintenance (library web staff). The first design error was the classification used for the
identification of the professional speciality of the staff (Q4, 23.2, 24.1): “Librarians”,

94

“Information Technology (IT) staff”, “Archivists”, “Administrative staff” and “Other”
with space for details to be given. Respondents usually used the space of the field “other”
typing a sum total of staff, explaining that the classification did not match their
organisation (e.g. ‘Total 125 (not fte)’ and ‘120 - Can't differentiate between librarian and
IT, also we have some media’). The second error referred to counting of library staff (Q4,
Q23 and Q24). Respondents counted it in two different ways; either based on person or
based on the full-time equivalence (FTE). Consequently, the results were estimated. An
alternative design of these questions could be a rating range of FTE for the library staffing
(e.g. 1-50, 50-100, etc) and for the library web staff the questions could be asked
specifically to count the people, without any further examination about their speciality.

3.4.2.5 Survey response
The survey was carried out within the period 7/4/2008 – 20/6/2008, with three reminders
(see, Appendix I.4-8). The third reminder was sent separately to each case including to
the recipients’ list as well as additional persons from the wider e-mail list (secondary
contact point), making it clear that only one questionnaire was required from each library.
More reminders were not used because the period for response would over run the three
month period, which was set by the researcher as the maximum period for that process,
for time-management reasons and for securing the time homogeny of the data collection.
Moreover, as Gall et al. (1996, p. 302) noticed the use of four or more follow-ups in
studies had not led to ‘a significant increase in returns over three follow-ups’. However,
the fact that the percentage of responses increased with the use of the secondary contact
point list in the third reminder showed that it should be used at least after the first
reminder.
The response rate of the survey was 32%; 48 academic libraries returned completed the
questionnaire from the total study sample of the 149 university libraries (see, Appendix
I.9). Within the geographical sampling units the response rate was 30% for the English
libraries and 50% for the Scottish libraries (see, Appendix I.10). As Fink (2003, p. 42)
wrote ‘in practically all surveys, information is lost because of nonresponse. Nonresponse
may introduce error bias into a survey’s results’. However, according to Krosnick (1999)

95

and Dillman (1991), when the characteristics of the respondents are representative of nonrespondents, low response rates do not cause bias. Especially for the case of this study,
the non-probability sampling method successfully covered the aspect of representation at
least regarding the UK university libraries, as the study sample was compiled from the
entire sampling units of English and Scottish university libraries; the 90% of the UK
university libraries. Nevertheless, the low rate response was not a result of an unsolicited
survey implementation.
The decision to send the questionnaire to the library directors (as the primary contact
point) and to the library management team (as the secondary contact point) was verified
eventually by the sufficient completion of the questionnaires (see, Appendix I.12). As an
analysis of the respondents' profile (see, Appendix I.11) indicated that the majority of the
respondents were members of the library management team including the library directors,
for whom there was evidence of their relation and familiarity with the LWS management.
Therefore, the decision to send the questionnaire to library directors and members of the
management team was not conducive to gaining high rate response, but aimed to reduce
the bias caused by “item nonresponse”; ‘this type of bias comes about when respondents
do not know the answers to certain questions or refuse to answer them’ (Fink 1995b, p.
55).
The control of the questionnaires (see, Appendix I.12) identified three cases as providing
unserviceable data and they were excluded from the data analysis. The entire analysis of
the study was mainly based on the profiling of the LWS cases examined (see, section
3.4.5). Consequently, questionnaires, which provided very poor or little or selfcontradictory data, could not support the building of case profiling; as the survey was the
source of the core data, upon which additional and supplementary data would be added
from other research instruments. Three cases were excluded for that reason. Only one of
these three cases was due to the high percentage of “Don’t know” answers; almost to all
main questions, showing that the respondent was not familiar with the topic. That
particular questionnaire was completed by a member of library staff and not of the library
management team 9 . Moreover, for that questionnaire case some questions remained
9

The information derived from the data provided in the last part of the questionnaire about the respondent’s
details.
96

unanswered. The other two cases were identified as providing unserviceable data for two
different reasons. One of them provided very little data (it was returned almost empty)
and the other one presented a lot of contradictory statements. Therefore the final research
sample consisted of 45 LWS cases (30%); see, Appendix I.13.

3.4.3 Desk research
3.4.3.1 Desk research: an “invisible” method
Desk research is usually used during the preparation stage or as supportive process of the
main studies; for example, for the definition of the population and for the collection of
information about the sample profile (Birn 2000). Nevertheless, a common point in the
literature on research methods is that the desk research is placed among the methods in
marketing studies for secondary research data collection (e.g. Ellwood 2002). However,
an actual example of the multiple and wide use of the desk research as data collection
method is the present study, for which desk research was already applied for the pilot
content analysis (see, section 3.4.1) and the survey (3.4.2). The procedure for location of
the archived web sites, which was used for the content analysis, was desk research. In the
survey’s design (see, section 3.4.2.2), desk research was performed to locate and
evaluating of the sources a) for the definition of population and b) for the compilation of
sampling list. Jackson (1994, p. 21) defines desk research as ‘the process of accessing
published secondary data’ and he describes its process through four steps: data location,
recording, evaluation and integration. A similar definition is given by Birn (2000, p. xx):
‘Desk research is the collection, sifting and interpretation of published data’.

3.4.3.2 Aims and objectives
The desk research aimed to complete the data collection for two aspects of LWS’s context
and to collect data in order to explain an issue, which was raised during survey. The
selected information referred to cases where the academic libraries responded to the
survey (see, section 3.4.2). The objectives of the research were:

97

a) coding of the type of library organisation;
b) specifying the year of the first publication of the LWS;
c) investigating the use of Virtual Learning Systems (VLE) and other intranet systems.
For all objectives the secondary data was derived from free access sources on the Internet
and, specifically, from the official web sites of the libraries examined and the web sites of
their parent institutions. In addition, the relevant primary data derived from the
questionnaires was taken into account during the procedure of data analysis.

3.4.3.3 Objective 1: Type of Library organisation
The desk research was carried out after the completion of the survey period during July of
2008. The sources retrieved and analysed were the library and university web sites of the
Library cases who responded to the survey. The coded data recorded per library case was
about a) the organisational status of the library and b) the services provided by the library.
Additional sources taken into account in the analysis were the answers given by the
respondents for the questions: Q1b “Title of the library” and Q2 “What is the mission
statement of your Library?” (see, Appendix III.1). The results of the collected, crosschecked and coded data analysis were a broad categorisation of the library services type,
based on the content of services provision (e.g. library, archives, learning and IT) – see
results, section 4.2.2.2; Table 4.2. It is important to note that the limitations of this
categorisation were: a) the secondary data used was produced by its owners for other
purposes (Denscombe 1998) and b) this categorisation was developed only for the needs
of the further data analysis in the 3.4.5 stage. The aspect of “library organisation type”
was examined further in the integrated and structural analysis (see, section 3.4.5), with
other related data about the LWS management.

3.4.3.4 Objective 2: Year of the first publication of the library web site
The aim of the desk research was the collection of complete and valid data, indicating the
time-range of web presence in each library case. The need for that data collection arose
from the lack of relevant data of the survey (see, section 3.4.2.4.3-b). Specifically, only

98

67% of the respondents stated a specific year, whilst 20% of them stated that they did not
know the year of the first LWS publication and 13% of them did not answer the question
(see, Appendix III.1; Question 6, Table A3.5). The desk research carried out during the
survey’s period, during May and June of 2008 for each LWS cases there was response to
the survey. The Internet Archive Wayback Machine (see, section 3.4.1.4.2) was selected
and used as a data source taking into account the advantages already identified during the
pilot content analysis (see, section 3.4.1.4).
However, the accuracy of results would be a priori limited, regarding the time coverage
of the data availability of the Internet Archive collection because it begins from the year
1996; whilst Web publication was launched in 1991. This unavoidable limitation
determined that the findings could only indicate the time-range of the LWS presence
whilst at the same time obtaining the most accurate and verifiable data possible.
Therefore, the data from these research instruments were coded in two ways a) per decade
and b) per quinquennium. An indicative example was given by the comparison of results
derived from the desk research and the survey, which verified this limitation as 43% of
the survey’s comparable data referred to the period 1991-1995 (see, Appendix III.4).
In the desk research, the aspect of change in web publications was taken into account. It is
common practice for the web sites’ URL to have been changed during the publication’s
evolution. The desk research procedure included a range of searches in order to secure the
investigation’s efficiency. The search within the Internet Archive Wayback Machine was
developed taking also into account the primary data from survey’s question 6, when it
was provided, under the following search strategy:
a) Search with the current URL of the LWS, which was recorded within the sampling
procedure (see, section 3.4.2.2-d). For the cases that the URL was different from that
provided by the respondents in the Question 5 of the survey; “Home page of LWS”, a
second search was carried out as well.
b) Search with the URL of the university web site. The possibility of university URL
having changed (search for older URL versions) taking into account the year of
university establishment (information provided from university web pages) and the first
search results.

99

c) IF, the oldest archived version of the university web site was in an older year, then a
search within its pages took place in order to locate the home page of the library and to
retrieve the older version of its URL.
d) THEN, another search with the older retrieved URL of the LWS was run again.
The potential limitations regarding data availability of the archived web sites were
recorded in a checklist during the desk research. The developed checklist consisted of the
following options:
a. IF there were not results for an URL searching
b. IF the achieved version was blocked by robots.txt
c. IF the achieved version was in status “Not in Archive”, which ‘means that the site
archived has a redirect on it and the site you are redirected to is not in the archive
or cannot be found on the live web.’ (Frequently Asked Questions n.d.)

3.4.3.5 Objective 3: Use of VLE systems
The investigation of the VLE systems was instigated by the data derived from the
Question 10 of the survey (see, section 4.2.3.1). The need for deeper understanding of the
uses of VLE systems related to the LWS content was established, in order to achieve
better understanding of the data. Moreover, the results of the examination especially
about the extent of the use of VLE systems would have indicated whether this issue
would be included in the objectives of the interviews (see, section 3.4.6). Finally, the
extension of the investigation to other intranet/password protected environments was
decided in order for any other similar issue to be covered.
The desk research was carried out simultaneously during the survey period10 whenever
each library case responded. The sources retrieved and analysed were the library web
sites and the university web sites of the Library cases that responded to the survey. The
coded data recorded was about a) the existence of linking to VLE systems within the
LWS, b) the existence of the linking to other intranet or password protected web
10

During May – June 2008; therefore Internet Archive Wayback Machine was not used for this desk
research – current/online web document were used.

100

environments within the LWS, like portals, c) information provided free about the content
of VLE systems or the other intranet/password protected environments, d) the hosting of
those systems via their URL and e) the architectural position of those systems related to
the LWS.

3.4.4 Content Analysis

The content analysis aimed to identify the uses of the web sites of the libraries that
participated in the descriptive survey (3.4.2) during the period of May and June 2008.
Therefore, whilst the content analysis was carried out in November of 2008, the
documentary data used was the archived versions of May 2008 of those LWS cases11. The
data collection source was the Internet Archive and the web site versions were retrieved
via the service Internet Archive Wayback Machine (see, section 3.4.1.4). It is noticed that
the version of May 2008 was the last available, as the archived web sites need about six
months to appear publicly; this period was needed for storing and indexing by the system.
The design framework developed based on the pilot content analysis (see, section 3.4.1.3)
with only difference that in the recording process (see, section 3.4.1.3.4) the data was
stored and diversified per LWS case. In addition, no additional type of accessibility
limitations was encountered during the research procedure and the impact of the
limitations that appeared was ranged in a similarly low percentage, as discussed in section
3.4.1.3.4. Finally, the results (see, Appendix III.3) were analysed further in the terms of
the integrated and structural analysis (see, section 3.4.5) for the examination of the
subject area of LWS role, which supported the needs of the research objective 3.2.1

3.4.5 Analysis

The integrated and structural analysis aimed to identify and examine managerial
approaches undertaken by the academic libraries for the needs of their LWS development
and maintenance and to examine aspects of the LWS management with contextual
11

The survey period was from 7/4/2008 until 20/6/2008.

101

elements and the aspects of LWS uses. In other words, this fifth research instrument
aimed to provide the required results for the needs of the first three research objectives
(3.2.1, 3.2.2 & 3.2.3). It used all quantitative data for the 45 cases (research sample; see,
section 3.4.2.5 & Appendix I.13: Research sample), which was derived from the three
data collection methods (survey, desk research and content analysis).
The data analysed was based on the results of:
-

the content analysis about the LWS uses (see, 3.4.4 & for results Appendix III.3);

-

the desk research about the type of library organisation (see, 3.4.3.3 & for results
4.2.2.2);

-

the desk research about the time-range of LWS publishing (see, 3.4.3.4 & for
results Appendix III.2);

-

the desk research about the use of VLE systems (see, 3.4.3.5 & for results 4.2.3.1a);

-

the survey, excluding Question 6 (“In which year was the LWS first available?”)
because it used the relevant data from the desk research about the time-range of
LWS publishing, and Question 9 (“How is the LWS used?”) because it used the
relevant data from the content analysis.

The criteria for the selection of the study elements and the collection of the related data
have already described in each section regarding the methods. In this integrated and
structural analysis the whole data was grouped thematically, composing “piece by piece”
a complete basic profile for each LWS case of the research sample and all together these
profiles were examined thematically and per inter-related aspects. The structure of the
analysis presented whole data within its general framework, exploring the practice as it
was recorded and examining interrelations between study elements.
The analysis, firstly, presented the data about each subject area (e.g. “time-range of LWS
publishing” and “LWS management undertaken by libraries”), identified patterns of
practice and set coding for further analysis, when it was applicable and necessary for the
study. Secondly, aspects of each subject area were examined with other related aspects in
order to find out whether or not a crucial interaction or association existed between them
(e.g. cross-tabulation examination of “Development of LWS mission statement”,

102

“Development of specialised policies for the LWS” and “Development of the main
processes of the LWS management”).

Previous studies discussed (see, Chapter 2), beyond their partial examination of the LWS
management, did not examine associative data, which they had collected, but their
analysis was limited to the presentation of the results for each research element (single
element examination, see below Figure 3.4); two examples from those studies are
presented below. Thus, the inter-relations between the elements were not examined
(cross-tabulation examination, see Figure 3.4); an examination which could have brought
out a greater depth of results. Birn wrote:
‘cross-tabulations show the survey results in greater depth, indicating
where any significant differences arise in various subsamples’ (Birn
2000, p. 415)

Below, Figure 3.4 presents a demonstration with the two different data analysis of five
study elements (no.1 to no.5). The single element examination focuses on only to one
element each time, presenting the existence (“Yes”) or absence (“No”) of each element
(e.g. 93% the element no.2, 54% the element no.5); whist the cross-tabulation
examination takes into account all five elements and identifies patterns of combinations
of the existence and absence within all study elements (e.g. in 48% of the sample all five
elements appear and in 2% of the sample the combination of element no1., no3 and no.4).
Element
no. 2
No

Element
no. 3
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes

93
93%

Yes
No

Yes
100
100%

Element
no. 4
No
Yes
No

69
69%

Yes
80
80%

Element
no. 5
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
54
54%

Sum

%

5
2
13
7
6
2
17
48

5%
2%
13%
7%
6%
2%
17%
48%

100

100%

Cross-tabulation examination

Element
no. 1

Single element examination
Figure 3.4: “Single element & Cross-tabulation” examination (demonstration)

103

The ACRL (Traw 2000) studied the characteristics of LWS policies by small college and
university libraries. The survey was not only focused on the policies (existence, authority
and content) with 16 questions, but additionally contextual data was collected about the
libraries – nine questions - (e.g. size and staffing), the LWS – two questions - (e.g.
existence period) and the responsibility of the LWS development and maintenance – six
questions - (e.g. server hosting, library staff involvement). The analysis that took place
was mainly based on a single element examination of the results. The only results’
combination which was made referred to the comparison of the general library staffing to
the library staff working for the LWS development and maintenance. Single element
examination was also used for the analysis of the large range of results of the survey of 80
North American academic libraries (Academic library website benchmarks 2008). The
results for each study element - question were presented separately and in only some
cases characteristics of the sample were taken into account, like the enrollment size and
the status (public-private) of the institutions and the “webmaster staffing”. The present
study used both techniques of data analysis. For the analysis by subject initially single
element examination was used, presenting the primary results of the quantitative data
collection. However, cross-tabulations were predominantly used, examining further
selective study elements and taking into account other related elements or contextual of
LWS considerations.
The structure of the analysis (see, section 4.2) was built starting with the contextual
elements of LWS management and then by examining the main research subject areas
LWS role and the LWS management undertaken by libraries. Specifically, the first
section of analysis covered the aspects of LWS context and LWS sources for
development & maintenance and mainly aimed to set up step-by-step coding of aspects,
which were gradually used afterwards in cross-tabulations. The second section covered
the subject of LWS role, focused on the LWS uses setting coding and went ahead with
further examination of the LWS uses with aspects presented earlier in the first section.
The next three sections covered the subject area of LWS management as was undertaken
by the libraries, where cross-tabulations also took into account the aspects of the first
section and the LWS uses of the second section. Finally, the last two sections examined
the subject area of the non-library involvement in the LWS management, which brought
out a crucial aspect; the authority over LWS management (who is responsible for the

104

LWS management). This aspect was also examined with elements of the previous
sections, raising questions for further examination. Moreover, results about the main
study elements (LWS uses, LWS management patterns and authority over LWS
management) were examined with the aspect of the geographical regions of the sample
(England – Scotland) in order to identify whether or not there was any significant relation,
which would raise further questioning.
Figure 3.5 (below) is based on the Figure 2.2 “Interrelations of the library web site’s role
with library management & aspects of LWS publishing” (see, section 2.2.4). It shows the
main study elements and subject areas, which were analysed in the terms of this research
instrument. The subject area about the LWS role, which referred to the objective 3.2.1,
was examined through the approaches of LWS uses and mission statement. Nevertheless,
the patterns of the LWS uses were also examined taking into account other contextual
aspects, like time-range, library organisation type and LWS staffing. The subject area of
LWS management undertaken by libraries was examined taking into account contextual
aspects (see, objective 3.2.2) and the LWS uses (see, objective 3.2.3). In addition, the
subject of LWS management undertaken by libraries was examined, within the terms of
libraries’ or others’ involvement in the LWS management.

105

Library organisation type

Involvement of library in LWS management
Library management
LWS management undertaken by
libraries

Impacts

Role of LWS

Uses

Mission statement

Impacts

Library Web Site publishing

Non-library involvement in LWS
management

LWS management

Authority over LWS
management

LWS Development & maintenance

LWS staffing

LWS hosting

LWS publication
Content

Edition’s web
environment (design)

Time-range of LWS
publishing

Figure 3.5: Main study elements and subjects analysed in the terms of the method 3.4.5 and presented within the framework of the interrelations of
the LWS role with library management & aspects of LWS publishing

106

3.4.6 Interviews
3.4.6.1 Aims & objectives
Interviews were chosen to collect the qualitative data about the factors which affected the
formation of the management approaches and the LWS roles (see, objective 3.2.4). The
objectives of the interviews were:
a) to investigate the involvement in the authority over LWS management by other
unit(s) within the university apart from the library;
b) to examine the relation between the library management and the LWS
management;
c) to further examine the aspects of LWS resources management;
d) to explore the factors that have impacted upon the decision making about the
content development of the LWS

3.4.6.2 Content of interviews
The interviews were designed as “semi-structured interviews” (see, section 3.3). This
approach is suitable for qualitative studies through which ‘the interviewer has a list of
issues and questions to be covered, but may not deal with all of them in each interview
takes … [allowing] probing of views and opinions’ (Gray 2004, pp. 215-217). Predefined
questions were prepared in advance so that the interviews’ objectives were achieved.
However, the researcher could modify or sidestep them and include some other questions,
using her own judgement during the interviews’ conduct. Three interview schedules (see,
Appendix II.4-6) were developed addressed to the three groups of libraries identified
through the survey’s analysis based on their differences concerning the authority over
LWS management:
Group: Only library authority - libraries which stated that they had sole authority over
their LWS management;
Group: Shared authority - libraries which stated that other unit(s) within the university
was/were involved in the LWS management except the library;

107

Group: Non library authority - libraries which stated that they did not have the main
role in the LWS management
All schedules were structured in three parts, covering the subjects of:
Part I.

LWS management

Part II. Organising and leading the LWS development
Part III. Decision making on the LWS’s content
Each part of the schedules included a brief synopsis of part of the survey’s results as an
introduction and as the basis for the questions which followed. The content of those
synopses was related only to the specific group of libraries to whom each schedule was
addressed (see, below 3.4.6.4) and it was based on the results of the analysis (see, section
4.2.8.3).
Part I consisted of questions supporting objectives a) and b) of the interviews and the
questions were adapted to each group so as to differentiate them. Questions for the
investigation of the involvement in the authority over LWS management by other unit(s)
within the university apart from the library (objective a) included in the Part I of the
schedules for the groups “Shared authority” and “Non library authority”. However, it was
a design error that the group “Only library authority” was excluded from this subject
investigation; the discussion about the sole authority over LWS management by libraries
would have brought out another facet of the same issue enhancing the picture of the
subject; “why these LWS cases did not have shared authority”. The questions in Part II
were common for all groups, examining further aspects of resources management for the
needs of LWS publishing (objective c). Finally, Part III consisted of one common
question for all Groups aiming to open a discussion about the LWS’s uses, exploring the
factors that have impacted upon the decision making about the LWS content development
(objective d).

108

3.4.6.3 Data source
The interviewees were chosen to be the same people who completed the survey’s
questionnaire (see more details below in the sampling section, 3.4.6.8). This decision was
based on the advantages of their familiarity with the study and its content, their
experience in the study subject (see, section 3.4.2.5 & Appendix I.11) and their ownership
of the questionnaire’s answers, as the interview’s content was related to and connected
with the survey’s results. Therefore, the discussion could provide valid data and it could
be developed upon a common basis between interviewer and interviewee, avoiding time
consumption in explanations and descriptions, but also avoiding potential controversies in
the survey’s results; a contingency which could have affected the interviews’ validity
undermining rapport and trust and switching the discussion from the real interview’s
content about the factors and reasons shaping the practice as was pictured through the
survey’s results.
The interviewees were asked to express their opinions about some of survey’s results (see
synopsis introducing each part of the interview schedule) taking into account their
experience in the academic libraries, emphasising the reasons that affect the reported
practice. The researcher, asking explicitly interviewees’ opinion based on their general
experience and phrasing the questions to avoid focusing on the interviewees’ particular
library. This was intended to clarify from the beginning that the interview was not
focused only on their library. Achieving this starting point, the researcher aimed to open a
discussion, which would be based on interviewees’ experience, derived either from the
specific working place and/or from previous similar working environments. This point
was made clearly between the interviewer and interviewee at the beginning of each
interview. A benefit of this tactic was that the interviewees were able to feel comfortable
to freely express their personal opinion, enhancing the data as much as possible.
Nevertheless, there was a risk that the data could be related to libraries other than those in
the group which the interviewee had been selected to represent. The researcher attempted
to minimise this danger firstly by being well prepared about the profile of each case of
library and the characteristic of its group and of the other groups and secondly making
this point clear when the interviewees generalised or talked about other library cases.

109

An alternative approach of interview, which could have provided rich data regarding each
library group of library cases, would have been three focus groups composed of survey’s
respondents from the same group of library cases. Kreuger (1998, p. 18) defined a focus
group as a ‘carefully planned discussion designed to obtain perceptions in a defined area
of interest in a permissive, non-threatening environment’. However, there were too many
limitations and risks in the undertaking this approach, as are described below, and the
final decision eventually was the use of one to one interviews, instead of focus groups; a
decision which was supported as well as by Slater’s (1990, p. 115) opinion that “solo
interviews have a reputation of being better media than group discussions”.
The risk of exclusionary low participation could have be occurred as the senior library
staff were expected to be over-occupied with duties and for their participation in a focus
group one or two days would have been necessary, as they were from different cities
within entire England and Scotland and there would have had to be only one meeting
point for all of them. Moreover, especially for one of the focus groups there were only
two possible participants; a number which on the one hand was too small for a focus
group and on the other hand was unsafe for successful conduct of a focus group or could
turn the focus group into a solo interview resulting in for the study two different
approaches of interviews to occur in the study. Nevertheless, bias could be caused by the
potential threat of an oblique comparison or competitive environment of discussion, as the
participants worked for different institutions and they would be asked to speak about their
library, and in essence, represent it. In addition, there were limitations by the study’s
time-scale and financial obstacles, as the preparation of these three focus groups would
needed more time than was available and the coverage of the travel and hosting expenses
for the participants would have meant prohibitively increased costs. New technologies,
like online conference via software such as Skype (www.skype.com), probably could
reduce the financial cost considerably and the cost of time for all participants, but bias
and other communication problems could be caused because of the difficulty of nonfamiliarity of the participants’ voices.

110

3.4.6.4 Interview schedules
The schedule and the content of the interview were sent to the interviewees in advance via
e-mail before the pre-arranged appointments. The “interview schedule” (see, Appendix
II.4-6) was a MSWord file including identity and contact of the interviewer-researcher,
the interview’s framework, definition of terms and the three subject areas for discussion,
including brief results’ synopsis and basic questions. The interview framework included
the interview’s purpose, selection criteria of the interviewee, information about the
interview’s procedure (length, parts and intention of request by the interviewer for
interview’s recording), interviewee’s rights, ethical issues like confidentiality. In addition
all interviewees were asked to contact the researcher before the interview regarding any
questions they may have. The decision of making the entire frame of the interview known
in advance by the interviewees aimed to achieve the following benefits:
-

building of rapport, trust and a common terminology between the researcher and
interviewee;

-

collection of rich data as the discussion’s subjects were wide and complex,
therefore the interviewee should be at least be aware of the content in advance of
the interview;

-

time reduction for the introductory information of the interview (interview’s
framework, definition of terms and results’ synopses) so as to use as much time
as possible for the discussion

The presentation of the brief synopsis of the survey’s results to the participants could be a
controversial point of the interviews’ design, as this could influence the interviewees
causing bias. However, the results presented could not influence the interviewees because
they were basic enough in order to provide a starting point for the discussion’s subject
areas and they were related only to the specific group of libraries in which the library
interviewees worked. Therefore, the results were very similar to the information given by
the interviewees answering the survey’s questionnaire, avoiding bias caused by
comparison between the practices presented and the library practice for which the
interviewee worked. Moreover, the content of the interview was focused on the factors
affecting the shaping of the practice as was shown through the results presented and some
particular points about the specific interviewee’s library case that the researcher included

111

during the interview. Consequently, the brief synopsis of the results could not influence
the interviewees guiding their answers, as the subject of the interview was not the practice
itself, but the factors which affected the formation of this practice. In other words, the
interviewees were not asked to describe what managerial activities were undertaken by
their library, having prior information about the practice by other libraries, but they were
asked to discuss the reasons which influenced the practice as they themselves had already
described through the survey's questionnaire.

3.4.6.5 Interview length
The length proposed for the interview in the call for participation (see, Appendix II.1)
was half an hour (30 minutes). The development of a wide and complex discussion could
be restricted within this time-frame, possibly reducing the discussion’s depth and
therefore data’s richness. However, the proposition of this short time-frame aimed to gain
a sufficient number of interviewees, who would consent to participate. The candidates for
the interview were members of academic libraries’ management team; professionals
expected to be over-occupied with duties and with limited time. This assumption for high
risk of low-rate participation was already taken into account and was eventually proven
during the survey’s procedure (see, section 3.4.2.5). The proposed of length the interview
was a crucial point for candidates’ consent to be interviewed.
The half-hour length of the interview was tested during the procedure of interview
pretesting (see, below 3.4.6.7) which indicated firstly, that indeed the professionals would
consider negatively a proposition for a longer interview and secondly, that the total length
of a half-hour interview, including the introductory stage and the discussion, could be
sufficient for the data collection. Moreover, the advanced provision of the interview’s
schedule and content to interviewees assisted in the time economy advance discussion, as
the interviewees were at least aware in advanced of the interview procedure, significantly
reducing the introductory stage. Nevertheless, the researcher was available for a longer
discussion in case the interviewees expressed willingness for this during the interview's
procedure.

112

3.4.6.6 Interview modes
The interview modes proposed in the invitation were either personal, in candidates’ work
place, or by telephone interview. The interviewees could choose the mode. The main
reason for this decision was the attainment of high participation rate, as advantages of
each modes identified by the participants could be motivated; for example, participants
could choose the mode in which they would feel more comfortable to speak. The
researcher-interviewer was prepared to utilize their advantages and to encounter their
disadvantages, ensuring equal quality as regards interviews’ conduct and data collection.
Floyd (2002) discusses the differences between personal and telephone interviewing and
thoroughly compares their advantages and disadvantages. The discussion’s content was
not related to sensitive personal subjects; therefore the rapport and confidence building
was not affected by the interviewing method, as telephone interviews are not suggested
for personal and sensitive questions. In addition, telephone interviews could not reduce
the data collection, as observations or other multimethod approaches were not used during
the in-person interviews. Moreover the interviewer covered the financial cost and the cost
of time to be in interviewees’ locations within England and Scotland and the cost of the
telephone calls.

3.4.6.7 Pretesting the interview
The researcher was aware that interviews’ conduct required special skills by the
interviewer and a well-prepared design in order to control and eventually avoid practices
causing bias herself. Gall et al (1996, p. 317) pointed out exactly this interviews’ threat,
writing that ‘researchers have discovered many interviewer behaviors that affect the
quality of data yielded by the interview method’. Moreover, Kvale (1996, p. 147) wrote
that ‘the interviewer is him- or herself the research instrument. A good interviewer is an
expert in the topic of the interview as well as in human interaction’. Pilot study on the
interviews was essential procedure aiming the researcher-interviewer to:
-

become familiar with the process of conducting an interview, encountering the
worry of talking about the topic and especially in non-mother tongue;

-

test interview’s length;

113

-

improve the interview schedule and content (questions) taking into account the
comments from the participants and the researcher’s personal notes and
observations;

-

test the use and the efficiency of the equipment for recording the interviews for
both modes (in-person and telephone) for ensuring sound quality, making at the
same time the researcher familiar in their use;

-

test the procedure and coding of interview transcription

The pilot study was conducted during January 2009. One approach for pretesting
interviews was the written documents (e-mail for invitation to participation and
interview’s schedules) to be given to three fellow research students from the same
department and to one professional librarian with postgraduate qualifications in library
and information management in order to check their wording-phrasing and structure. In
addition, the researcher had a long and in-depth discussion with the professional librarian
about the content of the interview as she was the most closely-related to the topic.
However, she was not able to contribute to answering the pre-testing questions, because
she was not a member of a library’s management team or her duties and working
experience were not related to the topic. This difficulty in the pretesting procedure was,
on the one hand, expected as it had occurred as well during the pretesting of the survey’s
questionnaire (see, section 3.4.2.3), and on the other hand it substantiated the decision
which had been made, firstly, for the survey and, secondly, for the interviews for
restricted participation for a specialized group of professionals.
An additional pretesting practice was one in-person pilot interview, during which the
researcher had only one opportunity to test the entire interview’s procedure and content,
but as well as this it enabled her to become familiar with the role of the researcherinterviewer. Only one pilot interview was not enough for the needs of the pretesting study.
However, this was the only possible way for a valid pilot interview. Specifically, one
library which had participated in the survey, but had returned the questionnaire after the
survey's termination, was used for the pilot in-person interview. This case was not
included in the survey’s results and the questionnaire’s respondent (manager of the LWS)
was the only available appropriate pilot interviewee, having all the characteristics of the
candidates for the interview. Consequently, this pilot interview managed to achieve all the

114

aims of the pretesting study, simulating entirely the real interviews, as they were
eventually conducted. Naturally, the interviewee was informed in advance that the
interview would be used for pretesting purposes.

3.4.6.8 Selecting sample
The sample frame used for the selection of the cases for the interviews was based on the
voluntary consent of 25 out of the 45 respondents for further contact (see, Appendix I.9;
Table A1.2). All three groups of library cases were represented through this sample;
within those 25 library cases there was from two to 17 cases for each group of library
cases. Therefore, the collection of data could be achieved covering all perspectives. The
conducting of interviews for half of the cases per group (see, Table 3.5) was set as
primary aim in order to achieve the:
-

efficient management of total time and cost required for conducting and analysing
the interviews, especially because the cases of libraries were located within both
countries (England & Scotland), but as well as within all nine regions of England;

-

ensuring availability of alternative cases, when the cases firstly selected could
respond negatively to the call for interviews.

Table 3.5: Sampling selection for interviews
Group
Only library authority
Shared authority
Non library authority
Grand total

Indented sum of
interviews
3
9
1
13

Sum of cases
providing contact details
6
17
2
25

Total cases
9
33
3
45

The primary group of 13 cases covering all groups was compiled according to two criteria
of representation of the analysis’ results (see, section 4.2) and the distance; only when it
could be applied. Taking into account the above criteria, the remaining 12 cases were
grouped and sorted as alternative cases for contact.
The calling period was from 20/01/2009 – 26/02/2009. Three reminders took place in
total, following the selection plan. In the end of the calling period all 25 candidates for
interviewing were called personally for participation. Finally, 13 candidates accepted the
call from two of the three groups:

115

-

four (4) of the group “Only library authority”

-

nine (9) of group “Shared authority”

Most of the 12 candidates did not reply to the call and some of them replied denying
participating because of inadequacy of available time (e.g. ‘I regret that I am unable to
assist with your research owing to pressure of work’). Most of the 13 positive respondents
selected the interview to be via telephone conversation (eight cases) and the remaining
five agreed for in-person interview. The length of interviews was from 20 to 68 minutes
with an average of 36 minutes. A detailed demographic analysis of the interviewees can
be found in Appendix II.7.

3.4.6.9 Conducting interviews
All interviews were conducted during the period 6/2/2009 to 9/3/2009 by prearranged
appointments. The interviewees were contacted and called personally for participation via
e-mail (see, Appendix II.1). The researcher, via this e-mail, thanked them for their earlier
contribution to the survey and their willingness for further contact, based on this she
asked them to take part in the next stage of the study. A brief description of the purpose,
the content and the procedure (e.g. length, interviewing mode) of the interview was
included in that call. In addition, the researcher made a special note of ethical assurances
(e.g. confidentiality).
After the arrangement of the interviews’ date, time and type, the researcher emailed the
schedule, at a maximum of seven days before the appointment, to the interviewees. For
the cases of telephone interview, the researcher posted as well as the consent form with
relevant memo (see, Appendix II.2) and a print copy of interview’s schedule, asking the
interviewees to read the ethical consent form, sign it and post it back, using the prepaid
envelope. For the in-person interviews the consent form was signed by the interviewees
after the introductory statement (see, Appendix II.3). The introductory statement also took
place in the telephone interviews. In other words, the researcher ensured that the
interviewees were aware of the identity of the interviewer, the content, but additionally
the procedure and the principles of the interviews, before they were asked to read and
sign the consent form. Therefore, the consent form was designed to be short, simple and

116

in an easy-to-read format summarising basic principles of agreement. Fink (2003, p. 93)
pointed out about the consent form that it ‘is designed to protect all parties: the subject,
the investigator, and the institution. Therefore, it is important that it present information
in an organized and easily understood format’.
All the interviews were recorded digitally, after gaining the interviewees’ permission,
enabling the researcher to engage without distractions, like constantly keeping notes, and
ensuring the accuracy of data collection. During interviews, the researcher asked
questions in a straightforward, clear, non-guiding and non-threatening way. The main
questions given in advance to the interviewees worked as starting point for the discussion
and the researcher encouraged the interviewees to talk freely, expanding the subjects
under investigation, clarifying some points when it was necessary and summarising for
better understanding. Nevertheless, the main aim was the interviewees to talk rather than
to listen to the interviewer. At the end of each interview, the researcher thanked the
interviewees and an e-mail, with compliments and acknowledgement, was sent to them
some days after the interview.

3.4.6.10 Analysis of interviews
Transcription of the full content for all sound recorded interviews took place as
preparatory work for the data analysis. Slater (1990, p. 114) writes that ‘the more fully
and accurately an interview can be recorded in respondent’s own words, the better
analysis and conclusions will be’. The scripts of all interviews were analysed via
qualitative data analysis computer program; a Computer Assisted Qualitative Data
Analysis

Software

(CAQDAS)

for

the

data

analysis.

The

ATLAS/ti

(http://www.atlasti.com) was chosen as the software for the in-depth and refined coding
analysis of the interviews. It was recommended for its effectiveness by other fellow
researchers and academic staff.
In the computer era, the advantages of the use of electronic analysis of the data were not a
discussion subject and the disadvantages were negligible, especially in a period in which
all these programs have been tested in practice and have been improved. Robson (2002, p.

117

426) mentioned three possible disadvantages. The first one is about how easy it is for the
researcher to use these programs and how much time he/she needs to become familiar and
proficient in their use. The researcher became familiar and proficient within a short period
of time (before and during the interviews). To this, two considerations played a pivotal
role:
-

The software has been developed to be easy in its use, providing support materials
(manual and tutorials) online from the official web site of ATLAS/ti.

-

The researcher’s experience in software development and evaluation minimised
the time.

The second possible disadvantage was about how easy it is to make changes in the data
coding. The specific software in its development provided a user-friendly environment,
providing easy methods for editing. Finally, the third possible disadvantage was about a
tendency to impose specific approaches to data analysis. However, the researcher did not
identify any evidence for that and literature review did not bring out relevant criticism.
The full content of the interviews was read carefully and the data for analysis was
identified and marked in text passages (quotations). Each quotation was coded. The codes
referred to the core message of the interviewees’ words. Each quotation could be linked to
more than one code according to the number of messages identified.
‘The key process in the analysis of qualitative … data is coding –
classifying or categorizing individual pieces of data…’ (Babbie c2008,
p. 422)

Interlinking between codes applied when relations between them were identified, for
example association, contradiction and cause. All codes were linked to subject categories
(family codes), which referred to the questions posed or to new issues raised during
interviews (see below, Figure 3.6). In other words, codes were the coded answers to the
questions posed or coded opinions on a new significant issue, which was brought out
during interviews.
The primary results of the analysis were the answers (codes) given for each of the
questions (Code Family) and the opinions (codes) about the new issues raised (Code
Family) – see, a demonstration in Appendix II.8. The aspect of codes frequency was also
recorded; in other words, how many interviewees gave the same answer or expressed the

118

same opinion to each question or issue. This primary data analysis was the basis for the
presentation and discussion of the results as developed in Chapter 4 (see, section 4.3).

Interview’s script

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Quotation
(Exact phrase with
message(s)/information)

Code
(coded message/information)

Code
(coded message/information)

Code Family
(Question posed or new
issue were raised during
interviews)

Figure 3.6: Components of the qualitative data analysis

Furthermore, the researcher, during the data analysis, took into account the issue of ethics,
as ‘researcher bias is hardly an inevitable outcome... Experienced qualitative analysts
avoid this pitfall in at least two ways: by cultivating a deliberate awareness of their own
values and preferences, and by adhering to established techniques for data collection and
analysis.’ (Babbie c2008, p. 439) In other words, the researcher analysed each script,
trying not to think about the whole picture, which was formulated step-by-step, but she
focused on the text and the messages in a very technical way without further considering
these messages. This method helped the researcher to avoid any criticism of the
interviewees’ answers at this research stage.

3.5 Summary
This chapter presented and discussed the research design of the study, including the
research aims and objectives (see, section 3.2), the methodology (see, section 3.3) and the
research instruments applied (see, section 3.4). The study aimed to investigate the LWS
management undertaken by British university libraries, taking into account the LWS role
as one of its crucial aspects, reviewing the LWS role, examining the application of the
managerial processes for the LWS development and maintenance and the relation

119

between the LWS roles and the LWS management approaches and investigating factors
which affected the formation of those two areas. Mixed quantitative and qualitative
methods for collection and analysis of data were chosen. The methods for the quantitative
data collection were survey, content analysis and desk research and an integrated and
structural analysis was designed to work as the nodal procedure of all quantitative data
analysis. Interviews were designed to collect and analysis qualitative data. Therefore, the
results of the study are going to be developed into three sections, presenting firstly the
results of the integrated analysis of the quantitative data (see, section 4.2), then the results
of the qualitative data analysis (see, section 4.3) and finally summarising thematically the
results of the quantitative and qualitative data analysis (see, section 4.4).

120

Chapter 4.

Results of data analysis
4.1
4.2
4.2.1
4.2.2
4.2.2.1
4.2.2.2
4.2.2.3
4.2.2.4
4.2.3
4.2.3.1
4.2.4
4.2.5
4.2.5.1
4.2.5.2
4.2.6
4.2.6.1
4.2.7
4.2.8
4.2.8.1
4.2.8.2
4.2.8.3
4.3
4.3.1
4.3.2
4.3.2.1
4.3.2.2
4.3.2.3
4.3.2.4
4.3.3
4.3.3.1
4.3.3.2
4.3.3.3
4.3.3.4
4.3.4
4.4
4.4.1
4.4.2
4.4.3
4.4.4
4.4.5

Introduction
Analysis of quantitative data
Introduction
Aspects of LWS’s context and LWS’s sources for development & maintenance
Time-range of library web site publishing
Library organization
Staffing of library web site
Hosting of library web site
The role of library web site
Change of LWS’s role in time
Library’s involvement in the management of library web site
Managerial activities undertaken by the library
Library staff involved in managerial processes
Development of specialised policies for LWS
LWS management undertaken by libraries
Other managerial activities undertaken by libraries
External involvement in the management of library web site
Authority over LWS management
Authority over LWS management & library’s involvement in decision-making
Authority over LWS management & LWS management undertaken by libraries
Questions raised by the parameter of authority over LWS management
Analysis of qualitative data
Introduction
Library web site management
Shared authority over LWS management
Managerial activities undertaken by libraries affected by the shared authority
over LWS management
Involvement by other units in the management of other library activities-functions
The LWS management approaches related with the general library management
practice
Resources management issues
Human resource management (HRM)
LWS staffing within the terms of the general library practice in HRM
Interaction between library staff and library web staff
Non library web staff & non library based LWS hosting
Decision making for the uses of LWS
Summary
Time-range of LWS practice
LWS role
LWS management undertaken by libraries
Authority over LWS management
Resources and infrastructures for LWS publishing

121
123
123
123
123
124
125
130
132
136
137
140
141
147
149
151
157
159
161
162
164
168
168
168
168
170
173
173
174
174
177
177
178
180
182
183
183
185
186
188

pp. 121-191

4. Results of data analysis
4.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the results of the quantitative and qualitative data analysis, in three
main sections. The first section includes the results of the integrated analysis of the
quantitative data, based on the sample of 45 English and Scottish university libraries (see,
section 3.4.5) and the second section includes the analysis of the qualitative data collected
through 13 semi-structured interviews (see, section 3.4.6). Finally, there is a third section,
which summarises the results of the quantitative and qualitative data analysis, thereby
providing a link to the Discussion in chapter five.

Throughout the whole chapter common terms and abbreviations are used, like LWS, LWS
management, LWS uses, LWS staffing, library web staff and shared authority, whose
definition either has already been set, like LWS and LWS management or will be set once
within the text, like in section 4.2.2.3 ‘the staff belonged only to other unit(s) of the
university (Non-library staff)’. Moreover, the term library refers to each of the English
and Scottish university libraries included in the sample. The abbreviation NA will be used
in some of the tables in order to indicate “Not Applicable”, when a specific element
examined was not applicable for some cases. In addition, the term unit refers to any
organisational division within universities, like department, office or service. For the
analysis and coding, the titles of the organisational units found in survey data were
checked with the official university web sites, to improve understanding and to ensure
accurate coding. The results were: the units of IT and marketing. (see, Appendix III.1;
Question 13).
Nevertheless, the contextual aspect of the UK university types, based either on an
evaluation or other basis/criterion, could be used in the analysis of the data about the
LWS. This aspect could have added value for the understanding of the results. The British
universities can be categorised or classified in a variety of ways, such as qualitative
criteria (e.g. the “Russell Group”, the “1994 Group”, “University Alliance” and the
“Million+” Group). Whilst the “Russell Group” is well established and widely understood,
the other groupings are less well known and group membership is subject to change; for

121

example the universities of Bath 1 and Reading 2 left the “1994 Group” in 2012.
Furthermore some universities, such as St. Andrews, are not in any of the recognised
groupings. Another classification way is based on the date of their foundation (e.g.
"ancient universities", the "civic universities" including the "red brick universities" and
the "plate glass universities"). However, the foundation date is not a safe basis for
evaluation, but a significant single change based on the date of foundation in university
status occurred in 1992 when 30 then polytechnics were granted university status.

This study did not include in the data analysis the university grouping and this could be
considered as a limitation regarding a qualitative approach of the research sample, even if
there was not an accurate and absolute classification for the UK universities. A broad
categorization of the research sample could be in four groups: “The Russell Group” – 7
cases -, “other pre-1992 universities” – 14 cases -, “new universities” or “post 1992
universities” (including universities designated in 1992 and more recently) – 18 - and
“specialist institutions” (such as agricultural or music colleges) – 9 cases – (see,
Appendix I.14, Table A1.19). This designation probably suggests a slight over
representation of newer universities and specialist institutions and it indicates clearly that
the research sample derived from a wider range of academic institutional types including
seven from 24 of the Russell Group.

1

University of Bath (30 October 2012). University of Bath withdraws from membership of the 1994
Group.[online] Available from: http://www.bath.ac.uk/news/2012/10/30/1994press/ [Last accessed: 22
December 2012]
2
Morgan, J. (19 December 2012). 1994 Group leaks yet another member. The Higher Education, [online]
Available from:
http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?sectioncode=26&storycode=422179&c=1 [Last accessed:
22 December 2012]

122

4.2 Analysis of quantitative data

4.2.1 Introduction

The purpose of this section is to present the results from the integrated and structural
analysis of all the quantitative data (see, section 3.4.5), which had been collected through
the research instruments of the survey (see, section 3.4.2), the desk research (see, section
3.4.3) and the content analysis (see, section 3.4.4). Therefore, in some cases the data
source is indicated (e.g. “Data source: Survey; Question 22”). The primary results of the
survey, the desk research about the first year of the LWS publications and the content
analysis are presented in Appendix III (see, sections 1, 2 and 3); whilst the results of the
desk research about the type of library organisation and the use of VLE systems are
included in the present chapter (see below, sections 4.2.2.2 & 4.2.3.1). The structure of
the integrated analysis, as described in the related section of the research design (see,
section 3.4.5), builds step-by-step the framework of the LWS management undertaken by
libraries, starting with contextual elements of LWS management (see, section 4.2.2),
continuing with the examination of the LWS role (see, section 4.2.3), the involvement of
libraries in the LWS management (see, section 4.2.4) and focusing on the managerial
procedures undertaken by libraries (see, sections 4.2.5 & 4.2.6). However, in the last two
sections (4.2.7 & 4.2.8), the analysis further examines further the subject area of the nonlibrary involvement in the LWS management and the aspect of the authority over the
LWS management because of the relatively low percentage of LWS cases (20%), in
which the library was solely responsible for the LWS management.

4.2.2 Aspects of LWS context and LWS sources for development & maintenance

4.2.2.1 Time range of library web site publishing

The exploration of the LWS time-range showed that 73% (33 cases) of the libraries had
launched their web sites during the 1990s and 27% (12 cases) during the first decade of
2000 (see, Table 4.1 & Appendix III.2). Considering the known year of each library’s
web site’s first appearance and that the data presented here was collected in 2008, then

123

the majority of the cases had been publishing the LWS from at least eight years to more
than ten years. In greater detail, 89% (47% and 42%) of the cases (40 in total cases) had
LWS publishing practice from six to more than ten years and only 11% of them had
relatively little practice (from two to five years) as can be seen in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Time range of LWS publishing
Time range

From at least 8 years to more than 10
years (during the 1990s)

Total

More than 10 years

21 (47%)

From 6 to 10 years

19 (42%)

from at least 2 years to at least 7 years
(during the 2000s)

33 (73%)

12 (27%)
From 2 to 5 years

5 (11%)

Total

45 (100%)

4.2.2.2 Library organisation
The analysis and coding of the data, collected from the survey and the desk research
about the Library organisations of the 45 LWS cases (see, section 3.4.3.3), identified
three categories of Library organisations – library types (see, Table 4.2):
a. Library Service (in 34 cases – 76%);
b. Converged Service (in seven cases – 16%), which consisted of sub-sections of
library services and IT services. In some cases, sub-section of learning-training
services was included too;
c. Library & Archive Service (in four cases – 8%)
Table 4.2: Types of Library organisations
Library type coding

Total of cases

%

Converged Service1

7

16%

Library & Archive Service

4

8%

34
45

76%
100%

Library Service
Total

Notes:
1. “Converged Services” refers to united services with sub-sections of library services and IT services or/and
learning-training services.

124

The detailed examination of the library types (e.g. “Library & Archive Services”) taking
into account, on the one hand, the status of library sites (e.g. “Central library with
branches (more than 8)” and the scale of library staff (e.g. “001 to 050”) and, on the other
hand, sample figure of the geographical region, did not elicit any significant pattern (see,
Appendix III.6 - Detailed Examination: Library organisation type).

4.2.2.3 Staffing of library web site

a) Staff for LWS development and maintenance
The investigation of the staff (LWS staff)3, who worked regularly for the development
and the maintenance of LWS (see, Survey; Question 22), showed that in the majority of
cases (67%) the LWS staff belonged only to the library (Only library staff) - see, Table
4.3. Only in one case of LWS did the staff belong exclusively to other unit(s) of the
university (Non-library staff). Whilst, in 31% of the cases the LWS staff was mixed; there
were members of staff, who belonged either to the library or to other unit(s) of the
university. A point for discussion is that none of the respondents referred to nonuniversity staff working for the LWS; especially the LWS cases hosted on servers of an
outsourcing Internet Service Provider - ISP (see, section 4.2.2.4 Hosting of library web
site and Table 4.11).
Table 4.3: Regular staffing for the LWS development and maintenance (LWS staff)
Members of
library staff
No
Yes

Members of other
unit(s) within the
University
Yes

Other staff

Total of cases

Coding of LWS
staff

No

1 (2%)

Non-library staff

No

No

30 (67%)

Only library staff

Yes

No

14 (31%)

Mixed staff

Total

45 (100%)

(Data source: Survey; Question 22)

The LWS staff, which did not belong to the library, belonged only to other unit(s) within
the university and not to any external organisation/company. Usually it belonged to one
3

This question did not seek to find out whether there was a web team, composed of library staff and/or/not
other staff from university or outsource), but to find out the source of staff, who was involved in the LWS
development and maintenance; even if it was one or more people.

125

unit, but there were some cases that derived from two or three units (see, Table 4.4). The
analysis and the coding of the units showed that the external staff belonged to the units:
IT (10 cases), Marketing (6 cases); eLearning (1 case), Off-campus support (1 case).
Table 4.4: Regular staffing for the LWS development and maintenance (LWS staff): staff belonged to
other unit within the university than the library
Total of units

One unit
Two units
Three units

Coded unit(s) of university

Total of cases

IT

7

Learning

1

Marketing

3

Marketing & IT

1

Marketing - IT - eLearning

1

Marketing - IT - Off Campus support

1
1

no details given
Total

15

(Data source: Survey; Question 22)

The staffing arrangement for the LWS development and maintenance was examined with
the factor of time-range of LWS practice (Table 4.5). In other words, the potential relation
between LWS staffing and the length of LWS practice was examined. The results showed
that both categories of LWS staffing -mixed staff and only library staff- were found
through all broad time periods. The single case for which there was no member of library
staff working for the LWS (non-library staff) was of particular interest as it was a case
where there has been LWS presence for more than 10 years, generating the assumption
that this status was not temporary.
Table 4.5: LWS staffing and time-range of LWS practice
Time range of LWS practice
from 2 to 5 years
from 6 to 10 years

more than 10 years

Total of
cases

LWS staffing
Mixed staff

1

Only library staff

4

Mixed staff

7

Only library staff

12

Mixed staff

6

Non-library staff

1

Only library staff

14
Total

126

45

b) Library staff worked for LWS development and maintenance

The investigation of the library staff, who worked for the LWS development and
maintenance (library web staff), usually were only occupied part-time (PT) for the worktask of LWS (75%; 33 cases) having other duties too. In most of the cases, the staff scale
was from one to ten people. One person was reported only in four cases. In 25% of the
cases (11 of the total 44), apart from the PT library web staff, there consisted of members
of staff, whose duties solely related to the LWS; full-time (FT) library web staff. Usually,
one person occupied solely for the tasks of LWS (see, Table 4.6 and Appendix III.1;
Section 6).
Table 4.6: Library staff worked the LWS development and maintenance (Library web staff)
Library web staff

Library web staff scale

Total of cases

1 to 5

2

6 to 10

3

FT & PT library web staff

11 to 15

1

(Total 11 cases; 25%)

16 to 20

2

21 to 26

1

1- 5 FT and many PT

2

1 to 5

15

6 to 10

9

only PT library web staff

11 to 15

4

(Total 33 cases; 75%)

16 to 20

1

21 to 26

3

many PT

1

Total of library cases

44

Keys:
FT: Full-Time - Library staff working for the LWS solely
PT: Part-Time - Library staff working for the LWS having additional duties as well

c) Library web staff within total library staff

The number of library web staff was examined within the total number of library staff and
it was presented as its percentage within total library staff. Below in the Table 4.7 the
percentage of library web staff is presented from the smallest to the highest, also taking
into account the aspect of library sites and the library staff scale in order to formulate a

127

picture of practise which is as accurate as possible. The percentage of the library web
staff ranged from 3% to 61% within the library staff (see, Table 4.7)4, with an overall
average of 18% (see, Appendix III.7). It is noticeable that three of the four highest
percentages (61%, 33% & 20%) were found within the library staff scale “1 to 50”, but
the library site status seemed that it was not a crucial factor for the percentage of the
library staff working for the LWS.
Table 4.7: Average of the percentage of library web staff within the total library staff

Library sites status
Central library with branches (more than 8)
Central library with one branch
One site Library
Central library with branches (2-8)
Central library with one branch
Central library with branches (2-8)
One site Library
Central library with branches (more than 8)
Central library with branches (2-8)
One site Library
Central library with branches (2-8)
Central library with branches (2-8)
Central library with one branch

Library staff
scale

Total of cases

251 to 300
51 to 100
101 to 150
201 to 250
151 to 200
101 to 150
51 to 100
101 to 150
151 to 200
1 to 50
51 to 100
1 to 50
1 to 50

1
1
1
3
2
5
3
1
1
9
5
4
2

% of library web
staff within library
staff
3%
4%
5%
5%
8%
9%
10%
16%
17%
20%
22%
33%
61%

d) Full-time (FT) library web staff

A detailed examination of the 25% of the libraries – 11 cases - (see, Appendix III.1;
Section 6 & Appendix III.7), which occupied staff solely for the LWS work (FT library
web staff) - apart from the FT library web staff - showed that:
-

usually it was one person, with a maximum number of seven people (Appendix
III.1);

-

for about half of these cases (5 of 11), the full-time library web staff composed a
group/team as part of a library section related to information systems and
electronic services or they were a cross disciplinary group/team (Appendix III.1);

-

the majority of these cases operated within a Central library with 2 to 8 branches
(Appendix III.7);

4

Without the aspect of library sites, the average was ranged from 2% to 91% (see, Appendix III.7).

128

-

the average of total library web staff percentages within the total library staff was
26.5% (Appendix III.7).

Nevertheless, the cross-tabulation in Table 4.8 showed that the existence of solely
occupied library web staff (FT) - composing or not a team - was not related exclusively to
any particular type of LWS staffing, type of library organisation and the time-range of
LWS practice. In other words, FT library web staff:
-

were found in both LWS staffing (mixed and only library staff), but more
frequently in the cases with only library staff (eight from the eleven cases);

-

who composed a team, were found almost equally in both LWS staffing (mixed
and only library staff);

-

were found in all three library types (type of library organisation);

-

were found in cases, which had variety of time-range of LWS practice (from two
to more than ten years).

FT & PT

Yes

No
Only library
staff

Total of cases

Mixed Staff

Time range of LWS
practice

No

Library Service

more than 10 years

1

Converged Service

from 6 to 10 years

1

Library & Archive Service

more than 10 years

1

Converged Service

from 2 to 5 years

1

Library type

Existence of team

LWS staffing

Library web staff

Table 4.8: Library web staffing (FT occupation), LWS staffing, library type & time-range of LWS
practice – detailed cases examination

Library Service
Converged Service

Yes

Library Service

from 6 to 10 years

2

more than 10 years

2

from 2 to 5 years

1

from 6 to 10 years

1

more than 10 years

1

Total

11

129

4.2.2.4 Hosting of library web site

The majority of library web sites were hosted on server(s) of other unit(s) within the
university (72%); 24% of them were hosted on library’s server(s) and for a small
percentage of cases (4%), the host was an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP) –
see, Chart 4.1 & Appendix III.1

Chart 4.1 Host of library web site
2 (4%)
Outsource Internet Service Provider (ISP)

11 (24%)

Other unit w ithin the university
Library

32 (72%)
Total: 45 cases (100%)

Data source: Survey; Question 7

Cross-tabulations of LWS hosting status with time-range of LWS practice (see, Table 4.9)
and with Library type (see, Table 4.10) showed that there was not any major impact in
particular. However, especially in the two cases of libraries which hosted their LWS on
server/s of an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP) the long time-range of practice
(from 6 to 10 years) showed that this decision could not be temporary and the fact that
both those cases were not located in a Converged service, whose basic component was an
IT section, could be related to the absence of technical specialised staff and equipment,
but this assumption would have high risk when more than half of the LWSs hosted on
library’s server(s) related to organisations provided only library services (see, library type
Library Service).

130

Table 4.9: LWS hosting & time-range of LWS practice
The LWS is hosted on server/s of:
an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP)
of other unit within the university

the Library

Time range of LWS practice

Total of
cases

from 6 to 10 years

2

from 2 to 5 years

3

from 6 to 10 years

12

more than 10 years

17

from 2 to 5 years

2

from 6 to 10 years

5

more than 10 years

4
Total

45

Table 4.10: LWS hosting & Library type
The LWS is hosted on server/s of:
an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP)
of other unit within the university

the Library

Total of
cases

Library type
Library Service

2

Converged Service

3

Library & Archive Service

4

Library Service

25

Converged Service

4

Library Service

7
Total

45

The cross-tabulation of LWS hosting status with LWS staffing and the regular staff
belonging to another unit within the university other than the library (see, Table 4.11)
revealed that many survey respondents did not include in the staff working regularly for
the LWS the people who worked exclusively with the LWS hosting: for all the cases with
hosting by a ISP and for more than half of the cases with hosting by another unit within
the university, the stated staff belonged only to the library.

131

Table 4.11: LWS hosting & LWS staffing
The LWS is hosted on server/s of:
an outsourcing Internet
Service Provider (ISP)
(total: 2; 4%)

of other unit within the
university
(total: 32; 72%)

LWS staffing
Mixed staff
Only library staff

Mixed staff
(total: 12)

Non-library staff
Only library staff
the Library
(total: 11; 24%)

Mixed staff
Only library staff

LWS staff belonged to:

Total of
cases

Library & Marketing

1

Library

1

Library & IT

6

Library & Learning

1

Library & Marketing

2

Library & Marketing - IT
Library & Marketing - IT - elearning
Library & no details given for
the other university staff
IT

1

Library
Library & Marketing - IT - Off
Campus support
Library
Total

1
1
1
19
1
10
45

4.2.3 The role of library web site

a) Analysis of LWS mission statements

The data about LWS mission statements was extremely limited; therefore its analysis
could provide only indicative information. Only 7% (three cases) of the survey’s
respondents stated that a mission statement for LWS had been developed and the content
of the mission statement was provided for two of those cases (see, also Appendix III.1;
Questions 8 & 8.1). Both statements referred to the LWS as an alternative format of or
tool for provision of library services to library’s “stakeholders” or “customers”. Below,
the exact text of statements provided is presented:
Case 86: ‘Libweb is one of a range of formats the library offers to all its stakeholders, giving
current information on library services & collections. Libweb seeks to be a
concise, easily navigable & intuitive website complementing hard copy, word-ofmouth & learn.gold information sources. Libweb is a dynamic website that will
continually adapt to the changing information needs of all of its users.’

132

Case 95: ‘to provide our customers with a professional service through the effective and
efficient use of the web as a communication tool.’

b) Analysis of LWS uses

The results of the content analysis of the library web sites (see, Table 4.12 & Appendix
III.3) established seven categories of LWS uses:
Category A. Provision of electronic library and information services - (in 45 cases;
100%);
Category B. Provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the
building/s of the library - (in 45 cases; 100%);
Category C. Provision of information about the character and the operation of the
library as an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff,
undertaken projects) - (in 38 cases; 84%);
Category D. Provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff (e.g. Intranet
with informative and/or functional content) – (in 5 cases; 11%);
Category E. Provision of collection development functions open to the academic
community (academic staff - students) – (in 5 cases; 11%);
Category F: Provision of information about library's commercial activities (e.g.
books’ sale) – (in 1 case; 2%);
Category G: Provision of cultural information about the town/city where the
university library is placed – (in 2 cases; 4%)

The type of outcome (see, section 3.4.1.3.4) for most of the categories was
informative/referential (see, Table 4.12). Specifically, from the seven identified
categories of LWS uses,
-

only informative/referential (content for provision of information about something)
– four categories;

-

only functional (content for action related to something) – two categories;

-

informative/referential and functional – one category

Moreover, regarding the stakeholders, the library users were identified as the most
frequent target-group. Analytically:

133

-

three of them addressed only to the library users;

-

three of them addressed to the library users & the general public;

-

one of them addressed only to the library staff;

information about the character and the operation of the
library as an organisation
information about library's commercial activities
cultural information about the town/city where the
university library is placed
information about services and facilities hosted locally
in the building/s of the Library
electronic library and information services
collection development functions open to the academic
community
an online “workstation” for the library staff

C
F
G
B
A
E
D

Total

Informative
/Referential

Use for provision of:

Functional

Code

Table 4.12: LWS uses (categories)

38 (84%)
1 (2%)
2 (4%)

No

Yes

Address to:

library users
/ general
web public

45 (100%)
45 (100%)
5 (11%)
5(11%)

library users
Yes

No
Yes

Library staff

(Data source: Content analysis)

There were seven patterns found in the categories of LWS uses (Table 4.13). The key
points of the analysis were:
-

Common basis for all seven patterns was that all libraries (100%) at least used
their LWS for provision of electronic library & information services and provision
of information about library services & facilities in-house provided (see, above
categories with code A and B, with further coding of the pattern as AB);

-

The LWS was usually used (73%) for provision of electronic library &
information services, for provision of information about library services &
facilities in-house provided, and/or not for provision of information about the
library as an organisation (coding of the patterns as ABC & AB) – basis patterns,
with most frequent schema the ABC (58%), whilst the schema AB was 16%;

-

The five enhanced patterns were found in 27% of the cases, but each single
pattern of them was located in very small percentages: ABCD (9%), ABCE (9%),
ABCG (4%), ABCF (2%) and ABCDE (2%);

-

The web sites of libraries were always addressed to the library users (100%),
mostly to the library users and the general web public (84%) and less additionally
to the library staff (11%);

134

Table 4.13: Patterns of categories of LWS uses & target groups
1

Group of
patterns

Total

Patterns

ABCDE

1 (2%)

ABCD

4 (9%)

ABCF

1 (2%)

ABCG

2 (4%)

ABCE

4 (9%)

Library users

General web public

Library staff
Yes
(5; 11%)

Enhanced
(12; 27%)

ABC

26 (58%)

AB

7 (16%)
Total

Address to:

Yes
(38; 84%)

Yes
(45; 100%)

Basic
(33; 73%)

No
(40; 89%)
No (7; 16%)

45 (100%)

Notes:
1. for the patterns’ coding, see Table 4.12
(Data source: Content analysis)

Nevertheless, examination of LWS uses with the aspects of time-range of LWS practice
or library type (see, Appendix III.8) showed that the development of LWS uses was not
related to the experience of libraries with LWS publishing or the type of library.

However, detailed examination of LWS uses within the eleven cases, which occupied FT
library web staff (see, Table 4.14) showed that the enhanced LWS uses were
proportionally higher (45.5%); whilst within whole sample the percentage was 27% (see,
Table 4.13). Nevertheless, the examination of the existence of team consisting of the FT
library web staff could not be related to the development of basic or enhanced LWS uses.
However, the examination with the aspect of LWS staffing showed that Enhanced LWS
uses were developed mostly in cases with Only library staff.
Table 4.14: Library web staffing (FT occupation) & LWS uses – detailed cases examination
LWS uses: group

LWS uses: pattern
A-B

Basic
(total: 6; 54.5%)
A-B-C
A-B-C-D-E
Enhanced
(total: 5; 45.5%)

LWS staffing

A-B-C-D

Total of
cases

Mixed staff

No

1

Only library staff

Yes

1

Mixed staff

Yes

1

Only library staff

No

3

Mixed staff

Yes

1

No

1

No

1

Yes

2

A-B-C-E
A-B-C-G

Team existence of FT
library web staff

Only library staff

Total

11

135

The examination of the patterns of uses of LWS taking into account the sampling unit of
geographical regions, (see, Table 4.15) brought out two points:
a) The Scottish Library cases presented a higher trend to enhanced patterns, related
to the general trend; pattern “A-B-C-E” (37.5%), which within the total sample it
has percentage only 9% and pattern “A-B-C-G” was found in 12.5%, when the
general percentage was 4%.
b) All the cases with pattern “A-B-C-D”, which in essence added the library staff as
a target-group for the LWS, were found only in English Library cases.
Table 4.15: LWS uses & geographical regions
LWS uses:
group

ENGLAND

pattern

Enhanced

SCOTLAND

Sample

A-B-C-D-E

1

(2.7%)

0

(0%)

1

(2%)

A-B-C-F

1

(2.7%)

0

(0%)

1

(2%)

A-B-C-G

1

(2.7%)

1

(12.5%)

2

(4%)

A-B-C-E

1

(2.7%)

3

(37.5%)

4

(9%)

A-B-C-D

4

(10.8%)

0

(0%)

4

(9%)

A-B

6

(16.2%)

1

(12.5%)

7

(16%)

A-B-C

23

(62.2%)

3

(37.5%)

26

(58%)

37

(100%)

8

(100%)

45

(100%)

Basic
Total

4.2.3.1 Change of LWS role in time

a) since the launch of the first version of LWS

The analysis of limited data (see, Appendix III.1; Questions 10 & 10.1) about the change
of LWS uses since the first version of LWSs for 11% of the cases (5 cases of the total
sample) showed that changes had been in the categories A (provision of electronic library
and information services) or B (provision of information about services and facilities
hosted locally in the building/s of the Library), either with addition or removal of related
content. Respondents stated, as the reason for the library to decide to reduce content of
LWS related to electronic library and information services, the provision of them through
the university’s Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) – e.g. ‘We no longer put much info
on our website, it is all provided via our VLE’.

136

Desk research in all LWS cases (see, section 3.4.3.5) showed that in 18% of them (8 cases)
VLE or another intranet system existed and for one of these cases (2%) the system was
not part of the LWS content, without any reference/interlinking from the LWS’s web
pages. In the rest seven cases, the VLE or intranet system included broad content for the
university and the relation between LWS and that system was:
-

either as interlinked content (9% - where the university’s system was used for
control of access to electronic library sources, operating between the free accessed
LWS’s web pages and the commercial information services subscribed);

-

or as separate university’s sub-sites (where LWS included limited content, like
OPAC and general information about the library, whilst a whole section of
university’s VLE system hosted the main library related web content). In those
three cases (7%) the web presence of the library took place in two sub-web sites;
in the LWS for free access by general web public and in university’s VLE for
access only by the academic community.

b) future plans

The analysis of data about future plans that would affect the role LWS indicated that the
status of the LWS role was not going to be changing (see, Appendix III.1; Question 11 &
Question 11.1).

4.2.4 Library’s involvement in the management of library web site

The majority of librarians (93%)
stated that the library had the main

Chart 4.2
Main role in LWS management by Library
3 ( 7 %)

role in the LWS management (see,

No
Yes

Chart 4.2 & Appendix III.1).
However,

the

involvement

of

Libraries in areas of decisionmaking varied (see below, Chart
4.3). Libraries were involved in:

4 2 ( 9 3 %)

Total: 45 cases; 100%

Data source: Survey; Question 14

137

-

decision-making about the content of LWS - 100% of the cases;

-

leading and controlling the LWS development procedure (content and design) 80% of the cases;

-

decision-making about the design of LWS - 69% of the cases;

-

budget for the LWS development procedure (content and design) - 47% of the
cases.

Chart 4.3 LWS managerial aspects & library’s involvement
0
9
14

Total sum: 45

21

No

45

Yes

100%
36
31

80%

69%

24

47%

12.a Decisions about 12.b Decisions about
the LWS content
the LWS design

12.c Leading and
controlling the LWS
development
procedure (content
and design)

12.d Budget for the
LWS development
procedure (content
and design)

Data source: Survey; Question 12

The most common patterns of library’s involvement in the above decision-making areas
within the six in total identified (see, Table 4.16) were:

138

-

involvement in all four areas (47%);

-

involvement in three areas apart from budget (20%);

-

involvement only in decision-making about the content of LWS (18%).

Table 4.16: Patterns of library’s involvement in decision making areas

Decision-making
about the
content of LWS
(YES in 45 cases)

Leading and
controlling the
LWS development
procedure
(content and
design)

Decision-making
about the design
of LWS
(YES in 31 cases)

Budget for the
LWS development
procedure
(content and
design)

Total

(YES in 24 cases)

(YES in 36 cases)
No
Yes

No

No

8 (18%)

Yes

No

1 (2%)

No

3 (7%)

Yes

3 (7%)

No

9 (20%)

Yes

21 (46%)
45 (100%)

No
Yes
Yes

Total of library cases
(Data source: Survey; Question 12)

Comparison of the patterns of library’s involvement in decision making areas with the
groups of LWS uses’ patterns (see, Table 4.17) showed that proportionally the most
enhanced LWS uses identified in cases, in which library was involved in all four or the
three decision-making areas.
Table 4.17: Library’s involvement in decision making areas & LWS uses (groups of categories)

Decision making areas about:
LWS
content

LWS uses:

Leading
&
controlling

LWS design

Budget

No

No

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes

No

Total

group of patterns
Basic

7

Enhanced

1
Basic

2

Enhanced

1

Yes

Basic

3

No

Basic

1

Basic

6

Basic

14

No
Yes
Yes

Enhanced

3

Enhanced

7

Total of library cases

45

139

The patterns of library’s involvement were also examined, taking into account the
sampling feature of the geographical regions (see, Table 4.18). The cross-tabulation
showed that in 87.5% of the Scottish LWS cases the library was involved in all four
decision making areas, covering the 1/3 of the cases of this pattern (seven of the total 21);
whilst this pattern was found in the almost 38% of the English LWS cases.
Table 4.18: Library’s involvement in decision making areas & geographical regions
Decision making areas about:
Geographical
region

LWS
content

Leading
& controlling

No
ENGLAND
(total: 37; 100%)

Yes

Yes

Budget

No

No

21,6%

8

No

5,4%

2

Yes

8,1%

3

No

2,7%

1

No

24.3%

9

Yes

14
7

Yes
No

Yes

SCOTLAND
(total: 8; 100%)

LWS design

% per
Geogr.
Region

Yes

No

Yes

No

37.9%
12.5%

Yes

Yes

Yes

87.5%

Total of library cases

Total

1
45

4.2.5 Managerial activities undertaken by the library

The most frequently occurring managerial activity undertaken by libraries (93%) was
organising the LWS development and maintenance (see, Table 4.19). Activities for
training and skills development for library staff working on LWS (73%) and planning
processes (71%) were recorded also in high percentages, whilst performance
measurement and monitoring processes were undertaken by almost half of libraries (49%).
Development of specialised policies for LWS was one of the most frequent managerial
functions (60%); marketing processes followed with 53%. Moreover, officially stated
procedures and work schedule for LWS development and maintenance were developed by
22% of libraries. Process of annual budgeting was recorded in 7% of libraries and 20% of
the libraries undertook externally funded projects for the development of particular webbased library services. In addition, 7% (3 cases) of libraries had developed a mission
statement for LWS, when only 91% (41 cases) did not have a library’s mission statement
(see, Appendix III.1; Table A3.8).

140

Table 4.19: Managerial activities undertaken by library

Q1

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Planning processes

15

32
(71%)

9
(20%)

1
(2%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

Responsibility for organising the LWS
development & maintenance

25

42
(93%)

3
(7%)

0
(0%)

0
(0%)

-

45
(100%)

28

33
(73%)

8
(18%)

1
(2%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

16

22
(49%)

20
(44%)

0
(0%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

8

3
(7%)

41
(91%)

1
(2%)

0
(0%)

-

45
(100%)

18

27
(60%)

15
(33%)

0
(0%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

27

10
(22%)

30
(67%)

1
(2%)

1
(2%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

20

3
(7%)

37
(82%)

2
(4%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

21

9
(20%)

31
(69%)

2
(4%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

17

24
(53%)

18
(40%)

0
(0%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

Activity/Responsibility

Activities for training and skills
development for library staff worked
for LWS
Performance measurement &
monitoring processes
Development of mission statement for
LWS
Development of specialised policies for
LWS
Official stated procedures and work
schedule for LWS development and
maintenance
Annual budget for LWS development
and maintenance
Undertaking of external funded
projects for development of particular
web-based library services
Marketing processes

Notes:
1.
2.

2

Related question of the questionnaire (Data source: survey)
Respondents skipped question

4.2.5.1 Library staff involved in managerial processes

The survey’s respondents were asked to provide details about the job titles of staff
involved in the managerial processes for the LWS related to the planning, marketing,
performance measurement & monitoring and organising, when library undertook these
processes (see, Table 4.20). The answers were analysed and their content was coded
mainly as:
-

library web staff: for the library staff, who worked regularly for the LWS
development & maintenance;

-

members of library management team: for the library staff, who had managerial
responsibilities within library organisation (including the LWS management);

141

-

non-library web staff: for the library staff, who worked mainly for other library
function(s) apart from the LWS;

-

other university staff: for staff, who worked in the parent institution, but did not
belonged to the library

Table 4.20: Completion coding - details provided about staff involved in managerial processes

Activity/Responsibility
Planning processes
Organising the LWS development &
maintenance
Performance measurement &
monitoring processes
Marketing processes
Notes:
1.
2.

3.

Q1

Provision of
valid data

Provision of
not valid
2
data

No
answer

15.1

31

1

0

32

26

40

0

2

42

16.1

21

0

1

22

17.1

22

1

1

24

Total

3

Related question of the questionnaire (Data source: survey)
When data was irrelevant with the question (e.g. The respondent described the procedure without
mentioning the library staff was involved in it.) or it was not sufficient to be analysed or to be coded (e.g. the
respondent wrote only “various”)
Total of cases, for which the respondents answered “Yes” in the subject related question; Question 15, 25,
16 and 17 respectively.

a. Planning processes

The staff involved in planning processes belonged only to library (see, Table 4.21) and
they were mainly members of the library management team with members of library web
staff (42%) or only members of library management team (39%). In fewer cases, the staff
consisted of:
-

only library web staff (10%);

-

members of library management team, of library web staff and of non-library web
staff (6%);

-

members of library management team and non-library web staff (3%)

The non-library web staff worked on library functions for the provision of library services
and they were involved in planning for suggestions. Moreover, usually – in 16 of the 18
cases -, all members of library web staff were involved in planning processes. Regarding
the members of library management team, in about 2/3 of the cases more than one person
was involved, having responsibilities in various sections of the library, including the

142

manager of LWS and the library director. In one case, the marketing management team
was leading the planning processes. In 1/3 of the cases with only one person responsible
for the planning, his/her position title was related to information systems, electronic
services and the LWS (like “web site manager”). Nevertheless, none was the library
director.
Table 4.21: Staff involved in the LWS planning process
Member(s) of library
management team

Library web staff

Non-library web staff

Total

No

Yes

No

3 (10%)

No

12 (39%)

Yes

1 (3%)

No

13 (42%)

No
Yes
Yes

Yes

2 (6%)
Total

31 (100%)

(Data source: Survey; Question 15.1)

b. Organising processes

The analysis of the results of the question 26 (see, Table 4.22) showed four staffing
schemas for the organising processes:
-

for 67% of the libraries, the lead was based on one person, who was usually a
member of the library management team occupied partially with LWS duties and
for more than 1/3 of them his/her title indicated relation with IS and electronic
services. In only 1/5 of the cases was his/her title directly related to the specific
duties of LWS management (e.g. “Library Web Manager or Administrator” and
“Libweb manager”);

-

for 17% of the libraries, organising activities were undertaken by the entire library
web staff based mostly on team-work without one-person leading (self-managed
team);

-

for 9% of the libraries, there was a co-ordination by one member of library
management team with the library web staff; his/her role was more consultative
rather than leading;

143

-

for 2% of the libraries, there was a two-manager leading schema separating
responsibility for technical and content aspects

These managerial arrangements for LWS organising were found to be unrelated to the
number of library web staff (see, Appendix III.9).
Table 4.22: Library staff involved in the LWS organising process
Managerial
arrangement

One person
(total: 28)

Position

Member of library
management
team
(total: 23)

Total

Director of library

2

Web site manager
Management team (relation
with IS and electronic
services)
Management team

5

Member of library
staff
(total: 4)

11
5

Staff
Staff (relation with IS and
electronic services)
Position under review

2

Self-managed team
Co-ordination by one
Management team (relation with IS and electronic
member of library
services)
management team
with the library web
Management team
staff
(total: 4)
Two-managers leading schema

7

Non one-person based managerial arrangement (not details given)
Total

67%

2
1
17%

3
9%
1
1

2%

2

5%

42

100%

(Data source: Survey; Question 26)

The examination (see, Table 4.23) of the managerial arrangement for the LWS organising
with aspects of LWS staffing showed that:
-

the LWS staffing schemas (regarding the mixed staff and the only library staff)
were not related to any particular managerial arrangement of LWS organising, as
all five approaches occurred in both groups of cases;

-

The existence of FT library web staff was found in the two most frequent practices;
One person and Non one-person based managerial arrangement, but mostly under
the first one (One person; 8 cases of the 11 ones);

-

all five cases, where there was FT library web staff composing a team, had
managerial arrangement based on One person;

144

Table 4.23: LWS organising & LWS staffing
LWS
staffing

Library
web
staff
PT & FT

Team existence
of FT library
web staff
No
Yes

Managerial arrangement

Total

Self-managed team

1

One person

2

Co-ordination by one member of management team

1

Mixed
staff
FT

Nonlibrary
staff

NA

PT & FT

NA

2

Non one-person based managerial arrangement

1

One person

6

Self-managed team

1

NA

NA

1

No

One person

3

No

Self-managed team

2

Yes

One person

3

Co-ordination by one member of management team

3

Non one-person based managerial arrangement

1

One person

14

Self-managed team

3

Two-managers leading schema

1

NA

Only
library
staff
PT

NA

Total

45

c. Performance measurement and monitoring processes

The analysis of the results (see, Table 4.24) showed that there was a variety of staff
involved in performance measurement and monitoring processes; members of library
management team, library web staff, non-library web staff and other university staff.
Nevertheless, it was noticed in some cases (13%) the exclusive involvement by nonlibrary web staff and other university staff. Respondents wrote for the non-library web
staff that it consisted of cross-section library staff and especially for the case in which
only non-library web staff worked on this managerial area, the staff belonged to the
“Enquiry desk staff (nine senior staff)”. In two of the three cases with participation from
other university staff, respondents specified that this staff belonged to the university web
team. However, the most frequent staffing consisted of either only member(s) of library
management team (33%) or only member(s) of library web staff (29%). Usually, for both
groups one person participated in these processes, specialised in IT.

145

Table 4.24: Staff involved in the LWS performance measurement and monitoring processes
Library staff
Member(s) of
library
management
team

Library web staff

Yes

No

Non-library web
staff

Yes

Yes

Other university
staff

Total

Yes

1 (5%)

No

1 (5%)

No

No

3 (14%)

No

No

No

7 (33%)

Yes

No

No

6 (29%)

Yes

No

2 (9%)

No

Yes

No

1 (5%)
Total

21 (100%)

(Data source: Survey; Question 16.1)

d. Marketing processes

In marketing processes the most frequent staffing (see, Table 4.25) consisted of members
of library management team and non-library web staff (27%). Moreover, in half of the
cases the non-library web staff belonged to the library marketing section. However, it was
noticed that the increased involvement of non-library web staff (in Total 12 cases - 55%),
related to the small participation of library web staff (in total 7 cases - 32%), who
participated with either one person or all. In addition, the involvement of management
library team (in total 14 cases – 64%) took place either with one or with more than one
member, who were not usually specialised in information systems or electronic services
or the LWS. Nevertheless, in only one case the marketing processes were undertaken
exclusively by “user consultations”, about whom the respondent did not provide further
details about whether they were members of library staff or members of university staff or
they worked for a private company.

146

Table 4.25: Staff involved in the LWS marketing processes
Library Staff
Member(s) of
library
management team

Library web staff

No
Yes
Yes

No

No
Yes

User
consultations
(not specified)

Total

Yes

No

6 (27%)

No

No

4 (18%)

Yes

No

2 (9%)

No

No

2 (9%)

Yes

No

4 (18%)

No

Yes

1 (5%)

No

No

3 (14%)

Non-library web
staff

Total

22

(Data source: Survey; Question 17.1)

4.2.5.2 Development of specialised policies for LWS

Specialised policies for the LWS were developed by 60% of libraries (see, section 4.2.5).
The most frequent subject areas covered by policies were a) “administrative issues
(responsibilities, procedures, aims/objectives, etc)” in 93% of those cases and b) “design
and construction issues” in 89% of them (see below, Chart 4.4 & Appendix III.1;
Question 18.1). The subject area of “copyright & freedom of information issues” was
included in 56% of the policies and 48% of them covered issues about “metadata &
documentation”. However, only one library respondent added one more subject area; the
“Web site archiving”.

147

Chart 4.4 Subject areas included in LWS policies
%

100
89 %

93 %

90
80
70
56 %

60
48 %

50
40
30
20
10

4%

0
Design and
construction
issues

Administrative
issues

Metadata and
documentation
issues

Copyright and
freedom of
information
issues

Web site
archiving

Data source: Survey; Question 18.1

All four subject areas, excluding “Web site archiving”, were present in 30% of the
policies, which was the most frequent pattern of subject areas (see, Table 4.26). The
second more frequent pattern (22%) was the inclusion of “administrative issues”, “design
& construction” and “copyright & freedom of information”. In addition, about 70% of
library policies included issues of three or four subject areas. Finally, the subject area of
“administrative issues” or “design & construction issues” was included in the few cases,
whose policies focused on only one subject area.
Table 4.26: Patterns of subject areas covered by specialised policies for the LWS

Administrative
issues

Design
&
construction
issues

(in 25 cases)

(in 24 cases)

Copyright
&
freedom of
information
issues
(in 15 cases)

No

Yes

No
No

No
Yes
Yes

Metadata
&
documentation
issues

Web site
archiving

(in 13 cases)

(in 1 case)

No

Total

%

No

2

7%

No

No

1

4%

Yes

No

1

4%

Yes

No

1

4%

No

No

4

15%

Yes

1

4%

Yes

No

3

11%

No

No

6

22%

No
Yes
Yes

Yes

No
Total of library cases

(Data source: Survey; Question 18.1)

148

8

30%

27

100%

4.2.6 LWS management undertaken by libraries

The examination of the wide managerial processes of planning (P), organising (O),
motivating (M) and controlling (C) undertaken by the libraries which had the main role in
LWS management (42 of the 45; see, section 4.2.4), as reported through the answers of
the survey (see, Table 4.27; supplementary see, section 4.2.5), showed that there were two
frequent patterns:
-

covered all four areas (43% - 18 cases; “POMC”);

-

coverage of the three areas, except from the Controlling (19% - 8 cases; “POM”)

The remaining 38% of cases presented a variety of six patterns, with coverage of three to
none of the managerial areas. Nevertheless, the absence of coverage in controlling was
found in the highest percentage of 48% and in organising was found in the lowest
percentage of 2%. Overall the notion of “controlling” was not present in 48% of cases
(the highest percentage), whilst the notion of “organising” was present in almost all cases
(98%).
Table 4.27: LWS management patterns
Patterns

Planning

Organising

Motivating

Controlling

Total of cases

none

No

No

No

No

1 (2%)

O

No

Yes

No

No

3 (7%)
4 (9.5%)

OM

No

Yes

Yes

No

Don't know

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

PO

Yes

Yes

No

No

POC

Yes

Yes

Don't know

Yes

No

Yes

POM

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

8 (19%)

POMC

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

18 (43%)

OMC

2 (5%)
4 (9.5%)
2 (5%)

Total

42 (100%)

Planning

Organising

Motivating

Controlling

Coverage

76%

98%

76%

52%

Absence

24%

2%

24%

48%

(Data source: Survey; Questions 15, 25, 28 & 16)

Cross-tabulations of LWS management patterns with other aspects did not reveal any
particular relation (see, Appendix III.10). The examined aspects were: time-range of LWS

149

practice, type of library, library’s involvement in decision-making and organising
arrangement. However, the examination of LWS management patterns with the aspect of
LWS uses and the sampling feature of geographical regions identified a key point.
Enhanced patterns of LWS management, regarding the coverage of managerial areas
(like POMC, POC and OMC), were located in higher percentages proportionally within
the LWS cases with enhanced patterns of LWS uses (see, Table 4.28) and within the
Scottish libraries (see, Table 4.29); for example these libraries had POMC pattern of 50%,
when the general percentage was 43% and POC pattern in 12.5% when the general
percentage was 5%. The English libraries presented similar percentages with those of the
sample.
Table 4.28: LWS management & LWS uses (groups of categories)
LWS uses: group

LWS management patterns

Total

none

1

O

2

OM

4

OMC

1

Basic

Enhanced

PO

4

POC

2

POM

5

POMC

12

O

1

OMC

1

POM

3

POMC

6
Total

42

Table 4.29: LWS management patterns & geographical regions
LWS management patterns

SCOTLAND

Sample

none

1

(3%)

0

(0%)

1

(2%)

O

3

(9%)

0

(0%)

3

(7%)

OM

3

(9%)

1

(12.5%)

4

(9.5%)

OMC

2

(6%)

0

(0%)

2

(5%)

PO

3

(9%)

1

(12.5%)

4

(9.5%)

POC

1

(3%)

1

(12.5%)

2

(5%)

POM

7

(20%)

1

(12.5%)

8

(19%)

POMC

14

(41%)

4

(50%)

18

(43%)

34

(100%)

8

(100%)

42

(100%)

Total

150

ENGLAND

4.2.6.1 Other managerial activities undertaken by libraries

Other managerial activities undertaken by libraries were examined (see, Table 4.30). The
results showed that within the 42 LWS cases, for which the library had the main role in
the LWS management, libraries usually developed LWS policies (64%) and marketing
processes (57%). Development of work procedures & schedules was found in 24% of
these cases and only 7% of these libraries developed a LWS mission statement or an
annual LWS budget.
Table 4.30: Other LWS managerial activities undertaken by libraries
Managerial activity

Total
Total

%

Development of LWS mission statement

3

7%

Development of Marketing processes

24

57%

Development of LWS policies

27

64%

Development of annual LWS budget
3
7%
Development of work procedures &
10
24%
schedules
(Data source: Survey; Questions 8, 17, 18, 20, & 27)

Within the 42 LWS
cases, for which
library had the main
role in LWS
management

These managerial activities were also examined in the terms of their application within a
planning process (32 cases; see, Table 4.20). The results showed that libraries usually
developed most of them undertaking at the same time planning processes (see, Table
4.31). Specifically, in the terms of LWS planning, the activities were developed in the
percentage of:
-

67% - Development of LWS mission statement;

-

88% - Development of marketing processes;

-

89% - Development of LWS policies;

-

100% - Development of annual LWS budget;

-

90% - Development of work procedures & schedules;

151

Table 4.31: Other managerial & planning procedures
Application in cases, for which planning
processes were undertaken too

Application in
LWS cases:

Managerial activity

%

Total
Development of LWS mission statement

3

2

67%

Development of Marketing processes

24

21

88%

Development of LWS policies

27

24

89%

Development of annual LWS budget
3
3
Development of work procedures &
10
9
schedules
(Data source: Survey; Questions 8, 15, 17, 18, 20, & 27)

100%
90%

Cross-tabulation (see, Table 4.32) of their application showed that usually libraries
undertook none or one or two of them at the same time; the four most frequent patterns of
their application by the libraries referred to:
-

development of LWS policies (21%);

-

development of marketing processes & development of LWS policies (19%);

-

none activity (17%);

-

development of marketing processes (14.3%)

Table 4.32: Other managerial activities (patterns)
Development of
LWS mission
statement
Yes

Development
of marketing
processes
No

No

Yes

Development of
LWS policies

Annual
budget

No

No

Development of
work procedures &
schedules
No

No

No

Yes

1 (2.4%)

1 (2.4%)

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

1 (2.4%)

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

1 (2.4%)

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

1 (2.4%)

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2 (4.8%)

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

5 (11.9%)

No

Yes

No

No

No

6 (14.3%)

No

No

No

No

No

7 (17%)

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

8 (19%)

No

No

Yes

No

No

9 (21%)
Total

(Data source: Survey; Questions 8, 17, 18, 20 & 27)

152

Total

42 (100%)

a) Development of LWS mission statement

The detailed examination (see below, Table 4.33) of the libraries, which had developed a
LWS mission statement (7%; 3 cases) showed that:
-

all of them referred to library services from England, with time-range in LWS
practice from six to ten years or more than ten years;

-

two out of the three of them had developed a LWS mission statement, in the terms
of their planning processes, having developed specialised policies for their LWS
in administrative issues and having presented that they undertook managerial
processes for all four areas (POMC);

-

one out of the three had developed a LWS mission statement, but without an
undertaking of other relevant managerial activities, having organising as the sole
main managerial activity;

-

all of them referred to LWS cases with basic categories of LWS uses

153

Development of
specialized LWS
policies in
administrative issues

O

No

No

POMC

Yes

Yes

Existence of
library mission
statement

Yes
No

Library
service

England

LWS uses:
group

Undertaking
of planning
processes

Geographical
county

LWS management
pattern

Library type

Table 4.33: Cases developed LWS mission statement – detailed cases examination

Basic

Time range of LWS
practice

Total

from 6 to 10 years

1

more than 10 years

1

from 6 to 10 years

1

Total

154

3

b) Undertaking external funded projects

The detailed examination (see, Table 4.34) of the libraries, which have undertaken
externally funded projects in order to develop particular web-based library services (20%;
9 cases) showed that:
-

there was no annual LWS budget for any of these cases;

-

the library was involved in decision-making over the LWS budget for more than
half of these cases;

-

the library undertook planning processes for its LWS in almost all of these cases;

-

there was variety of LWS management patterns, but in most of them the library
undertook activities for three or for all four main LWS managerial areas.

Table 4.34: Cases undertaken external funded projects – detailed cases examination
Existence of
planning processes
No

Library’s
involvement in the
LWS budget
No
No

Yes
(total: 8; 89%)

Yes
(total 5; 56%)

LWS
management
pattern
O

Existence of annual
LWS budget

Total

No

1

POM

No

1

POMC

No

2

PO

No

1

POC

No

1

POM

No

1

Don't know

1

No

1

POMC

Total

9 (100%)

c) Planning LWS work procedures

The detailed examination (see, Table 4.35) of the libraries which have developed
officially stated procedures and work schedules for the LWS development and
maintenance (24%; 10 cases) showed that:
-

for all these cases, the library had organising and motivating processes;

-

for almost all of these cases (9 of 10), the library had planning processes;

-

for almost all of these cases (9 of 10), the library had covered either three or all
four LWS management areas (POMC and POM);

-

there was not any particular organising arrangement;

155

-

usually the LWS staff consisted of only library staff, but their LWS was not
usually hosted on library’s servers (see, section 4.2.2.4);

-

half of these cases (5 of 10) occupied PT & FT library web staff and for three of
them the FT library staff composed a team, including in other words five of total
11 cases with PT&FT staff and three of the total five cases where the FT staff
composed a team (see, section 4.2.2.3-d):
a) five of the total 11 cases occupied FT library staff
b) three of the total five cases composed of a team

Library web staff

Team existence of
FT library web
staff

LWS management
pattern

LWS hosting on
library servers

Co-ordination by
one member of
management
team
Non one-person
based
managerial
arrangement

LWS staffing

Organising
arrangement

Table 4.35: Cases developed LWS work procedures – detailed cases examination

Total

Only library
staff

PT

NA

POMC

No

1

Only library
staff

PT

NA

POMC

No

1

Mixed staff

PT & FT

Yes

POMC

PT & FT
One person

Only library
staff
PT

Self-managed
team

Yes

Only library
staff

PT & FT

NA

No

No

1

No

1

Yes

1

OM

No

1

POM

Yes

1

POMC

No

1

POMC

Yes

2

POM

Total

156

9

4.2.7 External involvement in the management of library web site

a) University policies & guidelines

University policies and/or guidelines affected issues and aspects of LWS in 89% of the
cases (see, Table 4.36). These aspects were related mostly to the subject areas “design &
construction issues” (95%) and “copyright & freedom of information issues” (70%) and
less with “administrative issues” (43%) or “metadata & documentation issues” (28%) –
see, Chart 4.5 & Appendix III.1; Question 19.1.
Table 4.36: University’s policies/guidelines affected LWS

Activity

Q1

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

University’s policies/guidelines affected
LWS

19

40
(89%)

2
(4%)

0
(0%)

0
(0%)

3
(7%)

45
(100%)

Notes:
1.
2.

2

Related question of the questionnaire (Data source: survey)
Respondents skipped question

Chart 4.5
LWS subject areas affected by university’s policies & guidelines
%

100

95%

90
80

70%

70
60
50

43%

40
28%

30
20
10
0
Design and
construction issues

Administrative issues

Metadata and
documentation issues

Copyright and freedom
of information issues

Data source: Survey; Question 19.1

157

An interesting point was that for almost all libraries (26 of the 27 in total) which
developed LWS policies, there was already an existing framework of policies and
guidelines of their parent institution (see, Table 4.37).
Table 4.37: Library’s web policies and university’s policies / guidelines affected LWS
University’s policies/guidelines affected LWS

Library’s web policies

Total

No

1 (2%)

Yes

1 (2%)

No

14(31%)

Yes

26 (58%)

NA1

3 (7%)

No
Yes
NA1
Total of Library cases

45 (100%)

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question
(Data source: Survey; Question 18 & 19)

b) Non-library involvement in LWS management

Involvement in the management of LWS was recorded for 80% of the cases (see, Chart
4.6). Respondents identified the involvement only from other unit(s) of the university and
not from other external public or private organisation(s). The analysis and coding of the
details provided brought out involvement by the units of IT (47%) and marketing (39%),
and both of them (14%).
Chart 4.6
Involvement in LWS management by other units within the university
9 (20%)

IT
Marketing
IT & Marketing

No
Yes

5 (14%)
17 (47%)

36 (80%)

14 (39%)
Total: 36 cases (100%)

Total: 45 cases (100%)

Data source: Survey; Question 13 & 13.1

158

4.2.8 Authority over LWS management

The cross-tabulation about the role of Libraries in LWS management and the involvement
of other unit(s) within the university in LWS management (see, Table 4.38) showed that:
-

for the 73% of the cases, the library and one or more university units were
involved in the authority over LWS management (shared authority);

-

for 20% of the cases, the library had sole authority over LWS management (only
library authority);

-

for 7% of the cases, the library did not have main authority over LWS
management (non-library authority)

Table 4.38: Authority over LWS management (patterns)
Library had the main
role in LWS
management
No
Yes

Existence of
involvement by other
university unit
Yes

Pattern of authority
over LWS management

Total of cases

Non-library authority

3

(7%)

No

Only library authority

9

(20%)

Yes

Shared authority

33

(73%)

45

(100%)

Total
Data source: Survey; Questions 13 & 14

Cross-tabulation of the authority aspect with the LWS uses, also taking into account the
university units involved did not reveal any particular relation between them (see,
Appendix III.11; Table A3.45). However, the examination of the authority and the timerange of LWS practice (see, Table 4.39) showed that the newer established LWS cases
were managed under the status of the shared authority and the non-library authority was
not a temporary status for LWS management, as the time-range of LWS practice for those
cases was from six to more than ten years. In addition, cross-tabulation between the
aspect of authority only and the groups of LWS uses’ categories identified that
proportionally LWS cases with only library authority over LWS management had a
higher percentage of enhanced LWS uses and a lower percentage of basic LWS uses
related to the quota within total sample (see, Table 4.40).

159

Table 4.39: Authority over LWS management & time-range of LWS practice
Authority over LWS management

Time range of LWS practice

Only library authority

Shared authority

Non-library authority

Total

from 6 to 10 years

5

more than 10 years

4

from 2 to 5 years

5

from 6 to 10 years

12

more than 10 years

16

from 6 to 10 years

2

more than 10 years

1
Total

45

Table 4.40: Authority over LWS management & LWS uses (groups of categories)

LWS uses
(group of categories)

Only library
authority

Shared
authority

Non-library
authority

Sample

Total

%

Total

%

Total

%

Total

%

Basic

5

56%

26

79%

2

67%

33

73%

Enhanced

4

44%

7

21%

1

33%

12

27%

9

100%

33

100%

3

100%

45

100%

Total

The examination of the aspect of authority, taking into account the sampling feature of
geographical regions, brought out two points (see, Table 4.41):
-

All cases with non-library authority over LWS management were located in
English cases.

-

The group of only library authority was more frequent in Scotland than in
England, proportionally with the total sample and reversely the group of shared
authority was more frequent in England than in Scotland.

Table 4.41: Authority over LWS management & geographical regions of sample
ENGLAND

Authority over LWS management

Whole sample

Total

%

Total

%

Total

%

Only library authority

6

16%

3

37.5%

33

20%

Shared authority

28

76%

5

62.5%

9

73%

Non-library authority

3

8%

0

0%

3

7%

37

100%

8

100%

45

100%

Total

160

SCOTLAND

Cross-tabulation of the aspect of authority with the type of library and the involved
university units (see, Table 4.42) did not identify any significant relation regarding the
library type for all three groups of cases and regarding the involved unit for the group of
cases with only library and shared authority. However, for the small group of the LWS
cases with non-library authority over their management, it was found that the marketing
unit was more involved in relation to the IT unit, whose involvement within the whole
sample was higher (see, Appendix III.I; Table A3.14).
Table 4.42: Authority over LWS management, Library type & involved university unit(s)
Authority over LWS
management

Library type

University unit(s)
involved

Converged Service
Only library authority

3
None

Library Service
Converged Service

Shared authority

Library & Archive
Service

Library Service

Non-library authority

Total of cases

Library Service

6
IT

1

Marketing

3

IT

1

Marketing

2

Marketing - IT

1

IT

15

Marketing

7

Marketing - IT

3

Marketing

2

Marketing - IT

1
Total

45

4.2.8.1 Authority over LWS management & library’s involvement in decisionmaking

The possible impact of authority over LWS management on the involvement of library in
decision-making about LWS managerial aspects was examined and this cross-tabulation
identified (see, Table 4.43) that:
-

for the cases with only library authority, there was a trend for libraries to be
involved in the decision-making about the LWS content, design, development
procedure and budget;

161

-

for the cases with shared authority, no particular trend was identified, as there
were a proportional quota regarding all patterns of practice, related to the quotas
within whole sample;

-

for the cases with non-library authority, there was a trend libraries to be involved
only in the decision-making about LWS content;

Simultaneously, the examination of library’s involvement in the decision-making did not
bring out any particular relation with the involvement in LWS management by a
particular unit (see, Appendix III.11; Table A3.46).
Table 4.43: Authority over LWS management & library’s involvement in decision-making

Decision-making areas
(patterns)

Only library
authority

Shared
authority

Non-library
authority

Whole sample

Total

%

Total

%

Total

%

Total

%

content – design

0

0%

1

3%

0

0%

1

2%

content - development procedure
content - development procedure –
budget
content
content - design - development
procedure
content - design - development
procedure – budget
Total

0

0%

3

9%

0

0%

3

7%

0

0%

3

9%

0

0%

3

7%

0

0%

6

18%

2

67%

8

18%

2

22%

6

18%

1

33%

9

20%

7

78%

14

43%

0

0%

21

46%

9

100%

33

100%

3

100%

45

100%

4.2.8.2 Authority over LWS management & LWS management undertaken by
libraries
The examination of the aspect of authority with the identified LWS management patterns
(see, section 4.2.6) showed that the group of cases with only library authority almost
entirely (89%) had the most frequent patterns identified already; POMC & POM, whilst
in the 55% of the cases with shared authority these patterns were found. Furthermore, the
variety of the other six patterns was grouped almost entirely within the remaining 45% of
the cases with shared authority (see, Table 4.44). In addition, cross-tabulation based on
the aspect of authority showed that there was not any particular relation between the LWS
uses (group of categories) and LWS management patterns (see, Appendix III.11; Table
A3.47).

162

Table 4.44: Authority over LWS management and LWS management patterns
Authority over LWS
management

LWS management
patterns

Total

O

1 (11%)

POM

2 (22%)

POMC

6 (67%

Only library authority

8 (89%)
Total

9 (100%)

none

2 (3%)

O

2 (6%)

OMC

2 (6%)

POC

2 (6%)

PO

4 (12%)

OM

4 (12%)

POM

6 (18%)

POMC

12 (37%)

15 (45%)
Shared authority

18 (55%)
Total

33 (100%)

Cross-tabulations showed that the factor of authority could not be an obvious factor for
the formation of a range of aspects examined in relation to LWS management.
Specifically, it was found that authority was not related to the formation of:

-

The library’s organising arrangements, with the indirect exception of the group of
library cases with non-library authority which usually did not have the
responsibility for the organising within the terms of the LWS development &
management (see, Appendix III.11; Table A3.48).

-

The existence of FT library staff, with the exception that only establishment of
team was found solely within cases with the status of shared authority (see,
Appendix III.11; Table A3.49).

-

The undertaking of externally funded projects by libraries. Detailed examination
(see, Appendix III.11; Table A3.50) of the cases which undertook externally
funded project for the development of web-based library services also did not
identify evidence that connects the development of this managerial activity with

163

the authority of LWS management and library’s involvement in decision-making
about financial aspects of LWS (see, also section 4.2.6.1-b.).
-

The development of LWS mission statement. The detailed examination (see,
Appendix III.11; Table A3.51) of the cases which developed a LWS mission
statement (7%; 3 cases) showed that none of the factors of external involvement or
impact could have affected these libraries regarding the development of LWS
mission statement (see, also section 4.2.6.1-a). The factors examined in crosstabulation were: authority over LWS management, involved university unit(s) in
LWS

management

and

existence

of

university

policies/guidelines

in

administrative issues affecting LWS.

However, authority over the LWS management was found to be related in some ways to
aspects of LWS sources (see below, Table 4.45; also sections 4.2.2.3 & 4.2.2.4). Cases
with only library authority had only library web staff; cases with shared authority had
either only library web staff or mixed staff and finally within cases with non-library
authority all three types of web staffing were found. However, the external staff (not
belonging to library) was not exclusively related to the unit(s) involved in the LWS
management. Nevertheless, the cases with LWS hosting on servers of an outsourcing
Internet Service Provider (ISP) were located only in the group of non-library authority
and the university unit involved in LWS management was the marketing unit; whilst
correlation could not be found with LWS hosting and the other two groups of cases with
only library and shared authority.

4.2.8.3 Questions raised by the aspect of authority over LWS management

The analysis found that the LWS management was not an exclusive matter for libraries
for a very high percentage (80%; see section 4.2.8) and it identified that the aspect of
authority over the LWS management could affect the extent of libraries’ decision-making
and the formation of the LWS management undertaken by libraries, as variety of patterns
were identified, especially within the group of cases with shared authority.

164

Table 4.45: Authority over LWS management & LWS sources aspects
Authority over LWS
management

University unit(s) involved
in LWS management

LWS staffing

LWS staff belonged to:

Only library authority

NA

Only library staff

Library

Mixed staff

Library & IT

Only library staff

Library

IT

Library & IT

Mixed staff
Shared authority

Marketing

Marketing - IT

Non-library authority

Marketing
Marketing - IT

Total

other university unit

4

library

5

other university unit

5

other university unit

11

library

1

other university unit

1

Library & Learning

other university unit

1

Library & Marketing

other university unit

2

Library & Marketing - IT - Off Campus
support

library

1

no details given
Only library staff

LWS hosting on server(s) of:

Library

other university unit

1

other university unit

2

library

4

Library & Marketing - IT

other university unit

1

Library & Marketing - IT - e-learning

other university unit

1

Only library staff

Library

other university unit

2

Mixed staff

Library & Marketing

Internet Service Provider (ISP)

1

Only library staff

Library

Internet Service Provider (ISP)

1

Non-library staff

Library & IT

other university unit

1

Mixed staff

Total

45

165

Common practice within the groups of cases with only library and shared authority was
the low percentage of cases which developed controlling processes, established official
stated procedures and work schedule and had an annual budget for the LWS development
and maintenance, developing however specialised policies for the LWS and undertaking
marketing processes. Moreover, the library web staffing was based on a few people
working PT for the LWS. In other words, the activities of LWS management,
development and maintenance were not the responsibility of a specific section of the
library. After a long time-range of LWS practice from six to more than ten years,
questions were raised about which managerial perspective has formatted this organising
practice and whether this practice was common place for other libraries functions. In
addition, the high percentage of LWS hosting on other unit server(s) and of mixed LWS
staff rose questions about the extent of library’s involvement in the management of
sources and publishing procedure.

Common practice also for all three groups of cases was that the LWS was found to be
used almost exclusively as a tool for provision of electronic library & information
services, for provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the
building/s of the Library and for provision of information about the character and the
operation of the library as an organisation, addressed mainly to the academic community
(see, LWS categories of uses; A, B & C). However, additional LWS content was
developed in connection to other uses again mainly addressed to the academic community,
proportionally, mostly from the cases with only library authority and less from the other
two groups (share and non-library authority). Consequently, a question was raised about
the factors which impacted on that decision on the LWS content.

a) Only library authority over LWS management

The library cases with sole authority over the LWS management, usually, were involved
in all main areas of decision-making about LWS and they developed activities for all four
broad managerial areas. Furthermore, responsibility for the organising for these libraries
was usually based on one member of the management team, whose duties for the LWS
were in almost all cases in additional to others. At the same time, the remaining staff
working for the LWS belonged only to the library. In addition, in the few cases where

166

there was also FT staff - except from the PT - they did not compose a team. Questions
were raised over whether this managerial practice in LWS was common place in the
library management in general.

b) Shared authority over LWS management

The library cases with shared authority over the LWS management presented a variety of
patterns of library’s involvement in decision-making, in LWS management patterns
undertaken by libraries and in organising arrangements and LWS staffing. From the very
few cases that occupied FT library staff, for some of them this staff composed a team
which belonged to a section related to information or IT systems and electronic services.
In addition, there was not exclusive relationship between the university units involved and
the mixed LWS staffing. The questions raised were:
-

what reasons caused the involvement in the LWS management by other university
unit(s);

-

whether the involvement by other university unit(s) in the management was
common practice for other library functions – apart from the LWS;

-

whether and in what aspects the involvement of the other unit(s) affected the LWS
management undertaken by the libraries;

-

whether the LWS management practice of shared authority was common place in
the Library management in general;

c) Non-library authority over LWS management

The library cases with non-library authority over the LWS management were examined
only in the areas related to the library’s involvement in decision-making and the LWS
sources. The LWS staffing included all three types (only library, mixed and non-library)
and the LWS hosting was mostly on server(s) of an outsourcing ISP or of other university
unit(s). The questions raised were:
-

what reasons affected these libraries not having the main responsibility of the
LWS;

-

whether the involvement by other university unit(s) in the management was
common practice for other library functions – apart from the LWS;

167

4.3 Analysis of qualitative data

4.3.1 Introduction

The purpose of this section is to present the results from the analysis of the 13 interviews
with library professionals who worked in LWS management, who were included in the
respondents to the survey and voluntarily also participated in the interviews. They worked
either for cases with only library authority or shared authority over LWS management.
Moreover, all interviewees made clear that they were talking specifically for their specific
working place. For more information concerning the interviews, see section 3.4.6. The
interview schedules can be found in Appendix II.4-5. The section is divided into three
main sub-sections. The first sub-section presents the results of the discussion about
general issues in LWS management. The second and third sub-sections cover the focused
discussion on aspects of resource management and decision-making in LWS content and
uses. The interviewees’ comments were analysed according to the questions posed, taking
into account subjectively related comments made and issues raised during the interviews.

4.3.2 Library web site management

4.3.2.1 Shared authority over LWS management

The interviewees of the group of cases with shared authority were asked about the factors
which have impacted on the shaping of this practice; the shared authority over LWS
management. The most frequent factor referred to by five of the nine interviewees was
that the university management decided to develop one institutional web site including all
sub-web sites of all academic departments and services, either for better controlling of
information or for achievement of a common “look-and-feel” of the university web
presence.
‘…there is another aspect … our web presence is structured into
extranet and intranet. Extranet is handled by the department called
external affaires and that’s because it’s about the public safe to get in
the databases; it has to do basically with disciples…’ Interviewee6
‘…a number of years ago there was an intension of university for all
web sites to come under the university look-and-feel. They tried …. I
mean there are still some sites around … they don’t…academics they
have their own web sites and there is a recognition that academics

168

may be different, but we within the library we thought that it will be
basically a good idea, because students used to the look of university’s
web site, then we fit in that and it makes as one institution.’
Interviewee5

Another interviewee mentioned precisely that the idea of a same university interface was
derived from the library and not from the university management. Consequently, the
library management decided, asked for and achieved the involvement of another unit.
Nevertheless, Interviewee1 – in contrast – explained that her library had solely the
management of their LWS because of the absence of pressure from the university
management for another unit(s) to be involved.
‘College management, College management seniors, is hugely
concerned with selling courses, getting students; they concern in
marketing. At the moment, they don’t really care - they are not
interfering with us and I don’t know how long it will continue.’
Interviewee1

Three of the nine interviewees referred as a major factor, for the involvement of another
unit in LWS management, the inadequacy or absence of specialist library staff in aspects
of web development and maintenance. However, checking the statements of those three
interviewees about the potential financial impacts on the LWS management and the
staffing profile of their LWS cases (source: their statements in the questionnaire),
financial inadequacy or small size of library staffing could not be a reliable assumption
for the reason causing the inadequate number of specialist library web staff. For example,
one of them had approximately 80 employees in four library sites and at the same time 14
of them worked for the LWS having other duties as well (PT occupation on LWS tasks)
and, at the same time, recruitment of specialist staff was not included in the library
planning – as the interviewee herself said. For more related reasons which caused
inadequacy of library web staff, see below 4.3.2.4; see, low understanding of the special
needs/requirements of (library) web publishing. On the contrary, the inadequacy of
human resources on behalf of the university was mentioned by Interviewee1 as one of the
reasons that the library had the sole authority over LWS management; ‘…the web team
does not have the staff resource to possible manage it for us’.

In addition, Interviewee3, who worked for a LWS, for which the library had sole
authority over its management, - in the terms of the final question for any additional

169

comment - shared a personal idea about a possibly beneficial involvement in the LWS
management by a university committee with consultative role composed of academics,
students, IT unit and marketing unit, in order for the library to have an overall input of
stakeholders about the LWS. This idea was not found to be applied within the British
academic libraries examined by the present study, but a similar practice was reported for
American academic libraries; “website policy committees” for overseeing website policy
on content, IT, graphics, and other topics, in which library staff participated (Academic
library website benchmarks 2008) – see, section 2.3.4.

4.3.2.2 Managerial activities undertaken by libraries affected by the shared
authority over LWS management

The interviewees of the group of cases with shared authority were asked about whether
and which managerial activities were affected through the practice of this shared authority
over LWS management. The analysis of the answers showed that the status of shared
authority was not a crucial factor for the formation of the variety of LWS management
patterns, which were identified through the quantitative data analysis and raised a relevant
question (see, section 4.2.8.3-b). Taking into account the overall managerial profile of
these library cases, which was formatted via the survey and the answers provided via the
interview, for only two of them relation was partly identified between other unit’s
involvement and absence of library’s involvement in decision-making and development
of managerial processes undertaken by the library; whilst there was reported a range of
uncovered managerial areas for all these cases. Specifically, the involvement in the
decision-making in the design mentioned by an interviewee was verified by the relevant
statement given through the questionnaire and the absence of performance measurements
processes reported for a library case in the questionnaire was verified by the interviewee’s
answer. Nevertheless, the results of the interviews showed that five areas were affected
and three interviewees mentioned more than one area:

170

-

decision-making in the design (for eight of the nine interviewees);

-

decision-making in the content (for two of the nine interviewees);

-

organising and leading web site development (for two of the nine interviewees);

-

planning processes (for one of the nine interviewees);

-

performance measurements processes (for one of the nine interviewees);

The interviewees mentioned a range of involvement in the decision-making in the design;
from consultation in technical aspects to complete control of the lay-out and the
information architecture. An example of limitations derived from this involvement was
given by Interviewee6 saying that ‘…but when they [library web staff] want to change
things in the design or the layout, they need some IT staff to assist in that. There is no
way to have editorial authority there’. It was noted that the high involvement in this area
was found in library cases not necessarily in small size libraries, but in cases for which
staff belonged to other university unit working for the LWS development, the LWS was
hosted on server(s) of other unit and there was inadequacy of specialist library staff. An
example about problems that libraries encountered because of this complex situation was
given by Interviewee13:
‘Our Communications Department has responsibility for whole web
site, not only of the library. We have to make it in a similar style and we
want to make some changes to the style to suit the library, because we
found the navigation in the overall web site is not very good for us and
that’s one problem. The other problem we have with the IT department
is that we would like a number of links into the web site to other
databases and we need their involvement in order to achieve this,
because we don’t have technical expertise to build the search
capacities to the databases and link them to the web site, so those are
other problems we have with the web site.’ Interviewee13

This evidence in LWS staffing and LWS hosting was common practice for the two
interviewees, who mentioned problems with consistency caused by the involvement in
organising and leading web site development (see, more about it below in section 4.3.3.4).
An example of statement about consistency problems was:
‘it’s difficult because they (library staff) work part-time and from now it
is more difficult, because they have moved in another building … 20
min from there…actually they need to be together [staff from library, IT
and marketing unit] when they need to do something complicated’ and
‘the problem is finding the staff of the IT department to make all these
to work’. Interviewee13

Nevertheless, the involvement in decision-making in the LWS design can affect the
control of libraries over the whole LWS publishing, regarding the implementation of
library’s decisions in the LWS content development. None of the interviewees alluded to

171

that, although through the description of the practice by Interviewee11 this point was
brought out. Specifically, she said:
‘What would happened in real life…it would be we would ask it for the
ICT department and either they would say that this is impossible or
they would say that it would take a lot of time and effort and that would
be a project and then they charge us.’ Interviewee11

The involvement in decision-making in the LWS content was mentioned by two
interviewees, highlighting the primary role of the marketing units in that; on the contrary
for the decision-making in the LWS design both marketing and IT units were involved.
Interviewee16, talking about the library whose staff who added content in the library web
pages, noticed that: ‘When they want to put anything within reasons then they have to
make sufficient and put them down…’ and Interviewee6 said that: ‘We write the content,
but the external affairs check it before publishing for whether it should be there or not’.
However, Interviewee6 explained that this limited authority over the content and the fact
that they did not have direct control of the content made the library attempt to keep the
content very general and static in order to avoid updating and expanding it.

Finally, Interviewee5 referred to the involvement in the planning processes by the
marketing unit, as this took decisions for when the university web site, including library’s
sub-site, should be redesigned, forcing library to follow this schedule. Specifically, she
said:
‘…because this seems more like marketing site - the university site - is
to attack new students…they want to be very up to date; they want to
change it very frequently, so typically they change the template every
two years, which is quite fast for us really… sometime we are not in the
same template as they are, because we don’t have staff who could do
that during the year…’ Interviewee5

172

4.3.2.3 Involvement by other units in the management of other library activitiesfunctions

The interviewees from the group of libraries with shared authority over the LWS
management were asked whether involvement in management by other university units
was common practice and for other library activities/functions too. More than half of the
interviewees (five) stated that there was involvement only in the LWS management. For
example, Interviewee13 said: ‘Not really, no. I mean we have a lot of autonomy in those
things…and I think otherwise normally we are free to operate as we want’. Two
interviewees referred to the involvement of IT unit for network aspects, which was
common for the whole university and not only for the library to be managed by the IT
unit. Finally, two interviewees mentioned the university management’s involvement in
administrative and financial aspects, which was common practice for all university
services and departments.

4.3.2.4 The LWS management approaches related to the general library
management practice

All interviewees were asked whether the LWS management practice could be considered
as common with the other library functions, in the terms of the general library
management. Most of the interviewees stated that the LWS management was common or
quite common for the general library management practice. Therefore, to a great extent
the range of LWS management patterns - as they identified through the analysis (see,
sections 4.2.6 & 4.2.8.2) - could reflect the general library management practice.
However, to a limited extent interviewees pointed out that the LWS management practice
was not common and it was secondary related to the general library practice. The two
interviewees, who stated that it was not common, talked about a poor LWS management,
which was also verified by their answers to the questionnaire. They rationalised that
situation as a result of low understanding by the library management of the special needs
and requirements for the management and development of a web site.
‘As regards the LWS, I think that there is lack of understanding, to be
honest, of the technicality, of what happens and therefore there is all
ignorance…that somebody will do it…somebody will take care of it. But

173

because you only see that it is not working…that it is gone bad, then it
is more difficult to sell it as it is keeping good…that’s make sense? …
What I think is all about how [the library web site] is managed and it is
a big change management process. Although, like I say, people do
think that you do what I am saying and it’s done. They don’t recognise
that actually there is an awful ongoing background to make that
happened…’ Interviewee10

4.3.3 Resources management issues

4.3.3.1 Human resource management (HRM)

All Interviewees were asked to point out factors affecting the shaping of HRM for the
LWS. Common practice for the interviewees was the staffing for the LWS to consist of a
few people from different library sections occupied with multi-tasks and the existence of
one member of the library management team leading and working for the LWS
development having other duties as well. Only one interviewee worked solely for the
LWS management and development, having assistance from one other library staff.

Regarding the shaping of the group of people, who worked regularly in different library
sections, interviewees mentioned as main factors:
a) Inadequacy of library web staff, who could work more hours for the LWS or solely for
its tasks. Interviewees related that to the small size of the existing staff, financial
limitations for new posts and the university and library managements’ low understanding
for the needs of LWS management and development.
‘Another aspect…is it is also difficult to create new posts…We have
budget for the existing (team)…I thinks it is difficult to find new money
to create new posts.’ Interviewee7
‘Because we are very small institution we can not afford any extra staff.
So all the staff involve …they have much of work … we have to find
ways working and fitting in the work for the web site development along
6 millions other things.’ Interviewee13
‘I think because of the conflict things we talked about them before
about people say library web site is the most important thing we have,
but they don’t support it as investment.’ Interviewee10
‘…we don’t have actually a web team for the university either, so
actually this is the problem there is not coherence strategy across the
university using the web… Perhaps that’s one of the key reasons that
we don’t have a team …

174

So you could say that is not really sort of management for the library
point of view; there is anything within the university; this is how the web
is organized. We are trying to move old stuffs, but still there are {…}
views for the importance of the web.’ Interviewee3

Nevertheless, an interviewee expressed her thoughts about this inadequate number of
library web staff as regards the future of the LWS, when current staff would change work
tasks or be pensioned – like herself. However, at the same time the specific library case
hired temporarily an out-source company to develop the current LWS design.
‘…and also maintenance…I mean at this site at the moment I am the
only person who can do more complicated stuff technologically, so I
need to train the other liaisons subject librarians, … I have not
managed to do the training yet; we have not have time…
…before I leave even… who shall say, but my objective is to leave it in
a state in which it can actually be simply maintained for a period of
time … a year maybe … while new staff get in and … because I
think … because we are a small institution, because probably we can
not attract the most high flying staff I thing we have to look at to appoint
people who you can develop, who will be trained …’ Inerviewee1

Furthermore, one interviewee, discussing the financial limitation as factor, gave as an
example the fact that the library used PT one person for LWS tasks, when that person was
recruited full-time officially and worked in practice PT for the development of a webbased library service, in the terms of an external funded project that library undertook.

b) The variety of skills required, which at the same time could cause conflict within the
staff derived from the possible different perspectives upon web publishing. Mainly,
interviewees mentioned conflict between the technical staff and the librarians/front-desk
staff for the content of LWS.
‘I think because people have different skills, abilities and the
technical people are very good at …organising, writing html…but
they are not necessarily very good at writing text and communicating
with the users, so there are other people who are very good at
writing text and understanding what kind of things users might
looking for …so they are working together as team, covering different
sets.’ Interviewee10
‘…we have parts of IS that - the computing part and the library part sometimes things they see things quite differently, so talking on
behalf of one unit - IS, as one whole our policy - we talk about that
but you have to know for your research that it is not easy and we
disagree in several things, because we are a big division … and the
library culture and the computing culture are quite different about
communicate…what communicate means and that some times
causes … friendly arguments, but arguments about the web.’
Interviewee2

175

However, the conflict between staff worked for the LWS could be based
on unofficial/underground perspectives about the ownership of the LWS
content.
‘… but what always felt very strongly is that the liaison librarians
need to own the web site. You may you could employ specialist
technical help … to support, but the ownership, the decision making
about the mode that you present the resources and the kinds of the
information that the site curries … has got to be in the ownership of
the liaison librarians, because the other ones they have cold face …’
Interviewee1

c) The direct control and develop of the LWS content from the same people who work in
the related area.
‘Partly, is about of control thing…certainty here that the people who
work on the web site are the people who have contact with the
students, so we have…we are the academic information team so do
allies’ work…we do information sections with students; we write fact
sheets…so, in essence we have the message, so it is nice we have
the control how the message (not said: is delivered via the LWS).’
Interviewee5

d) The historical background of the LWS development.
‘For my perspective is that because when the LWS was started was
small…generally smaller…you know, in 1992 it was a small web
site…few pages and then it evolved along with the technology, but
for reasons they need to employ some specialists in that technology
does not seem that have been recognized in the library.’
Interviewee3

e) The amount of work, which affects the size and the type of occupation. Interviewees
gave two different perspectives strongly related to their perspective about the LWS
content. On the one hand, interviewees stated that the staffing with few “part-time”
employees answered the fact that there was not enough work for one “full-time”
employee and at the same time this schema provided back up as there were more than one
staff working for the LWS (see below, example by Interviewee7). On the other hand,
Interviewee6, whose library case – as an exceptional case - occupied seven FT people and
two PT for the needs of the LWS, explained that the library organised the staffing because
the large amount of work.

176

‘There is a lot of work for the set up of the library web pages, but when
they have set up; the majority of them do not change very much, just
only we look after keeping update there content, so there is not enough
sufficient work for just one responsibility.’ Interviewee7
‘…now the most information resources are electronic - there is a lot of
work… staff like to work electronically…’ Interviewee6

4.3.3.2 LWS staffing within the terms of the general library practice in HRM

All interviewees were asked whether the practice for the LWS organising and staffing
was common taking into account the general library practice in HRM. As mentioned
above, for almost all cases from which the interviewees derived, the LWS staffing
consisted of few people from different library sections occupied PT for the LWS work
tasks. Therefore, three interviewees said that it was the same for all library functions
because the size of the library staff was too small. Interviewee13 said, for example, that:
‘Yes, for everything…I mean everybody has their own jobs, but everybody also does
everything … we are small staff’. However, the majority of the interviewees said that this
practice was partly applied. Interviewee2 said about it: ‘Yes, we have a lot of matrix
teams…you know working with …yes, it is certainly common’. Five of those ten
interviewees mentioned that this staffing schema was applied for projects that the library
had undertaken. For example, Interviewee7 said: ‘In some areas, I think, yes. For example
for the projects on the collection management where there are people from the technical
services and the readers services’ and Interviewee11 said ‘there are various of team sizes
within the library … we do a lot of jobs and frequently review staffing …we have crosslibrary projects’.

4.3.3.3 Interaction between library staff and library web staff

Almost all interviewees referred to the internal interaction between the library staff, who
did not work for the LWS, and the people, who worked for it. Most of the interviewees
talked about unofficial feedback that the library staff provided in voluntary basis about
the LWS. This practice was encouraged mostly by the staff who worked for the LWS.
Interviewee9 said about it that: ‘we ask for all the library staff to provide feedback and we

177

deliver almost from everybody…we are not asking them to be involved in the design of
the LWS, but they use it everyday for their work’. Upon that point, Interviewee10
mentioned that her library decided to train the staff in the contents and the navigation of
the LWS, when a new version was launched because as she said: ‘…because they will
need to know the LWS upside-down … to be familiar with it, before it even launched.
Because, as soon we launch from the day somebody can ring you saying where can I find
this’. In general, the library staff was presented by the interviewees within their words as
source of information for the contents of the LWS, as carrier of feedback on behalf of
other users, but as well as source of feedback having the role of user.

4.3.3.4 Non-library web staff & non-library based LWS hosting
The question about possible impacts upon the LWS management derived possibly from
the hosting of the LWS on server(s) of other unit(s) or the existence of staff from other
unit(s) working for the LWS was asked to 11 from the 13 interviewees, as it was
applicable to their library cases. Five interviewees identified that there were some
negative impacts derived from non-library based LWS hosting. They referred to
limitations of library’s access to the content and control over the time and the type of
actions which had taken place by the non-library staff and about the development and
maintenance of LWS, including the content’s updating. Below, there are some examples
of interviewees’ phrases:
‘I think that the problem is not where are the servers…[but] finding
experts at the right time…’ Interviewee13
‘I think that it can be limiting, because some time development is very
slow…’ Interviewee11
‘…for example, we used to find students were reporting access
problems to us … and they were to do with the security setting on
folders …we did not have control over that.’ Interviewee1
‘sometimes things don’t go so quickly as we would do if it was inhouse, but we have said that we don’t have the experts to manage the
servers or to do that more advanced programming anyway…’
Interviewee3

The good relationship, which the library could develop with the coactive unit(s), was
mentioned as a key point for balancing these kinds of problems. Interviewee3 said for
example that: ‘We very much rely on our relationship with IT to be able to get things

178

done…’. Moreover, there is relevant note above (see, 4.3.2.2) about problems with
consistency caused by the involvement in organising and leading web site development;
an important point is that it was not included in the answers of this question. Nevertheless
most of the interviewees pointed out, focusing on the fact that library had access to the
content, that it was beneficial for the library not having responsibility for the maintenance
of the server and keeping back up, separating not only the work tasks of LWS publishing,
but as well separating the LWS staff.

This perspective about the separation of the processes and aspects of the web publishing
could be identified as well within the questionnaire’s answers, where most of the library
cases did not mentioned the existence of non-library staff working for the LWS, when
their LWS was hosted on servers of another unit within universtity. Within these 11
interviewees, the seven had stated in the survey that the LWS staffing consisted of only
library staff and at the same time the LWS was hosted on server(s) of another university
unit.
‘No, because I can separate the content from the technical site of thing,
so I think is much more about we use some contributor or some other
tool to update the information ourselves or we just pass content to the
web services team to update. I feel does not really matters; it’s about the
content being in the right place. I don’t thing is an issue - I don’t think so
and because we don’t even have the staff to look after the content,
definitely we don’t have the staff to look after the servers.’ Interviewee10
‘…that means that we don’t need to worry about -you know- back up and
security…’ Interviewee12
‘… it does not make any different to me, because I look after the content
with a few other people … it is about where the site is on, it is not about
the content…it is not how the users see it …it would not make any
difference to our students or the staff…it would not make any difference
to me…’ Interviewee5

A clear example of limited understanding of the LWS publication management and
development was given by two interviewees, who as LWS managers, on the one hand
pointed out negative impacts because of the external hosting of the LWS, like delay in
procedures and lack of content’s control by the library, but on the other hand they referred
to the above positive aspects, related to the library’s release from part of responsibilities.
Whilst, the same people stated in the questionnaire that only library staff working for the
LWS development and maintenance and the library had sole authority over the LWS

179

management, when part of the LWS publication procedure was not under the library’s
control.

4.3.4 Decision making for the uses of LWS

All interviewees were asked to point out crucial factors affecting the decision making for
the uses of their LWS. The major factor which determined the LWS uses - therefore its
content and its role - was the library’s perspective about what kind of tool the LWS was
and should be for the library. It defined it as a perspective because usually it was not
officially stated in the terms of library’s strategy as the interviewees clarified. However,
this perspective affected the LWS planning. All interviewees said that library was focused
on covering the needs of its users (students and academics) and on promoting the library
via the LWS. This perspective reflected the earlier finding about the use of the LWS for
provision of electronic library and information services, for provision of information
about services and facilities hosted in library’ location(s) and for provision of information
about the library as an organisation (see, section 4.2.3). Below, some examples are
presented:
‘…the main purpose is to provide information about the library services and
resources. That is the main factor for making decisions about the
content.’Interviewee7
‘…it is what students need and what the staff need and if we think that they
need this would become part of the web site.’ Interviewee5
‘ …well, what users’ tell us…actually this is the main thing; the users’
needs.’ Interviewee2
‘… initially the LWS and my role was part of resources development so
they would seen the LWS as entry point to all our resources, but now it
might it has been moved into the faculty support and I think now it’s
become a marketing tool…also as entry to library resources, but also as
marketing tool…’ Interviewee11
‘I think that there are two roles. One for prospective students and a role for
current students. For the prospective students information about the
service itself … to see what service are available and I think this help the
college in generally and then for current students is to give different
functions for them…’ Interviewee8

Most of the interviewees mentioned some other factors, which impacted mostly
negatively on the development of content supporting the current LWS uses. These factors

180

were: financial inadequacy, inadequate number of staff, limited time, inadequate number
of specialist staff, limited web skills of staff, limited technological capabilities. Below,
some examples are presented:
‘…a mixture, because if you decide that we cannot develop it inhouse or we don’t have time to do it, we have to buy it…we have to
get the money…’ Interviewee5
‘I think the main factor for us is the restrictions of the actual
software…it can not be more interactive {…}. There are other
restrictions by technical aspect…At the moment, we are not up to
free to change it…is not that we don’t want to change it, but we don’t
have enough money…in that moment we don’t feel that it need
enough change to worry about the money, but it something that we
will think in five years time, when we will see that we can not do
something that we want to do, but in the moment the budget is not an
restriction aspect.’ Interviewee8
‘…we would like a number of links into the web site to other
databases and we need their (IT unit) involvement in order to
achieve this, because we don’t have technical expertise to build the
search capacities to the databases and link them to the web site, so
those are other problems we have with the web site.’ Interviewee13

Interviewee3 pointed out, as a factor for the limited perspective about the capabilities of
web technology and therefore about the extent of LWS uses, the formal education of
professional librarians, even at postgraduate level, and the educational background of
managers who derived from older educational background. Specifically, she said:
‘Perhaps, one main reason is about the training and the formal training
we get. We still - is true to say - the generations of library staff come
from very different formal library education backgrounds and even now
formal training for web development in the library - according to my
experience - has not been at all related to truth of … and I think that
the dealing with a complex subject area is not communicated well at
postgraduate level and also dealing with different … backgrounds …
technological backgrounds…
The people …, which is the senior management level, maybe perhaps
they … may not even appreciate the possibilities and they are who is
driving the vision … let’s say they have not driven the vision …’
Interviewee3

The discussion with the interviewees, about the other LWS use identified via the previous
stages of the study about the provision of library staff intranet, showed that the factors,
which mainly discouraged its development, were inadequacy of staff’s web skills and
limited time, which could be connected with low priority for its development, the

181

unfamiliarity with the extent and breadth of technological capabilities, the existence of a
university intranet and the library perspective that the LWS should include only free
access content. Below, some examples are presented:
‘…we don’t do much in the intranet … it is relevantly new in the
institution.’ Interviewee1
‘…it (library staff intranet) has developed separately, but there are
thought to move things to LWS pages … intranet pages. … a new
staff intranet has not really achieved, because we did not have the
time to or the skills to develop a new intranet for the library staff.’
Interviewee7
‘I suppose that is because we feel the LWS should be external facing,
so for instance we … apart of one or two stuffs have to be password
protected everything is viewable to anybody…’ Interviewee3

Finally, the existence of a university VLE and its impacts on the LWS content was
discussed with two interviewees, for which this subject was applicable. Both of them
pointed out that as the VLE was used by the library only as protected virtual space for
access to electronic services (e.g. full-text to electronic resources) linked from the LWS,
the LWS information architecture was not affected crucially. Interviewee2 said about it:
‘not whole thing…this is only a sub-set of the web site, that it is particularly interesting
for the students and linked to the VLE’.

4.4 Summary
The integrated and structural analysis of the quantitative data brought out facets and
approaches of the practice in LWS management undertaken by English and Scottish
university libraries, taking into account the aspect of LWS role and contextual aspects,
like the time-range of the LWS publishing and resources and infrastructures for the LWS
publishing. Moreover, the analysis of interviews examined selective aspects of the
examined topic for deeper understanding of the recorded practice. Below, the results are
summarised within five sections, covering the main subject areas examined. Nevertheless,
the aspect of the sampling feature of the geographical regions was not found to be a
crucial impact upon examined elements; whilst a trend for only library’s involvement in
the LWS management was found comparatively higher in the Scottish cases (see, sections
4.2.4 & 4.2.8).

182

4.4.1 Time range of LWS practice

Web presence of libraries was lengthy taking into account the duration of the web
publishing in general5; 73% of LWSs had at least eight years to more than ten years
publishing practice and for only 11% the time-range was two to five years (see, section
4.2.2.1).

4.4.2 LWS role

The role of LWS was examined through two sources: its mission statement and its
contents. However, the results showed that only 7% of the libraries had developed
mission statement for their web site (see, section 4.2.3-a) and this was not found to be
affected by factors of external involvement or impact (see, section 4.2.8.2). On the
contrary, interviewees referred to an officially stated perspective about what was the
mission of LWS; specifically, they said that library - via the LWS - was focused on
covering the needs of its users (students and academics) and on promoting the library (see,
section 4.3.4). Nevertheless, the two mission statements, which were provided through
the survey, referred to that framework in general terms (see, section 4.2.3-a).

The content analysis showed that the major patterns of uses of LWS from libraries were
the provision of electronic library & information services, of information about services
& facilities provided only in-house by the library and/or not information about the type of
library organisation (73%; basic patterns of LWS uses). The remaining 27% of the other
five enhanced patterns of LWS uses, which included the above categories and added one
or

two

more

categories,

usually

referred

to

the

provision

of

information

(informative/referential uses). Overall, the categories of LWS uses were more
informative/referential, rather than functional, and they were addressed to the academic
community (student & academics); only 11% of the LWSs provided content address to
the library staff (see, section 4.2.3-b).

5

The introduction of WWW was in the early the 1990s (1991)

183

Evidence indicated that the formation of the LWS uses was not related to the type of
library organisation or the time-range of LWS practice. There was a trend to enhanced
LWS in cases, which library undertook processes for all or almost all broad LWS
management areas (see, section 4.2.6) or PT & FT library web staff was occupied (see,
section 4.2.3) or the library had sole authority over LWS management (see, section 4.2.6).
Nevertheless, the major – in 89% of the cases - orientation of LWS uses (basic or
enhanced patterns), which was addressed to the information needs of the academic
community and to promote library organisation, was not affected by the university policy
or other factors, like financial inadequacy, inadequate number of library web staff, limited
time, inadequate number of specialist library web staff, limited web skills of library web
staff and limited library’s technological standards. These factors could have influenced
the extent of the LWS content, but not its framework. The major factor for the formation
of that orientation for the LWS content development, therefore the LWS uses and LWS
role, was the library’s perspective about what kind of tool the LWS was and should be for
the library; a library service delivery tool and an informative tool about the library
services and library organisation. This perspective – as mentioned previously - was not
expressed officially in library strategy as interviewees said or in a LWS mission statement
as only for 7% of the LWS cases mission statement was developed. However, this
perspective determined eventually the orientation and the content of LWS planning and
development in practice.

In addition, the frameworks of LWS – focused only on library users and general web
public or on library users & library staff - seemed to have not evolved in time, without
existence of evidence for future plans which could change it (see, sections 4.2.3.1 &
4.3.4). Probably, the content, that supported those frameworks, has been changed
regarding its extent or the technologies used, but evidence showed that the framework
itself has not been changed and it was not going to be changed under the existent
infrastructures.

184

4.4.3 LWS management undertaken by libraries

The majority of libraries (93%) had the main role for the LWS management (see, section
4.2.4). The examination of the managerial processes undertaken by them for the needs of
LWS development and maintenance showed eight patterns of management approaches
(see, section 4.2.6). The two most frequent patterns of LWS management, which occurred
in 62% of the cases, showed that libraries usually developed planning, organizing,
motivating and/or controlling processes (POMC; 43% and POM; 19%), whilst the
remaining 38% of the libraries presented a variety of six patterns covering from none
management area (2%) to three, like organizing (O; 7%), planning & organizing (PO;
9.5%) and organizing-motivating-controlling (OMC; 5%).

Almost all libraries undertook organising processes (98%), but less developed planning
(76%) and motivating (76%) and only 52% of them had controlling activities. From the
other managerial activities examined (development of a LWS mission statement,
marketing processes, LWS policies, annual budget and official stated procedures/work
schedules - see, section 4.2.6.1), the most frequent were LWS policies (60%) and
marketing (53%) and less frequent were LWS mission statement (7%) and annual budget
(7%). Nevertheless, with exception the annual budget, the other activities were not
developed 100% within the terms of the LWS planning process. The most frequent
patterns of those activities were development of policies only (21%), development of
marketing & policies (19%) and development of no activity (17%).

The LWS was a cross-library sections object of interest. The staff who were involved in
planning, organising, controlling and marketing usually, except from members of library
management, were also members of library web staff, but as well as from other library
sections, especially regarding the marketing processes. Nevertheless, participation of
other university staff was found only for controlling processes. Moreover, regarding
organising usually one member of library management team was responsible staff (67%),
but the second most frequent managerial arrangement (17%) was the self-managed team,
where the library web staff worked on organising under a team-work basis (see, section
4.2.5.1). In general, the staffing schemas seemed to be adapted to the special requirements
of each procedure as libraries perceived them. In addition, interviewees pointed out that

185

because the LWS was used as an every-day tool by many library staff, they were
encouraged especially by the library web staff to provide unofficial feedback on a
voluntary basis about the LWS, either transfer opinions of other library users or giving
their opinions as users of the LWS themselves (see, 4.3.3.3).

The 60% of the libraries, which developed specialised policies for the LWS, usually
covered

administrative,

design,

copyright/freedom

of

information

and

metadata/documentation issues (30% of them). The second most frequent pattern of
subject areas (22%) included the above issues excluding the metadata/documentation.
Moreover, only one library had developed a policy for web site archiving (see, section
4.2.5.2). Nevertheless, university policies and guidelines affecting LWS were reported for
89% of the cases and only 2% of the libraries had developed LWS policies without the
parallel existence of university policies. The university policies/guidelines referred mostly
to design and copyright/freedom of information issues. In addition, the 1/3 of the library
LWS policies covered the same subject areas with the policies of the university to which
library belonged (see, section 4.2.7).

4.4.4 Authority over LWS management

The study was focused on and examined the LWS management undertaken by libraries.
However, the results showed that the aspect of external/non-library involvement in LWS
management was founded in 80% of the cases (see, section 4.2.8). For a small percentage
of 7% of LWS cases, the library did not have the main responsibility for the LWS
management, but for the remaining 73% the LWS management was shared between
library and one or more university units. For only 20% of the cases, the library had sole
authority over the LWS management. Shared authority was found exclusively in the
LWS cases with the shorter time-range of publishing (from two to five years); whilst nonlibrary authority was found in cases with time-range from six to more than ten years,
indicating that it was not a temporarily status.

The external involvement in the LWS management was allocated only to other university
unit(s) and not to other out-university organisations (see, section 4.2.7-b). For 86% of the

186

cases, the involvement was by one university unit; most of the times the IT unit (47%)
and less often the marketing unit (39%). For 14% of the case, both units were involved.
Any particular relation between shared authority status and specific unit was not
identified. However, for the small group with non-library authority, it was found that the
marketing unit was more involved in relation to the IT unit (see, section 4.2.8).

The involvement of other university unit(s) in LWS management was not related to the
type of library organisation (see, section 4.27). The main reason for the formation of the
practice at least for the LWS cases with shared authority over their management as
interviewees mentioned (see, section 4.3.2.1) was the university policy for development
of one institutional web site including all sub-web sites of all academic departments and
services (including the LWS), in order mainly for a common “look-and-feel” of the
university web presence to be achieved and less for information control. The inadequate
number or complete absence of specialist library web staff was referred to as a reason too,
but that it was not connected with small size library cases and financial limitations.
Furthermore, the LWS was identified as almost the only library function for which there
was involvement of other unit(s) of the university in its management (see, section 4.3.2.3).

Interviewees identified that shared authority mainly reduced library’s involvement in
decision-making mostly about the LWS design and less about the LWS content. However,
evidence showed the involvement by other unit(s) in the decisions about LWS design
affecting as well as the planning and development processes undertaken by library (see,
section 4.3.2.2). Survey’s results showed that 39% of these cases library was not involved
in the LWS design decision-making, but in general within the group of cases with shared
authority there was variety of patterns of library’s involvement in the decision-making
about LWS, for which any particular relation with specific unit was not identified. On the
contrary, for the group of cases with only library authority, library was involved in the
decision-making about the content, the design, the development procedure and/or the
budget. Nevertheless, for the cases with non-library authority, library was involved
usually only in the decision-making about the content (see, section 4.2.8.1).

The survey’s results showed that libraries, which had sole authority over LWS
management, usually developed planning, organizing, motivating and/or controlling

187

processes (POMC or POM; 89%), whilst for cases with shared authority libraries
undertook similar processes in 55% and the remaining percentage presented a variety of
patterns of LWS management covering from no process (3%) to three areas, like OM
(12%) or POC (6%) – see, section 4.2.8.2. Interviewees indicated that this variety in
patterns of LWS management was not derived from the involvement by other university
units in LWS management. However, the factor, which influenced the formation of LWS
managerial processes and activities undertaken by library, was the general management
approach of the library. Interviewees said that usually the LWS management practice was
not different from the management of the other library functions, but in the cases that
there was difference the LWS management was secondary related to the general library
practice, with poor development of managerial processes and support, as a result of low
understanding by the library management of the special needs and requirements for the
management and development of a web site (see, sections 4.3.2.2 & 4.3.2.4).

4.4.5 Resources and infrastructures for LWS publishing

This study examined two elements of resources and infrastructures for LWS publishing;
the LWS staffing and the LWS hosting. Survey respondents stated that the staff working
for the LWS development & management usually consisted of only members of library
staff (67%). Mixed staff with members of library staff and other university unit(s) staff
was found in 31% of the cases; and in 2% of the cases no member of library staff was
working for the LWS. The formation of LWS staffing was not related to the time-range of
LWS practice or the type of library organisation. Moreover, the staff that belonged to
another university unit usually came from the IT and the marketing unit and about 1/3 of
the cases they derived from two or three units (e.g. marketing-IT-eLearning). The
examination of these staff with the involved units in the LWS management showed that
there was not exclusively relation between them; for example a case had involvement by
the marketing unit in LWS management and the staff, worked for the LWS and was from
other university units, belonged to the units: Marking-IT-Off Campus support (see,
sections 4.2.1.3 & 4.2.8.2).

188

The majority of LWS cases was hosted on server(s) of another university unit (72%);
24% of them were hosted on library’s server(s) and for a small percentage of cases (4%),
the hosting was outsourced to an Internet Service Provider (ISP). The LWS hosting was
not related to the time-range of LWS practice or the type of library organisation (see,
section 4.2.2.4). However, the aspect of authority over LWS management was found to be
related only to the status of non-library authority and the LWS hosting on server(s) of an
ISP taking into account also that the involved university unit was the marketing unit.
Moreover, respondents did not include in the LWS staffing the ISP staff, but they stated
that it consisted of either only library staff or mixed staff (see, section 4.2.8.2). Similarly,
for the 59% of the cases with LWS hosting on server(s) of other university units, the LWS
staffing was defined as only library staff (see, section 4.2.2.4).

Discussion with interviewees revealed a related perspective, which could explain to an
extent this paradox. LWS managers identified and separated the development process into
two parts: the “content” and “technical” (including hosting and design issues). Therefore,
the LWS hosting on server(s) of other university was considered as a beneficial status for
the library because they did not have this part of the responsibility and the need to recruit
specialist staff. Based on this logic they did not count into the regular LWS staffing those
staff, who worked in the other university units but also worked on tasks of LWS
publishing. They were more interested in their involvement and control in the “part” of
LWS content. Nevertheless, they pointed out that good relationship, which library staff
could develop with staff from the coactive unit(s), was key for balancing existent
problems related to time production scheduling and consistency problems (see, section
4.3.3.4).

The library web staff usually consisted of one to ten people, including the person who
could be given a title like web manager or he/she had responsibility for the organising of
LWS – when this was applicable (see, sections 4.2.2.3 & 4.2.8.2). The average percentage
of library web staff within the total library staff was ranged from 9% to 28%. For 75% of
the cases the library web staff was occupied only PT and for 25% of the cases there were
PT and FT staff; usually one person was occupied solely for work tasks of LWS with a
maximum amount of seven people. Moreover, there was not any particular relation
between the existence of PT & FT library web staff and the type of LWS staffing or the

189

type of library organisation or the time-range of LWS practice or the status of authority
over LWS management. However, within only the cases with shared authority, the
establishment of a team with the FT library web staff was found. About half of the cases
with PT & FT staff, the FT staff composed a group/team as part of a library section
related to information systems and electronic services or they were a cross disciplinary
group/team. The FT occupation of staff and the establishment of a team with FT library
web staff were found usually in cases where the LWS management patterns was either
POMC or POM and the library had developed officially stated LWS work procedures and
schedules (see, section 4.2.6.1-c). Regarding the organising/leading in this 25%, there was
no relation with any particular managerial arrangement (e.g. one person or team-based
working), but all the cases for which the FT staff composed a team always the managerial
arrangement was based on one person (see, section 4.2.5.1-b).

Summarising, common practice for the LWS management undertaken by libraries was the
library web staff to consist of PT occupied staff and to be lead by one person or to
organise the work as a self-managed team. Nevertheless, this group of staff operated
without organisational status within library. This practice was considered by most of the
interviewees as common within the terms of the cross-library projects, which library
undertook (see, section 4.3.3.2). For example, Interviewee2 said ‘Yes, we have a lot of
matrix teams…’ and Interviewee7 said ‘there are various of team sizes within the
library…we do a lot of jobs and frequently review staffing…we have cross-library
projects’. However, for small size libraries the staffing and management of web team was
common for all library functions.

Interviewees (see, section 4.4.3) identified various reasons for the recruiting group of
people, who worked regularly in different library sections, for the work tasks of LWS.
One factor was the historical background of the LWS development, which started as a
project, but regardless of LWS evolution technologically and as regards its content
amount, library management had not recognized the need for hiring specialist staff.
Another factor was the variety of skills required for the LWS development, which could
cause conflicts between mainly IT staff and librarians because of their different
perspectives on web publishing. Moreover, because the content of LWS was related to

190

and derived from different library functions, the staff who provided this content wanted to
have its direct control.

The inadequate number of available library staff to work more or solely for the LWS
development was mentioned as well as a crucial factor for recruiting a small PT web team.
Interviewees related that to the small size of the existent staff and the university and
library management’s low understanding for the needs of LWS management and
development, but they connected it as well as to financial limitations for new posts.
Indeed, in one case of library the undertaking of an externally funded project for
development of particular web-based library service was the source of temporary staff
recruited for the general tasks of LWS development. Finally, the amount of work was
referred to as a factor affected the size and the type of occupation. On the one hand,
interviewees stated that the staffing with few PT staff answered to the fact that there was
not enough work for one FT employee and at the same time this staffing arrangement
provided back up, as there was more than one staff working for the LWS. On the other
hand, in one case the large amount of work was the reason that library recruited seven FT
and two PT staff for the needs of the LWS.

191

[ blank page ]

192

Chapter 5.

Discussion
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.4.1
5.4.2
5.5

Introduction
Library web site role
Library web site’s role & its management
Library web site management
Authority over LWS management
LWS managerial processes undertaken by libraries
Anti-summary

193
195
199
205
205
209
220

pp. 193-220

5. Discussion

5.1 Introduction
The crucial question for the study was how academic libraries have been managing the
role of their web presence, as this practice has been shaped after, more or less, fifteen
years1. Poulter et al. (1999, p. 41) wrote that the academic libraries ‘were amongst the
first wave of institutions to pioneer the development of Web pages’. In other words, this
library sector had the opportunity to utilise the WWW as it operated in the wellestablished networked environment of universities. Therefore, the first versions of LWS
were launched almost simultaneously with the introduction of WWW in the early 1990s.
In Britain, the academic community – especially in the universities – begun connecting to
the Web from 1991 and from 1993 onwards their libraries have been supported by
national funded programmes, such as eLib, for developing web-based library and
information services2.
This study sought to investigate the library web site (LWS) management undertaken by
British university libraries taking into account the LWS role as one of its crucial aspects.
The study’s objectives pursued, in order to meet the needs of the above aim, were:
•

to review, analyse and determine the range of LWS role 3;

•

to examine the application of the managerial processes for the LWS development
and maintenance undertaken by the libraries within their context4;

•

to examine the relation between the LWS roles and the LWS management
approaches which were identified 5;

•

to investigate factors, which affected the formation of the management approaches
and the LWS roles6

1

see, section 1.2
see, section 1.3
3
see, objective 3.2.1
4
see, objective 3.2.2
5
see, objective 3.2.3
6
see, objective 3.2.4
2

193

The study, in order to develop a primary, holistic and contextual investigation of the
practice, was designed on the “mixed methods research” paradigm. “Triangulation” was
applied as a methodological process using four methods. Quantitative data collected
firstly and foremost via descriptive survey, content analysis and desk research, along with
qualitative data via key informant interviews which supported the explanatory part of the
study. The overview - as methodological approach - provided evidence supporting the
general understanding of the phenomenon; it revealed for first time crucial issues about
the role of the LWS in the terms of the library’s ICTs management, the authority over the
LWS management, the status of LWS management within the general library’s
management and the overall understanding of web publication by the professionals
working on LWS management.
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the study’s major findings, which have met the
research objectives, as well as issues, which have risen during this research project,
within their overall conceptual framework. The discussion is developed in three sections
covering the subject areas of LWS role7, the management of LWS role8 and the LWS
management 9 in order to draw conclusions in the next chapter. In other words, the
structure of the chapter merges the evidence of literature review and the research findings
addressing to the research objectives. Because of this section 5.3 about the LWS role and
its management will consider the lack of research identified during the literature review
and the third research objective10. The findings referred to the LWS cases of the 1/3 of the
research sample providing evidence for the practice as it has evolved after more or less
ten years. Specifically, 73% of LWS cases had long experience in LWS publishing (from
at least eight years to more than ten years publishing history) and for only 11% the timerange was from two to five years11. The major findings and the issues are presented and
related to findings of similar studies and theoretical approaches. However, as presented in
Chapter 2, the related literature was limited. Furthermore, the meaning of the findings
will be explained and placed within the conceptual framework of the topic.

7

see section 5.2; see also, objectives 3.2.1 & 3.2.4
see section 5.3; see also, objectives 3.2.3 & 3.2.4
9
see section 5.3; see also, objectives 3.2.2 & 3.2.4
10
see, objective 3.2.3
11
see, section 4.2.2.1
8

194

5.2 Library web site role
The major findings of the study about the LWS uses confirmed and agreed with the major
perspective about the role of LWS identified already through the literature review12; as
provider of information about library (organisation & in-house library services and
facility) and electronic information/library services, operating mostly as a library’s virtual
front-desk addressed to library users and general web public, but also including part of
library staff in the target-groups as users. In details, the LWS content of the 73% of the
cases13 referred exclusively to the provision:
-

of electronic library & information services,

-

of information about services & facilities provided in-house the library and/or not

-

of information about the type of library.

This basis of serving perspective or of serving & marketing perspective about the LWS
role was expressed as a priori framework by the majority of authors and researchers
referred to the specific part of literature review. Alison (2001) and Stover (1997)
described the core contents/objectives of a LWS by having as their starting point that the
purpose of a LWS is the information delivery to users of library services (serving
perspective). Xiao et al. (1997), Diaz (1998) and Leigh (2000) approached the LWS role
as a multi-uses/multifunctional tool of library to provide organised electronic library
resources and referential information about its in-house library services and/ or not the
library. Chisenga (1998) and Agingu (2000) selected and examined particular elements of
LWS publications influenced by the perspective that the LWS role is to operate as a
library’s virtual front-desk. Cohen & Still (1999) and Sapa (2005) also studied the
application of specific LWS uses, which all of them referred to the above framework for
the LWS role. In addition, Travica (1999) studied the impacts of LWS role upon library
organisation by having also as his starting point that the LWS focused on the provision of
electronic information delivery services.
Whilst the users of library services was set as the main - if not the exclusive - target-group
for the LWS, Diaz (1998) and Moen & Murray (2002) added to LWS users the library
12
13

see, section 2.2
see, section 4.2.3-b; A-B-C: 58% and A-B: 16%

195

staff, who can use services and functions provided via LWS in order to serve the library’s
users directly or indirectly. Diaz points that the LWS can operate as a ‘library workstation
both for the users and for the librarians serving them’. Similar point of view was
expressed as well as by interviewees14, who pointed out that the LWS was used as an
every-day tool by many library staff and, for that reason, library staff working for the
LWS encouraged them to provide unofficial feedback in voluntary basis about the LWS,
either transferring opinions of other library users or providing their own opinions as users
of the LWS themselves.
‘we ask for all the library staff to provide feedback and we deliver
almost from everybody…we are not asking them to be involved in
the design of the LWS, but they use it everyday for their work’.
Interviewee9
‘…because they will need to know the LWS upside-down … to be
familiar with it, before it even launched. Because, as soon we launch
from the day somebody can ring you saying where can I find this.’
Interviewee10

Nevertheless, this study found that in only a small percentage (11%) additionally to the
categories of LWS uses, which referred to the LWS role as library’s virtual front-desk,
one category addressed to library staff providing them an online “workstation” (library
staff Intranet). This finding was also already known through literature review where few
authors mentioned uses for the library staff, but this aspect was not included in the
objectives of any undertaken study. Stielow (c1999, p. 25) suggested that librarians could
include in the objectives for LWS publishing the use of provision of ‘alternative sources
of information for their job’. Moreover, Corrall & Brewerton (1999) and Griffiths (2004)
wrote about the use of a library staff Intranet for the provision of assistance to their duties
and for the provision of alternative communication mediums. Moen & Murray (2002)
also added in the LWS content - apart from the services addressed to library’s users - the
‘internal or foundation services, that are the behind-the-scenes services without which the
patron-oriented services would be jeopardized’ (Moen & Murray 2002, p. 97); these
intranet’s services address to the library staff.

14

see, 4.3.3.3

196

The methodological approach applied by this study in order to explore the LWS uses15,
brought out more categories; new ones related to the evidence provided by literature.
Previous studies (Chisenga 1998; Cohen & Still 1999; Agignu 2000; Sapa 2005) had
limited from the beginning of the research the breadth of the possible results having as
their starting point the particular perspective about the content of LWS role discussed
above. Some of them (Cohen & Still 1999; Sapa 2005) also aimed to test specific LWS
uses and they applied assessed classification schemata furthermore limiting the
investigation of LWS role. Both methodological approaches - applied solely or in
combination - have produced a particular overall picture of the practice, especially
because the research on the topic carried out is so limited. This study developed
classification schema – categories of LWS uses based on the collected data – and it did
not collect data related to an assessed list of categories of LWS uses. This approach
allowed the results of the study to find a group of enhanced patterns of LWS uses in 27%
of the cases examined. This showed that the content of LWS role was not only as it was
defined by literature “traditionally”, even if the major findings verified this framework
with basic patterns of LWS uses16.
The enhanced patterns of LWS uses17 showed that the LWS role can include – apart from
the categories of the basic uses - also additional uses related at least to:
-

the library staff - see, above about the provision of an online “workstation” for
library staff, like Intranet (category D – 11%);

-

library’s collection development functions open to the academic community
(category E – 11%)

-

provision of local cultural information (category G – 4%)

-

commercial activities undertaken by libraries (category F – 2%)

Moreover, the exploration of LWS uses took into account the aspect of the type of the
outcome18; what the end-user can do by using each of the categories:
-

to be informed about something (informative/referential outcome), for example,
taking the information about the opening hours of library’s branches

15

see, sections 3.4.1 & 3.4.4
see, 4.2.3-b, Table 4.13: Group of patterns – enhanced: A-B & A-B-C
17
see, 4.2.3-b, Table 4.12 & 4.13
18
see, section 3.4.1.3.4
16

197

and/or
-

to act related to something (functioning outcome), for example, retrieving and/or
downloading an electronic information source.

The results showed that four out of seven in total categories of LWS uses were
informative/referential19, without counting the amount of the content per type of outcome.
A similar question - about whether LWS has functioning uses - was answered in Sapa’s
(2005) study. The researcher compared American to Polish academic LWSs, examining
the application of specific/assessed LWS uses, which also expressed functioning and/or
informative/referential outcome (e.g. ‘access point to digital resources integrated with
World Wide Web’ and ‘provider of information and reference services online’). In the
paper’s summary, Sapa writes that ‘while the users of Polish Web sites are only informed
about the services offered in “real life”, those who use American Web sites – “virtual
versions of libraries” – can complete their tasks and satisfy many of their information
needs wholly on the Web’ (Sapa 2005, p. 1).
The analysis of all seven categories of LWS uses showed that LWS was focused mainly
on the target-group of the library users (students & academics). Analytically, the web
sites were addressed20 to:
-

library users (100%);

-

exclusively to library users and general web public (84%);

-

library users and general web public and additionally to library staff (11%)

These findings reflected the impacts of the serving perspective or the serving & marketing
perspective, which were discussed above, and supported the concept of LWS role as a
library’s virtual front-desk. Related to this perspective, Von Elm & Trump (2001) write
that the LWS has to host user-centred services ‘keeping pace with evolving technology
and directing technology toward services that are relevant to the users; and maintaining
the library’s mission in a continually evolving environment’ (Von Elm & Trump 2001, p.
35).

19
20

see, section 4.2.3-b, Table 4.12
see, section 4.2.3-b, Table 4.13

198

5.3 Library web site’s role and its management
Corrall & Brewerton (1999) and Griffiths (2004) underline that the clear determination of
the LWS role, before the development of the publication through a planning process, is
essential for an effective publication. The content of the LWS role is composed of the
clear definition of its purposes (“What library wants to achieve via LWS?”) and its
audience (“To whom the LWS addresses?”). However, Griffiths (2004, p. 27) notes that
‘many website owners undertake or commission considerable amounts of design and
content collection work before they address this simple question, but if you do not know
what audience you have in mind when you develop your site, it will lack purpose and
cohesion’. This study was the first which worked on this research aspect; the mission
statement as one of the LWS management issues and as a data source for the study of
LWS role, but also it was worked on the relation between LWS role, LWS management
and LWS as library function.
The results showed that only a very small percentage of British university libraries (7%)
had developed a mission statement for their LWS and where the purposes were not
defined in details and the audience were not defined clearly21 and qualitative application
of editorial elements22 of a LWS publishing were included as objectives. In general terms,
the LWS was referred as an alternative format/tool for provision of library services to
library’s “stakeholders” or “customers”, which more or less approached the results of the
analysis of LWS content for the identification of LWS role through its uses and the major
perspective discussed above.
The term “customers” possibly referred to the people who deliver the services that library
provides, in the terms of a business oriented approach; in other words the users of library
services, excluding other types of library’s stakeholders like the library staff. Bryson &
Alston (1996, p. 43) define a stakeholder as ‘any person, group or organisation that can
place a claim on an organisation’s resources, attention or output, or is affected by its
output’. The term “stakeholders” for the academic libraries, as it was discussed in the
section 2.2.1, refers to a range of group of people (see, Brophy & Coulling 1996; Kuchi
21
22

see, section 4.2.3-a
e.g. ‘easily navigable’ and ‘a professional service through the effective and efficient use’

199

2006), from institution’s students and library staff to the international academic
community and library partners. Nevertheless, the LWS is able also to address to the
general web public because its WWW presence.
Clyde (1996; 1999; 2004) indentified the importance of clear determination of purpose
and users’ needs in LWS publishing and she carried out the only studies related to the
LWS role, as it was derived from its mission statement and other written evidence about
its aims and objectives available within LWS content, examining mostly school libraries
web sites23. This study approached the LWS role of the academic libraries through two
sources; the LWS mission statement, like Clyde, and the LWS content, as discussed
above. The aims and the objectives of LWS can be one primary basis for the
understanding of the LWS content/uses and their future development. However, on the
one hand, a sole investigation of the LWS role through the LWS’s mission statements has
a high risk of failure as the development of mission statement may not be outcome of
LWS planning processes eventually, as it happened for the cases examined in this study24.
On the other hand, the content of the LWS mission statements may not be sufficient or
appropriate for analysis to provide results, which can be compared with results about the
LWS contents/uses.
Evidence from the survey and interviews with practitioners in LWS management of the
LWS cases examined showed that the decision-making about the LWS uses and therefore
the LWS content development was not affected by university management or by the
official library strategy, but it was impacted by the perspective that the role of the LWS is
to work as a library’s virtual front-desk, exclusively for the majority of libraries and with
some additional facilities for the library staff for a minor part of them, as it was discussed
above25. In other words, the principal purposes and the prevalent target-groups among
stakeholders were not objects of question for the LWS planning process.
Consequently, the results for the evolution of LWS role within the time 26 can be
explained taking into account the above framework; the serving perspective or the service
23

see, section 2.2.1
see, Table A3.51
25
see, also section 4.4.2
26
see, sections 4.2.3.1, 4.3.4 & 4.4.2
24

200

& marketing perspective upon the concept of LWS role. The role of the LWS has not
been changed radically, within the rapidly changing environment of technology, and
purposes or future plans, which would change it, were not stated. At the same time, this
static status of LWS role evolution was supported by factors, which implicated the
development of the extent of the LWS content, like financial inadequacy, inadequate
number of library web staff and of specialist library web staff, limited time, limited
existent library web staff’ skills and limited library’s technological standards27.
‘…we would like a number of links into the web site to other
databases and we need their (IT unit) involvement in order to
achieve this, because we don’t have technical expertise to build the
search capacities to the databases and link them to the web site, so
those are other problems we have with the web site.’ Interviewee13

In addition, the development of enhanced LWS uses/content was enforced by LWS
infrastructures, which were found in small percentages in practice, like sole authority
over LWS management by library 28 , complete development of LWS management
processes29 and recruitment of library web staff occupied full time (FT)30.
Common practice in libraries for the implementation of the LWS role, as it has been
determined, was the recruitment of existing library staff – usually from one to ten people
(9%-28% within the total library staff) -, most of whom were occupied only part time (PT)
on the LWS publishing tasks (75%) and without regular and specialised financial
planning31. This team of people either was managed by one person (67%) or it operated as
a self-managed team (17%), without a particular organisational status within library.
Similar picture was given by Shropshire (2003), who discovered that staff working for
LWS management in USA academic libraries had responsibilities for the LWS, but they
did not have the authority which would be derived from an organisational relevant
position. A similar picture was updated later 2008 by Fagan & Keach (2011), who found
that web projects in academic libraries continued to be informally defined, without an
organisational chart, encountering challenges related to shifting or unclear priorities and
inadequate staff/budget and resources.

27

see, section 4.3.4
see, section 4.2.8
29
see, section 4.2.6
30
see, section 4.2.3
31
see, sections 4.2.2.3, 4.2.8.2, 4.2.5 & 4.3.3
28

201

Usually, the function of LWS publishing was counted as one of the cross-library projects,
which library undertook, or in particular for small size libraries this management style
was common for all library functions. Τhis practice of the LWS as a project approached
the one-off life cycle perspective, as Shucha (2003) presented, and the example described
by Fullington Ballard & Teague-Rector (2011)32. It can also be supported by the results of
Bundza’s et al. (2009) study, from which the results showed that the number of the staff
worked for the LWS tasks was limited, considering that none had them as primary
responsibility, the LWS management was distributed in the library organisation, and the
redesign as procedure was periodical aspect of the LWS evolution33. In the terms of this
perspective about LWS publishing, the Inreviewee7 stated that after the development
period there was not enough work for full-time occupation by library web staff34.
‘There is a lot of work for the set up of the library web pages, but when
they have set up; the majority of them do not change very much, just
only we look after keeping update there content, so there is not enough
sufficient work for just one responsibility.’ Interviewee7

Moreover, the character of cross-library sections interest was also reflected on the staff,
who were involved in other LWS managerial processes (planning, controlling and
marketing), where except for members of library management, were also members of
library web staff, but as well as from other library sections, especially regarding the
marketing processes35. Therefore, the role of LWS within library organisation could be
characterised, using Travica’s (1999) model systems, as a “Subsystem”, interacting with
library management partly, regarding its function mainly as a virtual library’s front desk.
‘Subsystem model: The VL may be treated as a system of a library
organization, crossing the boundaries of departments but anchored to
a set of technologies.’ Downing (2001, p. 34)

However, in the cases that the content of LWS is limited mainly to the provision of
electronic information services and mostly of them could be commercial then the
“Disintermediation” model could express more accurately the status of LWS, reducing
the functionality of the LWS to a portal to commercial information services.
‘Disintermediation model: As the Internet enables publishers to
communicate directly with information seekers and provides everyone
with the potential to become a global information provider, the VL may
32

see, section 2.3.2
see, section 2.3.4
34
see, section 4.3.3.1.e
35
see, section 4.2.5.1
33

202

reflect the elimination of the role of the library as intermediary in the
traditional chain of information delivery. ’ Downing (2001, p.34)

An expression of this practice and its consequences were identified in few cases of LWS,
which had limited content, because the electronic information services were provided via
university’s Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) or other intranet environments 36 .
However, this perspective could be inaccurate, if interlinking services with the LWS’s
web pages, like commercial products/services and in this case part of university’s VLE,
identified as part of the LWS’s content (see, section 1.4).
Decision-making, as regards the LWS role/content and organising the LWS publishing,
and availability of resources (staff, budget & equipment) were interacting aspects of the
LWS undertaking, whose balance was impacted crucially by library management
understanding of web publishing37. This study revealed evidence for some related issues.
The skills and educational background of the library staff, including members of library
management staff, were reported as a factor for the limited perspective about the
capabilities of web technology and therefore about the extent of LWS uses 38 . The
combination of poor understanding on behalf of library management about the staffing
needs of web publishing and the historical background of the LWS development, which
had started as a project, limited the recognition for the need of hiring specialist staff39. As
an Interviewee said about it40:
‘For my perspective is that because when the LWS was started was
small…generally smaller…you know, in 1992 it was a small web
site…few pages and then it evolved along with the technology, but
for reasons they need to employ some specialists in that technology
does not seem that have been recognized in the library.’
Interviewee3

Moreover, the reason, which was indicated for the perspective that LWS management
was identified as a secondary priority within the terms of the general library practice
causing poor development of managerial processes and support, was the low
understanding by the library management of the special needs and requirements for the
management and development of a web site41.
36

See, section 4.2.3.1.a
see, about LWS publishing in section 1.4
38
see, section 4.3.4
39
see, section 4.4.3
40
See, section 4.3.3.1.d
41
see, section 4.3.2.3
37

203

‘As regards the LWS, I think that there is lack of understanding, to be
honest, of the technicality, of what happens and therefore there is all
ignorance…that somebody will do it…somebody will take care of it. But
because you only see that it is not working…that it is gone bad, then it
is more difficult to sell it as it is keeping good…that’s make sense? …
‘What I think is all about how [the library web site] is managed and it is
a big change management process. Although, like I say, people do
think that you do what I am saying and it’s done. They don’t recognise
that actually there is an awful ongoing background to make that
happened…’ Interviewee10

In addition, paradoxes identified in statements of library members of LWS management
were derived from an incomplete understanding of web publishing and its management.
Many libraries’ web managers did not recognise in-depth impacts upon library’s control
in processes and procedures of LWS management and development by the status of
shared authority over LWS management42. A high percentage of libraries’ web managers
(about 60%) did not count in the human resources for the LWS development staff, who
worked for work tasks of LWS but belonged to other university units or an Internet
Service Provider (ISP) because of the perspective that the LWS publishing can be split
into two parts; the “content” and the “technical” one and for that cases the library was
only responsible for the part of “content”43.
‘No, because I can separate the content from the technical site of
thing, so I think is much more about we use some contributor or some
other tool to update the information ourselves or we just pass content
to the web services team to update. I feel does not really matters; it’s
about the content being in the right place. I don’t thing is an issue - I
don’t think so and because we don’t even have the staff to look after
the content, definitely we don’t have the staff to look after the servers.’
Interviewee10

Similar evidence was provided by the survey of 80 Northern American academic libraries
(Academic library website benchmarks 2008). Respondents reported - but they did not
identify - two parallel developmental procedures from library staff and from university IT
staff, separating the “technical work” (e.g. design task works, web pages and servers
maintenance, etc.) and the “content”.
‘The majority of respondents (75.3%) answered that the library IT staff
handles both web content and most web-related technical work. The
remaining 25% reported that the college IT division does most of the
technical work and that library staff handles the content.’ (Academic
library website benchmarks 2008, p. 30)

42
43

see, section 4.4.4
see, section 4.3.3.4 & 4.4.5

204

5.4 Library web site management
5.4.1 Authority over LWS management
The study found the LWS was one of the few library functions, in whose management
there was involvement by another university unit(s) (80%), mostly by IT unit or/and
marketing unit, mainly because of the university concern either to present a common layout of its web presence and/or to control the information which was available online44.
For a small percentage of 7% of LWS cases, the library did not have the main
responsibility for the LWS management, but for the rest 73% the LWS management was
shared between library and one or more university units. For only 20% of the cases, the
library had sole authority over the LWS management45.
The aspect of authority over the LWS management or any involvement by another
university unit(s) was not raised as crucial through the literature review in LWS
management; at least during the period of the study design 46 . In only two of the
background studies on aspects of LWS management (Liu 1999; Ragsdale 2001) carried
out in the terms of the American practice, there are reported only some related aspects,
but in none of them the aspect of authority was examined. A survey of the Association of
Research Libraries (ARL) in 1998 (Liu 1999) reported that in 1996 84% of the libraries
managed solely their LWS and 13% of them managed it jointly with other university units.
In Ragsdale’s (2001) study, it is reported that the staff working for the LWS development
and maintenance were only members of library staff, whilst in some cases “institutional
systems staff”, “graphic designers” and “consultants” found to assist LWS development
too. In the study of Academic library website benchmarks (2008), data showed that the
LWS budget was considered as part of university IT budget (35.14%), that 16.46% of
cases had hired a consultant or consulting firm for advice on LWS development and that

44

It is noted that the involvement by another university unit(s) in LWS management was not related to the
type of library organisation (see, section 4.27).
45
see, section 4.4.4
46
see, section 2.3.4

205

there was mixed web staffing in 24.69% of the cases. In this study, mixed staffing47 was
found in 31% of the cases; with the reservation whether all library web managers had
counted and reported as well the staff who belonged to other units, who worked at least
on the LWS hosting, as was discussed in the summary of the chapter about the results48.
Moreover, the aspect of authority over the management of universities sub-web sites by
the university and its units have not risen as pivotal and it was not examined or discussed
further related with the web presence of university units like library in Cox’s studies
(2007a; 2007b) about the UK university web presence49. In addition, in Peterson’s (2006)
study a concern was reported about whether an academic library’s web content could be
adaptable within the university template, in order the university web presence to have a
common “look-and-feel”, concluding only that ‘it can be very difficult to modify the
template effectively for the library’s purposes’ (Peterson 2006, p. 218). However, further
research or discussion about university’s involvement in LWS management had not
developed.
The study of Manuel et al. (2010), which was published after this research was designed,
and is the sole study to investigate British university practice, examined - as one of the
study aspects – whether there were impacts of the university policy on the decisionmaking about the LWS. This study showed that the university policy can be an influential
factor and the marketing was a key driver upon university affecting the university web
presence; issues that were confirmed by the results of this study. In addition, even if this
is a pilot study (in six library cases), the results indicated especially that the decisionmaking areas of the design and budget were mostly affected by the university authority
over LWS management and half of these cases had full control of their LWS, as regards
the areas of decision-making on the maintenance, design, budget, content and
development.
The results of the study presented the dimensions of the university involvement in the
LWS management at least for the British practice. The majority of the LWS cases
47

Mixed staff: members of staff, who worked for the LWS and they belonged either to the library or to
other unit(s) of the university.
48
see, section 4.4.5
49
see, section 1.4

206

examined was operating under the status of shared authority over their management
(73%). For those cases, limitations of library’s involvement in decision-making were
reported, in particular about the LWS design, but this affected as well as other decisionmaking areas and the progress of LWS development50 unavoidably, as LWS publishing is
one entire system and its aspects are interacting51. These impacts usually were not clearly
identified by libraries’ web managers, as it was discussed52. However, the status of shared
authority referred in essence to a status of split LWS management into at least two
sources of management (the library and at least one university unit), which operated
concurrently for the production of the one LWS publication.
Libraries’ web managers stated that in planning exclusively and in marketing and
controlling processes almost exclusively only members of library staff participated 53 ,
whilst at the same time other university units were involved too in the decision-making
and development for whole parts of LWS publishing procedure, like design, hosting and
maintenance, including their planning, marketing and controlling processes matters about
LWS. In addition, libraries also developed specialised policies for the LWS (60%), when
at the same time for almost all these libraries university policies/guidelines already have
affected the LWS54.
Libraries’ LWS managers, also, did not take into account whole parts of LWS
management within the LWS publishing undertaking because they had no responsibility
for them. However, for these procedures another university unit took decisions, occupied
and leading non-library staff. At the same time, the library web staff should co-operate
with this non-library staff for the final outcome of the LWS publishing. Upon this status,
libraries’ web managers mentioned problems with:
-

decision-making and planning conflicts, causing other problems too with content
development, budget, organising issues55;
‘What would happened in real life…it would be we would ask it for the
ICT department and either they would say that this is impossible or

50

see, section 4.3.2.2
see, section 1.4
52
see, section 4.3 & 4.4.4
53
see, section 4.2.5.1
54
see, section 4.2.7-a
55
see, section 4.3.2.2
51

207

they would say that it would take a lot of time and effort and that would
be a project and then they charge us.’ Interviewee11
‘…because this seems more like marketing site - the university site - is
to attack new students…they want to be very up to date; they want to
change it very frequently, so typically they change the template every
two years, which is quite fast for us really… sometime we are not in the
same template as they are because we don’t have staff who could do
that during the year…’ Interviewee5

-

consistency in LWS development processes, for which key solution was the good
relationship between staff of the cooperating units56;
‘I think that the problem is not where are the servers…[but] finding
experts at the right time…’ Interviewee13
‘I think that it can be limiting because some time development is very
slow…’ Interviewee11
‘…for example, we used to find students were reporting access
problems to us … and they were to do with the security setting on
folders …we did not have control over that.’ Interviewee1
‘sometimes things don’t go so quickly as we would do if it [the LWS
hosting] was in-house’ Interviewee3

Nevertheless, the low percentage of the only library authority over the LWS management
could be disputed at least for the 9% of the total cases. The 20% of the cases stated that
no other university unit was involved in the LWS management, the library had the main
role of the LWS management and only library staff worked on the LWS development and
maintenance, whilst for almost half of them the LWS hosting was responsibility of
another university unit57. This paradox on the one hand could increase more the already
very high percentage of the shared authority (73%), but on the other hand it reinforces the
prospect that there was an incomplete understanding of web publishing and its
management on behalf of library staff, who worked on the LWS management, as it was
already discussed based on other questions raised from the results.

56
57

see, section 4.3.3.4
see, section 4.2.8.2 - Table 4.45

208

5.4.2 LWS managerial processes undertaken by libraries
For the majority of libraries (93%), libraries’ web managers stated that library had the
main role of the LWS management 58 . The examination of the four broad areas of
managerial processes undertaken by libraries [planning (P), organizing (O), motivating
(M) and controlling(C)] brought out a variety of eight LWS management patterns (see,
section 4.2.6). The two most frequent patterns of LWS management, which referred to the
62% of the cases, showed that libraries usually developed planning, organising,
motivating and/or controlling processes (POMC; 43% and POM; 19%), whilst the rest
38% of the libraries presented a variety of six patterns covering from none area which
were examined (2%) to three, like organising (O; 7%), planning & organising (PO; 9.5%)
and organising-motivating-controlling (OMC; 5%). A first reading of these findings was
that the management of LWS had complete structure regarding its broad areas in 43% of
the cases and that many of the libraries did not develop controlling processes for their
LWS management (48%). Nevertheless, the perspective that LWS publishing was a
simple procedure of compiling some web page and launching them on the Web,
expressed by Lester and Oaks (Bell 1995), seemed that it was not applied in the academic
libraries after 13 years and the era of experimenting was part of the history of the LWS
publishing, as McLeod & White (1995) and Guenther (2000) had already pointed out for
the American library sector59.
The cases with only library authority usually developed planning, organising, motivating
and/or controlling processes (POMC or POM; 89%), whilst, for cases with status of
shared authority, libraries undertook the same patterns of 55% and the rest presented the
variety of the other six patterns of LWS management60. For the LWS cases with status of
shared authority, practitioners in LWS management did not refer to limitations caused by
external involvement and considered the LWS management practice as common with the
management practice for the other library functions 61 , therefore the variety in LWS
management patterns possible was to a great extent a reflection of the general library
management practice.
58

see, section 4.2.4
see, section 2.3.2
60
see, section 4.2.8.2
61
see, section 4.3.2.4
59

209

Planning (P)
76% of the libraries undertook planning for their LWS publishing62. The staff involved in
these processes usually consisted of members of library management team and the library
web staff or only members of library management team63. These figures showed on the
one hand that the LWS was an object of concern for library management and on the other
hand that the point of view of the library web staff was taken into account. Results of
Academic library website benchmarks (2008) showed that about 16% of American
libraries hired a consultant or consulting firm to advise (see, section 2.3.4), but in this
study the assistance or support by “information consultants” was reported in only for one
case, without clarifying whether they were other university staff or worked for a private
company.
Planning processes play crucial and intersectional role related to the other managerial
activities within the approaches for web publishing of Friedlein (2001) and for LWS
publishing of Clyde (2000) and Ryan (2003) 64 . However, on one hand, 24% of the
libraries had not developed planning processes65 and, on the other, several activities, tools
and techniques, like development of LWS mission statement, marketing processes,
development of policies and official stated work procedures & schedules, were not always
developed and taken place within the terms of the planning procedures66. In addition,
usually libraries from the above activities, including the establishment of annual budget
for the LWS, undertook either only development of LWS policies (21%) or development
of LWS policies and marketing processes (19% or none activity (17%) or development of
only marketing processes (14.3%).
Only 7% of libraries had developed LWS mission statement and 2/3 of them had planning
processes too 67 . The value of the determination and clarification of the aims and
objectives of the LWS publishing, including the target-groups (audience), have been

62

see, section 4.2.6; Table 4.27
see, section 4.2.5.1-a
64
see, section 2.3.2
65
see, section 4.2.6
66
see, section 4.2.6.1
67
see, section 4.2.6.1-a
63

210

discussed above68. Marketing processes were developed by 57% of the libraries and 88%
of them were taken place within the LWS planning 69 . Nevertheless, in the literature,
marketing activities and strategies are suggested as one of the cornerstones of good
practice in web publishing and LWS publishing (Stielow c1999; Friedlein (2001);
UNESCO 2005). The staff involved consisted usually of members of library management
team and other library staff, which in most of the cases worked for the library marketing
section 70 . Furthermore, the library web staff was less often involved in marketing, in
comparison with other activities, like planning and controlling.
Within total sample, only 47% of the libraries (25 from 45) were involved in the decisionmaking about budget for the LWS development and maintenance71 and only 3 libraries
(7%) had established an annual budget in the terms of the planning processes 72 . The
Academic library website benchmarks (2008) shows that none of the academic libraries
had a separate line for their LWS in the library budget, but most of them (about 65%)
considered the LWS budget as part of the library IT budget, whilst about 35% considered
it mostly as part of university IT budget73 . However, the 20% of the libraries, which
undertook externally funded projects for development of particular web-based library
services, at the same time did not establish annual LWS budget74. In other words, no
library managed in parallel both financial sources.
Officially stated procedures and work schedules for the LWS development and
maintenance were reported in 24% of cases and for almost all these cases planning
processes took also place75. This managerial aspect was developed usually in cases with
high level of LWS management (POMC), with only library web staffing, but without
relation with any particular organising arrangement (based on one person or self-managed
team). In addition, in these cases were found almost the 50% of the total LWS cases,
which was supported by a library web team76.
68

see, section 5.3
see, section 4.2.6.1
70
see, section 4.2.5.1-d
71
see, section 4.2.4
72
see, sections 4.2.5 & 4.2.6.1
73
see, section 2.3.4
74
see, section 4.2.6.1–b
75
see, section 4.2.6.1
76
see, section 4.2.6.1–c
69

211

Development of specialised policies was reported in 64% of cases and 84% of those cases
the library had also planning processes for their LWS77. Ryan (2003, p. 209) considers the
web site policies as an outcome of the strategic planning process and he notes that ‘those
[policies] developed outside a planning process are often arbitrary or contradictory to
institutional missions and goals’78. Moreover, for almost all cases, there were university
policies/guidelines which affected LWS’s issues79, mostly in design & construction and in
copyright & freedom of information issues. The policies80 developed by libraries covered
the subject areas of:
-

“administrative issues (responsibilities, procedures, aims/objectives, etc)” - 93%;

-

“design and construction issues” - 89%;

-

“copyright & freedom of information issues” - 56%;

-

“metadata & documentation” - 48%

However, there is question about the disproportional figures of the development of LWS
policies by the library (64%), the development of LWS mission statement (7%) and
official stated procedures & work schedules for the LWS development and maintenance
were reported (24%)81 and the very low percentage of libraries, which developed at the
same time most of the above processes (2.4%-4.8%) 82 . Nevertheless only one survey
respondent added another subject area: the “Web site archiving”, which showed that
libraries - after more or less ten years of LWS practice - had not yet given this issue much
consideration. Whilst wide range web archiving had been taking place from the Internet
Archive even since 1996 and national related projects were undertaken by at least USA,
UK and Australia too since 199683.
Development of policies has attracted academic interest. In five out of the ten studies in
LWS management aspects, issues about it were found 84 . The figures indicated that
development of policies was common place for more that half libraries, but the university
77

see, section 4.2.6.1
see, section 2.3.2
79
see, section 4.2.7-a
80
see, section 4.2.5.2
81
see, section 4.2.6.1 (Table 4.31)
82
see, section 4.2.6.1 (Table 4.32)
83
see, section 3.4.1.4.3
84
see, section 2.3.4
78

212

policy was a strong influence on that. A survey of the Association of Research Libraries
(ARL) in 1998 (Liu 1999) reported the existence of web site development guidelines
(67% by library – 70% by university, indicating the strong influence of the university
policy) and electronic collections development guidelines (37% by library). The survey of
the Association of College and Research Libraries (Traw 2000) reported the existence of
“policies to govern the college/university’s web site” (52%) and the existence of policies
developed by libraries specifically for their LWS (21%); the majority of them covered
subjects about design and content issues. Traw (2000, p. 5) explained that the low
percentage of development of library’s policies derived from the fact that ‘library web site
policies are a relatively new idea for most small college and university libraries’.
Ragsdale (2001) found surveying ARL for LWS’s staffing issues that in 79% of libraries
there existed LWS development guidelines. Hendricks (2007) reported again for
American academic libraries that about 54% of libraries had developed a web policy with
the note that the majority of respondents indicated that libraries should follow their
university’s policy. Finally, in the pilot study on British academic libraries (Manuel et al.
2010), the issue of development of web policy documents was one of the aspects
examined and the results showed that half of the libraries had developed web policy, but
under strong influence of the university policy.

Organising (O)
Organising activities were undertaken by almost all libraries (98%) 85 . These libraries
were responsible for the organisation of the work of LWS development and maintenance;
in other words they were responsible for ‘determining activities and allocating
responsibilities for the achievement of plans; coordinating activities and responsibilities
into an appropriate structure’ (Cole 2004, p. 10). The most common managerial
arrangements was either based on one person (67%) responsible for the organising or
based on a self-managed team (17%), which found that it was not related to any particular
pattern of LWS management 86 or with any particular status of authority over LWS

85
86

see, section 4.2.6
see, section 4.2.6

213

management87 or with any particular type of LWS staffing (mixed or only library staff)88.
Nevertheless, in all cases with PT&FT library web staff the managerial arrangement was
based on one person.
The work for LWS development and maintenance was not the responsibility of a
particular library section/division. Usually, the function of LWS publishing was counted
as one of the cross-library projects. The only small scale evidence about a specific
relationship between LWS work tasks and a library section was found referred to library
section related to information systems and electronic services (for less than 10% of the
sample), within it FT library web staff worked89. Interviews brought out some evidence
about conflict between librarians and IT/technical library staff, as members of LWS
staffing, raising authority and control question possibly derived from a cultural difference
related to the understanding about web publishing90.
‘…we have parts of IS that - the computing part and the library part sometimes things they see things quite differently, so talking on
behalf of one unit - IS, as one whole our policy - we talk about that
but you have to know for your research that it is not easy and we
disagree in several things, because we are a big division … and the
library culture and the computing culture are quite different about
communicate…what communicate means and that some times
causes … friendly arguments, but arguments about the web.’
Interviewee2
‘… but what always felt very strongly is that the liaison librarians
need to own the web site. You may you could employ specialist
technical help … to support, but the ownership, the decision making
about the mode that you present the resources and the kinds of the
information that the site curries … has got to be in the ownership of
the liaison librarians, because the other ones they have cold face …’
Interviewee1

Guenther (2000) refers to that question/conflict and specifically between usually the
marketing and the IT section of the library for American academic libraries; whilst
Roberts & Rowley (2004) allocate in a hierarchical structure the “Web Development”
under the “ICT & Media services” library section, using a typical organisation structure
for an academic library91.

87

see, section 4.2.8.2
see, section 4.2.5.1-c
89
see, section 4.2.2.3-d
90
see, section 4.3.3.1-b & c
91
see, section 2.3.2
88

214

McLeod & White (1995, p. 47) report that in 1994 ‘librarians [from their academic library]
began experimenting with writing in HTML and creating actual Web home pages … this
small group formed an information Web Team…[which] quickly broke itself down into
three subcommittees: technical, graphics, and policy and content’. Later on, Mach &
Kutzik (2001, p. 32) set the issue of LWS’s place/status within the library organisation,
suggesting that ‘it is no longer possible for many library web sites to be maintained by an
individual or small group’92, and Church & Felker (2005) pointed out that, because of the
greater complexity of an academic LWS, one person can not do all the work93. Connell
(2008) found that for almost its half sample of library cases (49%) the size of the Web
team was one person and in approximately 28% of cases the Web teams were based on
two or three people.
This study found that the library web staffing usually did not consist of only one person,
but a small group 94 . However, factors for the size of the LWS staffing, beyond of
financial limitations for creating new posts and inadequacy of library staff, who could
worked PT for the LWS’s work tasks, were brought out the historical background of the
LWS publishing and the amount of work required for the needs of LWS95. The historical
background was referred as a factor for keeping the size small, as library management did
not recognise that since the first launches of the LWS, developed from a small team, the
requirements of a LWS publishing had been increased because the increase of the
content’s amount and the continual changing technical requirements in staff’s skills.
‘For my perspective is that because when the LWS was started was
small…generally smaller…you know, in 1992 it was a small web
site…few pages and then it evolved along with the technology, but
for reasons they need to employ some specialists in that technology
does not seem that have been recognized in the library.’
Interviewee3

Moreover, the amount of work was referred as factor either for keeping the size small or
increasing the size, but as well as the type of occupation (from PT to FT), always taking
into account the work tasks for which libraries was not responsible, like in design and
maintenance.

92

see, section 2.3.2
see, section 2.3.3
94
see, section 4.2.2.3
95
see, section 4.3.3.1-d & e
93

215

‘There is a lot of work for the set up of the library web pages, but when
they have set up; the majority of them do not change very much, just
only we look after keeping update there content, so there is not enough
sufficient work for just one responsibility.’ Interviewee7
‘…now the most information resources are electronic - there is a lot of
work… staff like to work electronically…’ Interviewee6

However, this study did not take into account the aspect of the phase of the one-off life
cycle, in which a LWS could be during the research period – as it was not raised as crucial
issue in literature related with the LWS publishing procedure. Only, Wilson (2004) 96
differentiates the amount of staff worked on LWS during redesigning and maintenance
period. In the cases that the LWS was managed as a periodical project, then the phase that
the one-off life cycle of LWS can be crucial factor for the assessment and understanding
of whole LWS management and its infrastructures. A relevant example is the study of
Connell (2008) in which it was not clear whether the researcher examined the factor of
redesign period and staffing or not. Nevertheless, the general picture of the results on the
British university library web staffing indicated that the LWS management, development
and maintenance were not responsibilities of a library section, staffed by people worked
only on that and with identified organisational status.

Motivating (M)
Activities for training and skills development of library web staff were selected to
examine the existence of motivating processes by libraries97. The major results of the
study showed that 76% of the libraries developed training activities98. Web publishing is a
complex undertaking with multi-tasks requiring skills in various areas (Rosenfeld &
Morville 1998; Friedlein 2001)99, whilst after more a decade of LWS presence Brophy
(2007) notices that ‘…technology is complex and librarians have not developed the skills
to understand it…’100. An interviewee introduced this issue, when she pointed out the
formal education of professional librarians - even in postgraduate level - and the
educational background of manager, who derived from older educational background.
96

see, section 2.3.3
see, section 3.4.2.4.1
98
see, section 4.2.5
99
see, section 1.4
100
see, section 1.3
97

216

She encountered this issue as factor which limited the perspective of the capabilities of
web technology and therefore about the extent of LWS’ uses101. Specifically, she said:
‘Perhaps, one main reason is about the training and the formal training
we get. We still - is true to say - the generations of library staff come
from very different formal library education backgrounds and even now
formal training for web development in the library - according to my
experience - has not been at all related to truth of … and I think that
the dealing with a complex subject area is not communicated well at
postgraduate level and also dealing with different … backgrounds …
technological backgrounds…
The people …, which is the senior management level, maybe perhaps
they … may not even appreciate the possibilities and they are who is
driving the vision … let’s say they have not driven the vision …’
Interviewee3

Moreover, Johnson (1998) notes the critical role of training activities for supporting
library web team in a rapidly changing environment, developing skills needed to increase
productivity, but as well as for increasing employees’ confidence within the team and
within organisation, improving the communication and collaboration between the staff
with different specialities102. Therefore, the training programmes addressed to the library
web staff could play pivotal role, especially for the libraries examined in this study
because their organisational status had not been established and conflicts between staff of
different specialities were reported – as mentioned already. However, it is a question
about the adequacy and stable provision of these motivating activities undertaken by
libraries, when annual LWS budget was part of planning for only 7% of libraries103.
Training issues were examined in few of the previous studies. Ragsdale (2001, p. 11) in
her investigation about LWS’s staffing found that ‘a few libraries offer[ed] database
management training, but most systems and software training [was] provided by the
institution or outsource workshops’. In addition, Evans (1999) – as later Kneip (2007) did
as well, but without discussing it further -, investigating the formal training and the selfinstruction in authors of LWS pages for technological skills development, concluded that
skills need to be continually upgraded with both ways, but always with organisation’s
support and she pointed out that:
‘the investment in training has its payoff … Institutional support for
training will allow those … both to create a more attractive, useful
101

see, section 4.3.4
see, section 2.3.1
103
see, section 4.2.5
102

217

and functional presence for the library on the World Wide Web and
to develop a larger pool of human resources for continuing to work in
the virtual environment’ (Evans 1999, p. 318).

Controlling (C)
Activities in performance measurement and monitoring were developed by 52% of the
libraries104. Usually the staff involved in these processes belonged to library management
team (33%) or to the library web staff (29%). Usually, for both groups one person was
involved and he/she was specialised in IT. Nevertheless, in this managerial area,
involvement by university staff (e.g. from the university web team-IT) was reported (10%)
and for half of them these staff exclusively were involved and were responsible for
controlling processes105.
The involvement of library staff specialised in IT could be grounded from the technical
nature of the techniques could be used for these processes. The involvement of university
staff from the IT unit, also, could be rationalised from the high involvement of the
university IT unit in the LWS management and that many LWS cases were hosted on
servers of another university unit. However, this managerial broad area was the least
developed in the terms of the LWS management and the possible involvement of other
university units could not reduce the interest of library management in this aspect of LWS
publishing, setting procedures, collecting and analysed data – even if this data derived
from non-library staff. In addition, the techniques for performance measurement and
monitoring are not exclusively related to exports of log files, for example about how
many users visited the LWS, but they can include a wide range of processes for
monitoring qualitative and quantitative aspects of LWS publication and the functions are
hosted on it, like the electronic services.
Performance measurement and monitoring processes play a critical role for an “alive”,
well-maintained and strategically planned LWS publication106. They are a vital and stable
part of the management of the whole publishing procedure of a web site as ‘a living and
104

see, section 4.2.6
see, section 4.2.5.1-d
106
see, section 2.3.2
105

218

evolving “creature”, with no end’ Friedlein (2001, p. 10), a “digital branch” (King 2009;
2012) and ‘not as one-off project’ Clyde (2000, p. 107), regardless of the major redesign
projects, which can take place within the long time-range of a web publication. The
absence of this part of the LWS management could be referred to an approach like that,
which is presented by Shucha (2003), about a closed cycle of life for each LWS’s version;
a one-off life cycle approach. According to this approach the LWS publishing consists of
periodical redesign projects, with in-between periods of basic maintenance of the LWS
content and the design, which had developed from the previous redesign project. Within
this cycle of life of an LWS’s version, performance measurements and monitoring
processes are not included or they do not play vital role for the LWS publication.
Nevertheless, this approach minimises or debases too the other managerial processes and
activities, like planning, organising, motivating, marketing and development of policies
because this one-off life cycle transforms or formulates the web publishing to a nonregular short-period developmental project with a period of maintenance. Very briefly,
within this framework, the planning can be only short-term, without stable marketing
activities, without establishment of annual budget and without official regular work
procedure; the motivating processes can not be organised in a regular basis, especially for
a web team, which is occupied PT and possibly its size is changing in the period of
redesign and the period of maintenance; like in the example presented by Fullington
Ballard & Teague-Rector (2011), where during the redesign process the library hired a
project manager and composed a core implementation team, only for the period of the
redesign project107.

107

see, section 2.3.2

219

5.5 Anti-summary
This study investigated the practice of LWS management, seeking crucial factors for the
formatted of the identified management approaches. The LWS role was set as a crucial
aspect and it was reviewed and examined with the LWS management approaches. The a
priori limited LWS role in the terms of the serving/marketing perspective seemed that it
operated harmoniously with the quite poor management practices, operating usually the
LWS publishing as a project under a possible one-off cycle perspective, and the relatively
poor understanding of the web publishing on behalf of library web managers or library
administration. The investigation of the context brought out a crucial factor - the
involvement of the parent institution in the management of the LWS -, which was not
taken into account by previous studies and to this initial research design; whilst it seems
essential for the understanding of the practice.

220

Chapter 6.

Conclusions, limitations,
contribution to knowledge &
recommendations
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4

Conclusions
Limitations
Contribution to knowledge
Recommendations

221
224
224
226

pp. 221-228

6. Conclusions, limitations, contribution to
knowledge & recommendations

Web technology in the terms of the ICTs in the library practice remains a strong and
evolutionary force. It can work as a driver of change and as a tool to handle/manage
change. The library web site (LWS) especially for the academic libraries, which had the
opportunity very early to utilise the Web technology, it could technically become the
platform for the online presence and workstation for the library and its stakeholders,
impacting to a greater or lesser extent the library work tasks and the library management.
This study sought to investigate the library web site (LWS) management undertaken by
British university libraries taking into account the LWS role as one of its crucial aspects.

6.1 Conclusions
The investigation based on the overview - as methodological approach – succeeded in
providing evidence for the general understanding of the phenomenon, but also identified
additional crucial aspects beyond those which were included in the research design. The
stereotypes and perspectives about the LWS role and about the LWS as library function in
the terms of library organisation, and the knowledge and understanding of the web
publishing on behalf library managers can affect basically the LWS management. In
addition and in correlation, the aspect of the authority over the LWS management was
brought out as equally crucial aspects in the LWS management practice.

The major results of the study lead to the following conclusions:

a) The LWS management undertaken by a big majority of British university libraries
to a great extent operated concurrently with at least another one management
process undertaken by another university unit for the production and the
maintenance of the same LWS publication. This status did not affect crucially the
formation of the major LWS role, but it impacted on the extent and efficiency of
the library’s decision-making, with further implications in LWS management
undertaken by them. Nevertheless, the extent and the depth of these implications

221

could not be identified by the professionals in their whole range because of
possible limited understanding of the web publishing undertaking on behalf of the
library web manager (see, section 5.3 & 5.4.1). Figure 6.1 below, based on the
Figures 1.2 & 2.2 about the LWS publishing, shows additionally the factor of
authority over LWS management and its practice, as it was identified in a raw
level through this study; as at least another one concurrent management process
(beyond library’s one) undertaken by another university unit(s).

b) The development and completeness of LWS management processes undertaken by
libraries was affected negatively by the factor of shared authority over LWS
management, but as well as by the factor of one-off life cycle approach for the
LWS publication. The combination of poor understanding about web publishing,
relatively basic content requirements for the achievement of the main LWS role
and an approach for LWS re-development as an “one-off project” (see, one-off life
cycle approach) formatted to a great extent the library’s function for LWS
publishing to a cross-library project (without distinctive organisational status;
whilst library web presence has been established) managed under variety of
incomplete LWS management patterns, especially during the period between
redesigns – when this is applied -, excluding or reducing planning, controlling
processes and motivating (see, section 5.4.2).

c) The serving perspective or serving & marketing perspective (especially the second
one, which was supported by university policies) limited the content of LWS role,
impoverishing its role in library management and operation, especially when the
authority over the LWS management was not exclusively library’s responsibility
and matter. In other words, the LWS was not used as the integrated platform for
ICTs utilisation and management on behalf of the library – see, an organisational
perspective for the LWS role. Nevertheless, the aspect of LWS role, when it was
presented in more enhanced and wider concept, was related to more complete
patterns in LWS management, with more efficient infrastructures and library’s
involvement in the LWS management (see, section 5.2).

222

Parent institution’s management - via involvement of another unit(s)

Library management

Impacts

Role of LWS

Uses

Mission statement

Impacts
Library Web Site publishing
LWS management

LWS Development & maintenance

LWS publication
Content

Edition’s web
environment (design)

Figure 6.1: Interrelations of the library web site’s role with library management &
aspects of LWS publishing, taking into account the factor of authority over
LWS management and its practice as at least another one concurrent
management process undertaken by another university unit(s).

223

d) As the concept of LWS role remains limited within the terms of the serving
perspective or serving & marketing perspective, then the LWS is going to remain
as an assistant extension of existing library services. Therefore, it is going to
remain as a temporary platform for publicising information about library to library
users and general public and library services addressed to library users. The
management approach can be the one-off life cycle one with the framework of the
periodical cross-library project, with or without assistance or leading by another
university unit (see, sections 5.3 & 5.4.2).

6.2 Limitations
The study investigated the LWS management undertaken by British university libraries
within their context. Its strength was based on it methodological stance (see, section 3.3),
but at the same time its limitation derived from it too. The comprehensive data, which
collected for each one of the LWS cases, for which there was response to the survey, and
the structural analysis of all these data, which examined interrelations between relevant
aspects and key factors, provided a composite investigation in a large scale of examined
cases based on cross-tabulation examination. However, this case-profile examination was
limited by the limited rate response to the survey (see, section 3.4.2.5) and the smaller
authorisation for further contact provided by the respondent (see, section 3.4.6.8). In other
words, the research could not increase the research data, including fragmentary data from
other LWS cases beyond the research sample or to approach library managers of LWS
cases out of the research sample for interviewing (see, section 3.3). Furthermore, whilst
the study approached its topic examining and its context, the aspect of the university type
(the parent institution grouping) was not including in the data analysis (see, section 4.1).

6.3 Contribution to knowledge
The study contributes to the knowledge about the evolution of ICTs in library practice
and its management, focusing on the LWS; as one of the major applications of the
library’s Web presence. Specifically, the study investigated the core of that practice; the

224

LWS management. The LWS management consists of crucial aspects in planning,
organising, motivating and controlling, which affect practice’s outcome; the LWS as web
publication. Moreover, it opens widely the research on this field in the British academic
library sector1, picturing the LWS status regarding its position within the library practice
as library function and the position of the LWS within the library management, revealing
possible different LWS management approaches. However, the study identifies additional
crucial aspects affecting LWS management apart from those which literature review had
revealed; for example the authority over LWS management, the understanding by the
librarians of the web publishing as procedure and the LWS role. Finally, a major
contribution of this study is that a wide research field has been opened with a lot of
questions requiring further and specialised research (see, section 6.3).

Nevertheless, the study applied new practice on data collection and analysis tools, and
criterions for investigation about the library web publishing as library procedure in
general and in particular regarding its management and its role. Firstly, the study
examined LWS cases, composing their profile using triangulation and analysed them
through mainly a cross-tabulation examination, identifying patterns and interrelations.
Secondly, this study in order to approach its topic developed theoretical background
(organised knowledge) on:
-

the LWS publishing, identifying and picturing relations between its components
(LWS management, LWS development & maintenance, LWS publication
(including the content & the design) – see, section 1.4;

-

the LWS role, its facets, approaches for their investigation and their relations with
the components of the LWS publishing (see, section 2.2.4);

-

the LWS management in the terms of an abstractive framework (see, sections
2.3.1 & 3.4.2.4.1);

Thirdly, the study developed a systematic and accurate method of content analysis of
LWS content, based on theoretical background, aiming to investigate the LWS role
through the LWS uses, which could be identified, and at the same time avoiding bias
caused by fault utinizing (see, sections 3.4.1.2 & 3.4.1.3). Fourthly, the study tested (see,
section 3.4.1.4) and used (see, sections 3.4.3 & 3.4.4) for first time in library science the
1

See, for instant below in section 6.4, future research possibilities.

225

Internet Archive Wayback Machine as data collection source for documentary data for
desk research and for content analysis.

6.4 Recommendations
a) to LIS researchers

This study pictured the British academic practice, opening a further dialogue for
comparative studies with academic library sectors of other nations, especially those which
have long and rich practice, like the American academic and research library sector.
Moreover, the study showed that there was conflict between the high interest in library
web presence and the limited support on behalf the library management and almost the
organisational absence of the LWS as library function. For example, limited and usually
not exclusively occupied library web staffing, lack of any clear line in the library budget,
limited utilisation of the web capabilities/uses and operation of the LWS most like as a
library project are only some weak practices (see, sections 5.3 & 5.4). Especially, the
practice of the one-off life cycle as a style (management approach) of web publishing for a
non-regular short-period developmental project with a period of maintenance raised
(research) questions related to the reasons caused it.

Does this LWS publishing style (one-off life cycle) derive from a low level of
understanding about the web publishing? Does this LWS publishing style (management
approach) derive from a perspective for a limited importance of LWS as web publication?
If yes, can the hypothesis, that a strategic LWS publishing style would not be costeffective for the library, be stand? Do academic libraries adapt and utilise web
technologies or they are just consumers of commercial products hyper-linking them on
the LWS’s web pages? Furthermore, the issue of redesign, not as a regular procedure for
the technological upgrade of the LWS’s platform, but as a periodical procedure of the
LWS revision including scope and information architecture, can become a starting point
for the investigation of the one-off life cycle as a style (management approach) of a web
publishing.

226

The involvement of the parent institution must be from here a stable aspect of the LWS
publishing. Crucial question become whether the practice identified with the two
concurrent management processes for the LWS publishing undertaken by library and by
another university unit(s) is the only one pattern of practice or there are other
patterns/models too. In this point, a reference to the results (see, section 4.3.2.2) can be
relevant providing a step for further though and study. The Interviewee3, who worked for
a LWS case, for which the library had sole authority over its management, - in the terms
of the final question for any additional comment - shared a personal idea about a possibly
beneficial involvement in the LWS management by a university committee with
consultative role composed of academics, students, IT unit and marketing unit, in order
for the library to have an overall input of stakeholders about the LWS. This idea was not
found to be applied within the British academic libraries examined by the present study,
but a similar practice was reported for American academic libraries; “website policy
committees” for overseeing website policy on content, IT, graphics, and other topics, in
which library staff participated (Academic library website benchmarks 2008) – see,
section 2.3.4.

Finally, there are research questions:
-

about the possible relation between the LWS publishing approach/management
style (e.g. one-off life cycle) and the aspect of the authority over the LWS
management;

-

about the aspect of authority over the management of ICTs in the library
organisation and the role of the LWS in the ICTs’ management of the library.

b) to LIS educators & library managers

The understanding and knowledge of the ICTs by the library sector, even if their
application has been fixed, still remains as a need and requirement for improvement of
practice. The lack of understanding on the web publishing on behalf of libraries raises
educational issues for library schools and training issues for library managers, related to
the ICTs and their understanding, handling and management by librarians (see, section
5.3).

227

The LWS, even if its role seems to be limited because of the serving perspective or
serving & marketing perspective, it remains a different web site from the other
departmental ones within the university web presence, especially because the increased
need for updating. Therefore, its respective autonomy, within the university web
framework, in management, development and maintenance could allow library to provide
high quality information, services and other functions through its LWS. Of course, it
remains crucial preposition for the libraries to understand the benefits and capabilities of
the web publication under a strategic approach and to develop this library function within
the terms of a library function, rather than a project.

However, the web presence of academic libraries is an integral part of the institutional
web presence, although its operational character distinguishes it from the another
university sub-web sites. Therefore it is a fact the involvement in its management by the
university. Then, the LWS publishing has to be planned and organised from a single
management undertaken exclusively by library and driven by a university based strategy.
The establishment of a university committee for the LWS strategy, which would be
consisted of representatives of library management and selective - according to the LWS
role - university based stakeholders, could give the answer to the common interest about
the library web presence. Nevertheless, pivotal requirement on behalf of the library
management is the improvement of understanding (through self-educations and
educational/training programs) about web publications and web publishing, as
undertaking and as integral part of library organisation’s function, within the terms of
library’s management of ICTs. Consequently, libraries, which want to cope and
participate in the changing environment, should obtain the appropriate and efficient
infrastructures (management and implementation staff, equipment, budget and
organisational status), embodying them in library organisation.

228

Bibliography

pp. 229-240

Bibliography
[anon] (2008). Academic library website benchmarks. New York: Primary Research Group.
[anon] (n.d.) About the Internet Archive. [online] Internet Archive. Available from:
http://www.archive.org/about/about.php [Last accessed: 27 October 2009]
[anon] (n.d.) Frequently Asked Questions. [online] Internet Archive. Available from:
http://www.archive.org/about/faqs.php [Last accessed: 27 October 2009]
Access Tools Working Group (2006). Use Cases for Access to Internet Archives. Version 1,
International Internet Preservation Consortium. Available from:
http://netpreserve.org/publications/iipc-r-003.pdf [Last accessed: 27 October 2009]
ACRL Research Planning and Review Committee (2012). 2012 top ten trends in academic
libraries. College and research libraries news, 73(6), pp. 311-322.
Agingu, B.O. (2000). Library Web sites at historically black colleges and universities. Colleges
& Research Libraries, 61(1), pp. 30-37.
Aharony, N. (2012). An analysis of American academic libraries' websites: 2000-2010. The
Electronic Library, 30(6), pp. 764-776.
Akeroyd, J. (2001). The management of change in electronic libraries. IFLA Journal, 27(2), pp.
70-73.
Alison, S. (ed.) (2001). Handbook of information management. 8th ed., London: Aslib/IMI.
Allen, B. & Reser, D. (1990). Content analysis in library and information science research.
Library & Information Science Research, 12, pp. 251-262.
Babbie, E.R. (c2008). The basics of social research. 4th ed., Belmont, CA:
Thomson/Wadsworth.
Baker, K. (1982). The impact of information technology In: BJORN-ANDERSEN, N., et al.
(eds.), Information Society: for richer, for poorer: selected papers from a conference
held at the Selsdon Park Hotel, London, 25-29 January, 1982. Amsterdam; Oxford:
North-Holland, pp. 77-80.
Bell, C. (1995). Using the World Wide Web in libraries. PNLA Quarterly, 60(Fall), pp. 29-30.
Berkeley Digital Library SunSITE (n.d.). Guidelines for Web document style & design.
[online] Available from: http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/Web/guidelines.html [Last
accessed 20 February 2008]
Berners-Lee, T. (1992). Style guide for online hypertext. [online] Available from:
http://www.w3.org/Provider/Style/All.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Berners-Lee, T. (22 November 2010). Long live the Web: a call for continued open standards
and neutrality. Scientific American (December), [online] Available from:
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=long-live-the-web [Last accessed 21
February 2011]

229

Birn, R.J. (ed.) (2000). The Handbook of international market research techniques. 2nd ed.,
London: Kogan Page.
Bourque, L. & Fielder, E. (1995). How to conduct self-administered and mail surveys.
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Breeding, M. (2006). Web 2.0? let's get to web 1.0 first. Computers in Libraries, 26(5), pp. 3033.
Brophy, P. & Coulling, K. (1996). Quality management for information and library managers.
Aldershot: Gower.
Brophy, P. (2005). The academic library. 2nd ed., London: Facet Publishing.
Brophy, P. (2007). The library in the twenty-first century. 2nd ed., London: Facet Publishing.
Brown, S. & Swan, A. (2007). Researchers' use of academic libraries and their services: a
report commissioned by the Research Information Network and the Consortium of
Research Libraries. [online] Available from:
http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/13868/1/libraries-report-2007.pdf [Last accessed 27
October 2009]
Brügger, N. (2005). Archiving websites: general considerations and strategies. Arhus,
Denmark: The Centre for Internet Research. Available also online from:
http://www.cfi.au.dk/publikationer/archiving/guide.pdf [Last accessed 27 October
2009]
Bryson, J.M. & Alston, F.K. (1996). Creating and implementing your strategic plan: a
workbook for public and non-profit organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bundza, M., et al. (2009). Work of the web weavers: web development in academic libraries.
Journal of Web Librarianship, 3(3), pp. 239-262.
Busha, C.H. & Harter, S.P. (1980). Research methods in librarianship: techniques and
interpretation. New York; London: Academic Press.
Cailliau, R. & Connolly, D. (1995). A little history of the World Wide Web: from 1945 to
1995. [online] (Last modified 6 June 2006) World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).
Available from: http://www.w3.org/History.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Carr, R. (8 February 2006). What users want: an academic “hybrid” library perspective.
Ariadne. (46), [online] Available from:
http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue46/carr/intro.html [Last accessed 20 March 2008]
Chisenga, J. (1998). A study of university libraries' home pages in Sub-Saharan Africa. Libri,
48(1), pp. 49-57.
Chudnov, D. (2009). The Illusion of stability. Computers in Libraries, 29(6), pp. 31-33.
Church, J. & Felker, K. (2005). Web team development. Portal-Libraries and the Academy,
5(4), pp. 545-554.
Cisler, S. (1995). Library web sites. Library Journal, 120(19), pp. 24-25.

230

Clyde, L.A. (1996). The library as information provider: the home page. The Electronic
Library, 14(6), pp.549-557.
Clyde, L.A. (1999). The school library web site: on the information highway or stalled in the
carpark? In: LIGHTHALL, L. & HOWE, E. (eds.), Unleash the Power! Knowledge Technology - Diversity: Papers Presented at the Third International Forum on Research
in School Librarianship, Annual Conference of the International Association of School
Librarianship (IASL) (28th, Birmingham, Alabama, November 10-14, 1999). LMC
Source, pp. 227-237.
Clyde, L.A. (2000). A strategic planning approach to Web site management. The Electronic
Library, 18(2), pp. 97-108.
Clyde, L.A. (2004). School library Web sites: 1996-2002. The Electronic Library, 22(2), pp.
158-167.
Cogburn, D.L. (1998). Globalization, knowledge, education and training in the information age
In: InfoEthics '98: Ethical, Legal and Societal Challenges of Cyberspace. Principality
of Monaco, 1-3 October 1998. Available from:
http://www.unesco.org/webworld/infoethics_2/eng/papers/paper_23.htm [Last
accessed 27 October 2009]
Cohen, L. & Manion, L. (1997). Research methods in education. 4th ed., London: Routledge.
Cohen, L.B. & Still, J.M. (1999). A comparison of research university and two-year college
library web sites: content, functionality, and form. College & Research Libraries,
60(3), pp. 275-289.
Cole, G.A. (2004). Management theory and practice. 6th ed., London: Thomson.
Connell, R.S. (2008). Survey of web developers in academic libraries. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 34(2), pp. 121-129.
Connolly, C.G. (2000). From Static Web Site to Portal. EDUCAUSE Quarterly, 23(2), pp. 3942.
Cooper, E.A. (1997). Applying the fundamentals of librarianship to technology: designing and
maintaining your library's web site. Illinois Libraries, 79(1), pp. 5-10.
Corrall, S. & Brewerton, A. (1999). The new professional's handbook: your guide to
information services management. London: Library Association Publishing.
Corrall, S. (1995). Academic libraries in the information society. New Library World,
96(1120), pp. 35-42.
Corrall, S. (1998). The SCONUL vision: academic library in the year 2002. London:
SCONUL.
Corrall, S. (2000). Strategic management of information services: a planning handbook.
London: Aslib/IMI.
Corrall, S. (2001). The SCONUL vision: academic information services in the year 2005.
London: SCONUL.

231

Cox, A.M. (1996). Hypermedia library guides for academic libraries on the World Wide Web.
Program, 30(1), pp. 39-50.
Cox, A.M. (2007a). Beyond information: factors in participation in networks of practice, a case
study of web management in UK Higher Education. Journal of Documentation, 63(5),
pp. 765-787.
Cox, A.M. (2007b). The power and vulnerability of the “new professional”: web management
in UK universities. Program: electronic library and information systems, 41(2), pp.
148-169.
Crawford, W. (2000). Principled libraries: finding stability in changing times. Online, 24(2),
pp. 49-53.
Creswell, J.W. & Clark , V.L.P. (c2007). Designing and conducting mixed methods research.
Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage.
Creswell, J.W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among five traditions.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J.W. (2002). Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method
approaches. 2nd ed., London: SAGE.
Cvetkovic, M. (2009). Making Web 2.0 Work-From ‘Librarian Habilis’ to ‘Librarian Sapiens’.
Computers in Libraries, 29(9), pp.14-17.
Czaja, R. & Blair, J. (2003). Designing surveys: a guide to decisions and procedures. 2nd ed.,
Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge.
DCMI - Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (2008). Dublin Core Metadata Element Set, Version
1.1. [online] (Last modified 2008-01-14) Available from:
http://dublincore.org/documents/2008/01/14/dces/ [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Denscombe, M. (1998). The good research guide for small-scale social research projects.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Denscombe, M. (2002). Ground rules for good research: a 10 point guide for social researchers.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Detlor, B. & Lewis, V. (2006). Academic library web sites: current practice and future
directions. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 32(3), pp. 251-258.
Diaz, K.R. (1998). The role of the library web site: a step beyond deli sandwiches. Reference
& User Services Quarterly, 38(1), pp. 41-43.
Dillman, D.A. (1991). The Design and Administration of Mail Surveys. Annual Review of
Sociology, 17, pp. 225-249.
Dillman, D.A. (2000). Mail and self-administered surveys: the new total design method. 2nd
ed., New York; Chichester: Wiley.
Dillon, A. (2008). Accelerating learning and discovery: refining the role of academic librarians
In: No brief candle: reconceiving research libraries for the 21st Century. Washington:
Council on Library and Information Resources, pp. 51-57. Available also from:

232

http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub142/dillon.html [Last accessed 06 May 2010]
Dowling, T. (2003). Web manager's handbook. Library Technology Reports, 39(1), pp. 1-73.
Downing, A. (2001). The impact of the Internet on the administration of libraries In: LIU, L.G. (ed.) The role and impacts of the Internet on library and information services.
London: Greenwood, pp. 25-57.
Dubost, K. (28 May 2003). Steps of Web site development. [online] (Last modified 23 June
2005) Available from: http://www.w3.org/QA/2003/05/Web-site-steps [Last accessed
27 October 2009]
Ellwood, I. (2002). The essential brand book: over 100 techniques to increase brand value.
London: Kogan Page.
Epperson, A. & Leffler J. J. (2009). Social software programs: student preferences of librarian
use. New Library World, 110(7/8), pp. 366-372.
Eustis, J.D. & Kenney, D.J. (comps.) (1996). Library reorganization & restructuring.
Washington: Association of Research Libraries, Office of Management Services.
[SPEC kit. 0160-3582. 215]
Evans, B. (1999). The authors of academic library home pages: their identity, training and
dissemination of Web construction skills. Internet Research-Electronic Networking
Applications and Policy, 9(4), pp. 309-319.
Fagan, J.C. & Keach, J.A. (2011). Managing web projects in academic libraries. Library
Leadership & Management, 25(3), pp. 1-23.
Fink, A. (1995a). How to ask survey questions. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Fink, A. (1995b). How to sample in surveys. London SAGE.
Fink, A. (2003). The survey handbook. 2nd ed., Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Flick, U. (2002). An introduction to qualitative research. 2nd ed., London: Sage.
Floyd, F.J. (2002). Survey research methods. 3rd ed., London: SAGE.
Frey, J.H. & Oishi, S.M. (c1995). How to conduct interviews by telephone and in person.
Thousand Oaks; London: SAGE.
Friedlein, A. (2001). Web project management: delivering successful commercial Web sites.
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Fullington Ballard, A. & Teague-Rector, S. (2011). Building a library Web site: strategies for
success. College & Research Libraries News, 72(March), pp. 132-135.
Gall, M.D., et al. (1996). Educational research: an introduction. 6th ed., White Plains:
Longman.
Garlock, K.L. & Piontek, S. (1996). Building the service-base library Web site: a step-by-step
guide to design and options. Chicago: American Library Association.

233

Garlock, K.L. & Piontek, S. (1999). Designing Web interfaces to library services and
resources. Chicago: American Library Association.
Gibson J.L. et al. (2000). Organizations: behavior, structure, processes. 10th ed., Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Glesne, C. (1999). Becoming qualitative researchers: an introduction. 2nd ed., New York:
Longman.
Golding, J., et al. (2000). Library website management guidelines: what you need to know!
Australian Library Journal, 49(1), pp. 51-56.
Gray, D.E. (2004). Doing research in the real world. London: SAGE.
Greene, J.C. & Caracelli, V.J. (1997). Defining and describing the paradigm issue in mixedmethod evaluation In: GREENE, J.C. & CARACELLI, V.J. (eds.), Advances in
mixed-method evaluation: the challenges and benefits of integrating diverse
paradigms. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 5-17.
Griffiths, J.J. (1995). Managing rapid change in the UK library sector. Management
Development Review, 8(5), pp. 11-14.
Griffiths, P. (2004). Managing your Internet and Intranet services: the information and library
professional's guide to strategy. 2nd ed., London: Facet publishing.
Guenther, K. (2000). Marketing and communicating Web development efforts in-house.
Online, 24(4), pp. 81-83.
Hanson, A. & Lubotsky Levin, B. (eds.) (2003). Building a virtual library. Hershey PA;
London: Information Science Publishing.
Hendricks, A. (2007). Webmasters, web policies, and academic libraries: a survey. Library Hi
Tech, 25(1), pp. 136-146.
Holsti, O.R. (1969). Content analysis for the social sciences and humanities. Reading:
Addison-Wesley.
Howcroft, D. & Carroll, J. (2000). A proposed methodology for Web development In:
Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on Information Systems. Vienna, 3–5
July. Available from: http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2000/73 [Last accessed 20 February
2011]
Jackson, P. (1994). Desk research. London: Kogan Page.
Jick, T.D. (c2008). Mixing Qualitative and quantitative Methods: triangulation in action In:
CLARK , V.L.P. & CRESWELL, J.W. (eds.), The mixed methods reader. Thousand
Oaks, Calif.: Sage, pp. 107-120.
Johnson, B. (1998). Academic library web team management: the role of leadership authority.
Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship. 18 (Spring) [online] Available from:
http://www.istl.org/98-spring/article4.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]

234

Johnson, G. et al. (2005). Exploring corporate strategy. 7th ed., Harlow: Financial Times
Prentice Hall.
Joint Academic NETwork (n.d.). A brief history of JANET. [online] The JNT Association: the
UK's education and research network. Available from:
http://www.webarchive.ja.net/sj5/history.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Kaur, K. (2009). Marketing the academic library on the web. Library Management, 30(6/7), pp.
454-468.
Kelly, B. (1998). Web focus corner: the role of a web editor. Ariadne. (18), [online] Available
from: http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue18/web-focus/ [Last accessed 20 February 2011]
Kelly, B. (n.d.). Technologies and standards for building web sites. [online] (Last modified 5
May 1999) Available from: http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/web-focus/articles/onlinejun1999/article.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Kent, F. (2003). Web site archiving - an approach to recording every materially different
response produced by a website. [online] Available from:
http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw03/papers/fitch/paper.html [Last accessed 27 October
2009]
King, D.L. (2009). Chapter 4: Building the branch. Library Technology Reports, 45(6), pp. 1622.
King, D.L. (2012). Chapter 4: How we operate the digital branch. Library Technology Reports,
48(6), pp. 16-18.
Kim, Y. M. & Abbas, J. (2010). Adoption of Library 2.0 functionalities by academic libraries
and users: a knowledge management perspective. Journal of Academic Librarianship,
36(3), pp. 211-218.
Klein, L.R. (2001). Where the Bucks Stop. Library Journal's netConnect, Spring, pp. 24-25.
Kneip, J. (2007). Library webmasters in medium-sized Academic libraries. Journal of Web
Librarianship, 1(3), pp. 3-23.
Kochtanek, T.R. & Matthews, J.R. (2002). Library information systems: from library
automation to distributed information access solutions. Westport: Libraries Unlimited.
Kreuger, R.A. (1988). Focus groups: a practical guide for applied research. London: SAGE.
Krippendorff, K. (1980). Content analysis: an introduction to its methodology. Newbury Park:
SAGE.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: an introduction to its methodology. 2nd ed.,
Thousand Oaks; London: SAGE.
Krosnick, J.A. (1999). Survey Research. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, pp. 537-567.
Kuchi, T. (2006). Communicating mission: an analysis of academic library web sites. Journal
of Academic Librarianship, 32(2), pp. 148-154.

235

Kvale, S. (1996). InterViews: an introduction to qualitative Research interviewing. London:
SAGE.
Lancaster, F. W. and B. Sandore (1997). Technology and management in library and
information services. London, Library Association.
Leedy, P.D. (1997). Practical research: planning and design. 6th ed., New Jersey: Prectice Hall.
Leigh, S. (2000).Resource Discovery within the Networked “Hybrid” Library. In: ALIA 2000.
Capitalising on Knowledge: The Information Profession in the 21st Century. Canberra,
Australia, October 23-26, 2000. Available from:
http://conferences.alia.org.au/alia2000/proceedings/sallyanne.leigh.html [Last accessed
27 October 2009]
Leiner, B.M., et al. Histories of the Internet: a brief history of the Internet. [online] (Last
modified 10 December 2003) Available from:
http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/brief.shtml [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Lifer, E. (1996). Net work: new roles, same mission. Library Journal, 121(19), pp. 26-30.
Lingle, V.A. & Delozier, E.P. (1998). Policy aspects of web page development. Internet
Reference Services Quarterly, 3(2), pp. 33-48.
Liu, S. (2008). Engaging users: the future of academic library web sites. College & Research
Libraries, 69(1), pp. 6-27.
Liu, Y.P. (comp.) (1999). Web page development and management. Washington: Association
of Research Libraries. Office of Leadership and Management Services.
Lukasiewicz, A. (2007). Exploring the role of digital academic libraries: changing student
needs demand innovative service approach. Library Review, 56(9), pp. 821-827.
Lyman, P. (2002). Archiving the World Wide Web In: Building a national strategy for
preservation: issues in digital media archiving. Council on Library and Information
Resources and the Library of Congress. Available from:
http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub106/web.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Lynch, P. & Horton, S. (c2001). Web Style Guide: basic design principles for creating Web
sites. 2nd ed., New Haven: Yale University Press. Available also from:
http://www.webstyleguide.com/index.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Lynch, P. (c1997). Yale C/AIM Web Style Guide. [online] Available from:
http://www.pakscot.org/formsys/Ftp/YaleWebStyleGuide.pdf [Last accessed 27
October 2009]
Ma, L. (2012). Some philosophical considerations in using mixed methods in library and
information science research. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 63(9), pp. 1859–1867.
Mach, M. & Kutzik, J.S. (2001). The Web is everyone's business: a distributed system for
managing the library Web site. Colorado Libraries, 27(3), pp. 29-32.
Makin, L. & Craven, J. (1999). Changing libraries: the impact of national policy on UK library
services Library Management, 20(8), pp. 425-430.

236

Manuel, S., et al. (2010). Strategic development of UK academic library websites: a survey of
East Midlands university libraries. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science,
42(2), pp. 147-155.
Maxwell, J.A. & Loomis, D.M. (c2003). Mixed methods design: an alternative approach In:
TASHAKKORI, A. & TEDDLIE, C. (eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social &
behavioral research. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, pp. 209-240.
Mcleod, J. & White, M. (1995). Building the virtual campus bit by bit: World Wide Web
development at university of Maine. Computers in Libraries, 15(10), pp. 45-49.
Mcmillan, S.J. (2000). The microscope and the moving target: the challenge of applying
content analysis to the World Wide Web. Journalism and Mass Communication
Quarterly, 77(1), pp. 80-99.
Mctavish, D., et al. (1975). The systematic assessment and prediction of research
methodology: advisory report (Vol. 1). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota (Final
Report on Grant OEO 005-P-20-2-74, Minnesota Continuing Program for the
Assessment and Improvement of Research).
Middleton, I., et al. (1999). Presenting a model for the structure and content of a university
World Wide Web site. Journal of Information Science, 25(3), pp. 219-227.
Moen, W.E. & Murray, K.R. (2002). Virtual libraries: a service-based approach for virtual
libraries. Texas Library Journal, Fall, pp. 96-100.
Morgan, S. (1996). Developing academic library skills for the future. Library Review, 45(5),
pp. 41-53.
Myburgh, S. (2005). The new information professional: how to thrive in the information age
doing what you love. Oxford: Chandos.
Nesta, F. & Mi, J. (2011). Library 2.0 or Library III: returning to leadership. Library
Management, 32(1/2), pp. 5-97.
Oppenheim, A.N. (1992). Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude measurement. New
ed., London: Continuum.
Partridge, H. (2011).Librarian 2.0: it’s all in the attitude! In: A Declaration of Interdependence.
Philadelphia, March 30–April 2, 2011. Available from:
http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/events/national/2011/papers/librarian2.0.pdf
[Last accessed 22 September 2011]
Patton, M.Q. (1988). Paradigms and pragmatism In: FETTERMAN, D.M. (ed.) Qualitative
approaches to evaluation in education: the silent scientific revolution. New York:
Praeger, pp. 116-137.
Patton, M.Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods. 2nd ed., Newbury Park, CA;
London: Sage.
Patton, M.Q. (c1997). Utilization-focused evaluation: the new century text. 3rd ed., Thousand
Oaks, Calif.; London: SAGE.

237

Peterson, K. (2006). Academic web site design and academic templates: where does the library
fit in? Information Technology and Libraries, 24(4), pp. 217-221.
Pinfield, S. (2001). Managing electronic library services: current issues in UK higher education
institutions. Ariadne. (29), [online] Available from:
http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue29/pinfield/intro.html [Last accessed 27 October 2009]
Pinfield, S., et al. (1998). Realizing the hybrid library. D-Lib Magazine. October [online]
Available from: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/october98/10pinfield.html [Last accessed 27
October 2009]
Place, E., et al. (Launched 13th June 2006). Internet Detective. [online] (Last modified May 16
2008) Available from: http://www.vts.intute.ac.uk/detective/ [Last accessed 27 October
2009]
Poulter, A., et al. (1999). The library and information professional's guide to the World Wide
Web. London: Library Association.
Powell, R.R. (2004). Basic research methods for librarians. 4th ed., Westport, Conn.: Libraries
Unlimited.
Ragsdale, K. (comp.) (2001). Staffing the library Website. Washington: Association of
Research Libraries, Office of Management Services.
Richards, L. (2005). Handling qualitative data: a practical guide. London: SAGE.
Richmond, A. (n.d.). What is a Webmaster? [online] Available from:
http://www.wdvl.com/Internet/Web/Jobs/Webmaster.html [Last accessed 27 October
2009]
Roberts, S. & Rowley, J. (2004). Managing information services. London: Facet Publishing.
Robson, C. (2002). Real world research: a resource for social scientists and practitionerresearchers. 2nd ed., Oxford: Blackwell.
Rosenfeld, L. & Morville, P. (1998). Information Architecture for the World Wide Web.
Cambridge: O'Reilly.
Rusbridge, C. (1998). Towards the Hybrid Library. D-Lib Magazine. (July/August), [online]
Available from: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july98/rusbridge/07rusbridge.html [Last
accessed 27 October 2009]
Ryan, S.M. (2003). Library web site administration: strategic planning model for the small
academic library. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(4), pp. 207-218.
Sadeh, T. (2007). Time for a change: new approaches for a new generation of library users.
New Library World, 108(7/8), pp. 307-316.
Sapa, R. (2005). The roles of American and Polish academic library Web sites: a comparative
study. Libri, 55(1), pp. 1-20.
Sapsford, R. & Jupp, V. (eds.) (2006). Data collection and analysis. 2nd ed., London: Sage
Publications.

238

Sennyey, P., et al. (2009). Exploring the future of academic libraries: a definitional approach.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 35(3), pp. 252-259.
Shoniwa, P. & Hall, H. (2007). Library 2.0 and UK academic libraries: drivers and impacts.
New Review of Information Networking, 13(2), pp. 69-79.
Shropshire, S. (2003). Beyond the design and evaluation of library Web sites: an analysis and
four case studies. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(2), pp. 95-101.
Shucha, B. (2003). The circle-of life: managing a law library Web site redesign project. Law
Library Journal, 95(1), pp. 47-67.
Slater, M. (1990). Research methods in library and information studies. London: Library
Association.
Spainhour, S. & Eckstein, R. (2003). Webmaster in a Nutshell. 3rd ed., Bijing: O'Reilly.
Stevens, D. (2002). Enforcer of Web Policies. Computers in Libraries, 22(6), pp. 34-36.
Stielow, F. (ed.) (c1999). Creating a virtual library: a how-to-do-it manual. New York: NealSchuman.
Stover, M. (1997). Library web sites: mission and function in the networked organization.
Computers in Libraries, 17(10), pp. 55-57.
Strauss, A.L. & Corbin, J.M. (c1998). Basics of qualitative research: techniques and
procedures for developing grounded theory. 2nd ed., Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.
Sun, H., et al. (2011). Role changing for librarians in the new information technology era. New
Library World, 112(7/8), pp. 321-333.
Tashakkori, A. & Teddlie, C. (1998). Mixed methodology: combining qualitative and
quantitative approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tashakkori, A. & Teddlie, C. (c2009). Foundations of mixed methods research: integrating
quantitative and qualitative approaches in the social and behavioral sciences. Los
Angeles: Sage.
Taylor, M.K. (2000). Library webmasters: satisfactions, dissatisfactions, and expectations.
Information Technology and Libraries, 19(3), pp. 116-124.
Totterdell, A. (2005). An introduction to library and information work. London: Facet.
Travica, B. (1999). Organizational aspects of the virtual library: a survey of academic libraries.
Library & Information Science Research, 21(2), pp. 173-203.
Traw, J.I. (comp.) (2000). Library web site policies. Chigago: ACRL, College Libraries
Section.
UNESCO (2005). How to create a website: guiding principles. New Delhi: Unesco. Available
also
http://portal.unesco.org/ci/en/files/20938/11401731359How_Create_Website.pdf/How
_Create_Website.pdf [Last accessed 27 October 2009]

239

Van Der Walt, P.W. & Van Brakel, P.A. (1997). The webmaster: a new player in the
information center's online team. The Electronic Library, 15(6), pp. 447-452.
Van Der Walt, P.W. & Van Brakel, P.A. (2000). Task analysis of the webmaster: results of an
empirical study. Aslib Proceedings, 52(1), pp. 20-38.
Veen, J. (c2001). The art & science of Web design. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Von Elm, C. & Trump, J.F. (2001). Maintaining the mission in the hybrid library. Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 27(1), pp. 33-35.
W3 Wide World Web Consortium. [online] Available from: http://www.w3.org [Last accessed
27 October 2009]
Wilson, P.A. (2004). Library Web sites: creating online collections and services. Chicago:
American Library Association.
World Organization of Webmasters (n.d.). What is a Web Professional? [online] Available
from: http://www.webprofessionals.org/about/webmaster/web1.html [Last accessed 27
October 2009]
Xiao, D., et al. (1997). Library services through the World Wide Web. Public-Access
Computer Systems Review. 8(4), [online] Available from:
http://info.lib.uh.edu/pr/v8/n4/xiao8n4.html

240

Appendices
Appendix I
Appendix II
Appendix III

Descriptive survey
Interviews
Quantitative data collection methods: results

1-43 | Appendix
45-78 | Appendix
79-123 | Appendix

Appendix I. Descriptive survey

Contents:
I.1. Definition of sample population: examination of sources about the
UK academic institutions ……………………………………………2
I.2. Sample – English & Scottish HEI …………………….…………..3-6
I.3. Self-administered questionnaire (cover letter included)………[7-17]
I.4. E-mail cover letter: 1st dispatch…………………………………...18
I.5. E-mail cover letter: 1st and 2nd reminder………………………...19
I.6. E-mail cover letter: 3rd reminder………………………………….20
I.7. Reply e-mail to respondents………………….…………………….21
I.8. Progress of survey response progress.…………………….…….…21
I.9. Survey response.…………………………………………………….21
I.10. Geographical profile of respondent libraries………………...…22
I.11. Respondents’ profile………..………………………………….…23
I.12. Control of questionnaires………………………………………...24
I.13. Research sample…………………………………………………..42
I.14. Research sample grouped by parent institution type…………..42

1 | Appendix

Appendix I.1: Definition of sample population: examination of sources about the
UK academic institutions
Related section: 3.4.2.2.b

Date of data access: 25-01-2008

Sources
UK
countries

England
N. Ireland
Scotland
Wales
UK total

Funding
Councils

UUK

HERO

Universities

Higher education
institutions

FE

HEI

A-Z list

88
2
13
3
106

132
4
20
12
168

135
43
7
6
191

131
18
13
4
166

151
4
21
13
189

DFES

HESA

-

-

Memo:
DFES: Department of Children, School and families – Higher Education http://www.dfes.gov.uk/hegateway/index.cfm. It provided links to relevant resources with
the higher education in UK, but it did not provide a list of institutions.
FE: Further Education Colleges that offer Higher Education courses
Funding Councils:
a) Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) - http://www.hefce.ac.uk/
b) North Ireland Higher Education Council (NIHEC) - http://www.delni.gov.uk/
c) Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council (SFC) - http://www.sfc.ac.uk/
d) Higher Education Funding Council for Wales (HEFCW) - http://www.hefcw.ac.uk/
HEI: Higher Education Institutions
HERO: Higher Education & Research Opportunities in the United Kingdom – “A to Z
listings : Universities & HE colleges” http://www.hero.ac.uk/uk/universities___colleges/index.cfm
HESA: Higher Education Statistics Agency - www.hesa.ac.uk. It provided links to statistical
information about students and other elements, but not for the total number of the
academic institutions.
UUK: Universities UK (formerly CVCP) - http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/

2| Appendix

Appendix I.2: Sample – English & Scottish HEI
Related section: 3.4.2.2.c
Note: The asterisk (*) indicates that the academic library of the institution responded to the survey
Title of HEI
Anglia Ruskin University
Aston University
Bath Spa University
Birkbeck, University of London
Birmingham City University
Bishop Grosseteste University
College Lincoln *
Bournemouth University
Brunel University
Bucks New University
Canterbury Christ Church
University *
Central School of Speech and
Drama, University of London
City University, London *
Conservatoire for Dance and
Drama
Courtauld Institute of Art
Coventry University *
Cranfield University *
Dartington College of Arts
De Montfort University
Durham University
Edge Hill University *
Edinburgh College of Art
Glasgow Caledonian University
Goldsmiths *
Guildhall School of Music and
Drama
Harper Adams University College
Heriot-Watt University *

Country
England
England
England
England
England

Region
Eastern
West Midlands
South-West
London
West Midlands

England

East Midlands

England
England
England

South-West
London
South-East

Web site
http://www.anglia.ac.uk/
http://www.aston.ac.uk
http://www.bathspa.ac.uk
http://www.bbk.ac.uk
http://www.bcu.ac.uk/
http://www.bishopg.ac.uk/
http://www.bishopg.ac.uk/
http://www.bournemouth.ac.uk
http://www.brunel.ac.uk
http://www.bcuc.ac.uk/

England

South-East

http://www.canterbury.ac.uk/

England

London

http://www.cssd.ac.uk

England

London

http://www.city.ac.uk

England

London

http://www.cdd.ac.uk/

England
England
England
England
England
England
England
Scotland
Scotland
England

London
West Midlands
Eastern
South-West
East Midlands
North-East
North-West
----London

England

London

England
Scotland

West Midlands
---

Heythrop College

England

London

Imperial College London *
Institute of Education, University
of London
Keele University *
King's College London
Kingston University *

England

London

http://www.harper-adams.ac.uk
http://www.hw.ac.uk
http://www.heythrop.ac.uk
http://www.heythrop.ac.uk
http://www.imperial.ac.uk

England

London

http://ioewebserver.ioe.ac.uk/

England
England
England

West Midlands
London
London

Lancaster University *

England

North-West

Leeds College of Music *

England

Leeds Metropolitan University

England

Leeds Trinity and All Saints *

England

Liverpool Hope University

England

Yorkshire &
Humber
Yorkshire &
Humber
Yorkshire &
Humber
North-West

http://www.courtauld.ac.uk
http://www.coventry.ac.uk
http://www.cranfield.ac.uk
http://www.dartington.ac.uk
http://www.dmu.ac.uk
http://www.durham.ac.uk
http://www.edgehill.ac.uk
http://www.eca.ac.uk
http://www.caledonian.ac.uk
http://www.goldsmiths.ac.uk
http://www.gsmd.ac.uk/

http://www.keele.ac.uk
http://www.kcl.ac.uk
http://www.kingston.ac.uk
http://www.lancs.ac.uk
http://www.lcm.ac.uk/
http://www.leedsmet.ac.uk
http://www.leedstrinity.ac.uk
http://www.hope.ac.uk

3 | Appendix

Title of HEI
Liverpool Institute for Performing
Arts
Liverpool John Moores University
London Business School
London Metropolitan University
London School of Economics
and Political Science
London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine
London South Bank University *
Loughborough University
Manchester Metropolitan
University
Middlesex University
Napier University
Newcastle University
Newman University College,
Birmingham
Northumbria University
(University of Northumbria at
Newcastle)
Norwich School of Art & Design
Nottingham Trent University
Open University
Oxford Brookes University
Queen Margaret University *
Queen Mary, University of
London *
Ravensbourne College of Design
and Communication
RCN Institute
Robert Gordon University *
Roehampton University
Rose Bruford College
Royal Academy of Music
Royal Agricultural College *
Royal College of Art
Royal College of Music *
Royal Holloway, University of
London
Royal Northern College of Music
*
Royal Scottish Academy of
Music and Drama
Royal Veterinary College
School of Oriental and African
Studies *
School of Pharmacy

Country

Region

Web site

England

North-West

http://www.lipa.ac.uk/

England
England
England

North-West
London
London

http://www.ljmu.ac.uk
http://www.london.edu
http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/s

England

London

http://www.lse.ac.uk/

England

London

http://www.lshtm.ac.uk

England
England

London
East Midlands

http://www.lsbu.ac.uk
http://www.lboro.ac.uk

England

North-West

http://www.mmu.ac.uk

England
Scotland
England

London
North-East

http://www.mdx.ac.uk
http://www.napier.ac.uk
http://www.ncl.ac.uk/

England

West Midlands

England

North-East

England
England
England
England
Scotland

Eastern
East Midlands
South-West
South-East
---

England

London

http://www.qmul.ac.uk

England

London

http://www.ravensbourne.ac.uk

England
Scotland
England
England
England
England
England
England

London
--London
London
London
South-West
London
London

http://www.rcn.org.uk
http://www.rgu.ac.uk
http://www.roehampton.ac.uk
http://www.bruford.ac.uk
http://www.ram.ac.uk
http://www.rac.ac.uk
http://www.rca.ac.uk/
http://www.rcm.ac.uk

England

South-East

http://www.rhul.ac.uk/

England

North-West

http://www.rncm.ac.uk

Scotland

---

http://www.rsamd.ac.uk

England

London

http://www.rvc.ac.uk

England

London

http://www.soas.ac.uk

England

http://www.shu.ac.uk

http://www.newman.ac.uk
http://www.northumbria.ac.uk
http://www.nsad.ac.uk/
http://www.ntu.ac.uk
http://www.open.ac.uk
http://www.brookes.ac.uk
http://www.qmu.ac.uk/

Sheffield Hallam University

England

Southampton Solent University
St George's, University of
London
St Mary's College
Staffordshire University
Thames Valley University

England

London
Yorkshire &
Humber
South-East

England

London

http://www.sgul.ac.uk/

England
England
England

London
West Midlands
London

http://www.smuc.ac.uk
http://www.staffs.ac.uk
http://www.tvu.ac.uk

4| Appendix

http://www.pharmacy.ac.uk

http://www.solent.ac.uk

Title of HEI
The Arts Institute at
Bournemouth
The Glasgow School of Art *
The Institute of Cancer Research
The University of Birmingham *
The University of Manchester
Trinity Laban *
UHI Millennium Institute
University College Birmingham
(Birmingham College of Food,
Tourism and Creative
Studies)
University College Falmouth
University College for the
Creative Arts at Canterbury,
Epsom, Farnham, Maidstone
and Rochesters *
University College London (UCL)
University College Plymouth St
Mark & St John
University of Aberdeen *
University of Abertay Dundee
University of Bath
University of Bedfordshire
University of Bolton

Country

Region

University of Bradford

England

University of Brighton
University of Bristol *
University of Cambridge
University of Central Lancashire
University of Chester
University of Chichester
University of Cumbria *
University of Derby *
University of Dundee *
University of East Anglia *
University of East London *
University of Edinburgh *
University of Essex
University of Exeter
University of Glasgow *
University of Gloucestershire
University of Greenwich *
University of Hertfordshire

England
England
England
England
England
England
England
England
Scotland
England
England
Scotland
England
England
Scotland
England
England
England

England

South-West

Scotland
England
England
England
England
Scotland

--London
West Midlands
North-West
London
---

http://www.gsa.ac.uk
http://www.icr.ac.uk
http://www.bham.ac.uk
http://www.manchester.ac.uk
http://www.trinitylaban.ac.uk
http://www.uhi.ac.uk/

England

West Midlands

http://www.bcftcs.ac.uk

England

South-West

http://www.falmouth.ac.uk

England

South-East

http://www.ucreative.ac.uk

England

London

England

South-West

http://www.marjon.ac.uk

Scotland
Scotland
England
England
England

----South-West
Eastern
North-West
Yorkshire &
Humber
South-East
South-West
Eastern
North-West
North-West
South-East
North-West
East Midlands
--Eastern
London

http://www.abdn.ac.uk/
http://www.abertay.ac.uk
http://www.bath.ac.uk/
http://www.beds.ac.uk/
http://www.bolton.ac.uk

University of Huddersfield *

England

University of Hull

England

University of Kent

England

University of Leeds

England

University of Leicester *
University of Lincoln

England
England

Eastern
South-West
--South-West
London
Eastern
Yorkshire &
Humber
Yorkshire &
Humber
South-East
Yorkshire &
Humber
East Midlands
East Midlands

Web site
http://www.aib.ac.uk/

http://www.ucl.ac.uk

http://www.bradford.ac.uk
http://www.brighton.ac.uk
http://www.bristol.ac.uk
http://www.cam.ac.uk
http://www.uclan.ac.uk/
http://www.chester.ac.uk
http://www.chiuni.ac.uk
http://www.cumbria.ac.uk
http://www.derby.ac.uk
http://www.dundee.ac.uk/
http://www.uea.ac.uk
http://www.uel.ac.uk
http://www.ed.ac.uk/
http://www.essex.ac.uk
http://www.exeter.ac.uk/
http://www.gla.ac.uk
http://www.glos.ac.uk
http://www.gre.ac.uk
http://www.herts.ac.uk
http://www.hud.ac.uk
http://www.hull.ac.uk
http://www.kent.ac.uk/
http://www.leeds.ac.uk
http://www.le.ac.uk
http://www.lincoln.ac.uk

5 | Appendix

Title of HEI
University of Liverpool
University of London
University of Northampton
University of Nottingham
University of Oxford
University of Plymouth *
University of Portsmouth
University of Reading *
University of Salford

Country
England
England
England
England
England
England
England
England
England

University of Sheffield

England

University of Southampton *
University of St Andrews
University of Stirling *
University of Strathclyde
University of Sunderland
University of Surrey
University of Sussex *
University of Teesside *
University of the Arts London *
University of the West of
England, Bristol *
University of the West of
Scotland (University of
Paisley)
University of Warwick
University of Westminster
University of Winchester
University of Wolverhampton
University of Worcester

England
Scotland
Scotland
Scotland
England
England
England
England
England

Region
North-West
London
East Midlands
East Midlands
South-East
South-West
South-East
South-East
North-West
Yorkshire &
Humber
South-East
------North-West
South-East
South-East
North-East
London

England

South-West

Scotland

---

England
England
England
England
England

University of York

England

Writtle College *

England

York St John University *

England

West Midlands
London
South-East
West Midlands
West Midlands
Yorkshire &
Humber
Eastern
Yorkshire &
Humber

6| Appendix

Web site
http://www.liv.ac.uk
http://www.lon.ac.uk
http://www.northampton.ac.uk
http://www.nottingham.ac.uk
http://www.ox.ac.uk/
http://www.plymouth.ac.uk/
http://www.port.ac.uk
http://www.rdg.ac.uk
http://www.salford.ac.uk
http://www.sheffield.ac.uk/
http://www.soton.ac.uk
http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk
http://www.stir.ac.uk
http://www.strath.ac.uk
http://www.sunderland.ac.uk/
http://www.surrey.ac.uk
http://www.sussex.ac.uk
http://www.tees.ac.uk/
http://www.arts.ac.uk
http://www.uwe.ac.uk/
http://www.paisley.ac.uk
http://www.warwick.ac.uk
http://www.westminster.ac.uk
http://www.winchester.ac.uk
http://www.wlv.ac.uk
http://www.worcester.ac.uk/
http://www.york.ac.uk/
http://www.writtle.ac.uk
http://www.yorksj.ac.uk

Appendix I.3: Self-administered questionnaire (cover letter included)

Related section: 3.4.2.4

7-17 | Appendix

..
..
..
..
..

07th of April 2008

Managing the changing role of the
library web sites: a study into UK
academic libraries
Dear sir/madam
I am a research student currently working on my PhD in the
Department of Information and Communication at Manchester
Metropolitan University (MMU). My research will investigate the
intersection of the library web site management, the virtualisation of
library services and functions and the management of change. This
research will be the first exploration and analysis of this interrelationship for library practice.
The research is focused on the UK academic libraries and it will be
completed in three stages; this survey is part of the first stage. All
questionnaire responses will be treated according to the ethical policy
of the MMU (http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/).
Your participation would be appreciated in order to contribute to the
implementation and the quality of the research. I intend to provide an
abstract of the final findings to any of the participants wishing to
follow the progress of this study.
In addition, if you would be willing to participate further in this
study, please indicate so at the last section “Respondent's details”
providing contact details.
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and
Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West
Off Oxford Road
Manchester
M15 6LL
UK

Please return the questionnaire attached to the e-mail address:
ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk by 18th of April 2008.
Yours sincerely
Ioanna Zorba

P.S.: The format of the questionnaire is electronic; MSWord file (.doc)
format protected. If you encounter any problem, please do not hesitate
to contact me or if you wish other information.

Section 1: Information about the Library
This section is about general information for the Library, focusing on its mission and its staffing.
The term “Library” is used for any organisational structure providing library services to the
particular academic community (e.g. Library, Information Services, Learning and Information
Services, Library & Archives Service, Information Services and Technical Support).
1. Library identity:
1a. Title of the university:
1b. Title of the Library:

2. What is the mission statement of your Library?

3. How many sites does the Library have?

4. How many members of Library staff are:
a.

Librarians:

b.

Information Technology (IT) staff:

c.

Archivists:

d.

Administrative staff:

e.

OTHER:
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’:

2
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 2: Basic information for the Library web site (LWS)
This section is about basic information for the library web site. The term “Library web site” with
the abbreviation "LWS" refers to the official web presence of your Library.
5. Home page of LWS: http://

6. In which year was the LWS first available?

7. Where is the LWS hosted?
Please, tick the most appropriate statement (one choice).
a.

The LWS is hosted on server/s of the Library:

b.

The LWS is hosted on server/s of other unit within the university:

c.

The LWS is hosted on server/s of an outsource Internet Service Provider (ISP):

d.

The LWS is hosted on server/s of OTHER:
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’:

3
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 3: The role of the Library web site (LWS)
This section is about the role of the LWS as it can be identified via its mission statement and its
uses.
8. Is there a mission statement for the LWS?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

8.1 If YES, what is it?

9. How is the LWS used?
Please, tick all statements that apply (multiple choices).
a.

The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.

b.

The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted
locally in the building/s of the Library.

c.

The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the operation of
the Library as organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff, undertaken
projects).

d.

The LWS is used for provision of information for the professional interests of the
library staff.

e.

The LWS is used for provision of an online “work station” for the Library staff (e.g.
Intranet for the staff with password protected access to library automated systems).

f.

The LWS is used for OTHER uses.
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’:

10. Have the uses of the LWS been diversified since the first LWS was available?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

10.1 If YES, please give details

11. Are there any future plans that will affect the role of LWS?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

11.1 If YES, please give details

4
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 4: Management of the Library web site (LWS)
This section is about the responsibility for the decision making about the LWS.
12. In which of the following managerial aspects of the LWS is the Library involved?
Please, tick all statements that apply (multiple choices).
a.

Decisions about the LWS content

b.

Decisions about the LWS design

c.

Leading and controlling the LWS development procedure (content and design)

d.

Budget for the LWS development procedure (content and design)

13. Are there others (e.g. other unit within the university) who are involved in the LWS management?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
No

Yes

Don’t know

13.1 If Yes, please give details

14. Taking into account the above answers, has the Library the main role for the management of
the LWS?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

If “NO”, please skip to the Section 6 of the questionnaire.

5
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 5: Library web site planning, controlling and achieving
This section is about the Library’s involvement in the LWS managerial aspects of planning,
controlling and achieving.
15. Is there an LWS planning process?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

15.1 If YES, which Library staff (position titles) are involved in this process?

16. Are there LWS performance measurement and monitoring processes?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
No

Yes

Don’t know

16.1 If YES, which Library staff (position titles) are involved in these processes?

17. Are there LWS marketing processes?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

17.1 If YES, which Library staff (position titles) are involved in these processes?

18. Has the Library developed specialised policies for the LWS?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

18.1 If YES, which of the stated subject/issues cover?
Please, tick all statements that apply (multiple choices).
a.

Design and construction issues.

b.

Administrative issues (responsibilities, procedures, aims/objectives, etc).

c.

Metadata and documentation issues.

d.

Copyright and Freedom of Information issues.

e.

OTHER issues/subjects.
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’:

6
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 5 (continued)
19. Are there university policies and/or guidelines, which affect to the LWS?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

19.1 If YES, which LWS aspects are affected?
Please, tick all statements that apply (multiple choices).
a.

Design and construction issues.

b.

Administrative issues (responsibilities, procedures, aims/objectives, etc).

c.

Metadata and documentation issues.

d.

Copyright and Freedom of Information issues.

e.

OTHER issues/subjects.
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’:

20. Is there an annual budget for LWS development and maintenance?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

21. Does the Library undertake external funded projects for the development of particular web-based
library services?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

7
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 6: Library web site human resources
This section is about the involvement of the Library staff in the procedure of LWS development
and maintenance.
22. The staff who works regularly on the LWS development and maintenance are members of
staff of:
Please, tick all statements that apply (multiple choices).
a. the Library *
b. other unit(s) within the university
If ‘Yes’, which is the title(s)?
c. OTHER
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’:

* If the option a. the library has not been selected,
please skip to the Section 7 of the questionnaire.

23. How many members of Library staff work solely on the LWS?

23.1 Do they compose a particular Library unit/team?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

If YES:
- which is the title of this unit/team?
- which is the position of the unit/team within the Library organisation?

23.2 How many of them are:
a. Librarians:
b. Information Technology (IT) staff:
c. Archivists:
d. Administrative staff:
e. OTHER:
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’?

8
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 6 (continued)
24. How many members of Library staff are not occupied solely on the LWS, but they have
additional duties as well?
24.1 How many of them are:
a. Librarians:
b. Information Technology (IT) staff:
c. Archivists:
d. Administrative staff:
e. OTHER:
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’?

9
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Section 7: Organising and leading library web site development
This section is about the responsibility for organising and leading the LWS operations and some
aspects of this management area.
25. Is the Library responsible for the organisation of the work of the LWS development and
maintenance?
Please, tick any statement that apply
Yes

No

Don’t know

If “NO”, please skip to the end of the questionnaire ‘Respondent’s details’.
26. Is there ONE person of the members of Library staff who is responsible for organising the
work for the LWS development and maintenance?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

If YES, please give details for:
Title of the position:
Please, allocate the position within the structure
of the Library organisation:
Speciality:
Occupation (Full-time or Part-time):
Please, tick the statement that applies.

Full-time

Part-time

If NO, please, describe under what managerial arrangement the work of the LWS is
organised:

27. Are there officially stated procedures and work schedule for the LWS development and
maintenance?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

28. Are there activities for training and skills development of Library staff who works for the LWS?
Please, tick the statement that applies.
Yes

No

Don’t know

10
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Respondent’s details
Thank you for replying to the questionnaire. Your contribution is valued for this research
progress and quality.
Date of questionnaire completion:
Personal details for statistical purposes:
Respondent's title of position:
In case that more than one person contributed to completion of the questionnaire,
please add their titles of position:

If you are willing to be contacted for further information,
please fill the following personal details:
Contact details - Name:
Contact details - e-mail:
Contact details - office tel.:

If you would like to make any comment or to give any further information about the issues
mentioned, please feel free to do so below:

Thank you very much
for your co-operation
&
for your contribution
Ioanna Zorba

11
S u r ve y i n l i b r a r y w e b s i t e m a n a g e m e n t – Ap r i l 2 0 0 8

Appendix I.4: E-mail cover letter: 1st dispatch
Related section: 3.4.2.5
Dear sir/madam
I am a research student currently working on my PhD in the Department of
Information and Communication at Manchester Metropolitan University
(MMU). My research will investigate the intersection of the library web
site management, the virtualisation of library services and functions
and the management of change. This research will be the first
exploration and analysis of this inter-relationship for the library
practice.
The research is focused on the UK academic libraries and it will be
completed in three stages; this survey is part of the first stage. All
questionnaire responses will be treated according to the ethical policy
of the MMU (http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/).
Your participation would be appreciated in order to contribute to the
implementation and the quality of the research.
Please return the questionnaire attached to the e-mail address:
ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk by 18th of April 2008.
The format of the questionnaire is electronic; MSWord file (.doc) format
protected. If you encounter any problem, please do not hesitate to
contact me or if you wish more or other information.
Yours sincerely
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester
M15 6LL
UK

Note: in the few cases that there were not found personal contact details…
“Please, forward the e-mail to the director of the library Service.”

18| Appendix

Appendix I.5: E-mail cover letter: 1st and 2nd reminder
Related section: 3.4.2.5
Dear sir/madam
This is a reminder for the survey about the management of the library
web site by UK academic libraries.
Please, reply to or forward the e-mail to the appropriate member of
library staff.
Your participation would be appreciated in order to contribute to the
implementation and the quality of the research.
Yours sincerely
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester
M15 6LL
UK

19 | Appendix

Appendix I.6: E-mail cover letter: 3rd reminder
Related section: 3.4.2.5

Dear colleagues from the ………………………………………………1,
This is a reminder for the survey about the management of the library
web site by UK academic libraries.
The participation of your service would be appreciated in order to
contribute to the implementation and the quality of the research. This
research will be the first exploration and analysis of this interrelationship for the library practice. All questionnaire responses will
be treated according to the ethical policy of the MMU
(http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/).
This reminder is addressed to more members of staff of your department
than the previous reminders were. Please, reply to or forward the e-mail
to the appropriate member of staff.
The contact details were located from:
- http:// ………………………………………………2
- the directory “Libraries in academic institutions in the United
Kingdom” in the Libraries and information services in the United Kingdom
and the Republic of Ireland 2007-2008. 34th ed., London: Facet, 2007.2
The format of the questionnaire is electronic; MSWord file (.doc) format
protected. If you encounter any problem, please do not hesitate to
contact me or if you wish more or other information
(ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk).
Yours sincerely
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester
M15 6LL
UK

Notes:
1. Title of the library accompanied by the title of the parent institution
2. Web page source (when it was applicable)
3. When it was applicable

20| Appendix

Appendix I.7: Reply e-mail to respondents
Related section: 3.4.2.5

Dear ………………………,
Thank you for your participation. I appreciate it a lot.
Yours sincerely
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester
M15 6LL
UK

Appendix I.8: Progress of survey response
Related section: 3.4.2.5
Table A1.1: Survey; Questionnaire dispatch, reminders and responses
Actions

Date

Sum of library cases
recipients

Sum of library cases
respondents

Dispatch of questionnaire

7/4/2008

149

10

1st reminder

18/4/2008

139

7

2nd reminder

27/4/2008

132

6

3rd reminder

28/5/2008

126

25

Appendix I.9: Survey response
Related section: 3.4.2.5
The questionnaire was distributed via e-mail to members of staff of 149 UK academic
libraries, during the period April-June of 2008. From the 149 Libraries (100%) 48 of them
(32%) completed and sent back the questionnaire via e-mail (Table A1.2). One case
returned the questionnaire by post, print and handwritten. Moreover, one more case

21 | Appendix

responded via e-mail stating that: ‘We don't have a library website per se. We have pages
on the main School one which are managed by our Marketing Department.1’, without
completing and sending back the questionnaire. More than half of the respondent libraries
(26 of the 48 cases) expressed their willingness to be contacted for further information,
providing personal contact details. In addition, almost all of the respondent libraries (45
of 48 cases) provided information about the title of position of the persons, who
completed the questionnaire.
Table A1.2: Survey response
Sent back questionnaires

Yes

Positive cases for further
contact1

48 (32%)

No

101 (68%)

Sum of survey sample

149 (100%)

Provision of respondents’
statistical data1

Yes

No

Yes

No

262

22

45

3

NA

Notes:
1.
2.

Appendix I.3, p. 11
After the control of questionnaire (see, below Appendix I.12), the total number was reduced to 25

Appendix I.10: Geographical profile of respondent libraries
Related section: 3.4.2.5
The responses by the geographical sampling units were 39 (30%) from the 131 (100%)
English and 9 (50%) from the 18 (100%) Scottish Libraries.
Table A1.3: Survey respondent Libraries’ geographical profile
Survey response
Country

Sum
No

Yes

England

92

39 (30%)

131 (100%)

Scotland

9

9 (50%)

18 (100%)

Grand total:

48 (32%)

101 (68%)

f
1

Exact phrase

22| Appendix

149 (100%)

pp. 221-232

Appendix I.11: Respondents’ profile
Related section: 3.4.2.5
The general respondents’ profile for the most of the cases indicated that the
questionnaires were completed by members of library staff, who had access to or
knowledge of the information requested (see, section 3.4.2.2-a). Most of the respondents,
who completed the questionnaire, were members of the management team of their library
(37/45); seven were directors of Library. Three had title position related to LWS
management (Libweb manager, Library Website Administrator and Library Web
Manager) and from the rest 27 cases belonging to management team 12 cases were
managers of units related to information systems (IS) and electronic services. For one
only case, it was stated that more than one person contributed to the completion of the
questionnaire. The primary person was a librarian involved with IS and electronic
services and a member of the library management team contributed to the questionnaire’s
completion. In addition, from the seven cases, for which the respondents were members
of library staff, three of them were librarians involved with IS and electronic services.
(Table A1.4)
Table A1.4: Survey respondents’ position within library
Provision of
respondents’
statistical data

Director

7

Management team

15

Management team (relation with IS and electronic
services)

12

Web site manager

3

Management team & Staff (relation with IS and
electronic services)

1

Library Staff

Staff

4

(sum: 7)

Staff (relation with IS and electronic services)

3

Library
management team
(sum: 37)

True

45

Sum of
cases

Categories of respondents’ position

Library
management team
&
Library Staff
(sum: 1)

False

3

NA
Sum of survey responses

48

23 | Appendix

The comparison of the data for the respondents’ title position with the corresponding data
for the title of the position of the cases, which stated that there is one person responsible
for organising the work for the library web site development and maintenance (see,
Question 26), showed that for 18 of the 27 comparable cases the person was the same
(Table A.1.5). The 21 non-comparable cases consisted of:
-

three cases where no information was provided about the respondent’s title
position;

-

one case without information provided about the title position in the Question 26;

-

17 cases, which did not answer “Yes” in Question 26, consequently related
information was not provided.

Table A1.5: Survey respondents and “LWS managers”
Data comparability

Yes

No

Data comparison
Same person

18

Different person

9

27

21
NA

Sum of survey responses

48

Appendix I.12: Control of questionnaires
Related section: 3.4.2.4.1, 3.4.2.4.3.a & 3.4.2.5
The questionnaires of the 48 library cases responded to the survey were checked in order
to detect contradictory, unclear or missing statements causing insufficient overall LWS
profiles, which would cause obfuscation to the overall results of the integrated analysis.
This control aimed to detect and exclude these cases from the study’s analysis and it
consisted of the following processes and brought out three cases (Case id: 66, 91 &133):
a) check of completion patterns;
b) check of lack of data;
c) check of frequency of “Don’t Know” answer;
d) check of thematic and logical related elements for contradictory statements

24| Appendix

a) Control of questionnaire’s completion patterns

According to the flow chart of the questionnaire completion (Chart A1.1), the respondents
were expected to fill in the questionnaire with the following patterns following the
instructions in the pivotal questions no 14, 22 and 25:

A. Questions: 1-28
B. Questions: 1-22-25
C. Questions: 1-25
D. Questions: 1-22, 25-28
E. Questions: 1-14, 22-28
F. Questions: 1-14, 22-25
G. Questions: 1-14, 22, 25-28
H. Questions: 1-14, 22, 25
Chart A1.1: Self-administered Questionnaire: flow
chart of completion
Q1

Q2-13
Yes/DK

Q15-21

Q14
No
Yes

Q23-24

Q22a
No
Yes/DK

Q25

Q26-28

No

Respondent’s details

The Question 14 was asking the respondents to skip to the Section 6 (Q22), if they had
stated that the library did not have the main role for the management of the LWS (Answer
= No).

25 | Appendix

The Question 22 was asking the respondents to skip to the Section 7 (Q25), if they had
stated that there was not members of the library staff, who worked regularly on the LWS
development and maintenance (22a = not ticked).

The Question 25 was asking the respondents to skip to the end of the questionnaire
(Respondent’s details), if they had stated that the library was not responsible for the
organisation of the work for the LWS development and maintenance (Answer = No).

The above logic spit the questions in 4 groups:
•

Group A: Section 1 (Questions 1-4), Section 2 (Questions 4-7), Section 3
(Questions 8-11), Section 4 (Questions 12-14)

•

Group B: Section 5 (Questions 15-21)

•

Group C: Section 6 (Questions 22-24)

•

Group D: Section 7 (Questions 25-28)

The completion analysis (see, Table A1.6) showed that 46 of the total 48 cases followed
the above instructions. Most of them 42 cases completed the questionnaire according to
the pattern A. Questions: 1-28. 6 cases followed singularly the other patterns, apart from
the patterns C and G. Nevertheless, 1 case did not fill in completely the Group of
questions C, as well as without filling in the pivotal Question 22 (Case id: 133).
Table A1.6: Survey; Questionnaire – Control of completion patterns
Completion patterns

Sum of cases

A. Questions: 1-28

42

B. Questions: 1-22-25

1

C. Questions: 1-25

0

D. Questions: 1-22, 25-28

1

E. Questions: 1-14, 22-28

1

F. Questions: 1-14, 22-25

1

G. Questions: 1-14, 22, 25-28

0

H. Questions: 1-14, 22, 25

1

Lack of Group C (Section 6 - Q 22-24): Questions: 1-21, 25-28

1
Grand total

26| Appendix

48

b) Control of lack of data

The control showed that only for the case with id: 133 presented noticeable lack of data,
as whole the Section 6 (see, above) and other 5 questions were not completed in the
control for lack of data; it was returned almost empty. Not answers of questions regarding the main questions - were found in other 20 cases (see below, Table A1.7). This
lack of data was located from one up to three questions per case and this did not make the
general profile ambiguous, with exception the case with id: 91, which - apart from the
three unanswered questions – presented high frequency of “Don’t Know” answers (see
below, Table A1.8).

c) Control of “Don’t Know” frequency

The control “Don’t Know” answers frequency per questionnaire aimed to identify cases
for which the respondent was not familiar with the LWS management topic. Only one
case (id: 91) was identified through this control and the particular questionnaire was
completed by a member of library staff and not of the library management team. Other 20
cases were located with usually one or two “Don’t Know” statements (see below, Table,
A1.8) and the questions referred mostly to the first year of LWS publication (Q6) and to
the diversion of LWS role in time (Q10 & Q11).

27 | Appendix

Table A1.7: Survey; Questionnaire – Lack of data per case (not answered questions)
Questions
1b
2
Section 1
Group A
4
6
Section 2
22
23
23.1
Group C
Section 6
23.2
24
24.1
Q26
Section 7
Group D
27
Section 7
Not answered questions per case

28| Appendix

42

157

36
Y

91
Y
Y

45

47

133

54

66

Cases ID
129 33 161
Y
Y
Y
Y

175

180

Y

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

2

2

3

2

43

84

Y

Y

1

1

181

56

69

95

154

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

1

1

1

1

1

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
1

Y
2

Y
Y
2

3

1

1

5

1

1

1

Table A1.8: Survey; Questionnaire – Frequency of “Don’t know” statements per case
Questions
6
8
10
Section 3
11
14
Section 4
15
16
17
18
Section 5
19
20
21
25
26
Section 7
27
28
Frequency per case

Cases ID
36

91

45

63

47

54

170

14

86

129

30
Y

42

53

138
Y

Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

1

1

1

2

1

1

2

Section 2

Group A

Group B

Group D

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

24
Y

39
Y

61
Y

67
Y

78
Y

140
Y

180
Y

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
1

12

Y
Y

Y

1

3

Y
Y
2

2

1

29 | Appendix

d) Control of thematic and logical related elements for contradictory statements

This control of the cases was focused on a range of thematic and logical related elements,
aiming to detect potential insufficient cases for the analysis, which would cause
obfuscation to the final results of the integrated analysis. The two cases identified above
as provided unclear or missing statements were already excluded; thus the check referred
to 46 cases. For the cases’ profile control, 18 data elements derived from the answers to
14 questions of the survey (see, Figure A1.1) were used within nine cross-tabulations.
The data from the questions Q7, Q13, Q14, Q18, Q22.a and Q25 was used in some
controls in order to explain the absence or otherwise of data or to provide information for
better understanding of the cross-tabulations; they are presented below within brackets.
The logical relation controls were:
1. the role of library on the LWS management (Q14) and the involvement in LWS
management by other university unit/s (Q13);
2. the role of library in the LWS management (Q14) and library’s involvement in
decision making and organising (Q12) – [Q13];
3. leading & organising by the library (Q12.c) and staff that worked for the LWS
development and maintenance (Q22) – [Q14, Q25];
4. the involvement in LWS management by other university unit/s (Q13) and the staff
that worked for the LWS development and maintenance (Q22) – [Q7, Q14];
5. controlling & monitoring (Q16) and existence of library’s staff worked for the LWS
development and maintenance (Q22.a) – [Q14, Q25];
6. decision making by the library about the LWS design (Q12.b) and existence of library
policies on LWS design (Q18.a) – [Q14, Q18];
7. planning (Q15) and mission statement for the LWS (Q8) – [Q14];
8. financial decision making (Q12.d) and planning (Q20) – [Q14];
9. number of library staff (Q4) and number of library staff worked for the LWS
development and maintenance (Q23 & Q24) - [Q22.a].

The combinations of the element of the Q22.a with the Q27 or Q28 were not checked
because contradictory statement was already not found between the Q22.a and Q25 (see,
above 3rd control); the question 25 was “control question” for the filling in of questions
Q26 – Q28 (see, above completion patterns). In other words, it was not checked whether

30| Appendix

the respondents, who stated that there was not members of their library staff worked for
the LWS (Q22.a) and at the same time they stated either that their library had either
officially stated procedures and work schedule for the LWS development and
maintenance (Q27) or that there were activities in their library for training and skills
development of the library staff worked for the LWS (Q28) because there was none case
for which the library had the responsibility for the organisation of the work of the LWS
development and maintenance (Q25), but without the existence of members of their
library staff worked for the LWS (Q22.a).

Q8

Q22

Q25

Q13
Q7
Q15

Q12.a
Q12.b

Q14

Q16

Q12.c

Q18

Q12.d

Q20

Q18.a

Q23
Q4
Q24

Figure A1.1: Elements used for the questionnaires’ control for contradictory statements

The results of the nine controls are presented below. Summarising, in five of the nine
controls ten cases in total were bought out for further lookout separately. The case by case
control took place by the researcher reviewing entirely the questionnaires had as result the
identification of one of them as insufficient case for the analysis, which would cause
obfuscation to the final results of the analysis and which was excluded from the total
sample of cases further analysed. The case with id 61, which as the respondent informed
in the last part of the questionnaire for comment and additional information that the
library as an unit was under transition for being merged with the Computing Centre.
Consequently, the responsibilities and the activities of the LWS management were under

31 | Appendix

review and the reported situation, on the one hand it was not representative either for the
recent past, but as well as for the toward future of the specific case of LWS management,
and on the other hand there were basic contradictory statements related to the library’s
involvement in the LWS management.

Control 1: The role of library on the LWS management and the involvement in
LWS management by other university unit/s.
The combinations of statements found were three (see, Table A1.9):
a) Library without having the main role in LWS management (Q14 = No) and
existence of involvement in LWS management by other unit(s) of the university
(Q13 = Yes) – three cases;
b) Library having the main role in LWS management (Q14 = Yes) and not
involvement in LWS management by other unit(s) of the university (Q13 = No) –
nine cases;
c) Library having the main role in LWS management (Q14 = Yes) and existence of
involvement in LWS management by other unit(s) of the university (Q13 = Yes) –
34 cases.
None of the patterns identified raised contradictory statements, as it would be the
combination of two negative statements, where neither the library would have had the
main role in the LWS management (Q14 = No) nor any other unit(s) of the university
would have had involvement in LWS management (Q13 = No).
Table A1.9: Cases’ profile control – Q13 & Q14
Q14

Q13

Sum of cases

No

Yes

3

No

9

Yes

34

Yes

Total sum of cases

46

Keys:
Q14: Question 14. “Taking into account to the above answers, has the library the main role for the
management of the LWS?”
Q13: Question 13. “Are there other (e.g. other unit within the university) who are involved in the LWS
management?”

32| Appendix

Control 2: The role of library on the LWS management and library’s involvement in
decision making and organising

All most all Libraries (43 of the 46 cases) stated that they had the main role in the
management of the LWS (Q14). This statement was cross-checked with the related
statements of the grouping sub-questions of Q12 about the involvement of the library in
the managerial aspects of decision-making about the LWS content (Q12.a), the LWS
design (Q12.b), the LWS budget (Q12.d) and about the involvement in the leading and
controlling the LWS development procedure (Q12.c). The data from the Question 13
about the possible involvement in LWS management by others provided addition
information for better understanding of the examined elements’ relation. From the
identified combinations (see below, Table A1.10) two groups of cases raised question for
further lookout:
I. One case (with ID 167): library which had involvement in three of the four managerial
aspects, but stated that it did not have the main role in the LWS management.
II. Question and need for further check was raised for the 6 cases (with ID 31, 86, 138,
142, 154, and 170): Libraries who had involvement only in the decisions about the LWS
content (Q12a) and stated that they had the main role in the LWS management.

33 | Appendix

Table A1.10: Cases’ profile control – Q12 & Q14
Q14

Q13

Q12.a

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Q12.c

Q12.b

Q12.d

Sum of
cases

No

No

No

2

Yes

Yes

No

1

Yes

Yes

No

2

Yes

7

No

6

No
No

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
No

Yes

Yes

No

3

Yes

3

No

1

No

6

Yes

15

Grand total

46

Groups for
lookout

I

II

7 cases

Keys:
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the
management of the LWS?”
Q13: Question 13. “Are there other (e.g. other unit within the university) who are involved in the LWS
management?”
Provided statements for the Question 12: “In which of the following managerial aspects of the LWS is the
library involved?”
Q12.a: “Decisions about the LWS content”
Q12.b: “Decisions about the LWS design”
Q12.c: “Leading and controlling the LWS development procedure (content and design)”
Q12.d: “Budget for the LWS development procedure (content and design)”

Control 3: Leading & Organising by the library and staff worked for the LWS
development and maintenance

The control of the statements per case given about the involvement of the library in the
leading and organising with combination the staff worked for the LWS brought out two
cases for lookout with id 167 and 61 (see below, Table A1.11). In the one case (with id:
167), the library did not have the main role for the LWS management (Q14), but at the
same time the library was involved and responsible for the leading and controlling of the
LWS development and maintenance (Q12.c & Q25) and the staff worked for the LWS
belonged only to the library (Q22). In the second case (with id: 61), the library had the
main role for the LWS management (Q14) and it was involved in (Q12.c), but not
responsible (Q25) for the leading and controlling of the LWS development and
maintenance and none member of library staff worked for the LWS (Q22).

34| Appendix

Table A1.11: Cases’ profile control – Q12.c & Q22
Q14

No

Q12.c

Q25

No

No

Yes

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
No

Yes

Yes

Q22 (coded)

Sum of
cases

MIXED STAFF

1

NON LIBRARY STAFF

1

ONLY LIBRARY STAFF

1

MIXED STAFF

1

MIXED STAFF

4

ONLY LIBRARY STAFF

2

NON LIBRARY STAFF

1

MIXED STAFF

8

ONLY LIBRARY STAFF
Grand total

Groups for
lookout

9

9

27
46

2 cases

Keys:
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the
management of the LWS?”
Provided statements for the Question 12: “In which of the following managerial aspects of the LWS is the
library involved?”
Q12.c: “Leading and controlling the LWS development procedure (content and design)”
Q25: Question 25: “Is the library responsible for the organisation of the work for the LWS development and
maintenance?”
Q22 (coded): staff worked for the LWS development and maintenance:
- mixed staff: belonged to the library and other unit(s) of the university
- non library staff: belonged only to other unit(s) of the university (not to the Library)
- only library staff: belonged only to the Library

Control 4: The involvement in LWS management by other university unit/s and the
staff worked for the LWS development and maintenance

A further investigation focused on the Q13 took place examining whether there was the
contradictory combination of statements Q13 = No and Q22 = “Non library staff”. In
other words, the examination aimed to find out whether any case stated that there was not
any member of library staff worked for the LWS development and maintenance and at the
same time only library was involved in the LWS management. Nevertheless, the data
from the question 7 about the hosting of the LWS used to check the potential impact of an
outsource Internet Service Provider (ISP) in staffing. The results (see below, Table A1.12)
showed that there was none contradictory or questioning case as regards the specific
investigation.

35 | Appendix

Table A1.12: Cases’ profile control – Q13 & Q22
Q22 (coded)

Q13

No
MIXED STAFF

NON LIBRARY
STAFF

Yes

Yes
No

ONLY
LIBRARY
STAFF

Yes

Sum of
cases

an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP)

1

other unit within the university

12

the Library

1

No

other unit within the university

1

Yes

other unit within the university

1

other unit within the university

4

of the Library

5

of an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP)

1

of other unit within the university

15

of the Library

5

Yes
No

Yes

Q7
The LWS is hosted on server/s of:

Q14

Yes

Grand total

46

Keys:
Q22 (coded): staff worked for the LWS development and maintenance:
- mixed staff: belonged to the library and other unit(s) of the university
- non library staff: belonged only to other unit(s) of the university (not to the Library)
- only library staff: belonged only to the Library
Q13: Question 13. “Are there other (e.g. other unit within the university) who are involved in the LWS
management?”
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the
management of the LWS?”
Q7: Question 7: “Where is the LWS hosted?”

The absent of any statement related to potential impact of an outsourcing Internet Service
Provider (ISP) in staffing guided to an investigation on hosting as an essential element for
the LWS development and maintenance, which is connected with the management of
sources (staff and equipment), but as well with the procedure of publishing. The element
was examined with the data about staff worked regularly for the LWS development and
maintenance (Q22) taking into account the LWS management authority status (Q13 &
Q14). The investigation focused mainly on the cases which hosted the LWS on server(s)
of other unit within the university and of an outsourcing ISP and these cases were about
the 75% of the total sample (34 cases of the total 56). The cross-tabulation (see below,
Table A1.13) brought out a question for 20 cases, which stated that only staff belonged to
the library worked regularly for the LWS, but they have not mentioned in the Question 22
at least the staff worked on the hosting, when the hosting was not on library’s server(s);
especially for one case of them, in which only the library had the LWS management
authority (Q13 = No; Q14 = Yes).

36| Appendix

Table A1.13: Cases’ profile control – Q7 & Q22
Q7

Q13

Q13.1

Q14

c

Yes

Marketing

No

No

NA

Yes

IT

Yes

Marketing

Yes

b

Yes

No
Marketing - IT
No
a

Yes

Yes

NA

Yes

Marketing

Yes

IT

Yes

Q22 (coded)
Mixed staff
Only library staff
Only library staff
Mixed staff
Non library staff
Only library staff
Mixed staff
Only library staff
Non library staff
Mixed staff
Only library staff
Only library staff
Mixed staff
Only library staff
Only library staff

Q22.b
(coded)

Question
on Q22

Sum of
cases

Marketing
NA
NA
IT
IT
NA
Learning
Marketing
no given details
IT
NA
IT
Marketing - IT
Marketing - IT - e-learning
NA
NA
Marketing - IT - Off Campus
support
NA
NA

No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No

1
1
4
5
1
11
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
5

No

1

No
No
Grand total

4
1
46

Keys:
Q7: Question 7: “Where is the LWS hosted?”
The LWS is hosted on server/s of:
a. the Library
b. other unit within the university
c. an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP)
Q13: Question 13. “Are there other (e.g. other unit within the university) who are involved in the LWS management?”
Q13.1: Question 13.1. space for details when the Q13 = Yes
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the management of the LWS?”
Q22.b (coded): coded details given for the Question 22.b, when the option was checked

37 | Appendix

Control 5: Controlling & Monitoring and existence of library’s staff worked for the
LWS development and maintenance

The statements about the LWS performance measurements and monitoring controlling
given through the question 16 were examined per case taking into account the existence
or not of library’s staff worked for the LWS development and maintenance (Q22.a) and
the library’s role in the LWS management (Q14), but as well its responsibility for the
organisation of the work for the LWS development and maintenance (Q25). The crosstabulation (see, Table A1.14) brought out one case (id: 61) for further lookout. In that
case the library carried out controlling activities (Q16 = Yes) and at the same time it had
the main role for the LWS management (Q14 = Yes), without having the responsibility
for the managerial group of activities in organizing (Q25 = No) and any member of the
library staff did not take part in the LWS development and maintenance (Q22.a = No).
Table A1.14: Cases’ profile control – Q16 & Q22.a
Q14

No

Q16

NA

No
Yes
Yes

Q22.a

Q25

Sum of
cases

No

No

1

No

1

Yes

1

No

1

Yes
Yes

Yes

19

No

No

1

Yes

Yes

22

Grand total

46

Groups for
lookout

9
1 case

Keys:
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the
management of the LWS?”
Q16: Question 16. “Are there LWS performance measurement and monitoring processes?”
Q22: option for the Question 22: For the LWS development & maintenance the staff belonged to the Library
Q25: Question 25: “Is the library responsible for the organisation of the work for the LWS development and
maintenance?”

38| Appendix

Control 6: Decision making by the library about the LWS design and existence of
library policies on LWS design

The cross-tabulation of the given statements related to the library’s involvement in the
decision making about the LWS design (Q12.b) and the development by the library of
policies covered aspects and issues for the LWS (Q18.1a) design pointed out one group of
cases for further lookout (see, Table A1.15). The cases with id 39, 86, 138 and 154 stated
that the library has developed policies covering issues for the LWS design and
construction, but it was not involved in the decision making about this issue. The case
with id 167 has already been marked above as a case for lookout as within and this crosstabulation there is question about the logical relation between the statements about
library’s involvement in decision making and library’s role in LWS management (in the
table is marked with asterisk).

Table A1.15: Cases’ profile control – Q12.b & Q18.a
Q12.b

No

Q14

Q18

Q18.1a

Sum of
cases

No

NA

NA

2

No

NA

6

No

2

Yes

4

9

NA

NA

1

*

No

NA

10

No

1

Yes

20

Grand total

46

Yes
No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Groups for
lookout

4 cases

Notes:
* case with id 167: question for the combination of statements in Q12 & Q14
Keys:
Provided statements for the Question 12: “In which of the following managerial aspects of the LWS is the
library involved?”
Q12.b: “Decisions about the LWS design”
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the management
of the LWS?”
Q18: Question 18. “Has the library developed specialised policies for the LWS?”
Q18.1a option of the Question 18.1 – Specialised policies for the LWS developed by the Libraries covering the
subject/issue of LWS design and construction

39 | Appendix

Control 7: Planning and mission statement for the LWS

The existence of LWS mission statement (Q8) was examined (see, Table A1.16) with the
statement about the existence or not of planning processes by the library (Q15). The
aspect of library’s involvement in the decision making about the LWS content, which is
strongly related to the role of LWS, was not added in the cross-tabulation because for all
cases positive statement (Q12.a = Yes) was given. From the three cases stated that there
was mission statement for the LWS (Q8 = Yes), one case with id 66 raised question as the
respondent stated that there were not planning processes by the library (Q15 = No). A
further check showed that this case was the only for which it was not filled in the question
8.1 with the content of the mission statement.
Table A1.16: Cases’ profile control – Q8 & Q15
Q14

Q15

Q8

Sum of
cases

No

NA

No

3

Don't know

No

1

No

8

No
Yes
Yes

Yes

1

Don't know

1

No

30

Yes

2

Grand total

46

Groups for
lookout

9

1 cases

Keys:
Q14: Question 14: “Taking into account the above answers, has the library the main role for the management
of the LWS?”
Q15: Question 15. “Is there an LWS planning process?”
Q8: Question 8. “Is there a mission statement for the LWS?”

Control 8: Financial decision making and planning

The statement about the existence of annual budget for the LWS development and
maintenance (Q20) was checked with the element of library’s involvement in the budget
for the LWS development procedure (Q12.d). The patterns derived from the crosstabulation (see below, Table A1.17) did not bring out any group of case for lookout, as all
Libraries having annual budget were involved as well in the related managerial activity.

40| Appendix

Table A1.17: Cases’ profile control – Q20 & Q12.d
Q14

Q12.d

No

No
No

Yes

Yes

Q20
NA
No
Don't know
No
Yes
Grand total

ID case
3
18
2
19
4
46

Keys:
Q13: Question 13: “Are there others (e.g. other unit within the university) who involved in the LWS
management?”
Provided statements for the Question 12: “In which of the following managerial aspects of the LWS is the
library involved?”
Q12.d: “Budget for the LWS development procedure (content and design)”
Q20: Question 20. “Is there an annual budget for LWS development and maintenance?”

Control 9: Sum of the members of library staff and sum of members of library staff
worked for the LWS development and maintenance

The figures given from the 44 cases stated that there were members of library’s staff
worked for the LWS development and maintenance (Q22.a) were checked with the
respective figures given for the total library’s staff (Q4). Three cases did not provide
number of staff, but they gave descriptive answers like “all librarians” or “many
librarians”, were excluded from the control, as well as another three cases for which the
responded did not answer the question about the library’s staff (Q4). The control of the 38
final cases did not show any contradictory figure, as it would be if the sum of members of
library’s staff worked for the LWS was greater than the sum of library’s staff in total.

41 | Appendix

Appendix I.13: Research sample
Related section: 3.4.2.5

The final research sample, after the control of the questionnaire, was 45 LWS cases (30%)
of the total survey sample (see, Table A1.18). The cases by geographical sampling units
were 38 (83%) English cases and 8 (17%) Scottish cases.
Table A1.18: Research sample and its geographical profile

Country

Research sample

England

38 (83%)

Scotland

8 (17%)

Sum

46 (30%)

Grand total:

46 (100%)

149 (100%)

Appendix I.14: Research sample grouped by parent institution type

Related section: 4.1
Table A1.19: Research sample: grouping of parent institutions

University Group

University
City University, London
Cranfield University

other pre-1992 universities

Goldsmiths
Heriot-Watt University
Keele University
Lancaster University
School of Oriental and African Studies
University of Aberdeen
University of Dundee
University of East Anglia
University of Leicester
University of Reading
University of Stirling
University of Sussex

42| Appendix

Sum
14

University Group

University

Sum

Bishop Grosseteste University College Lincoln

18

Canterbury Christ Church University
Coventry University
Edge Hill University

post 1992 universities

Kingston University
Leeds Trinity and All Saints
London South Bank University
Queen Margaret University
Robert Gordon University
University of Cumbria
University of Derby
University of East London
University of Greenwich
University of Huddersfield
University of Plymouth
University of Teesside
University of the West of England, Bristol
York St John University
Russell Group

Imperial College London

7

Queen Mary, University of London
The University of Birmingham
University of Bristol
University of Edinburgh
University of Glasgow
University of Southampton

specialist institutions

Leeds College of Music

9

Royal Agricultural College
Royal College of Music
Royal Northern College of Music
The Glasgow School of Art
Trinity Laban
University College for the Creative Arts at Canterbury,
Epsom, Farnham, Maidstone and Rochesters
University of the Arts London
Writtle College
Grand Total

48

43 | Appendix

[ blank page ]

44| Appendix

Appendix II. Interviews

Contents:
II.1.

Interviews – email (call for participation)……………………..46

II.2.

Accompanying memo (sent by post) and Consent form..…47-48

II.3.

Introduction of interview (before recording)………………….49

II.4.

Interview schedule (Group: Only library authority)………..[50-58]

II.5.

Interview schedule (Group: Shared authority)……………...[59-67]

II.6.

Interview schedule (Group: Non library authority)……...…[68-76]

II.7.

Demographic analysis of interviewees…………………………77

II.8.

Demonstration of primary results of interviews analysis……78

45 | Appendix

Appendix II.1: Interviews – email (call for participation)
Related section: 3.4.6, 3.4.6.5 & 3.4.6.9
Subject: Call for participation

Dear Mrs./ Mr. ……………………… (the specific name of the contact person)
I am the research student currently working on
of Information and Communication at Manchester
(MMU), for whom you completed in and sent back
about the management of library web sites last
month and the date).

my PhD in the Department
Metropolitan University
a survey questionnaire
……………………… (the specific

Once more, I would like to thank you for your participation in the
survey and for providing contact details for further information. With
this e-mail I would like to call you for participation in the next stage
of my study, which consists of interviews. The interview should take
approximately 30 minutes and its content will be an open discussion on
issues derived from the survey’s results. The information provided will
be treated according to the ethical policy of the MMU
(http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/). Naturally, your identity as person, as well
as institution, will be confidential, and you can end the interview at
any time. The results will be presented with the use of a code name (e.g.
Interviewee 1). The schedule and the content of the interview will be
sent to you before the prearranged interview. For any questions, please
contact with me directly.
Please, let me know within next days whether you be willing to take part
and make an appointment for an interview at convenient date and time for
you within the period from ……………………… to ………………………. The interview can be
conducted in your place of work or it can be conducted by telephone.
Your participation will be greatly appreciated.
Thank you in advance,

Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester M15 6LL
E-mail: ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk
Tel.: 07828067306
Skype name: iazorba
Info web page: http://www.tiri.mmu.ac.uk/students/iz/

46 | Appendix

Appendix II.2: Accompanying Memo (sent by post) and Consent form
Related section: 3.4.6, 3.4.6.9

MEMO

TO:

……………………………

FROM:

IOANNA ZORBA

SUBJECT:

CONSENT FORM

DATE:

……………………………

The present memo accompanies the ethical consent form for the prearranged
interview with the research Ioanna Zorba.
Please, read the information of the consent form, sign it and post it back using the
prepaid envelope to the address is printed on it.

RESEARCHER’S DETAILS:
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester M15 6LL
E-mail: ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk
Tel.: 07828067306
Skype name: iazorba

47 | Appendix

CONSENT FORM
I have volunteered/agreed to participate in a research project, where I understand that the purpose
of this study is to investigate the management of library web site by British academic libraries.

My participation in the study will involve interview with the researcher Ioanna Zorba, PhD
student of Manchester Metropolitan University.

I have been informed that any questions I have about the interview will be answered by the
researcher (Ioanna Zorba).

I understand that the issue of confidentiality will be addressed – names will be changed to ensure
anonymity and workplace identity will be concealed. The PhD thesis and any academic papers
consequently will be written carefully to ensure the identity of participants is not revealed. I
understand that information provided by me will only be accessed by Ioanna Zorba.

I have been made aware of my right to withdraw my participation at any time without objection.

I have read the above information. The purpose of the study has been explained to me and I agree
to participate.

Name ........

Signature ........

Date: ........

48 | Appendix

Appendix II.3: Introduction of interview (before recording)
Related section: 3.4.6, 3.4.6.9

-

Greet and verify the identity of the person interviewed

-

Introduce interviewer (name and university)

-

Thank and note the importance of interviewee’s participation

For the telephone interviews:

-

-

verify the quality of sound

-

clarify that the discussion was not recorded

Verify that the interviewee has looked through the interview’s schedule-content sent
before the prearranged meeting1.

-

Ask interviewee if he/she want to make any question about the interview’s procedure

-

Remind some points on the interview’s process (interview’s purpose, interviewee’s
authority to stop any time the interview and confidentiality issues)

-

Ask interviewee to sign the consent form (for the in-person interviews)

-

Ask interviewee’s permission to record the interview and mention that recorder will
be turned off at any stage interviewee will wish so.

-

Ask permission to proceed with the interview

1

In case, that the interviewee would not had read the interview’s schedule-content, the researcher was
prepared to provide a spare copy to the interviewee or to send it via e-mail (for the telephone interviews),
presenting orally the framework and the term definitions (see, pp. 1 & 2 of Interview schedule and content).
However, this steps never used because all the interviewees were aware of the interview schedule. In
addition for the telephone interviews, the researcher verified whether the interviewee had received the letter
with the consent form.

49 | Appendix

Appendix II.4: Interview schedule (Group: Only library authority)

Related section: 3.4.6, 3.4.6.2 & 3.4.6.4

50-78 | Appendix

I N T E RV I E W S C H E D U L E
ISSUES IN MANAGEMENT OF LIBRARY WEB
SITES IN UK ACADEMIC LIBRARIES

RESEARCHER’S DETAILS:
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester M15 6LL
E-mail: ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk
Tel.: 07828067306
Skype name: iazorba

Manchester 2009

I N T E RV I E W F R A M E WO R K

•

The purpose of this interview is to discuss some issues derived from the survey’s1 results
on the library web site management.

•

Criteria of selection: Your library was selected, taking into account the permission of
contact for further information, as one of the cases, for which it was stated that the library
had sole authority of its LWS management. Based on this particularity the related results
will be presented for discussion.

•

The interviewee will be asked to express his/her opinion upon the results, taking into
account his/her experience in the academic libraries, emphasising the reasons affect the
practice was reported.

•

Length: The interview will take about 30 minutes to complete.

•

Procedure: The interview will cover three (3) subject areas (see, pp. 3-5). For each one a
brief synopsis of related survey’s results is given, from which the discussion will begin.

•

For the purposes of the study, some specific terms will be used with specific content,
which is given below (see, p. 2)

•

The interview can be stopped any time by the interviewee.

•

The identity of the interviewee and the institution for which he/she works will be
confidential. At no time, will the information provided be associated with personal details
(name or institution). In the results presented in the PhD thesis and in any academic
papers the interviewee will be referred with a numeral ID (e.g. Interviewee 1) and the
name of institution will be concealed.

•

The information provided will be treated according to the ethical policy of the MMU
(http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/).

•

Permission will be asked for recording of the interview. The reason for recording the
interview is the achievement of high objectivity for the analysis, but as well as for time
management purposes (detailed notes will be not needed to be written by the researcher).

•

The interviewee will be asked to express freely any questions about the interview, to
which the researcher will answer.

1

The research study aims to examine the managerial operations for the library web site development and
maintenance taken place within the academic library practice and to investigate the correlation between
management frameworks and the final outcomes (end uses) of the library web sites. For the needs of the
study a questionnaire survey carried out during the period April-June 2008.

1

D E F I N I T I ON O F T E R M S

For the purposes of the study, some specific terms will be used with specific content:
Library: any organisational unit providing library services to the particular university (e.g.
Library, Information Services, Learner Support Services, Library and Learning Resource etc).

Library web site (LWS): the official presence of/for the “Library” on the Web; the sub-site or
the web pages of the official web site of Library’s parent institution.

Management of library web site: the managerial activities, which are undertaken for the
development and maintenance of the library web site. These activities are grouped as:
A. Planning activities are determined as: 1) Decision making about the LWS’s
aims and the objectives, plans, policies, content of the LWS, development
(design) specifications for its publication mean, sources required in staffing,
hardware and software, budget, working structuring and 2) Marketing.
B. Organising activities are determined as organisation and coordination of
tasks and the sources needed to carry them out, according to the planning
specifications.
C. Motivating activities are determined as leading the members of library staff,
who work for the LWS development and maintenance. One relevant aspect
is the training and skills development of library staff on issues about this
field of work.
D. Controlling activities are determined as measuring progress and
performance, reporting errors and correcting deviations.

2

PA RT I : M A NA G E R I A L A C T I V I T I E S B Y T H E L I B R A RY

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
For the libraries having the responsibility of their LWS management:
- The general managerial frame of activities which libraries undertook for their LWS
covered - for most of the cases - planning, organising, motivating and controlling.
However, in a small percentage of cases the activities especially of controlling were not
undertaken.
-

For the majority of the libraries official stated procedures and work schedules and an
annual budget for the LWS development and maintenance were not reported.

-

Marketing processes and development of specialised policies for the LWS in particular
areas (e.g. design and copyright issues) were reported in most of the cases.

Question: In your opinion can this practice be considered as characteristic for the general
Library management practice as regards the other functions/sections as well?

o

[If not] Which reasons do you think affect to the formulation of this management
practice for the LWS?

3

PA RT I I : O RG A N I S I N G / L E A D I N G A S P E C T A N D S TA F F I N G

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
For the libraries having the responsibility of their LWS management:
- The leading-organising responsibility was mostly based on one member of the
management team, whose duties were not in nearly all cases sole on the LWS.
- The members of library staff were working on the LWS employed by the library. In most
of the cases they had additional duties except from those related with the LWS. In the
few cases found members of library staff worked solely on the LWS, there was no case
for which that staff composed an entire team/unit.
In other words, the activities of LWS management, development and maintenance were not sole
responsibility of a section of the library organisation.

Question: In your opinion which factors have impacted on the shaping of this practice?

Question: Do you consider this practice as common for other library activities-functions
too?
o

[If not] Why do you think this happen?

Only if applicable for the case

Question: Do you consider that the management of sources (equipment – human resources)
and/or the whole publishing procedure can be impacted in any particular way by the hosting
of the LWS on server(s) of other unit(s)?

4

PA RT I I I : U S E S O F L I B R A RY W E B S I T E S

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
The LWS was found to be used almost exclusively as a tool for the provision:
- of electronic library and information services;
- of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the building/s of the Library
and;
- of information about the character and the operation of the Library as an organisation.
In only a few cases additional uses were found, such as for provision of:
- intranet for the Library staff;
- collection development functions and;
- information about library’s commercial activities.

Question: Which factors do you consider impact upon the decision making about the
content development of the library web site?
Alphabetic list of possible factors:
-

Financial sufficiency / budget
Library’s human resources management policy
Library’s planning
Staff’s existence of skills
Staffing’ sufficiency
Technological capabilities
University’s policy

-

…. Other?

5

A D D I T I O NA L I N F O R M A T I O N

Question: Do you have anything else to add, or any other comments to make in any of the above
subjects that we discussed?

**************
Thank you, once more, for your participation in the interview. The data (information)
provided by you will be very important for the investigation of the management of library
web sites within the British academic libraries and very helpful to complete my study.

6

Appendix II.5: Interview schedule (Group: Shared authority)
Related section: 3.4.6, 3.4.6.2 & 3.4.6.4

59-67 | Appendix

I N T E RV I E W S C H E D U L E
ISSUES IN MANAGEMENT OF LIBRARY WEB
SITES IN UK ACADEMIC LIBRARIES

RESEARCHER’S DETAILS:
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester M15 6LL
E-mail: ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk
Tel.: 07828067306
Skype name: iazorba

Manchester 2009

I N T E RV I E W F R A M E WO R K

•

The purpose of this interview is to discuss some issues derived from the survey’s1 results
on the library web site management.

•

Criteria of selection: Your library was selected, taking into account the permission of
contact for further information, as one of the cases, for which it was stated that other
unit(s) within the university was/were involved in the management of the library web site
except from the library. Based on this particularity the related results will be presented
for discussion.

•

The interviewee will be asked to express his/her opinion upon the results, taking into
account his/her experience in the academic libraries, emphasising the reasons affect the
practice was reported.

•

Length: The interview will take about 30 minutes to complete.

•

Procedure: The interview will cover three (3) subject areas (see, pp. 3-5). For each one a
brief synopsis of related survey’s results is given, from which the discussion will begin.

•

For the purposes of the study, some specific terms will be used with specific content,
which is given below (see, p. 2)

•

The interview can be stopped any time by the interviewee.

•

The identity of the interviewee and the institution for which he/she works will be
confidential. At no time, will the information provided be associated with personal details
(name or institution). In the results presented in the PhD thesis and in any academic
papers the interviewee will be referred with a numeral ID (e.g. Interviewee 1) and the
name of institution will be concealed.

•

The information provided will be treated according to the ethical policy of the MMU
(http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/).

•

Permission will be asked for recording of the interview. The reason for recording the
interview is the achievement of high objectivity for the analysis, but as well as for time
management purposes (detailed notes will be not needed to be written by the researcher).

•

The interviewee will be asked to express freely any questions about the interview, to
which the researcher will answer.

1

The research study aims to examine the managerial operations for the library web site development and
maintenance taken place within the academic library practice and to investigate the correlation between
management frameworks and the final outcomes (end uses) of the library web sites. For the needs of the
study a questionnaire survey carried out during the period April-June 2008.

1

D E F I N I T I ON O F T E R M S

For the purposes of the study, some specific terms will be used with specific content:
Library: any organisational unit providing library services to the particular university (e.g.
Library, Information Services, Learner Support Services, Library and Learning Resource etc).

Library web site (LWS): the official presence of/for the “Library” on the Web; the sub-site or
the web pages of the official web site of Library’s parent institution.

Management of library web site: the managerial activities, which are undertaken for the
development and maintenance of the library web site. These activities are grouped as:
A. Planning activities are determined as: 1) Decision making about the LWS’s
aims and the objectives, plans, policies, content of the LWS, development
(design) specifications for its publication mean, sources required in staffing,
hardware and software, budget, working structuring and 2) Marketing.
B. Organising activities are determined as organisation and coordination of
tasks and the sources needed to carry them out, according to the planning
specifications.
C. Motivating activities are determined as leading the members of library staff,
who work for the LWS development and maintenance. One relevant aspect
is the training and skills development of library staff on issues about this
field of work.
D. Controlling activities are determined as measuring progress and
performance, reporting errors and correcting deviations.

2

PA RT I : AU T H O R I T Y OV E R LW S M A NA G E M E N T & M A NA G E R I A L A C T I V I T I E S B Y
T H E L I B R A RY

For the group of cases, in the management of the LWS there was involvement by the library and
other unit(s) with the university.

Question: In your opinion which factors have impacted on the shaping of this practice for
the LWS management?

Question: Does this involvement affect the managerial activities undertaken by the library?
o

[If yes] With which ways?

Question: Do you consider this involvement in LWS management as common practice for
other library activities-functions too?
o

[If not] Why do you think this happen?

Question: In your opinion the managerial activities undertaken by the Library for the LWS
can be considered as characteristic for the general Library management practice as
regards the other functions/sections as well?

o

[If not] Which reasons do you think affect to the formulation of this management
practice for the LWS?

3

PA RT I I : O RG A N I S I N G / L E A D I N G A S P E C T A N D S TA F F I N G

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
For the group of cases, in the management of the LWS there was involvement by the library and
other unit(s) with the university:
-

-

The leading-organising responsibility was mostly based on one member of the
management team, whose duties were not in nearly all cases sole on the LWS.
The members of staff were working on LWS employed either only by the Library or by
the Library and other unit(s) within the university. In most of the cases the duties of
library’s staff were not sole on the LWS.
There were few cases for which some of the library’s staff worked on the LWS had only
duties related with the LWS composing a team within a wider section of the service.
However, the activities of LWS management, development and maintenance were not
sole responsibility of a section of the library organisation.

Question: In your opinion which factors have impacted on the shaping of this practice?

Question: Do you consider this practice as common for other library activities-functions
too?
o

[If not] Why do you think this happen?

Only if applicable for the case

Question: Do you consider that the management of sources (equipment – human resources)
and/or the whole publishing procedure can be impacted in any particular way by:
- the existence of staff working on the LWS employed by other unit than library
and/or
- the hosting of the LWS on server(s) of other unit(s)

4

PA RT I I I : U S E S O F L I B R A RY W E B S I T E S

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
The LWS was found to be used almost exclusively as a tool for the provision:
- of electronic library and information services;
- of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the building/s of the Library
and;
- of information about the character and the operation of the Library as an organisation.
In only a few cases additional uses were found, such as for provision of:
- intranet for the Library staff;
- collection development functions and;
- information about library’s commercial activities.

Question: Which factors do you consider impact upon the decision making about the
content development of the library web site?
Alphabetic list of possible factors:
-

Financial sufficiency / budget
Library’s human resources management policy
Library’s planning
Staff’s existence of skills
Staffing’ sufficiency
Technological capabilities
University’s policy

-

…. Other?

5

A D D I T I O NA L I N F O R M A T I O N

Question: Do you have anything else to add, or any other comments to make in any of the above
subjects that we discussed?

**************
Thank you, once more, for your participation in the interview. The data (information)
provided by you will be very important for the investigation of the management of library
web sites within the British academic libraries and very helpful to complete my study.

6

Appendix II.6: Interview schedule (Group: Non library authority)
Related section: 3.4.6, 3.4.6.2 & 3.4.6.4

68-76 | Appendix

I N T E RV I E W S C H E D U L E
ISSUES IN MANAGEMENT OF LIBRARY WEB
SITES IN UK ACADEMIC LIBRARIES

RESEARCHER’S DETAILS:
Ioanna Zorba
Doctoral Research Student
Department of Information and Communications
Manchester Metropolitan University
Geoffrey Manton Building
Rosamond Street West Off Oxford Road
Manchester M15 6LL
E-mail: ioanna.zorba@student.mmu.ac.uk
Tel.: 07828067306
Skype name: iazorba

Manchester 2009

I N T E RV I E W F R A M E WO R K

•

The purpose of this interview is to discuss some issues derived from the survey’s1 results
on the library web site management.

•

Criteria of selection: Your library was selected, taking into account the permission of
contact for further information, as one of the cases, for which it was stated that the library
did not have the main role in its web site management. Based on this particularity the
related results will be presented for discussion.

•

The interviewee will be asked to express his/her opinion upon the results, taking into
account his/her experience in the academic libraries, emphasising the reasons affect the
practice was reported.

•

Length: The interview will take about 30 minutes to complete.

•

Procedure: The interview will cover three (3) subject areas (see, pp. 3-5). For each one a
brief synopsis of related survey’s results is given, from which the discussion will begin.

•

For the purposes of the study, some specific terms will be used with specific content,
which is given below (see, p. 2)

•

The interview can be stopped any time by the interviewee.

•

The identity of the interviewee and the institution for which he/she works will be
confidential. At no time, will the information provided be associated with personal details
(name or institution). In the results presented in the PhD thesis and in any academic
papers the interviewee will be referred with a numeral ID (e.g. Interviewee 1) and the
name of institution will be concealed.

•

The information provided will be treated according to the ethical policy of the MMU
(http://www.red.mmu.ac.uk/).

•

Permission will be asked for recording of the interview. The reason for recording the
interview is the achievement of high objectivity for the analysis, but as well as for time
management purposes (detailed notes will be not needed to be written by the researcher).

•

The interviewee will be asked to express freely any questions about the interview, to
which the researcher will answer.

1

The research study aims to examine the managerial operations for the library web site development and
maintenance taken place within the academic library practice and to investigate the correlation between
management frameworks and the final outcomes (end uses) of the library web sites. For the needs of the
study a questionnaire survey carried out during the period April-June 2008.

1

D E F I N I T I ON O F T E R M S

For the purposes of the study, some specific terms will be used with specific content:
Library: any organisational unit providing library services to the particular university (e.g.
Library, Information Services, Learner Support Services, Library and Learning Resource etc).

Library web site (LWS): the official presence of/for the “Library” on the Web; the sub-site or
the web pages of the official web site of Library’s parent institution.

Management of library web site: the managerial activities, which are undertaken for the
development and maintenance of the library web site. These activities are grouped as:
A. Planning activities are determined as: 1) Decision making about the LWS’s
aims and the objectives, plans, policies, content of the LWS, development
(design) specifications for its publication mean, sources required in staffing,
hardware and software, budget, working structuring and 2) Marketing.
B. Organising activities are determined as organisation and coordination of
tasks and the sources needed to carry them out, according to the planning
specifications.
C. Motivating activities are determined as leading the members of library staff,
who work for the LWS development and maintenance. One relevant aspect
is the training and skills development of library staff on issues about this
field of work.
D. Controlling activities are determined as measuring progress and
performance, reporting errors and correcting deviations.

2

PA RT I : AU T H O R I T Y OV E R LW S M A NA G E M E N T & M A NA G E R I A L A C T I V I T I E S B Y
T H E L I B R A RY

For the group of cases that library did not have the main role in the management of its LWS.

Question: In your opinion for which reasons a Library may not have the main role in the
management of its web site?

Question: Do you consider this involvement in LWS management as common practice for
other library activities-functions too?
o

[If not] Why do you think this happen?

3

PA RT I I : O RG A N I S I N G / L E A D I N G A S P E C T A N D S TA F F I N G

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
For the group of cases that the library did not have the main role in its web site management:
-

-

For almost all the cases, the library was not responsible for the leading-organising. In the
cases that the library undertook these managerial activities there was one member of
management team responsible for organising the work on the LWS.
For most of the cases there was library’s staff worked on the LWS development and
maintenance solely or having other duties as well.
The activities of LWS management, development and maintenance were not sole
responsibility of a section of the library organisation.
It was noticeable that the hosting on server(s) of an outsource Internet Service Provider
was common place for most of the libraries.

Question: In your opinion which factors impacted on the shaping of this practice?

Question: Do you consider this practice as common for other library activities-functions
too?
o

[If not] Why do you think this happen?

Only if applicable for the case

Question: Do you consider that the management of sources (equipment – human resources)
and/or the whole publishing procedure can be impacted in any particular way by:
- the existence of staff working on the LWS employed by other unit than library
and/or
- the hosting of the LWS on server(s) of other unit(s) or of an outsource Internet
Service Provider (ISP)

4

PA RT I I I : U S E S O F L I B R A RY W E B S I T E S

Brief synopsis of survey’s results:
The LWS was found to be used almost exclusively as a tool for the provision:
- of electronic library and information services and;
- of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the building/s of the Library

Question: Which factors do you consider impact upon the decision making about the
content development of the library web site?
Alphabetic list of possible factors:
-

Financial sufficiency / budget
Library’s human resources management policy
Library’s planning
Staff’s existence of skills
Staffing’ sufficiency
Technological capabilities
University’s policy

-

…. Other?

5

A D D I T I O NA L I N F O R M A T I O N

Question: Do you have anything else to add, or any other comments to make in any of the above
subjects that we discussed?

**************
Thank you, once more, for your participation in the interview. The data (information)
provided by you will be very important for the investigation of the management of library
web sites within the British academic libraries and very helpful to complete my study.

6

Appendix II.7: Demographic analysis of interviewees
Related section: 3.4.6.8

Interviewee ID

Group

Country

Interviewee1

Only library authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee2

Only library authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee3

Only library authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee4

Only library authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee5

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee6

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee7

Shared authority

SCOTLAND

Interviewee8

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee9

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee10

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee11

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee12

Shared authority

ENGLAND

Interviewee13

Shared authority

ENGLAND

77 | Appendix

Appendix II.8: Demonstration of primary results of interviews analysis
Related section: 3.4.6.10
Screen shot with the window of Code Families, which referred to the questions posed or
to new issues raised during interviews. Each Code Family (question/issue) was linked
with codes.

Screen shot with the window of a network view (example): Question set in the first part
of interviews. The question (Code Family) is linked with coded messages (Codes) derived
from data (see, Quotations). The Quotations were linked with codes and with the
documents-interviews, from where they were marked.

Code Family

Code

Quotation

Interview within quotation
was marked

78 | Appendix

Appendix III. Quantitative data collection methods:
results

Contents:
III.1.

Descriptive survey………………………………………………80

III.2.

Desk research: Year of the first publication of the library web
site……………………………………………………………….107

III.3.

Content analysis………………………………………………..108

III.4.

First year of LWS publishing: data comparison…………….110

III.5.

LWS uses: data comparison…………………………………..111

III.6.

Detailed examination: Library organisation type…………...113

III.7.

Library web staff in library…………………………………...114

III.8.

Detailed examination: LWS uses……………………………..115

III.9.

LWS organising and library web staff……………………….116

III.10.

Detailed examination: LWS management (patterns)………..117

III.11.

Detailed examination: Authority over LWS management….119

79 | Appendix

Appendix III.1: Descriptive survey1

Related section: 3.4.2 & 4.2
Section 1: Information about the Library (Questions 1-4)

Question 1.a “Title of the university”: All 45 respondents answered the question. The data
was cross-checked with the collected data for the needs of the compilation of Libraries’
list (see, section 3.4.2.2-d), the respondents’ e-mail address and the data of the Question 5
“Home page of LWS”. The cross-checked showed that there was not controversy for any
one of the cases.

Question 1.b “Title of the Library”: 42 of the 45 respondents answered the question with
a title consisted usually of two parts: a) the institution title or type (e.g. university) and b)
words related to the information and learning sector. Two cases re-typed the title of the
university as well as in the Question 1a and finally two cases did not answer. The
qualitative data of the second part was analysed and coded (see, Table A3.1). Four types
of library titles (in six cases) were not include words based on the stem of “library” (e.g.
“library”, “libraries”), but most of the types identified the title included the word
“library/es” and indeed for the half of all titles examined “Library” or “Libraries” (24
cases; 57.14%) was the only component.
Table A3.1: Survey; Question 1b – Library title analysis

1

Library title coding

Total of cases

%

Information and Library Services. Learning Services
Information Services
Information Services & Libraries
Learning & Information Services
Learning Resource Centre
Learning Support Service
Library & Archive
Library & Historic Collections
Library & Information Services
Library & Learning Resources
Library & Learning Services
Library Service/s
Library/ies
Total

1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
2
2
1
3
24
42

2.38%
2.38%
2.38%
2.38%
7.15%
2.38%
2.38%
2.38%
4.76%
4.76%
2.38%
7.15%
57.14%
100%

See also, Appendix I.3: Self-administered questionnaire (cover letter included)

80 | Appendix

Question 2. “What is the mission statement of your Library”: Ten cases (22%) did not
answer this question (see, Table A3.2). Five cases (11%) stated that there was not mission
statement of the library and one case (2%) that it was under review. The rest 29 (64%)
cases provided the mission statement either as plain text typed within the questionnaire or
via a reference URL to the relevant web document and the case mail print the
questionnaire attached copies of the library mission statement.

Table A3.2: Survey; Question 2 – completion coding
Completion coding

Answered

Total

There was not mission statement

5 (11%)

Existence of library mission statement

29 (64%)

35 (78%)

1 (2%)

Mission statement under review
No answer

10 (22%)
Total

45 (100%)

Question 3. “How many sites does the library have?”: The majority of the cases (65%)
had from one to three library sites, with the most frequent practice (38%) the existence
only one site (see, Table A3.3).

Table A3.3: Survey; Question 3 – Library sites
Number of sites per Library

Total of cases

%

1

17

38%

2

5

11%

3

7

16%

4

3

7%

5

4

9%

6

3

7%

7

1

2%

9

1

2%

10

1

2%

13

1

2%

14

1

2%

16

1
45

2%
100%

Total

81 | Appendix

Question 4. “How many members if library staff are: a) Librarians, b) Information
technology (IT) staff, c) Archivists, d) Administrative staff and e) other staff”: The
respondents in their majority did not provide detailed data (see, section 3.4.2.4.3).
Consequently, the data derived from the answers from the 42 of the 45 cases referred to
the estimated total of library staff on the one hand it was guided to the use only of the
total of the members of library staff (see, Table A3.4).
Table A3.4: Survey; Question 4 - Library staff
Estimated total of staff per
Library
7
8
9
11
12
13
19
24
28
30
31
36
45
49
51
53
54
56
57
71
74
80
95
107
109
112
114
120
124
130
151
154
168
238
240
250
291
No Answer
Total

82 | Appendix

Total of cases
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
45

Section 2: Basic information for the Library web site (LWS) (Questions 5-7)
Question 5. “Home page of LWS”: All 45 respondents provided the home page’s URL of
their LWS. The cross-check with the data of the libraries’ list (see, section 3.4.2.2-d) did
not bring out any controversial case.

Question 6. “In which year was the LWS first available?”: Data provided only from 67%
of the respondents, whilst 20% of them stated that they did not know the year of the first
LWS publication and 13% of the respondents did not answer the question (Table A3.5).
The data from the 30 respondent (67%), who provided the information of the year that the
LWS was first available, showed that most of the cases published their web site within
1990s (23 cases; 77% - see, Table A3.6).
Table A3.5: Survey; Question 6 – completion coding
Provision of answer
Yes
No

Type of answer

Total of cases

%

Year

30

67%

Don’t know

9

20%

6
45

13%
100%

NA
Total

Table A3.6: Survey; Question 6 – First year of LWS publication
Year
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2002
2003
2005
2006

Decade

Total of cases

1990s
(23 cases; 77%)

2000s
(7 cases; 23%)

Total

1
2
1
1
8
2
1
4
3
2
2
1
1
1
30

83 | Appendix

Question 7. “Where is the LWS hosted?”: All 45 respondents answered the question. The
results (Table A3.7) showed that the majority of LWS were hosted on server(s) of other
unit within the university (32 cases; 72%). The second more frequent practice was the
hosting on library’s server(s) (11 cases; 24%) and for a small percentage of cases (4%;
two cases), the host of the LWS was an outsourcing Internet Service Provider (ISP).
Table A3.7: Survey; Question 7 – Hosting of LWS
Hosting of LWS

Total of cases

%

The LWS is hosted on server/s of the Library

11

24%

The LWS is hosted on server/s of other unit within the university
The LWS is hosted on server/s of an outsourcing Internet Service Provider
(ISP)
The LWS is hosted on server/s of OTHER

32

72%

2

4%

0

0%

45

100%

Total

Section 3: The role of the Library web site (LWS) (Questions 8-11)

Question 8. “Is there a mission statement for the LWS?”: All 45 respondents answered the
question. The grand majority of them (41 cases; 91%) stated that there was not mission
statement for the LWS. In only 7% (3 cases) a mission statement had been developed and
in one case, the respondent did not know if there was a mission statement for the LWS
(Table A3.8).
Table A3.8: Survey; Question 8 – Existence of mission statement for LWS
Completion coding

Total

%

Yes

3

7%

No

41

91%

Don’t know

1

2%

45

100%

Total

Question 8.1 “If YES, what is it?”: Two of the three respondents, who stated that there
was a mission statement for the LWS, provided the text of mission statement. Below, the
exact text of statements provided is presented:

84 | Appendix

Case 86: ‘Libweb is one of a range of formats the library offers to all its stakeholders, giving
current information on library services & collections. Libweb seeks to be a
concise, easily navigable & intuitive website complementing hard copy, word-ofmouth & learn.gold information sources. Libweb is a dynamic website that will
continually adapt to the changing information needs of all of its users.’
Case 95: ‘to provide our customers with a professional service through the effective and
efficient use of the web as a communication tool.’

Question 9. “How is the LWS used”: All 45 respondents answered the question. The
results per option/provided statement (Table A3.9) showed that the most frequent LWS
uses were the:
-

9.b “The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities
hosted locally in the building/s of the Library.” in 98% of the cases;

-

9.a “The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information
services.” in 89% of the cases;

-

9.c “The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the
operation of the library as an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the
staff, undertaken projects).” in 76% of the cases;

At the contrary the other provided statements were checked by very few respondents:
-

9.e “The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff
(e.g. Intranet for the staff with password protected access to library automated
systems).” in 16% of the cases;

-

9.d “The LWS is used for provision of information for the professional interests of
the library staff.” in 11% of the cases;

The analysis of the “other” uses of LWS (see, option 9.f) in nine cases brought out two
additional categories of LWS uses:
-

9.f1 “The LWS is used for provision of library collection development activities
open to academic community (e.g. book suggestions, orders).” in 2% of the cases;

-

9.f2 “The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the town/city
where the university library is placed (e.g. London -- Galleries, museums, etc).” in
2% of the cases;

85 | Appendix

Table A3.9: Survey; Question 9 – LWS uses
Provided statements
9.a
9.b
9.c
9.d
9.e

9.f1

9.f2

The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information
services.
The LWS is used for provision of information about services and
facilities hosted locally in the building/s of the Library.
The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and
the operation of the library as an organisation (e.g. mission,
information about the staff, undertaken projects).
The LWS is used for provision of information for the professional
interests of the library staff.
The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library
staff (e.g. Intranet for the staff with password protected access to
library automated systems).
The LWS is used for provision of library collection development
activities open to academic community (e.g. book suggestions,
orders).
The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the city
where the university library is placed (e.g. London -- Galleries,
museums, etc).

Checked by Cases
Total
%
40

89%

44

98%

34

76%

5

11%

7

16%

1

2%

1

2%

Six respondents filled in as “other” uses the provision of specific library & information
services, whilst they had already checked the statement 9.a (e.g. ‘registration of guest
users, support for off campus users, etc’). Therefore, these six answers were not included
in the further results’ analysis. In addition, one case used the space for the details to make
a note about non-selection of the statement/option 9.e: ‘Depends what you mean by LWS.
We have a separate Intranet website for supporting library staff. I wouldn't count that as
part of the LWS’.

The results about the LWS uses per case showed that the most frequent patterns of LWS
uses were (see below, Table A3.10):
a) The combination of uses: 9.a-9.b-9.c (21 cases; 48%)
b) The combination of uses: 9.a-9.b (7 cases; 16%)

The other nine patterns ranged over 2% and 7%.

86 | Appendix

Table A3.10: Survey; Question 9 – Patterns of LWS uses

No

Total of
cases
1

2%

9.b

9.a

9.c

9.e

9.d

9.f1

9f.2

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

%

No

No

No

No

No

2

4%

Yes

No

No

No

No

2

4%

No

No

No

No

7

16%

Yes

No

No

No

2

4%

No

No

21

2%

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Yes

No

1

2%

No

Yes

1

48%

Yes

No

No

3

7%

No

No

No

3

7%

Yes

No

No

2

4%

45

100%

No

Total

Keys:
Provided statements for the Question 9: “How is the LWS used?”
9.b: The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the
building/s of the Library.
9.a: The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.
9.c: The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the operation of the library
as an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff, undertaken projects).
9.e: The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff (e.g. Intranet for the
staff with password protected access to library automated systems).
9.d: The LWS is used for provision of information for the professional interests of the library staff.
9.f1: The LWS is used for provision of library collection development activities open to academic
community (e.g. book suggestions, orders).
9.f2: The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the city where the university library is
placed (e.g. London -- Galleries, museums, etc).

Question 10. “Have the uses of the LWS been diversified since the first LWS was
available?”: The question was not answered by one respondent. 26 respondents filled in
the option “Yes”; 13 ones the option “No” and five respondents the option “Don’t Know”.
(Table A3.11)

Question 10.1. “If YES, please give details”: The question was filled in by 26 cases.
However, the 24 of them gave details following the relevant instruction because they had
answered “Yes” in the Question 10; whilst the rest two respondents had answered “No” in
that question. Nevertheless, the analysis of the data completed in the space of question
10.1 showed that the data provided only by six respondents was valid for the study.

87 | Appendix

Table A3.11: Survey; Question 10 – Library web site uses’ diversification since the first LWS was
available.
Provided
Q10.1 filled
Provision of answer
Total of cases
Valid data
statements
in
Yes

No

Don't know

5

0

NA

No

13

2

1

Yes

26

24
NA

5
NA

26

6

NA
Total

1
45

The examination of the two answers in the question 10.1 from the cases in which the
answer in the Question 10 was “No” brought out that only one of them was valid, as the
statement of no diversifications in the LWS uses (Q10 = No) and the content of the details
in the question 10.1 raised a logic conflict for one of the two cases. Specifically, the
respondent provided details in the question 10.1 explaining that the LWS uses have been
reduced, whilst he/she stated in Question 10 that the LWS uses have not diversified. The
respondent wrote: ‘We no longer put much info on our website, it is all provided via our
vle’. In the Question 9, also, only the category 9.b2 was selected as the current LWS uses
category. The content analysis of the specific web site showed that indeed the extent of
the LWS content was limited and there was a reference for the students and academic
staff for visiting the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) of the university in order to
have access to electronic library and information services. However, a brief visit to
archived versions of the specific LWS retrieved through the Internet Archive collection
from two randomly selected previous years verified that the contents of specific category
of LWS uses was reduced after the transfer of content from the LWS to the university
VLE. However, this perspective could be fault, if interlinking services with the LWS’s
web pages, like commercial products/services and in this case part of university’s VLE,
identified as part of the LWS’s content (see, section 1.4).

The examination and analysis of the data provided in the question 10.1 by the 24
respondents from the 27, who answered in Question 10 “Yes”, identified only five valid
statements, which referred to diversifications in the LWS uses. The 19 of the 24 cases
referred either to content enhancement for existent uses or to LWS design improvements.
On the contrary the five cases mentioned above referred to either additions or removals of

2

9.b: The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the
building/s of the Library.

88 | Appendix

the LWS uses; specifically of the categories of LWS uses 9.a3 & 9.b. One case of them
reported that the LWS uses were enhanced with the category 9.a (provision of electronic
library and information services), writing that: ‘The site originally just hosted basic
information about the library itself, but has since developed into a gateway to our
electronic journals and databases, and has also become a key tool in providing subjectspecific information and support for all members of the University.’ Another case referred
to the enhancement of the LWS uses with the category 9.b (provision of information
about services and facilities hosted locally in the building/s of the library), mentioning
that: ‘Only very basic details, mainly access to Internet resources was initially available.
The move to the Learning Centre brought about a rethink of the web changes to promote
other services and facilities in the building.’ Finally, the other three cases reported a
reduction of the LWS uses as regards the category 9.a because the library currently
provided its online services via the university VLE for the academic community.

Question 11. “Are there any future plans that will affect the role of LWS?”: Thirty-one
(31) of the respondents stated and provided relevant details that there were plans affecting
the LWS role (Table A3.12). However, the content analysis of the question 11.1 (“If Yes,
please give details”) showed that all respondents referred to plans either for content
enhancement for the existent LWS uses or for LWS design upgrades.
Table A3.12: Survey; Question 11 – Future plans affected the LWS role
Provision of answer

True

Provided
statements

Total of cases

Q10.1 filled

Don't know

6

0

No

8

0

31

31

Yes
Total

3

45

Valid data
NA
0
NA

9.a: The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.

89 | Appendix

Section 4: Management of the Library web site (LWS) (Questions 12-14)

Question 12. “In which of the following managerial aspects of the LWS is the Library
involved?” : (Table A3.13)

-

Decisions about the LWS content: in 45 cases (100%);

-

Decisions about the LWS design: in 31 cases (69%);

-

Leading and controlling the LWS development procedure (content and design): in
36 cases (80%);

-

Budget for the LWS development procedure (content and design): in 24 cases
(47%)

Table A3.13: Survey; Question 12 – Library’s involvement in managerial aspects
Managerial aspects, in which library had involvement

Checked for “YES”
Total

%

12.a

Decisions about the LWS content

45

100%

12.b

Decisions about the LWS design
Leading and controlling the LWS development procedure (content
and design)
Budget for the LWS development procedure (content and design)

31

69%

36

80%

24

47%

12.c
12.d

Note: Total of cases: 45 (100%)

Question 13. “Are there others (e.g. other unit within the university) who are involved in
the LWS management?”: All respondents answered the question 13 and all respondents,
who stated that there was involvement (YES), filled in the question 13.1 (“If Yes, please
give details”). The results showed that for 36 of the cases (80%) there was involvement in
the LWS management by others (Table, A3.14). In all those cases, the involvement
derived from other units4 within the university. The analysis and coding of the details
provided showed that those units were: IT (in 17 cases; 47%), marketing (in 14 cases;
39%) and for 5 cases (14%) the involvement derived from both units (IT & Marketing).

4

The term unit refers to the any organisational division within universities, like department, office and
service.

90 | Appendix

Table A3.14: Survey; Questions 13 & 13.1 – Involvement in LWS management by others
Existence of involvement in LWS management by
others1
Total of
Provided statements
%
cases

36

Yes

Involvement in LWS
management by other
university units2

Total

%

IT

17

47%

Marketing

14

39%

IT & marketing

5

14%

36

100%

80%

Total
Don't know

0

0%

No

9

20%

45

100%

Total
Notes:
1. Question 13
2. Question 13.1

For the analysis and coding, the titles of the organisational units found in survey data
were checked with the official university web sites, to improve understanding and to
ensure accurate coding. The results were: the units of IT and marketing. In IT unit
included references to “university web team”, “graphic designers” and “web development
unit”. In the marketing unit included alternative titles, like “External Affairs”,
“Communications & Development” and “External relations department”. The 36 exact
answers and its coding for the university units are presented in table A3.15.
Table A3.15: Survey; Question 13.1 – Coding of university units
Involvement in LWS management by other university units

Coding of university units

University web team

IT

A Web Development Group is responsible for setting up the new Library
web-site. This includes 2 web developers from IT services. A consultant
from the Marketing and Online Communications division has also advised
on the design. The web team (In IT services) are responsible for the
UCMS, and provide training on this too.

IT & marketing

The University College's Web Developer (based in IT Services)

IT

Web Development Unit

IT

University Marketing & Recruitment, University Web Team

IT & marketing

University’s Web development team

IT

University marketing department impose branding on design of the site

Marketing

The is a web team with overall responsibility for the cohesive design and
look and feel of the University College website, monitoring broken links,

IT
…continues

91 | Appendix

Table A3.15: Survey; Question 13.1 – Coding of university units
Involvement in LWS management by other university units

Coding of university units

management of servers, etc.
design is controlled by Marketing

Marketing

Marketing lead on design. We follow their template.

Marketing

Graphic Designers

IT

University web team

IT

IT Services

IT

Marketing Dept have overall management of the university site

Marketing

UICS (University Information & Computing Services)

IT

marketing

Marketing

External relations dept

Marketing

IT Services web development team, audio visual services design team

IT

Central marketing department

Marketing

ICT

IT

College web team

IT

To some small extent the University Marketing unit have input.

Marketing

Information Services

IT

We use University templates designed by the University's IT Services
Department. They were customised in collaboration with us. No one else is
involved in the management of the content of the site.

IT

Overall design is led by Marketing team

Marketing

Communications Dept. and IT Dept.

IT & marketing

Library pages are a section of whole College website. Communications
Manager has overall responsibility for whole website
The LWS is hosted on the University's content management system. As a
result, the design of the LWS has to match the University's website design which is controlled by the marketing department.

Marketing
Marketing

template is designed/enforced by uni webmaster

IT

webteam

IT

LWS uses same template as main university website, devised by Corporate
Communications. ICT systems currently look after the server.

IT & marketing

Marketing and Communications

Marketing

Department of Communications & Development

Marketing

IT Services

IT

IT department, marketing

IT & marketing

External Affairs (Marketing)

Marketing

92 | Appendix

Question 14. “Taking into account the above answers, has the Library the main role for
the management of the LWS?”: All respondents answered the question and the grand
majority (93%) stated that library had the main role for the management of their LWS
(Table A3.16).

Table A3.16: Survey; Question 14 – completion coding

Main role for the LWS management by library

Total

%

Yes

42

93%

No

3

7%

Don’t know

0

0%

45

100%

Total

93 | Appendix

Section 5: Library web site planning, controlling and achieving (Questions 15-21)

The respondents, who answered in the question 14 “No” (that Library did not have the
main role in the LWS management), were asked to skip the Section 5.

Question 15. “Is there an LWS planning process?”: Planning processes were undertaken
by 71% of the libraries, in the terms of the LWS management undertaken by the library;
20% of the respondents stated that there were not planning processes and one of them
stated that he/she did not know if there were planning processes (Table A3.17).
Table A3.17: Survey; Question 15 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

32

9

1

0

3

45

%

71%

20%

2%

0%

7%

100%

1

Planning processes

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped the question because they answered “No” in question 14

Question 15.1 “If YES, which Library staff (position titles) are involved in this process?:
From the 32 respondents, who answered “Yes” in the question 15, 31 answered the
question. The data analysis identified one case, for which the data was not valid because it
did not provide sufficient information (exact phrase: “Various”). The results of the
analysis and coding showed that the staff, who were involved in the planning processes,
were:
-

“Member(s) of library management team” and “Library web staff”: in 13 cases
(42%);

-

Only “Member(s) of library management team”: in 12 cases (39%);

-

Only “Library web staff”: in 3 cases (10%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team”, “Library web staff” and “Non library
web staff”: in 2 cases (6%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team” and “Non library web staff”: in 1 case
(3%);

94 | Appendix

Question 16. “Are there LWS performance measurement and monitoring processes?”:
Performance measurement and monitoring processes were undertaken only by 49% of the
libraries, in the terms of the LWS management undertaken by the library (Table A3.18).
Table A3.18: Survey; Question 16 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

22

20

0

0

3

45

%

49%

44%

0%

0%

7%

Performance measurement &
monitoring processes

1

100%

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 14

Question 16.1 “If YES, which Library staff (position titles) are involved in this process?:
From the 22 respondents, who answered “Yes” in the question 16, 21 answered the
question. The results of the analysis and coding showed that the staff, who were involved
in the planning processes, were:
-

Only “Member(s) of library management team”: in 7 cases (33%);

-

Only “Library web staff”: in 6 cases (29%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team” and “Library web staff”: in 3 cases
(14%);

-

Only “Non library web staff”: in 2 cases (9%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team”, “Library web staff”, “Non library web
staff” and “Other university staff”: in 1 case (5%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team”, “Library web staff” and “Non library
web staff”: in 1 case (5%);

-

Only “Other university staff”: in 1 case (5%);

95 | Appendix

Question 17. “Are there LWS marketing processes?”: Marketing processes were
undertaken by 53% of the libraries, in the terms of the LWS management undertaken by
the library; 40% of the respondents stated that there were not marketing processes (Table
A3.19).
Table A3.19: Survey; Question 17 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

24

18

0

0

3

45

%

53%

40%

0%

0%

7%

1

Marketing processes
100%

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 14

Question 17.1 “If YES, which Library staff (position titles) are involved in this process?:
From the 24 respondents, who answered “Yes” in the question 17, 23 answered the
question. The data analysis identified one case, for which the data was not valid because it
did not provide relevant information, as the respondent described the procedure without
mentioning the library staff was involved in it. The results of the analysis and coding
showed that the staff, who were involved in the planning processes, were:
-

“Member(s) of library management team” and “Non library web staff”: in 6 cases
(27%);

-

Only “Member(s) of library management team”: in 4 cases (18%);

-

Only “Non library web staff”: in 4 cases (18%);

-

Only “Library web staff”: in 3 cases (14%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team”, “Library web staff” and “Non library
web staff”: in 2 cases (9%);

-

“Member(s) of library management team” and “Library web staff”: in 2 cases
(9%);

-

Only “User consultations (not specified)”: in 1 case (5%);

96 | Appendix

Question 18. “Has the Library developed specialised policies for the LWS?”: Specialised
policies were developed by 60% of the libraries, in the terms of the LWS management
undertaken by the library (Table A3.20).
Table A3.20: Survey; Question 18 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

27

15

0

0

3

45

%

60%

33%

0%

0%

7%

Development of specialised
policies for LWS

1

100%

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 14

Question 18.1 “If YES, which of the stated subject/issues cover?: All of the respondents,
who answered in question 18, that library had developed specialised policies for its LWS,
specified the subject areas/issues covered. Apart from the four provided areas, one
respondent added a new one, filling in the option for specification of “Other
issues/subjects”, with the “Web archiving”. The results per subject areas were:
18.1-a. Design & construction issues: 24 cases (89%);
18.1-b. Administrative issues (responsibilities, procedures, aims/objectives, etc): 25
cases (93%);
18.1-c. Metadata and documentation issues: 13 cases (48%);
18.1-d. Copyright and Freedom of Information issues: 15 cases (56%);
18.1-e. Web archiving: 1 case (4%);
The patterns of subject areas/issues identified per cases were:
-

a-b-c-d: in 8 cases (30%);

-

a-b-d: in 6 cases (22%);

-

a-b: in 4 cases (15%);

-

a-b-c: in 3 cases (11%);

-

a: in 2 cases (7%);

-

b: in 1 case (4%);

-

b-c: in 1 case (4%);

-

b-c-d: in 1 case (4%);

-

a-b-e: in 1 case (4%);

97 | Appendix

Question 19. “Are there university policies and/or guidelines, which affect to5 the LWS?”:
89% of the respondents stated that university policies affecting the LWS (Table A3.21).
Table A3.21: Survey; Question 19 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by university
University’s
policies/guidelines affected
LWS

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

40

2

0

0

3

45

%

89%

4%

0%

0%

7%

1

100%

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 14

Question 19.1 “If YES, which of the stated subject/issues cover?: All of the respondents,
who answered in question 19 “Yes”, specified the subject areas/issues. None of them
added subject areas, selecting the option “Other”. The results per subject areas were:
19.1-a. Design & construction issues: 38 cases (95%);
19.1-b. Administrative issues (responsibilities, procedures, aims/objectives, etc): 17
cases (43%);
19.1-c. Metadata and documentation issues: 11 cases (28%);
19.1-d. Copyright and Freedom of Information issues: 28 cases (70%);
19.1-e. Other issues/subjects: 0 cases (0%);

5

Exact phrase of the formal questionnaire

98 | Appendix

Question 20. “Is there an annual budget for LWS development and maintenance?”: Only
7% of the libraries had annual budget for the LWS development and maintenance; whilst
the 82% of them did not have it. Moreover, 4% of the respondent did know whether
annual LWS’s budget existed (Table A3.22).
Table A3.22: Survey; Question 20 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library
Annual budget for LWS
development and
maintenance

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

3

37

2

0

3

45

%

7%

82%

4%

0%

7%

100%

1

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 14

Question 21. “Does the Library undertake external funded projects for the development of
particular web-based library services?”: 20% of the libraries undertook externally funded
projects for development of particular web-based library services; whilst the 69% of them
did not undertake any one. Moreover, 4% of the respondent did know whether the library
any project like that was undertaken by the library (Table A3.23).
Table A3.23: Survey; Question 21 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library
Undertaking of external
funded projects for
development of particular
web-based library services

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

9

31

2

0

3

45

%

20%

69%

4%

0%

7%

100%

1

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 14

99 | Appendix

Section 6: Library web site human resources (Questions 22-24)

Question 22. “The staff who works regularly on the LWS development and maintenance
are members of staff of:”
- the library, in 30 cases (67%);
- the library and other unit(s) within the university, in 14 cases (31%);
- other unit(s) within the university, in one case (2%)
All 45 respondents answered the question and the option “Other” (22.c) was not selected
by anyone of them; 14 of the 15 respondents, who stated that the staff belonged to other
unit(s) within the university, specified these units (Table A3.24). The analysis and coding
of these answers showed that usually the staff belonged to one unit (in 11 cases of the 14)
and the units identified were:
-

IT (in ten cases);

-

Marketing (in six cases);

-

eLearning (in one case);

-

Off-campus support (in one case)

Table A2.24: Survey; Question 22.b – coding of titles of other units within the university

Coded unit(s) of university
IT

Marketing

eLearning

Off Campus support

Total of
cases

Yes

No

No

No

7

No

No

Yes

No

1

No

Yes

No

No

3

Yes

Yes

No

No

1

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

1

no given details

NA

NA

NA

NA

1

Total

10

6

1

1

15

Total of units

One unit
Two units
Three units

Question 23. “How many members of Library staff work solely on the LWS?”: In 11
library cases (25%) of the 44 ones, which stated that staff of library worked regularly on
the LWS development and maintenance (see, question 22), there was staff, whose duties
were only about the web site (Table A3.25). In most of the cases (six), the full-time
library web staff consisted of one person; the maximum number was seven.

100 | Appendix

Table A3.25: Survey; Question 23 – Total of members of library staff, which worked solely on the
LWS development and maintenance [Full-time]
Total of staff

Total of cases

1

6

2

1

3

1

5

2

7

1
Total

111

Notes:
1. Within the 44 cases, which stated that staff of library worked regularly on the LWS development and
maintenance (Question 22).

Question 23.1 “Do they compose a particular library unit/team?” and in positive answer
(Yes),
-

“Which is the title of this unit/team?”

-

“Which is the position of the unit/team within the library organisation?”

From the 11 cases with staff with full duties in the LWS development:
-

Two cases did not give any answer in that group of questions

-

three cases answered “No”: this staff did not compose a particular library
unit/team

-

Five cases answered “Yes”: this staff composed a group as part of other library
department related to information systems and electronic services or they were a
cross disciplinary group.

-

One case answered “Don’t know”, giving further details about their position
within the organisation, which was “part of Systems team”.

Question 23.2 How many of them are:
a. Librarians:
b. Information Technology (IT) staff:
c. Archivists:
d. Administrative staff:
e. OTHER:
Please, specify the ‘OTHER’?

101 | Appendix

Most of the respondents did not filled in the options 23.2.a. to 23.2.d., but they preferred
to use the space for the details of the option 23.2.e “Other” in order to give information
about the staffing composition. Therefore, specific picture about the staff specialities was
not possible to be drawn (see, section 3.4.2.4.3).

Question 24 “How many members of Library staff are not occupied solely on the LWS,
but they have additional duties as well?”: All 44 cases, which stated that staff of library
worked regularly on the LWS development and maintenance (Question 22), provided
details for members of library staff, whose additional duties were about the web site
(Table A3.26). Cross-checking of the answers in Question 24 with the answers of the
question 24.1 about the speciality of that staff, showed that the total number was from one
to 26 people and for three cases the answer was not number, but phrase like ‘all or many
librarians’ or ‘Any member of the library team could be ask to work on aspects of the web
site’, without any clear pattern. Almost half of the respondents (26) did not fill in the
question of 24.1, whilst they preferred to use the space for the details of the option 24.1.e
“Other” in order to give information about the staffing composition. Therefore, specific
picture about the staff specialities was not possible to be drawn (see, section 3.4.2.4.3).
Table A3.26: Survey; Question 24 – Total of members of library staff, which worked on the LWS
development and maintenance having additional duties as well [Part-time]
Total of staff

Total of cases

1

4

2

3

3

4

4

3

5

4

6

1

7

1

8

2

9

4

10

3

11

2

14

1

15

3

18

2

21

1

25

1
2

26

…continues

102 | Appendix

Table A3.26: Survey; Question 24 – Total of members of library staff, which worked on the LWS
development and maintenance having additional duties as well [Part-time]
2

“All librarians”
“Any member of the library team could be ask to work on aspects of the
2
web site.”
“Many librarians”

2

Total

1
1
1
441

Notes:
1. 44 of the 45 cases, which stated that staff of library worked regularly on the LWS development and
maintenance (Question 22).
2. Exact phrases as they provided by respondents.

103 | Appendix

Section 7: Organising and leading Library web site development (Questions 25-28)

Question 25. “Is the Library responsible for the organisation of the work of the LWS
development and maintenance?”: All respondents answered the question. Almost all of
them (93%) stated that library was responsible for the organising of the LWS
development and maintenance. (Table A3.27).
Table A3.27: Survey; Question 25 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library
Responsibility for organising
the LWS development &
maintenance

Yes

No

Don’t know

No answer

Total

Total

42

3

0

0

45

%

93%

7%

0%

0%

100%

Question 26. “Is there ONE person of the members of Library staff who is responsible for
organising the work for the LWS development and maintenance?”: All respondents, who
answered “Yes” in the question 25 (42), answered this question (Table A3.28).

The results showed that 62% of the libraries had one-person based managerial
arrangement for the organising of the LWS development & maintenance. The analysis of
the details provided for this case of managerial arrangement showed that for usually that
one person was member of library management team occupied partially with LWS duties
and more that 1/3 of them his/her title indicated relation with IS and electronic services.
In only 1/5 of the cases his/her title was directly related to the specific duties of LWS
management (e.g. “Library Web Manager or Administrator” and “Libweb manager”).

The analysis of the information provided by 12 respondents of the 14 ones, who stated
that the managerial arrangement of leading was not based on one-person, showed that
-

in seven cases of the libraries organising activities undertaken by whole library
web staff based mostly on team-working without one-person based leading duties
(self-managed team);

104 | Appendix

-

in four of the cases there was a co-ordination by one member of library
management team with the library web staff; his/her role was more consultative
rather than leading;

-

in one case there was a two-managers leading schema separating responsibility for
technical and content aspects

Table A3.28: Survey; Question 26 – completion coding

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

28

14

0

0

3

45

%

62%

31%

0%

0%

7%

100%

Managerial arrangement

Responsibility for organising
the LWS development &
maintenance by ONE person

1

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 25

Question 27. “Are there officially stated procedures and work schedule for the LWS
development and maintenance?”: Only 22% of the libraries had developed official stated
procedures and work schedule for the LWS development and maintenance; whilst the
67% of them did not do it. Moreover, 2% of the respondent did know whether the library
had developed this managerial activity (Table A3.29).
Table A3.29: Survey; Question 27 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library
Official stated procedures and
work schedule for LWS
development and
maintenance

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

10

30

1

1

3

45

%

22%

67%

2%

2%

7%

100%

1

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 25

105 | Appendix

Question 28. “Are there activities for training and skills development of Library staff who
works for the LWS?”: Most of the libraries (73%) had developed activities for training
and skills development for the library web staff; whilst the 18% of them did not do it.
Moreover, 2% of the respondent did know whether the library had developed this
managerial activity (Table A3.30).
Table A3.30: Survey; Question 28 – completion coding
Managerial activities
undertaken by library
Activities for training and
skills development for library
staff worked for LWS

Yes

No

Don’t
know

No
answer

NA

Total

Total

33

8

1

0

3

45

%

73%

18%

2%

0%

7%

100%

Notes:
1. Respondents skipped question because they answered “No” in question 25

106 | Appendix

1

Appendix III.2: Desk research: Year of the first publication of the library web site
Related section: 4.2.2.1
The desk research within the Internet Archive’s collection (see, section 3.4.3.4) collected
complete and valid data for all the 45 LWS cases examined. According to the results
(Table A3.31), 73% of the LWSs have been published for first time within the decade of
1990s and 27% of them during the 2000s.

Table A3.31: Desk research (Internet Archive) – First year of LWS publication
Desk research results
Year

Period until
2008

Coded timerange

1996

12

More than 10
years

1997

11

(21 cases; 47%)

1998

10

1999

9

2000

8

2001

7

2002

6

2003

Total of cases
Decade
3
1990s
(33 cases; 73%)

18
11

From 6 to 10
years

1

(19 cases; 42%)

3

2
2

5

2004

4

From 2 to 5 years

2005

3

(5 cases; 11%)

2006

2

2000s
(27%)

1
1
1
2

Total

45

107 | Appendix

Appendix III.3: Content analysis
Related section: 3.4.1.3, 3.4.4 & 4.2.3-b
The content analysis for the identification of the LWS uses within the research sample
brought out:
1. that one category from the core list (see, 3.4.1 Pilot content analysis) was not
located (Table A3.32). Specifically, the category had the title: “The LWS is used
for provision of information for the professional interests of the library staff.” and
it was used in the Question 9 of the survey as the provided statement 9.d (see,
Appendix I.3);
2. three new categories of LWS uses, which were formatted as:
N.a) “The LWS is used for provision of library collection development functions
open to the academic community (academic staff - students), with free or
restricted access”
N.b) “The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the town/city
where the university library is placed”.
N.c) “The LWS is used for provision of information about library's commercial
activities”; for example books’ sale.
Analytically, the results per category were that the LWSs were used for provision of:
Category A. [9.a of survey] electronic library and information services - (in 45 cases;
100%);
Category B. [9.b of survey] information about services and facilities hosted locally in
the building/s of the library - (in 45 cases; 100%);
Category C. [9.c of survey] information about the character and the operation of the
library as an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff,
undertaken projects) - (in 38 cases; 84%);
Category D. [9.e of survey] an online “workstation” for the library staff (e.g. Intranet
with informative and/or functional content) – (in 5 cases; 11%);
Category E. [N.a] collection development functions open to the academic community
(academic staff - students) – (in 5 cases; 11%) type of outcome:
functional;

108 | Appendix

Category F: [N.c] information about library's commercial activities (e.g. books’ sale)
– (in 1 case; 2%);
Category G: [N.b] cultural information about the town/city where the university
library is placed – (in 2 cases; 4%)

The patterns of the categories of LWS uses (Table A3.32), which were found, were:
-

ABC: in 26 cases (58%)
AB: in 7 cases (16%)
ABCD: in 4 cases (9%)
ABCE: in 4 cases (9%)
ABCG: in 2 cases (4%)
ABCD-E: in 1 case (2%)
ABCF: in 1 case (2%)

Table A3.32: LWS content analysis – Patterns of LWS uses
Categories of LWS uses
A

Yes

B

Yes

1

C

D

E

F

G

9.d2

Total of
cases (%)

No

No

No

No

No

No

7 (16%)

No

No

26 (58%)

No
Yes
Yes

No

Yes

No

1 (2%)

Yes

No

No

2 (4%)

Yes

No

No

No

4 (9%)

No

No

No

No

4 (9%)

Yes

No

No

No

1 (2%)

No

Total of library cases

45 (100%)

Keys & Notes:
1. Categories of LWS uses:
A: The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.
B: The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the
building/s of the Library.
C: The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the operation of the library as
an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff, undertaken projects).
D: The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff (e.g. Intranet for the staff
with password protected access to library automated systems).
E: The LWS is used for provision of collection development functions open to the academic community
(academic staff - students), with free or restricted access.
F: The LWS is used for provision of information about library's commercial activities (e.g. books’ sale).
G: The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the town/city where the university library
is placed.
2. Category used in the survey as optional statement: 9.d “The LWS is used for provision of information
for the professional interests of the library staff.”

109 | Appendix

Appendix III.4: First year of LWS publishing: data comparison
Related section: 3.4.3.4
The comparison of the data (see, Table A3.33) derived from the survey (see, Appendix
III.1; Question 6 - Table A3.6) to the data derived from the desk research (see, Appendix
III.2; Table A3.31) confirmed the unavoidable limitation of the Internet Archive
collection as data source. The comparable data referred only to 17 cases. From the 30
cases of the survey with stated first year, 13 cases referred to years before 1996; period
that the Internet Archive collection does not cover. Finally, only for four comparable
cases there was the data was the same and the differences for the rest of the cases varied
from one to eight years.
Table A3.33: First year of LWS publishing - comparison of results
1st year: desk
research

1st year: survey

Variation in
years

1997
1998
2002
1997
1999
2001
1997
1996
1997
1998
2001
2004
1996
2006
1998
1997
2002
1997
1997
1998
1996
2005
1997
1998
2000
2003
2001
1998
1997
2006
2000
1998
1997

1997
1998
2002
1996
1998
2000
1999
1999
2000
2002
2005
1999
2003
1998
2006
1991
1992
1992
1993
1994
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
D/K
D/K
D/K
D/K
no answer
no answer
no answer
no answer

0
0
0
1
1
1
-2
-3
-3
-4
-4
5
-7
8
-8
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

13 cases

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
1

17 cases

1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

28 cases

1
1
3
4
1
1
1
3
Total

110 | Appendix

Total of cases

45

Appendix III.5: LWS uses: data comparison
Related section: 3.4.2.4.2
The primary sources of data about the LWS uses were:
a) the survey (see, Appendix III.1; Question 9);
b) the content analysis (see, Appendix III.3)

The comparison (see below, Table A3.34) of the results per each case from the data
derived from the survey to the data derived from the content analysis showed that for less
than the half of the cases (20) the LWS uses were the same. The varieties identified were
in one to three categories from the total eight ones, but in most of the cases (19 from the
25) the varieties referred to one category only.

The category with the most differences (in 10 cases) was the “9.c The LWS is used for
provision of information about the character and the operation of the library as an
organisation.”, usually because some of the respondents did not count the related
information “units”, which were found during the content analysis to be scattering within
the library web sites, without composing whole web page/s content.

The next category with high number of differences (in six cases) was the “9.e The LWS is
used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff” (e.g. Intranet for the
staff with password). For four of them through the content analysis none access link to
library staff intranet found, whist the respondents were checked this statement. In two
cases through the content analysis a clearly labelled link to library staff intranet found
(“IS staff area”, where IS “Information Services” and “ILS Staff Intranet”, where ILS
“Information and library Services”) and in the home page, but the respondents did not
check the statement 9.e. In all cases found Intranet for the library staff the URL syntax of
the link referred to a sub-folder of the LWS (e.g. http://www.university-name.ac.uk/LWSfolder/intranet). Nevertheless, the content analysis of the web site of the case noted above
- that they had separate Intranet for the staff, but it was not part of the LWS - verified the
absent of any reference or link to this type of use.

111 | Appendix

In the results of the content analysis the category “9.d The LWS is used for provision of
information for the professional interests of the library staff.” was not identified in any of
the web sites examined. However, in five cases of the survey, the respondents checked
this option.

The differences in the category “9.a The LWS is used for provision of electronic library
and information services.” were for all five cases in that the respondents did not check
this statement in the questionnaire sent back, even if the content analysis found for the
three of the cases plenty of electronic services provided and for the other two at least the
online library catalogue.
Table A3.34: LWS uses - data comparison
N.b

9.b

N.c

N.a

9.a

9.d

9.e

9.c

Varieties

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

0

Total of
cases
20

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

1

4

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

1

2

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

1

3

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

1

3

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

1

7

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

2

1

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

FALSE

TRUE

2

2

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

FALSE

2

1

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

3

1

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

TRUE

FALSE

3

Total of library cases

1
45

Keys:
TRUE: concurrence of results
FALSE: variation of results
Provided statements for the Question 9: “How is the LWS used?” and the new categories reported:
N.b: The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the town/city where the university
library is placed.
9.b: The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the
building/s of the Library.
N.c: The LWS is used for provision of information about library's commercial activities (e.g. books’
sale).
N.a: The LWS is used for provision of collection development functions open to the academic
community (academic staff - students), with free or restricted access.
9.a: The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.
9.d: The LWS is used for provision of information for the professional interests of the library staff.
9.e: The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the library staff (e.g. Intranet for the
staff with password protected access to library automated systems).
9.c: The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the operation of the library as
an organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff, undertaken projects).

112 | Appendix

Appendix III.6: Detailed Examination: Library organisation type
Related section: 4.2.2.2
Table A3.35: Library type – Library site status - Library staff scale
Library type

Library sites status
One site Library

Converged Services

Central Library with
branches (2-8)
Central Library with
branches (more than 8)
One site Library

Library & Archive Services

Central Library with
branches (2-8)
Central Library with
branches (more than 8)
One site Library

Central Library with one
branch
Library Services
Central Library with
branches (2-8)

Central Library with
branches (more than 8)

Library staff scale
001 to 050
no data
001 to 050
051 to 100
101 to 150
251 to 300
no data
001 to 050
051 to 100
201 to 250

Total of cases
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

101 to 150

1

001 to 050
051 to 100
101 to 150
001 to 050
051 to 100
151 to 200
001 to 050
051 to 100
101 to 150
151 to 200
201 to 250

10
3
1
2
1
2
3
4
4
1
2

no data

1

Total of library cases

45

Table A3.36: Library type – Geographical region

Library type
Converged Services
Library & Archive Services
Library Services
Total of library cases

Sample’s geographical regions
England
Scotland
5 (14%)
2 (25%)
3 (8%)
1 (12.5%)
29 (29%)
5 (62.5%)
37 (100%)
8 (100%)

Total of cases
7 (16%)
4 (8%)
34 (76%)
45 (100%)

113 | Appendix

Appendix III.7: Library web staff in library
Related section: 4.2.2.3-c & d
Primary data source: Survey Analysis of data (actual numbers) derived from the answers
to the Question 4 (library staff) and the Questions 23 & 24 (library web staff).
Table A3.37: Percentage (%) of Library web staff within total library staff taking into
account the elements of library sites status, library staff scale and
existence of full-time Library web staff
Library sites
Library
% of LWS
Existence of
Total of
Average
status
staff scale
staff
“FT”1 staff
cases
of %
7%
No
8%
No
10%
No
11%
Yes2
1 to 050
9
20%
13%
No
25%
No
One site
26%
No
Library
33%
No
43%
No
5%
No
51 to 100
11%
No
3
10%
14%
No
101 to 150
5%
No
1
5%
Total of cases
13
16%
31%
No
1 to 050
2
61%
91%
Yes2
Central Library
with one
51 to 100
4%
No
1
4%
branch
4%
No
151 to 200
2
8%
12%
No
Total of cases
5
28%
18%
No
22%
No
1 to 050
4
33%
44%
Yes2
2
45%
Yes
5%
Yes2
11%
Yes2
51 to 100
18%
No
5
22%
28%
No
Central Library
48%
No
with branches
4%
No
(2-8)
7%
No
101 to 150
7%
No
5
9%
10%
No
17%
Yes2
151 to 200
17%
No
1
17%
2%
No
201 to 250
4%
Yes2
3
5%
11%
Yes2
Total of cases
18
18%
Central Library
101 to 150
16%
No
1
16%
with branches
251 to 300
3%
No
1
3%
(more than 8)
Total of cases
2
9%
Total
383
18%
Notes:
1. “FT” (Full-Time): Library staff working for the LWS development and maintenance solely
2. Average of all cases with FT library web staff: 26.5%
3. From the 45 LWS cases, seven cases could not be examined because there were not both needed
amounts for Library staff and Library web staff, either because one of them was not given or it was not
countable (use of phrase, e.g. “All librarians”) or respondent skipped Section 6.

114 | Appendix

Appendix III.8: Detailed examination: LWS uses
Related section: 4.2.3-b
Table A3.38: LWS uses & time-range of LWS practice
LWS uses: group

Basic
(33; 73%)

Time-range of LWS practice
from 2 to 5 years
(total: 4)

A-B

1

A-B-C

3

from 6 to 10 years
(total: 13)

A-B

2

A-B-C

11

more than 10 years
(total: 16)

A-B

4

A-B-C

12

from 2 to 5 years (total: 1)

Enhanced
(12; 27%)

Total of
cases

LWS uses: pattern

from 6 to 10 years
(total: 6)

more than 10 years
(total: 5)

A-B-C-F

1

A-B-C-D

1

A-B-C-D-E

1

A-B-C-E

2

A-B-C-G

2

A-B-C-E

2

A-B-C-D

3
Total

45

Table A3.39: LWS uses & Library type
LWS uses: group

Library type
Converged Service
(total: 4)

Basic
(33; 73%)

Library & Archive Service
(total: 2)
Library Service
(total: 27)
Converged Service
(total: 3)

Enhanced
(12; 27%)

Library & Archive Service
(total: 2)

Library Service
(total: 7)

Total of
cases

LWS uses: pattern
A-B

1

A-B-C

3

A-B-C

2

A-B

6

A-B-C

21

A-B-C-D

1

A-B-C-D-E

1

A-B-C-E

1

A-B-C-D

1

A-B-C-G

1

A-B-C-F

1

A-B-C-G

1

A-B-C-D

2

A-B-C-E

3
Total

45

115 | Appendix

Appendix III.9: LWS organising and library web staff
Related section: 4.2.5.1-b
Table A3.40: LWS organising & Library web staff scale
Managerial arrangement

Co-ordination by one member of
management team
NA1
Non one-person based managerial
arrangement

One person

Self-managed team

Two-managers leading schema

Library web staff scale

Total

1 to 5

2

11 to 15

1

21 to 26

1

1 to 5

2

NA

1

1 to 5

1

11 to 15

1

1 to 5

12

1 - 5 FT and many PT

1

11 to 15

2

16-20

2

21 to 26

1

6 to 10

9

many PT

1

1 - 5 FT and many PT

1

11 to 15

1

16-20

1

21 to 26

2

6 to 10

2

6 to 10

1
Total

Notes:
1. Respondent skipped the question 26 rightly

116 | Appendix

45

Appendix III.10: Detailed examination: LWS management (patterns)
Related section: 4.2.6
Table A3.41: LWS management & time-range of LWS practice
Time-range of LWS practice

from 2 to 5 years

from 6 to 10 years

more than 10 years

LWS management patterns

Total

OMC

1

PO

1

POM

1

POMC

2

none

1

O

3

OM

2

OMC

1

PO

1

POM

4

POMC

5

OM

2

PO

2

POC

2

POM

3

POMC

11
Total

42

Table A3.42: LWS management & Library type
Library type

Converged Service

Library & Archive Service

Library Service

LWS management patterns

Total

OMC

1

PO

1

POM

2

POMC

3

none

1

POM

1

POMC

2

O

3

OM

4

OMC

1

PO

3

POC

2

POM

5

POMC

13
Total

42

117 | Appendix

Table A3.43: LWS management & Library’s involvement in decision-making

Decision making areas about:
Leading

LWS
content

&
controlling

LWS design

No

Budget

LWS management
patterns

Total

none
OM
PO
POMC
OMC
PO
PO
POM
OM
O
POM
POMC
O
O
OM
POC
POM
POMC

1
1
1
3
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
4
2
1
2
2
5
11
42

No

No
No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes

No
No

Yes

Yes
Yes

Total

Table A3.44: LWS management & organising arrangement

LWS management pattern
Co-ordination by one member of
management team
NA
Non one-person based managerial
arrangement

One person

Self-managed team
Two-managers leading schema

Organising arrangement

Total

OM
POM
POMC
none
PO
POMC
O
OM
OMC
PO
POC
POM
POMC
OM
PO
POM
POMC
POM

1
2
1
1
1
1
3
2
2
2
2
4
12
1
1
1
4
1
42

Total

118 | Appendix

Appendix III.11: Detailed examination: Authority over LWS management
Related section: 4.2.8

Table A3.45: Authority over LWS management, LWS uses & university unit(s) involved
Authority over LWS
management

University unit(s)
involved

LWS uses: groups
Basic

Only library authority

None
Enhanced
Basic
IT
Enhanced

Shared authority

Basic
Marketing
Enhanced
Marketing - IT

Non library authority

Marketing
Marketing - IT

Basic
Enhanced
Basic
Enhanced
Basic

LWS uses:
patterns

Total

A-B

1

A-B-C

4

A-B-C-D

1

A-B-C-E

3

A-B

1

A-B-C

12

A-B-C-E

1

A-B-C-G

1

A-B-C-D

2

A-B

3

A-B-C

7

A-B-C-D-E

1

A-B-C-F

1

A-B-C

3

A-B-C-D

1

A-B

1

A-B-C-G

1

A-B

1
Total

45

Keys:
A: The LWS is used for provision of electronic library and information services.
B: The LWS is used for provision of information about services and facilities hosted locally in the building/s
of the Library.
C: The LWS is used for provision of information about the character and the operation of the Library as an
organisation (e.g. mission, information about the staff, undertaken projects).
D: The LWS is used for provision of an online “workstation” for the Library staff (e.g. Intranet for the staff
with password protected access to library automated systems).
E: The LWS is used for provision of collection development functions open to the academic community
(academic staff - students), with free or restricted access.
F: The LWS is used for provision of information about library's commercial activities (e.g. books’ sale).
G: The LWS is used for provision of cultural information about the town/city where the university library is
placed.

119 | Appendix

Related section: 4.2.8.1
Table A3.46: Authority over LWS management, Involvement in LWS management by other university
unit(s) & library’s involvement in decision-making

IT

Shared authority

Yes
Yes

Budget

No

Development
procedure

Authority over LWS
management

Design

Other university
unit(s) involved in
LWS management

Content

Library’s involvement in decision-making
about LWS:

Total

No

No

2

Yes

No

2

No

No

1

No

4

Yes

8

No

4

Yes
No

No
Shared authority

Yes

Marketing

Non library authority

Marketing - IT

Shared authority
Non library authority

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

No

1

Yes

2

No

1

Yes

4

No

1

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

1

No

Yes

Yes

1

Yes

Yes

No

1

Yes

2

No

No

No

1

Total

120 | Appendix

36

Related section: 4.2.8.2
Table A3.47: Authority over LWS management, LWS management patterns & LWS uses (groups of
categories)
Authority over LWS
management

LWS management
pattern
O

LWS uses: group

Basic
Only library authority
Enhanced

Basic
Shared authority

Enhanced

Total
1

POM

1

POMC

3

POM

1

POMC

3

none

1

O

1

OMC

1

POC

2

PO

4

OM

4

POM

4

POMC

9

O

1

OMC

1

POM

2

POMC

3
Total

42

Table A3.48: Authority over LWS management & library’s organising arrangements
Authority over LWS
management
Only library authority

Shared authority

Non library authority

Library’s organising arrangement

Total

One person

5

Self-managed team

3

Two-managers leading schema

1

Co-ordination by one member of management team

4

NA

1

Non one-person based managerial arrangement

2

One person

22

Self-managed team

4

NA

2

One person

1
Total

45

121 | Appendix

Table A3.49: Authority over LWS management & LWS staffing
Authority over LWS
management

LWS staffing

Only library authority

Only library staff

Mixed staff

PT

No

7

No

1

Yes

2

No

10

PT &FT
PT

Shared authority

Total
2

No

2

Yes

3

PT

No

15

Mixed staff

PT

No

1

Non library staff

NA

No

1

Only library staff

PT &FT

No

Only library staff

Non library authority

PT &FT

Team existence of
FT library web staff
No

Library web staff

PT &FT

1
Total

45

Table A3.50: Authority over LWS management & cases undertaken external funded projects –
detailed cases examination
Authority over LWS management
Only library authority
Shared authority

Library’s involvement in the LWS
budget
No

1

Yes

3

No

3

Yes

2
Total

122 | Appendix

Total

9

Table A3.51: Authority over the LWS management & cases developed LWS mission statement – detailed cases examination

Authority over LWS
management

Involved
university
unit(s)

Only library authority

NA

Shared authority

IT

LWS
management
pattern

Existence of
library mission
statement

Development of
specialized LWS
policies in
administrative
issues

O

Yes

No

POMC

no answer

POMC

Yes

Yes

Existence of
university
policies affected
LWS

Existence of
university
policies in
administrative
issues affected
LWS

Total

1
Yes

No

1
1
Total

3

123 | Appendix

[blank page]

