LIBRARY 2.0 AND EMERGING COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES
IN COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIES

A Dissertation
Presented to
The Faculty of the School of Education
Saint Mary’s College of California

In Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Education in Educational Leadership

By
Nancy Simmons Golz
Spring 2014

UMI Number: 3628741

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3628741
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© 2014
Nancy Simmons Golz
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

LIBRARY 2.0 AND EMERGING COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES IN
COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIES
By
Nancy Simmons Golz
Spring 2014

APPROVED FOR THE
SAINT MARY’S COLLEGE OF CALIFORNIA
KALMANOVITZ SCHOOL OF EDUCATION

Candidate
Ed.D. Dissertation Committee:

Sawako Suzuki, Ph.D., Chair

Rebecca Proehl, Ph.D.

David Patterson, Ph.D.

Christopher Sindt, Ph.D., Interim Dean

Abstract
LIBRARY 2.0 AND EMERGING COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES IN
COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIES
By
Nancy Simmons Golz
Saint Mary’s College of California, 2014
Sawako Suzuki, Chair

This mixed methods study combined quantitative and qualitative data gathered from library
websites, library social media posts, and a survey of library leaders in California community
college libraries to explore how California community colleges use Library/Web 2.0
technologies like social media, chat reference, and text messaging. Facebook and LibGuides
emerged as the predominant Library/Web 2.0 technologies used by more than half of California
community college libraries. The majority of California community college librarians rated
LibGuides as effective or highly effective; whereas Facebook was most commonly rated as only
somewhat effective. The majority of the librarians in the study agreed that social media could be
an effective platform to promote library programs and events to students, and that social media
could be an effective outreach tool. Reported barriers to the implementation of new technologies
were lack of staff time, limited budgets, lack of staff training, and institutional policies. Student
response to library social media was measured through growth in subscribers to library social
media and through analysis of the types of content that garnered the most student response.
Students responded most frequently to local library content that could be interpreted as an

i

attempt to build connections and community. Examples of this type of content were humor,
invitations to conversation and connection, and local library pictures.

ii

Dedication
Ephesians 2:8; "For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is
the gift of God".
My dissertation is dedicated to my family. To my mother who felt my first heartbeat and
guided my first steps. She encouraged my creativity, my love of learning, and my love for
reading. A woman of love and faith, my mother gave me wings to soar. To my father who
embodies leadership and strength, and who always encouraged me to seek more education. Dad,
I always wanted to be like you.
To my husband who loved and supported me through this long process and faithfully
chauffeured me from Merced to Moraga every other weekend for three years. Whenever I was
frustrated, Friedhelm believed in me and gave me the strength to continue. To my daughter
Annemarie, who is an incredibly creative and brilliant young woman. You are natural leader, and
I am proud that you will graduate with a Master’s Degree from Berkeley one week before I
graduate from Saint Mary’s. To my son Alex, intelligent, faithful, and loving, who always
makes me smile. Thank you for taking care of everything at home when I was away at Saint
Mary’s. The world is a better place because of each of you.
My gifts in life are many; I am truly blessed.

iii

Table of Contents
Page
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………. i
Dedication………………………………………………………………………………iii
Table of Contents…………………………………………………………………….....iv
List of Figures………………………………………………………………………….vii
List of Tables…………………………………………………………………………. viii
Acknowledgements ………………………………………………………………….....ix
Chapter 1: Introduction………………………………………………………………….1
Background…………………………………………………………………………..2
Problem Statement…………………………………………………………………. 11
Purpose and Research Questions…………………………………………………... 13
Summary of Methods……………………………………………………………….14
Significance………………………………………………………………………....15
Theoretical Framework……………………………………………………………...15
Assumptions ………………………………………………………………………...17
Limitations and Delimitations……………………………………………………....19
Definitions of Terms…………………………………………………………….......20
Summary…………………………………………………………………………… 22
Chapter 2: Literature Review………………………………………………………….. 24
Libraries and Technology………………………………………………………….. 27
College Students as Digital Natives……………………………………………….. 29
College Students and Academic Libraries………………………………………….36

iv

Librarian Perceptions of Social Media and Emerging Technologies……………..49
Academic Library Usage of Library/Web 2.0 Technologies and Social Media…..53
Overall Summary……………………………………………………………...…..64
Chapter 3: Method……………………………………………………………………69
Purpose of the Study……………………………………………………………... 69
Epistemological Assumptions……………………………………………………. 70
Research Design. ...…………………………………………………………...….. 71
Setting……………………………………………………………………………..72
Participants………………………………………………………………………..72
Instrumentation……………………………………………………………………73
Data Collection Strategy…………………………………………………………..74
Data Analysis Procedures…………………………………………………………76
Summary…………………………………………………………………………..78
Chapter 4: Results…………………………………………………………………….79
Review of Methodology…………………………………………………………...79
Demographics……………………………………………………………………..80
Research Question 1: Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California
Community Colleges Using?...................................................................................86
Research Question 2: How are Library/Web 2.0 Technologies Being Used by
California Community College libraries to Communicate with Students, and to
What Extent are Students Responding as Measured by the Frequency of
Student Responses to Library Social Media Posts. ……………………………….94
Research Question 3: What are California Community College Librarian
Perceptions about the Efficacy of Using Library/Web 2.0 Technologies with
Community College Students?...............................................................................104
Overall Summary of Findings……………………………………………………110

v

Chapter 5: Discussion………………………………………………………………..113
Library/Web Emerging Communication Technologies Used by California
Community College Libraries……………………………………………………114
How Library/Web 2.0 Technologies Are Being Used by California Community
College Libraries…………………………………………………………………119
California Community College Librarian Perceptions About the Efficacy of Using
Library/Web 2.0 Technologies with Community College Students……………..126
Limitations……………………………………………………………………….129
Conclusions and Recommendations for Practice………………………………...130
Suggestions for Future Research………………………………………………....136
Conclusion………………………………………………………………………..138
References…………………………………………………………………………...141
Appendix A: Survey Instrument…………………………………………………….150
Appendix B: Website Checklist……………………………………………………..158
Appendix C: Postcard Reminder…………………………………………………….164
Appendix D: California Community Colleges and Academic Faculty Librarians…..166

vi

List of Figures
Figure

Page
1. Map Showing the Location of the 112 California Community Colleges…………....81
2. Student Responses to California Community College Library Facebook Content...102
3. Recommended Social Media Content for Libraries..................................................132
4. Why Libraries Should Use Library 2.0 Technologies and Social Media..................135

vii

List of Tables
Table

Page

1.

Research Questions and Data Collection Methods

71

2.

Librarian Age and Education Levels

83

3.

Years of Experience as a Community College Librarian

85

4.

Previous Professional Experience in Other Libraries

85

5.

Frequency and Percentages of Communication Technologies Evident on

87

California Community College Websites
6.

Frequency and Percentages of Communication Technologies as Reported by

88

California Community College Librarians
7.

Barriers to the Implementation of New Technologies in California

89

Community College (CCC) Libraries
8.

How CCC Librarians Report Learning Library/Web 2.0 Technologies

93

9.

How CCC Librarians Prefer to Learn New Technologies

94

10.

CCC Library Facebook and Twitter Followers and Frequency of Posts Sept.

95

15-Oct. 13, 2013
11.

Types of Content that CCC Librarians Report Posting to Social Media

97

12.

California Community College Facebook Content, Sept. 15-Oct. 13, 2013

98

13.

California Community College Twitter Content, Sept. 15-Oct. 13, 2013

103

14.

CCC Librarian Perceptions about the Usefulness of Social Media with

105

Students
15.

CCC Librarian Perceptions of the Effectiveness of Communication
Technologies with Students

viii

109

Acknowledgements
I am thankful to my dissertation chair, Dr. Sawako Suzuki, for her expertise and her
kindness. Thank you for encouraging me to apply to AERA, and for gently guiding and
shepherding my research and writing. Thank you Dr. David Patterson, the subject specialist on
my committee, who was extremely sympathetic and supportive while providing valuable subject
expertise and connections. Thank you also to Dr. Rebecca Proehl, who served on my
dissertation committee and as my advisor during my first two years at Saint Mary’s. I especially
enjoyed your leadership, your humor, and your passion for educational leadership and
organizational change.
I am thankful to the faculty at Saint Mary’s who provided inspiring classes that
challenged me to grow and change, both personally and academically. I am also thankful to the
Kalmanovitz School of Education and the Christian Brothers for providing the institutional
support for an excellent program. I am also extremely grateful for the scholarships that I
received from the Kalmanovitz School of Education.
Thank you to all of my colleagues in Cohort 10! It was a delightful experience to spend
three years of weekends with you sharing meals, lofty thoughts, the occasional frustration, and
the joy of learning. You will always have a special place in my heart.
Thank you also to my co-workers at Merced College who were understanding and
patient. Thank you, especially, to Dr. Susan Walsh, a mentor and a role model of political and
educational leadership, who was very supportive and encouraging throughout my dissertation. I
am thankful to consider you colleagues and friends.

ix

The library will endure; it is the universe.
James Gleick (2011)
Chapter I
The Internet, social media, mobile devices like cell phones, and Internet-enabled tablets
are changing the way we communicate and find information. Libraries, traditional repositories
of human knowledge, are active participants in the technological shift in how we access
information and communicate in our wired and wireless society. Libraries in California
community colleges, the largest system of higher education in the nation, have begun to
experiment with social media, chat reference, and text messaging as methods of outreach and
education to community college students. Few empirical studies of academic libraries and social
media have been conducted, so very little is known about how community college libraries are
using social media and other emerging forms of electronically-assisted communication to
interact with students. This study was launched to gather and analyze data to describe how
California community colleges use social media and communication technology to interact with
students. This study also examined community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy
of using social media and emerging communication technologies to communicate with students
and assist with information requests. Although many libraries are experimenting with these new
forms of communication, it was largely unknown how and to what extent California community
colleges were actually using these emerging forms of communication technology to connect
with, communicate, and educate students.
The first part of this chapter provides a brief historical background of the origins of
communication through computerized networks, and the rapid growth of social media and the
technology that keeps us constantly connected to the Internet through mobile handheld devices.
Since community college librarians teach information literacy, information competency, and the
1

use of technology, social media and emerging forms of communication technology are utilized
by some community college librarians as a natural extension of their education and outreach role.
Libraries have been early adopters in the information revolution prompted by the Internet;
consequently, some libraries are attempting to join in the conversation with students through the
use of social media, text messaging, and chat.
The problem and purpose section of this study will identify why it is important to study
social media and emerging forms of communication technology in academic libraries with
community college students who are predominantly digital natives, a term that was coined by
Prensky (2001) to describe students who have grown up with computers, video games, and the
Internet. Although there is some related research, there is very little comprehensive empirical
data about how California community college libraries are using social media, or about
California community college librarians’ perceptions of the efficacy of using emerging forms of
communication technology with students. The methodology section will describe the
triangulation design of this descriptive study, and the significance portion will address how this
study will add to the growing body of knowledge on this rapidly changing phenomenon. The
results of the study will hopefully add to the body of knowledge about academic libraries, social
media, and emerging forms of communication technology. This information may be useful to
academic library leaders who are developing education strategies and library policies about
social media, outreach, and Library/Web 2.0 technologies. The theory of Library 2.0 (Casey &
Savastinuk 2007) which is descriptive of the participative and interactive nature of libraries in a
networked world, will provide the theoretical framework for this study.
Background

2

According to the American Library Association publication The Whole Library
Handbook, libraries contain collections of resources in a multiplicity of formats organized by
information professionals to provide expedient physical and digital access (Eberhart, 2006).
Additionally, libraries offer services and programs that provide information, entertainment, and
education to motivate life-long learning and improve society as a whole (Eberhart, 2006).
Within academic libraries, reference and instruction librarians have the role of educating and
communicating with students and faculty about information resources and library programs and
services. If librarians were once the “quiet gatekeeper(s) to discreet places of knowledge,”
librarians now are guides to the “raucous, multi-headed, madly multiplying beast of exploding
information and information delivery systems” (Johnson, 2010, p. 7). In a rapidly changing
information landscape, libraries and academic librarians have adopted modern methods of
storing and retrieving information via electronic networks and proprietary databases of
information, and librarians communicate with students and the community using methods of
communication that the Internet has made possible, such as email, chat, text-services, video, and
social media.
With the invention of each new form of technology designed to disseminate information,
humans have attempted to communicate and send messages to audiences both large and small
through technologies like the printing press, the telegraph, radio, telephones, televisions,
mimeographs, and photocopiers. In The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, Eisenstein
(1979) theorized that the printing press monumentally transformed communication with the shift
from script to print. Gleick (2011) echoed Eisenstein’s idea that the introduction of the printing
press changed science, religion, and history, and “shaped the modern mind” (Gleick, 2011, p.
399). The advent of the Internet with its rapidly evolving methods of electronic communication

3

may be the next seismic shift in information and communication technology. Modern forms of
information that are digitally stored and electronically transmitted bring what Gleick refers to as
“mind bombardment, data impinging in a series of blows from all sides, too fast” (p. 402). The
rapidly evolving Internet is a vast network with access to expanding stores of information and
millions of voices seeking to communicate through sound, text, video, and digital code.
Dependent on mission and scope, libraries have traditionally been organized repositories
of human knowledge in codex and print, and librarians have been scholars who provide access to
this information. The advent of the Internet has provided not only millions of new sources of
information in a variety of new formats, but also evolving methods of communicating this
information across space and time.
The Internet has become such an integral part of our academic and personal lives that it
may be difficult for college students from the millennial generation to imagine life without the
Internet. The Internet, however, is a relatively recent phenomenon which has its historical roots
in the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), whose task was to develop
technologies for national defense (Bidgoli, 2004). DARPA is credited with developing the first
computer network in 1969. The first computer network linked UCLA, Stanford, UC Santa
Barbara, and the University of Utah, with the goal of creating a redundant communication
system should one node in the communication channel be destroyed (Rochlin, 1997). DARPA
developed the idea of transmitting small packets of data over telephone lines with a set of
protocols and destination codes that allowed the messages to be re-assembled by the destination
computer. By 1973, DARPA had developed APRANET, a nationwide system with protocols for
formatting, transmitting, routing, and receiving data (Roberts, 1988; Rochlin, 1997). Much of
what transpires on the Internet today still uses the Transmission Control Protocol/ Internet

4

Protocol (TCP/IP) that was developed by DARPA for communication and national defense
purposes (Stevens, 2000).
In the early days of computer networking, Ray Tomlinson is credited with creating a
simple computer program and sending the first email communication in 1971 (Hafner, 2001).
By the mid-seventies, nearly 70% of all traffic on the APRANET was email. Since that time the
use of email as a method of communication has exploded exponentially. In 2001, it was
estimated that over 9.8 billion email messages were sent daily (Hafner, 2001). Email has
consistently remained the most prevalent use of the Internet; 92-93% of all Internet users
reported using email in Pew research surveys conducted in 2002 through 2011 (Purcell, 2011).
As an extension of asynchronous email, synchronous methods of communication such as chat
and instant messaging are also prevalent modes of communication on the Internet.
Social media, which may include email, online chat, or instant messaging to individuals
or a selected social network, is a growing method of communication on the Internet. According
to Boyd and Ellison (2007), social networking sites “allow individuals to construct a public or
semi-public profile within a bounded system,” articulate and share messages with others within
their network, and “view and transverse their list of connections and those made by others within
the system” (Boyd & Ellison, 2007, p. 211). The first recognizable social networking site,
SixDegrees.com, was launched in 1997 as an online tool to help people communicate and send
messages (Clemmitt, 2006). Although the network gathered millions of users, it did not have a
sustainable business model and the service folded in 2000 (Boyd & Ellison, 2007). Several other
social networking sites followed including Asian Avenue and BlackPlanet in 1999, and
Friendster in 2002; LinkedIn, a professional networking site, was launched in 2003 (Boyd &
Ellison, 2007). The year 2003 was also the starting date for Flickr, a photo sharing site;

5

Myspace, which was popular with teenagers and music and entertainment fans; and Facebook, a
social networking program developed for Harvard students to communicate with other Harvard
students (Clemmitt, 2006). YouTube, a video sharing site, was introduced in 2005, and Twitter,
a micro-blog which allows users to post messages no longer than 140 characters, debuted in 2006
(Clemmitt, 2010). Facebook allowed high school students to join the social network in 2005,
and in 2006 Facebook opened access to the general public (Boyd & Ellison, 2007).
Facebook has quickly grown into the predominant social networking site, with over 901
million total users worldwide and about 526 million daily users (Hoover’s Inc., 2012).
Facebook, whose main website is a Facebook profile page, lists its mission as giving “people the
power to share and make the world more open and connected” (Facebook, 2012, para. 2).
Facebook describes itself as a place “to keep up with friends, upload an unlimited number of
photos, share links and videos, and learn more about the people they meet” (Facebook, 2012,
para. 3).
The Internet and social media have become core methods for teens and young adults to
find and share information. Based on longitudinal data gathered by Pew Research Center’s
Internet and American Life Project, the “Internet is a central and indispensable element in the
lives of American teens and young adults” (Lenhart, Purcell, Smith, & Zickuhr, 2010, p. 5).
According to 2013 data gathered by Pew Research Center’s Internet and American Life Project,
84% of teens and young adults with online access have social networking accounts, which is a
significant increase from prior years; in 2006, 55% of young adults used social media and 65%
of young adults and teens used online social media (Lenhart et al., 2010; Duggan & Smith,
2013). The most popular social networking site for young adults is Facebook, with 84% of
young adults participating, followed by Instagram and Twitter (Duggan & Smith, 2013).

6

LinkedIn, with its professional orientation, is used more by professionals than teens or young
adults (Duggan & Smith, 2013; Lenhart et al., 2010).
For teens and young adults, the use of the Internet and social media is nearly ubiquitous
(Lenhart et al, 2010). If librarians want to reach students where they are and where they are most
likely to seek information, it may be through social media or other emerging communication
technologies. According to Sodt and Summey (2009), academic libraries should become
familiar with social media and collaborative sharing sites, since students are frequent users of
this technology.
Mobile technologies are becoming increasingly important as more students have access
to the Internet and social media applications through hand-held devices like cell phones and
tablets. In 2012, the number of cellular and wireless devices in the United States exceeded the
United States population, and the typical household with 2.6 people had an average of 24
gadgets, with at least one Internet-enabled smart phone (Kang, 2012). As part of this trend, the
use of text-messaging is rising rapidly. In 2011, 1.138 trillion text messages were sent in the
United States, which was a 16% increase over the prior year (Kang, 2012). Young adults, age 18
to 29 in particular, are the heaviest users of wireless technologies and social media methods of
communication (Lenhart et al., 2010). If academic libraries want to communicate with the wired
and wireless mobile student population, who may be off campus or across the room, then
librarians may need to adopt these new communication technologies “to meet the needs of the
current information culture” (Sodt & Summey, 2009, p. 98).
This study will focus on the use of social networking and emerging forms of
communication at libraries in California community colleges, the largest higher education system
in the nation, educating 2.4 million students at 112 colleges. Background on the California

7

higher education system and the students in California community colleges is provided in the
following paragraphs.
In 1960, the California State Legislature passed the California Master Plan for Higher
Education which established a tripartite system that now includes 112 California Community
Colleges, 23 California State Universities, and 10 campuses of the University of California. As
part of this plan, the Donahue Act established the coordination and differentiation of missions
between the three systems. The UCs would offer Bachelor’s degrees, Master’s degrees, and
PhD’s with an emphasis on research and public service and a minor emphasis on teacher
preparation. The CSUs would prepare students for Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees and assume
the major responsibility for educating teachers while placing a lesser emphasis on research. The
Community Colleges were designed to offer A.A. degrees in preparation for transfer to the CSU
or UC system as well as providing adult education and vocational training. The UCs are the
most selective, as they admit the top 12.5% of the graduates, while the CSUs admit the top
33.3% of graduating seniors. The Community Colleges have the most permissive admissions
policies, with a so called “open door” policy. Community Colleges were designed to be equal
opportunity institutions that allowed anyone in California an opportunity to attend college
(Douglass, 2000).
California community college students tend to be a very ethnically diverse group of
students; they are frequently first generation college students who often come from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. In 2008, the majority of students of color who attended college were
enrolled in community colleges—52% of all Latino, 45% of all Native American, and 40% of all
African American college students (Kim, 2011). More recent statistics by the UCLA Civil
Rights Project reveal that in California 75% of Latino high school students and 66% of African

8

American high school students who attend college start at a community college (Rhoades, 2012,
p. 7). It is discouraging to note that only 53.6% of the students at California Community
Colleges who seek a degree actually achieve a certificate, degree, or transfer to a four year
institution. For African American and Latino students, the success rates are even lower at 42%
and 43% respectively. Students who enter with below transfer-level skills have even lower rates
of success. Of those students who transfer to a four year college, only 41% graduate. Once
again students of color have lower graduation rates; 34% for African Americans, and 31% for
Latinos (California Community Colleges, 2011, p. 6).
The California Master Plan guaranteed the possibility of a college education through the
California community college system to every resident in the state of California including
women, disabled students, low-income students, and persons of color, and offered these students
a chance to enter the middle class by attaining an education that could lead to gainful
employment (California Ed Code 66010.2). By focusing this research on institutions that serve
the traditionally underserved, we indirectly practice “authentically caring pedagogy”
(Valenzuela, 1999, p. 266) that values cultural diversity and promotes the recruitment, retention,
and graduation of traditionally disadvantaged students.
Libraries and academic faculty librarians within the community college system in
California play an integral role in supporting the college curriculum and helping students to
succeed academically. In 2010, the Academic Senate for California Community Colleges
adopted a document which established standards of practice for community college faculty
librarians. This document discussed the specific role of faculty librarians to provide instruction,
research assistance, and information in the physical library facility as well as remotely to
distance education students. This instruction includes information literacy, information

9

competency, and the use of technology. Outreach to students, faculty, and administrators is
another core faculty librarian role (Academic Senate for California Community Colleges, 2010).
Social networking and emerging forms of electronically-assisted communication may, therefore,
be useful as librarians pursue outreach and instruction and assist students with research and
information needs.
As academic libraries attempt to communicate with students through social networking
websites, they will need to be mindful of controversial issues of privacy, security, and identity
(Light & McGrath, 2010). Critics of social media within academic libraries, like Sekyere (2009),
also question whether all of the time invested in new forms of technology is actually worth the
effort, especially in light of shrinking budgets and limited staff time. Results of a 2007 survey of
126 academic librarians revealed that 54% of the librarians in the study felt that Facebook did
not serve any academic purpose; only 12% of the respondents felt that Facebook had any
“academic potential or possible benefits” (Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007, p. 30). In another
study that evaluated Rutgers University library experience with Facebook, Glazer questioned
whether Facebook is an example of “clever outreach or costly diversion” (Glazer, 2009, p. 11).
Glazer noted that it was difficult to measure the impact of Facebook at Rutgers University
library, but using Facebook provided the library with “positive press coverage, terrific
testimonials, and rewarding extensions of established relationships” (Glazer, 2009, p. 19).
Like Glazer, many librarians have anecdotal evidence of the value of using social media,
but large scale empirical data is scarce. Most of the literature that exists involves discussions of
best practice based on the experience of individual librarians and libraries using social media. A
few studies, however, have been conducted about academic libraries and Facebook. For
example, Hendrix, Chiarella, Hasman, Murphy, and Zafron (2009) surveyed 144 health science

10

libraries and discovered that 12.5% of the libraries use Facebook, mostly for promotion,
announcements, and reference. Xia (2009) analyzed 26 Facebook groups affiliated with Rutgers
University and Indiana University to see if Facebook could be used effectively as a marketing
tool. Based on his review of the data, Xia (2009) concluded that Facebook could be used as an
effective marketing tool if the librarians maintained active discussions and posted frequent
announcements. Wan (2011) attempted the first comprehensive study of academic library
profiles in Facebook. His study was focused on 115 libraries in the Association of Research
Libraries (ARL), the predominant academic research libraries in the United States and Canada.
His study quantified how many of the ARL libraries maintained a Facebook presence, analyzed
the content of the postings, and attempted to measure how successful the libraries were at
reaching out to users. Oxford (2010) studied information competency and distance education in
community colleges, and asked whether instant messaging, texting or chat could be used for
information competency instruction. Both of these studies offer limited results about social
networking and academic libraries. Many questions and gaps in knowledge about the use of
social media and emerging communication technologies in community college libraries still
exist, and very little comprehensive data about academic librarian experiences with social media
have been gathered or analyzed.
Problem Statement
Research conducted by the Pew Institute indicates that most young adults are digital
natives (Prensky, 2001) who communicate with their peers through mobile technology and social
networking sites. Although undergraduate community college students may be familiar with
finding information in Google and communicating through mobile technologies, they are often
unfamiliar with library resources and databases. Some community college libraries attempt

11

communication with students through social networking sites like Twitter, Facebook, and
YouTube, and they offer reference services to students through mobile technologies like textmessaging and online chat. By communicating with students through these nontraditional
methods, librarians may be able to reach students and introduce them to valuable library
information resources and services.
Experimenting with social networking and emerging communication technologies to
reach community college students is challenging since the technology and the social media
platforms are rapidly changing. With limited time and economic resources, and even less time to
conduct research, librarians need to know where they will have the most success communicating
with students. Educator librarians may be interested in best practices for social media, but they
may also question whether social networking, text messaging services, or chat reference is the
best use of librarian time. A review of the literature reveals a research gap about how
community college libraries are using these new communication technologies. Additionally,
research on community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of social media and
emerging communication technologies with students is virtually non-existent. Analyzing
community college librarians’ perceptions of the efficacy of using social media and
electronically-assisted forms of communication will provide data that may inform practice and
help other libraries develop outreach and information services to students who need assistance,
but who may not be physically present in the library.
This study provides useful information for library directors, practicing faculty librarians,
and other educators about how mobile communication technologies are being used by California
community college libraries. Gaining an understanding of how these technologies are utilized
and how community college librarians perceived the effectiveness of these communication

12

technologies may help other academic libraries formulate social networking policy and plan
effective social networking and mobile communication strategies that engage students and help
students find information which should contribute to their success.
Purpose
This mixed-methods study explored how California community college library used
social media communication (like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Pinterest) and synchronous
and asynchronous methods of electronically-assisted communication including email, chat
reference, and text services to communicate with students. An analysis of California community
college library Facebook and Twitter posts provided valuable information about how librarians
use social media and to what extent students participate in the social media conversation, as
measured by the number of subscribers or followers of library social media accounts, and student
responses and posts on library Facebook pages. Survey research with California community
college library leaders explored how college libraries utilized emerging mobile technologies and
social networking sites to communicate with students. Open-response questions in the survey
provided qualitative data about community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of
social media and emerging forms of communication technology. Gaining an understanding of
how these technologies were utilized and librarian perceptions of the efficacy of social media
and emerging communication technologies may help other academic libraries plan successful
social networking and mobile communication strategies.
Research Questions
The three research questions that guided this study were:
1. Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California community college libraries using1?

1

Specifically, this question will examine California community college libraries’ use of:

13

2. How are Library/Web 2.0 technologies being used by California community college
libraries to communicate with students, and to what extent are students responding as
measured by the frequency of student responses to library social media posts?
3. What are California community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using
Library/Web 2.0 technologies with community college students?
Summary of Methods
This study utilized a mixed-methods triangulation design to provide a more complete

picture of how social networking and emerging forms of communication were being used in
California community colleges. The descriptive design allowed the researcher to gather both
quantitative and qualitative data through the validating quantitative data model (Creswell &
Plano, 2007). The initial phase of the study employed a researcher designed survey that was
designed to measure librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using social media and emerging
communication technologies with community college students. The survey was sent to each of
the 112 California community college libraries.

Chat or Instant Messaging

Wiki

Social Networking sites (like Facebook,
Myspace)

RSS

Twitter

Text-message service (like Text-a-Librarian)

YouTube

Pinterest

Photo sharing site (like Flickr)

Online Virtual Worlds (like Second Life)

Blog

Social bookmarking (del.icio.us or Technorati)

LibGuides

Podcasts

14

In a second phase of the study, the results of the survey were confirmed by visiting
library web pages and looking for links to text-a-librarian services, chat reference, Facebook, and
Twitter accounts. For a one-month time period, the Twitter and Facebook posting of those
libraries that have Facebook and Twitter accounts were monitored. The number of posts was
tallied and the types of information posted were qualitatively analyzed. The researcher also s
community colleges libraries. Gaining an understanding of how these technologies are utilized
will help other academic libraries formulate social networking policy and plan effective social
networking and mobile communication strategies that benefit students. Since librarian time and
resources are limited, before community colleges invest further in these technologies it is useful
to measure librarian perceptions of the efficacy of social media, text, email and chat reference
with the community college student population. This is one of the first large-scale studies of
social media and emerging forms of communication in community college libraries in the largest
college system in the nation.
The summative knowledge generated through this study may contribute to the scholarly
literature on Library/Web 2.0 technologies and inform further research. It is the hope of the
researcher that the results of this study will provide knowledge for academic library leaders who
develop library policies and practices that will best serve California community college students.
Theoretical Framework
The Internet and technology are transforming how we communicate, access information,
and connect with other people. Education is also evolving to embrace and utilize these new
technologies. Connectivism is a theory developed by Canadian educator George Siemens, who
is the Associate Director of the Technology Enhanced Knowledge Research Institute at
Athabasca University in Alberta, Canada. The theory of connectivism seeks to explain how

15

networks and technology are changing the field of education. According to Siemens (2004),
learning occurs when information nodes, which may be mediated through technology, are
connected, so the ability to see links between fields, ideas, and concepts is critical.
Connectivism, as defined by Siemens, acknowledges the importance of current information in
the existing climate of rapidly "shifting reality" (Siemens, 2004, para. 27).
The principles of connectivism inform Library/Web 2.0 and are descriptive of modern
library practices. For example, Transue (2013) demonstrated how closely connectivism aligns
with Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL) information literacy standards.
Libraries provide access to a wide diversity of opinions and information sources, and librarians
specialize in connecting people to these increasingly digital information sources. Faculty
librarians also help students discover connections between ideas and concepts and navigate and
make decisions about information sources. According to connectivism, it is important to nurture
and maintain connections to aid continual learning (Siemens, 2004). Social networking sites and
emerging methods of technology-assisted communication like text messages sent to mobile
phones and synchronous online chat reference are new ways to potentially facilitate connections
and link students with information to promote learning. The theory of connectivism maintains
that learning is a process of connecting nodes of information; librarians are information node
specialists who facilitate student learning by connecting students with current, accurate
information in a shifting information landscape. Increasingly, academic librarians are
connecting with students through social networking sites and emerging communication
technologies. According to Fichter & Wisniewski, “social media provides innovative ways for
librarians to, on a personal and meaningful level, connect with users we may never see face to
face” (Fichter & Wisniewski, 2008, p. 57).

16

The main theory which informed this research was Library 2.0, a term which was coined
by Michael Casey. Library 2.0, as described by Casey and Savastinuk (2007), was an extension
of what was happening in the business world and a twist on Web 2.0 terminology. Web 2.0
refers to the participatory nature of the Internet that is in “perpetual beta” and harnesses
collective intelligence (O’Reilly, 2005). Some examples of Web 2.0 applications are wikis,
mashups, social networking sites, and photo sharing sites like Flickr. Chris Anderson, the editor
of Wired magazine, defined Business 2.0 as a greater demand for efficiency and value, less
constrained by time and space due to the inter-connectivity of the Internet, which provides
“unlimited and unfiltered access to culture and content” (Anderson, 2006, p. 3). Translated for
libraries, Casey and Savastinuk (2007) defined Library 2.0 as a “model for constant and
purposeful change” that “empowers users through participatory, user-driven services” (Casey &
Savastinuk, 2007, p. 5). Casey and Savastinuk wrote that Library 2.0 is an attempt to continually
improve library services with “constant evaluation and updating of services” (Casey &
Savastinuk, 2007, p. 6). Implicit with Library 2.0 are newer participatory technologies that
empower library users. Library 2.0 also acknowledges the need for constant and purposeful
change.
Assumptions
Since most community college libraries are heavily invested in technology and struggling
to provide services to students in a rapidly changing environment, it is assumed that most
community college libraries are grappling with the effects of rapid technological changes. It is
also expected that academic librarians and community colleges want to communicate and
educate students with the most useful technologies.

17

It was also anticipated that community college websites would provide evidence of some
of the communication technologies that libraries use to communicate and educate students. A
further assumption was that librarians would respond truthfully and accurately about their
perceptions of the efficacy of these communications technologies to promote library services and
instruct students in the use of library resources.
Since I work as an Electronic Resources Librarian, I have a positive bias towards
technology. I have generally been an early adopter of new technologies and the cheerleader for
trying new technologies. It sounds like ancient history now, but I fervently lobbied for adding
Internet access for the students and librarians at my first library job in 1993. More recently, I
advocated for adding social media profiles and virtual reference tools like text reference in my
current position. It has also been my experience that not every new technology is an
improvement over prior practices.
Although I enjoy trying and using new technologies, I personally believe that face to face
interactions and instruction with students is more rewarding and probably more effective than
technology-mediated communication and instruction. It is my personal bias that emerging forms
of communication technology are additive tools in the educational toolkit that can be useful for
students who are not physically present in the library but also for students who might prefer
using technology for a variety of reasons, such as disposition, facility with spoken English,
mobility issues, and the emerging expectation of the availability of digital communication. In
my experience, it is not unusual for students within the library building to send text messages
instead of talking directly to a librarian who may be within visual sight and only a few steps
away.

18

My personal experience with social media has been positive, since I gather ideas and
inspiration from other librarians and professionals who post to social media sites. It is fun to
check in with my “friends” in far places. As I gather and interpret data I will attempt to be
mindful of my personal biases towards communication and information technologies and
endeavor to weigh results equally, especially when they may be counter to my expectations. To
minimize any researcher bias, another librarian researcher will review and corroborate the data
and verify the results.
Limitations and Delimitations
California community college libraries were chosen for this study, since this is the largest
higher education system in the nation with a very diverse student population. As the researcher,
I also have personal knowledge and a commitment to the California community college system
since my first academic librarian job was at a community college in Northern California, and I
am currently employed at community college in the Central Valley of California.
To keep a comparable sample of subjects, four-year colleges and universities were not
included in the study. Private and for-profit colleges and universities were also excluded from
the study for similar reasons. Consequently, the data that was gathered is relevant only to public
community colleges whose mission it is to provide undergraduate academic instruction to degree
and transfer students. Since the California community colleges’ mission also includes
vocational, remedial, and community services instruction, the student population at community
colleges is very diverse and rooted in each geographic region.
Although more ambitious studies may be able to survey and study the large 2.4 million
student population in the California community college system, this was beyond scope of this
study, which was limited to observing library websites and publically available social media

19

profiles, and to querying librarian perceptions of the efficacy of using social media and emerging
communication technologies. Student use of these communication technologies was indirectly
reported through faculty librarian perceptions; however, student perceptions of these emerging
communication technologies were not directly measured in this study. Consequently, this study
cannot presume to report on student attitudes about the efficacy of library use of emerging
communication technologies in community college libraries. This study was limited to
description of publically available electronic documents and librarian perceptions as measured
through a survey instrument.
Since the focus of the study was limited to California community college libraries, the
results of the study are not generalizable to other populations. However, the findings of the
study may provide useful information to other similar academic library populations.
Definitions of Terms
Chat – A technology (transmission path or channel) where real time, synchronous
communication takes place between two or more users (Khosrowpour, 2007). Chat is generally
text, but it could include audio and video.
Facebook- The most frequently used social networking site, with over 901 million total
users worldwide and about 526 million daily users (Hoover’s Inc, 2012).
LibGuides - widely used proprietary software by Springshare that allows librarians to
create information portals with links to databases and other information resources, and to create
web-based “content-rich web 2.0 multimedia guides” (Springshare, 2012, para. 2)
Library 2.0 - theory about library services that utilize emerging communication
technologies “to provide collaborative, user centered design in the creation and delivery of
content” (Landis, 2010, 90).

20

Reference- an information consultation where librarians “recommend, interpret, evaluate,
and/or use information resources” and instruct students to assist them with their research and
information needs (Reference and User Services Association, 2012, para. 1).
Social networking- The use of online tools, websites, and applications to maintain social
connections, meet new individuals, and expand social networks (Landis, 2010).
Social networking site – a website that allows users to set up a profile, connect their
profile to others and view connections across profiles (Landis, 2010). Social networking sites
are interactive, since individuals can post text, photos, videos, and web links, and comment on
the posts and photos of those within their network.
Text-a-Librarian – software used by some libraries as a 2-way text messaging service.
Students send text messages through their mobile phone or chat via the library’s website, and
librarians can respond using a secure computer website.
Twitter - a free micro-blogging service that blends social networking with the ability to
post short messages limited to 140 characters. Users can also add links to websites, videos, and
pictures that are posted on the Internet. Twitter is designed to be used on personal computers
and mobile devices like web-enabled cellular phones, also known as smart phones. Tweets can
be restricted to select viewers, or open to the public.
Virtual reference- computer assisted information service conducted electronically through
computers or other Internet technology, often in real-time, with students who are not physically
present. Virtual reference may be conducted using chat, videoconferencing, text-messaging, cobrowsing, e-mail, and instant messaging (American Library Association, 2012).

21

Web 2.0 – Internet based services that connect users to each other. Landis lists some
examples of Web 2.0: social networking sites, instant messaging, blogs, micro-blogs, wikis,
podcasts, vidcasts, and social bookmarking sites (Landis, 2010).
Summary
In The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood, Gleick (2011) writes about the deluge
of information that threatens to flood our consciousness. Gleick also acknowledges the paradox
inherent in the vast network of information, “Everything is close, and everything is far at the
same time. This is why cyberspace can feel not just crowded but lonely. You can drop a stone
into the well and never hear a splash” (Gleick, 2011, p. 425). It is an interesting paradox that
within the billions of bits and bytes of information available on the open web (and hidden in
proprietary databases), and with the cacophony of printed and recorded voices, that the Internet
can still feel like a lonely place. It is perhaps not surprising that the main use of the Internet is
email and other forms of electronic communication. As students seek to make connections and
navigate through myriad sources of information, academic librarians may be able to meet
students in the social networking arena and provide guidance to students through social media
and emerging communication technologies. This descriptive study looked at how community
college libraries are evolving and attempting to use emerging communication technologies and
social networking platforms to connect with a wireless and electronically connected generation.
It will also measure community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using social
media and emerging communication technologies with community college students.
In the next chapter, literature relevant to this study will be reviewed, beginning with a
review of research related to student receptiveness to a library presence in the social networking
realm. Existing research about the use of Library/Web 2.0 and social media applications in

22

academic libraries will also be discussed, as well as research on the use of virtual reference
methods like chat and text messaging. The limited research about the use of social media and
emerging communication technologies in community colleges was also explored.

23

Chapter II
Literature Review
The Internet, social media, mobile devices like cell phones, and Internet-enabled tablets
are changing the way we communicate and find information. Although the Internet, Wikipedia,
and Google may be perceived as disruptive technologies that threaten to supplant academic
libraries, Gibbons (2007) maintained that academic libraries could adapt and change to remain
relevant to current students by integrating new technologies into the academic repertoire. In an
era of rapidly changing technology with increased automation, many academic libraries are
adopting interactive Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies in an effort to extend library
services to students. Library 2.0, as defined by Casey and Savastinuk (2007), is a model that
acknowledges the need for constant and purposeful change to provide an interactive and
empowering experience for library users while expanding the reach of libraries to new and
potential library users. The concept of Library/Web 2.0 was used as a framework to inform this
study.
In an attempt to engage students, some academic libraries are experimenting with
Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies like social media to let students know about
library events and resources (Aharony, 2012; Jacobson, 2011; Mahmood & Richardson, 2011;
Xu, Fenfei, & Heting, 2009), and some studies have revealed that Library/Web 2.0 technologies
like Instant Messaging (IM), chat reference, and text messaging are being utilized to answer
academic questions and provide reference services to students (Aharony, 2012; Harinarayana &
Vasantha Raju, 2010; Rod-Welch, 2012; Xu et. al, 2009). Additionally, in a qualitative study of
social media and academic libraries in Illinois, Phillips (2011) found that besides providing
information about the library, social media can be used to build community and foster
relationships that support the educational experience of students.
24

Most of the existing research studies about Library/Web 2.0 and social media have
focused on large four-year universities. Many community college students are also active users
of social media, texting, and other forms of electronic communication, (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom,
2012), so Library/Web 2.0 technologies may provide useful methods to reach community college
students. However, we do not really know if these forms of technology-assisted communication
are actually an effective method for librarians to interact with community college students, since
very few studies of community college libraries and social media have been conducted. Booth
(2011) surveyed California community college students to measure student technology
ownership and receptiveness to Library/Web 2.0 technologies; based on the survey results, she
recommended that California community college pursue social media since survey data indicated
a student interest in library services delivered through social media.
Although preliminary research about large four year university libraries and social media
exists, a review of the literature revealed very little information about social media and emerging
forms of communication technology in California community college libraries. A quick search
in Facebook revealed that some California community college libraries have active social media
accounts; however, it was largely unknown how these Library/Web 2.0 communication
platforms are being used in community college libraries. Research about community college
librarian perceptions about the usefulness of Library/Web 2.0 technologies with students is
virtually non-existent. The study included analysis of data from California community college
library websites and social media accounts to describe how California community colleges use
social media and emerging forms of communication technology to interact with students.
Additionally, this study surveyed community college librarians about the efficacy of using social
media and emerging forms of communication technology with community college students.

25

The specific research questions that were addressed in this study are:
1. Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California community college (CCC) libraries
using?
2. How are social media and emerging communication technologies being used by California
community college libraries to communicate with students, and to what extent are students
responding as measured by the frequency of student responses.
3. What are California community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using
social media and emerging communication technologies with community college students?
Several databases were searched to locate relevant peer-reviewed research. To cast a
broad net, education databases like ERIC and Education Fulltext were examined, as well as
library specific databases like EBSCO’s Library Information Science Technology Abstracts
(LISTA). Large cross-disciplinary academic databases like EBSCO’s Academic Search, Science
Direct, Emerald, Social Science Abstracts, Omnifile Fulltext, and JSTOR were also searched for
relevant research. WorldCat, the world’s largest union catalog of books, was used to locate
pertinent recent library science monographs. PROQUEST provided access to relevant
dissertations. Descriptors that were used to locate relevant research were: academic libraries or
community college libraries AND social networking, social networks, Facebook, Library 2.0,
computer network resources, reference, content analysis, websites, librarians, and college
student’s attitudes. The reference lists of peer-reviewed articles and related dissertations
provided additional sources for research articles. Although some related research was located
pertaining to international universities, this literature review is primarily focused on research that
was conducted with North American colleges and universities. Particular attention was paid to
influential research that was repeatedly cited by other library science researchers. Due to the

26

topical and evolving nature of this research topic, the research studies included in this review
were published within the last 10 years.
The first theme that will be discussed in this literature review is the evolving relationship
between libraries and technology. In a review of recent research studies on academic libraries
and emerging communication technologies, the concept of digital natives (Prensky, 2001)
emerged, so the next theme of this literature review will be research about the current cohort of
college students, who have been called digital natives, and technology. The subsequent theme is
narrowed to research on college students and academic libraries, and more specifically, research
related to student receptiveness to a library presence in the social networking realm. Next,
existing research about librarian perceptions on the use of social media and Library/Web 2.0
applications in academic libraries will be reviewed. Another theme that will be explored in this
literature review is existing quantitative and qualitative research of academic library usage of
social media and emerging communication technologies.
Libraries and Technology
Although libraries are usually viewed as conservative institutions that organize, archive,
and conserve knowledge, libraries have also been consistent early adopters of new technologies.
In a literature review of the history of libraries and technology, Mash (2010) noted that the first
library technology in 3rd century Alexandria may have been as simple as alphabetization, but
library technology progressed to include now forgotten technologies like the 16th-century
mechanized French book wheel that let readers exchange books by stepping on a pedal, the 19thcentury English Cotgreave Indicator, which was a book issuing system, and the Rudolph
Continuous Indexer, an 1893 mechanical card catalog (Stevens, 1990). Although it may seem
quaint today, in 1877 the director of Harvard University library discussed the revolutionary

27

nature of using telephones in libraries; by 1912 libraries were marveling at the possibilities and
benefits of the electrical age (Mash, 2010).
Throughout the last century, libraries have been early adopters of what were then
revolutionary technologies, including typewriters, automated punch-cards, stereographs, teletype,
Ultrafax, Videodiscs, and CD-ROMs. Mash (2010) noted that there were fewer than 25
computers in American universities in 1955, and university libraries were some of the earliest
adopters of computer technology (p. 11). Within recent years, library collections have been
automated, digitized, networked, and made freely available on the Internet. In reviewing the
literature and history of libraries, Mash concluded that “libraries have been progressive
implementers of technology for centuries” and that “libraries and technology have a long history
of symbiosis” (Mash, p. 23). The progression of library technology includes what O’Reilly
(2005) dubbed Web 2.0, interactive collaborative applications available through the Internet.
With Library 2.0, the library version of Web 2.0, libraries are continuing to keep current with
evolving technologies in an effort to reach library users.
This study is rooted in the theory of Library 2.0, which was originally introduced by
Michael Casey in 2005 to explain the participatory and changing nature of library services.
Library 2.0 is part of a larger Web 2.0 movement (O’Reilly, 2005) which involves the Internet as
a platform for participatory collective intelligence in “perpetual beta” form, which is a reference
to the practice of releasing unfinished software programming to the public so that users can
participate in the development and test for glitches and errors. Examples of interactive Web 2.0
communication technologies are blogs, wikis, streaming media, instant messaging, and social
networking. Modeled after Internet 2.0, Casey and Savastinuk (2007) defined Library 2.0 as a
“model for constant and purposeful change” that “empowers users through participatory user-

28

driven services” (p. 5). As envisioned by Casey and Savastinuk, the main goal of Library 2.0 is
to improve library services to meet the ever changing needs of library users. Since Library 2.0 is
seen as participatory, library users have the opportunity to provide active input.
There has been some discussion about the definition of the term Library 2.0. Maness
(2006), the head of Gamnill library at the University of Colorado, conducted research on the
correlation between electronic resources and the library as a physical place, refined the theory of
Library 2.0 to include the following elements: it is user-centered, multi-media, socially rich, and
communally innovative. Huwe (2007), the library director at UC Berkeley Institute for Research
on Labor and Employment and a frequent columnist at Computers in Libraries, concluded that
Library 2.0 is a moving target because of rapidly changing technology, but it is primarily about
people communicating. In California community colleges, some librarians are using Library 2.0
technologies as a method of communication, outreach, and education to reach current students,
who have been defined by Prensky (2001) as digital natives.
College Students as Digital Natives
One popular source of information read by millions of online readers about the current
college students is the Beloit Mindset List, which was first published in 1998 to describe the
cultural events that frame the experiences of entering college freshmen to college professors.
Each year the list is updated to explain the cultural lens of the newest freshmen students.
According to the Beloit College’s Mindset List, the current generation of entering college
students were “born into cyberspace and they have therefore measured their output in the
fundamental particles of life: bits, bytes, and bauds” (Beloit College, 2012; para. 1).
Consequently, most undergraduate college students are familiar with instant access to all things

29

digital; they have “emerged as a post-email generation for whom the digital world is routine and
technology is just too slow” (Beloit College, 2012, para. 1).
The current cohort of students is often referred to as digital natives, a phrase coined by
Prensky (2001) to describe students who have grown up with computers, video games, cell
phones, and the Internet. Prensky (2001) maintained that the constant exposure to digital content
and the interactive nature of videogames and the Internet has caused structural changes in the
brains of digital natives, who “think and process information fundamentally differently than their
predecessors” (p. 1). Teachers, librarians, and college professors who are tasked with teaching
digital natives are often digital immigrants who still view technology as though it were a novelty
(Prensky, 2001). Consistent with Prensky’s notion of digital immigrants, survey research
conducted in Great Britain with academic librarians and researchers from 12 academic
institutions revealed that when faced with new technologies, some digital immigrant librarians
feel “paralyzed by the enormity of the task, and already reeling from the impact of the first
digital transition… the introduction of e-journal and e-books” (Nicholas, Watkinson, Rowlands
& Jubb, 2011). College students, in contrast, operate in a techno-centric information culture
where they are constantly connected to the Internet and a network of friends through cell phones,
tablets, and other mobile devices. According to Prensky, “digital immigrant instructors, who
speak an outdated language (that of the pre-digital age), are struggling to teach a population that
speaks an entirely new language” (p. 2).
The generational divide between digital native students and digital immigrant educators
in California community colleges is significant. Approximately 96% of tenure-track academic
faculty is above the age of 35, and the median instructor age is 51-55 (California Community
Colleges Chancellors Office, 2012). Based on Prensky’s (2001) definition, academic faculty

30

librarians are digital immigrants who speak an unintelligibly accented academic language which
may seem foreign to digital natives who are accustomed to the “instantaneity of hypertext,
downloaded music, phones in their pockets, a library on their laptops, beamed messages and
instant messaging” (p. 3).
Prensky's theory of a digital generation is provocative and descriptive of what many
educators observe; however, some, such as Siva Vaidhyanathan, cultural theorist and author of
The Googlization of Everything, disagree with Prensky’s theory of a digital generation.
Vaidhyanathan maintained that the presumed technological abilities of the millennial generation
may have more do to with knowledge, access, and socio-economic status than belonging to a
certain generation (Vaidhyanathan, 2008). Contrary to popular belief, Vaidhyanathan wrote that
his students actually prefer print to electronic text and reading pdf files online. Vaidhyanathan
contended that the “born digital” theory assumes a level playing field and ignores differences in
social, cultural, and financial privilege. This may be especially true for community college
students, who often lack the financial resources to buy the latest technology and the social capital
to troubleshoot the inevitable problems that arise with technology. In the following section,
survey results about college student technology device ownership and student attitudes towards
educational technology will be reviewed.
When planning how to use social media and emerging forms of communication
technology, it is important to consider student access and preferences regarding technology and
education. EDUCAUSE, a nonprofit association whose mission is to advance higher education
through the use of information technology, has been gathering data about the ownership and use
of technology by undergraduate students since 2004 with the goal of assessing the evolving
situation with college students and technology. The most recent EDUCAUSE Center for

31

Applied Research (ECAR) Study of Undergraduate Students and Information Technology, 2012,
tracks the evolving attitudes and perceptions of undergraduate students pertaining to the use of
technology to help students attain their academic goals (Dahlstrom, 2012). Since ECAR has
been gathering data for nine years on a similar population of students, it has been able to make
longitudinal comparisons of the changing perceptions and experiences of students in relation to
information technology and education. The interpretation of data obtained by EDUCAUSE’s
ECAR studies provides important information about use and ownership of technology by college
students. The 2012 EDUCAUSE study was based on data from a stratified random sample of
10,000 students from 184 colleges and universities in the United States. The study sample was
designed to mirror the demographic profile of college students in the United States. Significant
themes which emerged in the EDUCAUSE study, such as student technology device ownership,
student’s attitudes about educational technology, technology and feeling connected, and ethnicity
and Internet access will be discussed in the following subsections.
Technology device ownership. The 2012 EDUCAUSE study documented that there has
been a shift away from desktop computers to mobile technology. Over 86% of the 10,000
students in the survey reported owning and using laptops. For California community college
students, laptop ownership is somewhat lower at 75% (Booth, 2011), but the overwhelming
majority of the students in community colleges own laptops. About 18% of college students
report owning a tablet device (iPad or Android) and 67% of the students who owned a tablet
reported using the device for academic purposes (Dahlstrom, 2012). Another growing trend is
ownership of Internet-capable cell phones, which increased from 55% in 2011 to 62% in 2012.
Of those students who own an Internet-enabled cell phone, also called smartphones, 67%
reported using their smartphones for academic purposes which is nearly double the percentage of

32

students (37%) who reported using a smartphone for academic purposes in 2011 (Dahlstrom,
2012, p. 14). Based on longitudinal data gathered by EDUCAUSE, the trend among college
students is towards owning and using smaller portable devices with mobile Internet-enabled
technology.
The ECAR student technology ownership and preferences findings are consistent with
those of Booth (2011) and Stanley (2010) who surveyed community college students in
California and Arizona. Booth and Stanley both found that the majority of the students owned
cellular phones and laptops, and 56% of the students in the California community college survey
owned an Internet-enabled mobile phone or handheld device like an iPad. Students with mobile
devices stated that they frequently or very frequently used the device to text, take and post
pictures, search the Internet, read and send email, and interact with social media sites. Not
surprisingly, the most frequently used communication technology was text-messaging, which
was used by the vast majority of college students several times a day (Booth, 2011; Stanley,
2010). Of particular importance to libraries, 77% of the students in the California community
college survey reported using their mobile devices for research (Booth, p. 30). Student
preferences and the technological shift towards smaller Internet enabled portable devices have
implications for the design and delivery of academic library services to community college
students.
Student’s attitudes about educational technology. Most college students agree that
technology enhances learning. In the national EDUCAUSE study, 70% of the students reported
learning best in a blended environment, which was defined as including online components and
face-to face instruction; 64% of the students in the study agreed that “technology elevates the
level of teaching” (Dahlstrom, 2012, p. 9). Fully 75% of the students believed that technology

33

helped them achieve educational outcomes and 63% agreed technology prepared them for the
workforce (Dahlstrom, p. 19). In the California Community College Student Library and
Technology Engagement survey, Booth (2011) found that students generally held positive views
about technology. Over 77% of the students agreed that technology helped them to be more
productive, and 84% stated that technology helped them to learn (Booth, 2011, p. 31).
For most college students, the most widely used institutionally supported IT resources
were course management software like Blackboard, and the library website. Perhaps
surprisingly, 90% of the students reported that the library website was important to them
(Dahlstrom, 2012, p. 20). Additional studies also indicate the importance and student preference
for an embedded library presence in course management software like Moodle or Blackboard
(Booth, 2009; Burhanna, Seeholzer, & Salem, 2009; Ismail, 2010). Another unexpected finding
was that students felt they needed training to use existing technologies more effectively (Baggett
& Williams, 2012; Dahlstrom, 2012). Clearly, students have positive attitudes toward
technology, and they are interested in library services delivered through technology, such as
library links embedded in Blackboard.
Technology and feeling connected. For most college students, technology is a
significant communication tool that fosters a sense of connection to the university and the wider
world. A majority of college students (67%) in a large-scale EDUCAUSE survey reported that
technology “helps them feel connected” to the educational institution “regardless of time or
space” (Dahlstrom, 2012, p. 10). Email, listservs, electronic discussion boards, instant
messaging, text messaging, and social networking are all important tools which students use to
communicate with professors and other students (Dahlstrom, 2012; Jones, Madden, & Clarke,
2012). The student preference for technology has increased in recent years; in the original 2004

34

EDUCAUSE survey, which queried 4,363 undergraduate students from 13 colleges in five states,
students reported only a moderate preference for technology (Kvavik, 2005, p. 6). As
technology has become more ubiquitous, students have become more comfortable using
technology to communicate (Dahlstrom, 2012; Smith, 2012).
Since technology helps students to feel connected to the university (Dahlstrom, 2012;
Jones, Madden, & Clarke, 2012), it is important for academic libraries to explore Library/Web
2.0 communication technologies like instant messaging, text messaging, and social networking.
In library literature, Gall (2010) stressed the importance of libraries building relationships with
students through technology, and Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) suggested that social
networking might become an avenue to build relationships with students. Some evidence of
using social media being to build relationships and connections between students and academic
libraries was found in a qualitative study of 17 academic libraries in Illinois (Phillips, 2011).
Preliminary research has shown that college students are heavy technology users who are willing
to communicate with the library through social media and other forms of communication
technology (Sachs, Eckel, & Langan, 2011).
Ethnicity and Internet access. One statistically significant finding of the 2012
EDUCAUSE study was that non-White students were more likely to use their smart phones for
academic purposes than were White students. According to data gathered by the Pew Research
Center’s Internet and American Life Project, Blacks (64%) and Hispanics (63%) were much
more likely to use their cell phones as an Internet portal than were Whites (52%), and twice as
many Blacks as Whites reported accessing the Internet predominantly through a cell phone
(Smith, 2012) presumably because of the added cost of home access through an Internet Service
Provider. Most of the students who attend California community colleges fall within this

35

demographic. In 2012-2013, only 30.2% of California community college students self-identified
as White (California Community Colleges Chancellors Office, 2013). Additionally, research
conducted by the UCLA Civil Rights Project revealed that 75% of Latino high school students
and 66% of African American students in California who attended college started at a California
community college (Rhoades, 2012, p. 7). Since many of the non-White students at California
community colleges rely on small portable devices as their only Internet access point, this is an
important consideration when planning digital library services.
Prensky’s theory of digital natives assumes that the current generation of students was
“born digital” and that they have a strong preference for technology. Longitudinal research by
EDUCAUSE revealed a high degree of technology ownership among college students, and that
students reported technology elevated learning and made them feel more connected to
instructors. There is also a shift towards smaller portable devices, like smartphones, which for
some students may be the predominant portal to the Internet. In the next section, studies that
specifically address students' perceptions about academic libraries and technology will be
reviewed, starting first with a national study and then narrowing to studies in local contexts.
College Students and Academic Libraries
Most millennial students are frequent users of technology-assisted communication media
like social media and text messaging. In this section, the results of several library technology
studies that queried students about libraries and technology will be explored. The Ohio study
(Booth, 2009) will be discussed, since it is a seminal study that has been replicated in other local
college contexts. Most of these studies demonstrated heavy student usage of social media and
text messaging. Additionally, the studies documented student receptiveness to receiving
assistance and information from the library using these technologies. Although most of the

36

studies confirmed a positive student interest in Library/Web 2.0 technologies, some of the results
have been mixed. In particular, students still value the library as a physical place and they
appreciate receiving in-person assistance with research.
In the following sub-sections, student perceptions of the library, and student interest in
Library/Web 2.0 technologies as well as potential uses of Library/Web 2.0 technologies, will be
reviewed. Additional themes that will be covered in the next sections are the continued
importance of the library as a physical place and the growing importance of mobile handheld
technologies.
Student perceptions of the library. In the era of the Internet, the physical library is still
very important to students. In a national survey of undergraduate and graduate college students
(N = 396), 94% of college students reported using the college library; 14% reported daily use,
while 21% indicated weekly use, and 38 % reported using the library monthly to several times a
year (De Rosa, Cantrel, Hawk, & Wilson, 2006). For California community college students, the
number of students who report using the library is somewhat lower at 85% (N = 3,168) (Booth,
2011), but 85% is still a very high proportion of students. Perhaps surprisingly, 44% of college
students stated that their library usage increased from 2003 to 2006 (De Rosa et al., 2006, p. 22).
Although academic libraries are heavily invested in digital resources and e-books, many college
students still associate the library predominantly with print resources and as a physical place to
study or connect with peers (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2011; De Rosa et al., 2006;
Stanley, 2010).
Students may be frequent users of the library as a physical space, but they may not view
the library or librarians as their primary source of information. When students were asked in a
2006 survey (N = 396) where they were most likely to find information, librarians were cited as a

37

resource by only 33% of the students (De Rosa et al., 2006). Students were more likely to get
information from friends (67%), websites (61%), or teachers (50%), than from the library
website (36%) (De Rosa et al., 2006, p. 38). Perhaps more troubling to academic librarians,
although 92% of the college respondents had a favorable impression of the library (De Rosa et
al., 2006, p.42), when asked where they were most likely to look for information, 80% of the
students reported it would probably be a search engine. Only 17% of the students reported that
the library (online or the physical building) would be their first choice for information (De Rosa
et al., 2006, p. 44). This conclusion is consistent with Foster and Gibbons (2007) and Jones et
al., (2012) who also found that the majority of college students were more likely to look for
information on the Internet instead of in the library.
Although library electronic resources such as electronic journals, library websites,
databases, and online question services were all viewed favorably as providing worthwhile
information by college students, Google received the highest rating as a source for worthwhile
information (De Rosa et al., 2006, p. 45). The struggle for academic librarians is how to
communicate to students that libraries and librarians have resources and expertise, beyond
Google and Wikipedia, which would greatly benefit the students in their academic studies.
Do students really want libraries to use Library/Web 2.0 and social media? Some
colleges and universities have conducted research studies focused on libraries and technology
within their specific student population to determine students' attitudes about technology and
library participation in social media. This is an important distinction, since some research is
beginning to confirm what may seem like an intuitive conclusion, that the assessments of
emerging communication technologies may produce different results based on the local setting

38

(Naylor, Stoffel, &Van Der Laan, 2008). Therefore, studying the local population may be
prudent when considering emerging technologies and library services.
In the majority of local case studies that have been conducted to determine the usefulness
of social networking with their student populations, most students have been agreeable to a
library presence in social media sites. Students are interested in a library presence embedded in
course management software like Moodle and Blackboard, and they are willing to contact the
library through text-messaging, social media, and chat. This subsection will review the findings
about student receptiveness to Library/Web 2.0 technologies.
Booth (2009) conducted an oft-replicated seminal study at Ohio State University which
was sponsored by the Association of College & Research Libraries, a division of the American
Library Association, to measure student responsiveness to Library/Web 2.0 technologies.
Booth’s (2009) study was designed as an environmental scan to measure Ohio University student
use and attitudes toward libraries, technology, and communication technology. Two web-based
surveys were sent to students in the 2008 spring and winter quarters. According to Booth, the
surveys generated a strong response rate (N1 = 3,648; N2 = 1,651) which represented about 25%
of the total 21,000 student population. The study was designed to measure student receptivity to
library mobile internet applications, social networking sites, Skype reference, browser
customization, learning management systems, blogs, wikis, instant messaging, and podcasts
(Booth, 2009).
The results of Booth's study suggest that students are highly receptive to Library/Web 2.0
technologies. When asked specifically whether they would ask for help from the library within
Facebook, 38% of the students answered positively, and 32% would potentially use the service
(Booth, 2009, p. 82). Another interesting finding was that 44% of the students who used text

39

messaging were interested in library text-messaging services. The service that received the most
enthusiastic response from students was the inclusion of a library presence in Blackboard; 65%
of students reported that a link to the online library catalog would be helpful. Additionally, 62%
of the students expressed an interest in having access to library articles and databases within
Blackboard. Less popular, but still significant, 40% of the undergraduate students responded
favorably to an Ask a Librarian service (chat or instant messaging) within Blackboard (Booth,
2009, p.84). The results from the Ohio University study revealed a moderately strong student
interest in Library/Web 2.0 technologies like text reference and social networking, but the
strongest student preference was for library services, embedded within course management
software like Blackboard.
Further evidence of student receptiveness to Library/Web 2.0 technologies can be found
in studies that replicated Booth’s study by administering Booth's survey at Austin Community
College (Collier & Whatley, 2010), and at a large multi-campus southwestern community
college (Stanley, 2010). Nearly every student in these studies reported owning a cell phone and
approximately 66% (N = 257) of the respondents owned phones with Internet access. Facebook
and texting were rated as the online and mobile activities most frequently used by students, with
over 76% of the students reporting texting as a daily occurrence (Collier & Whatley, 2010). In
Stanley’s (2010) study, 89.5% of the participants reported that text messaging was the
communication technology they used most frequently, and 65.5% of the students agreed they
sent or received text messages several times a day (Stanley, 2010, p. 74). Instant messaging was
also used by more than half of the students. The most popular social networking site was
Facebook, which nearly half of the students reported "using all the time" (Stanley, 2010, p. 77).
After Facebook, the next highest online activity was watching YouTube videos and reading wiki

40

articles (Collier & Whatley, 2010). Stanley (2010) concluded in her findings that the majority of
students would be interested in virtual chat reference and a library-initiated online collaboration
space (Stanley, 2010, p. 95).
In another study which is often cited in library literature, Connell (2009) surveyed college
freshmen at Valparaiso University in Indiana to determine if college freshmen would welcome a
library presence in the social networking realm. Based on the survey results, with an impressive
return rate of 50.8% of the freshmen population (N = 366), Connell (2009) found that the
majority of the students were favorable (74.9%) to the library entering Facebook and other social
networking sites. Connell concluded that libraries should have social networking accounts, since
many students were open to interacting with the library in the social networking realm (Connell,
2009, p. 34).
Similar results were achieved in a study of student interest in academic libraries and
MySpace, Facebook, Instant Messaging (IM) and Second Life at two colleges, the University of
Northern Colorado, and Johnson and Wales University, which is located in Denver (Epperson &
Leffler, 2009). Survey results revealed that Facebook was used by 83% of the student
respondents (N = 65), and MySpace and IM were used by 58% and 34% of the respondents
respectively (Epperson & Leffler, 2009, p. 369). The researchers reported that 70% of the
students would “friend” the library in Facebook, which was consistent with Connell's (2009)
findings.
The research which is perhaps most significant to this study was the California
Community College Student Library Engagement Survey which was conducted by Booth (2011)
at the request of the California Community College Council of Chief Librarians. Booth surveyed
students at five community colleges from different regions within California, including Mission

41

College in Santa Clara, Mendocino College, Santa Barbara City College, East Los Angeles
Community College and Merced College in the Central Valley. The students from these five
campuses were considered representative of the socio-economic/cultural and
urban/suburban/rural contexts of public community colleges throughout California (Booth, 2011,
p. 2).
The survey yielded a total of 3,168 responses; based on the composite full time
enrollment (FTE) of the five campuses (N = 25,625), the survey had a 12.3% rate of return
(Booth, 2011, p. 3). Comparable to 2010 statewide enrollment data, 25% of the respondents
were 19 years old or younger, 38% were between 20 and 24 years of age, 14% were 25 through
29, 8% were 30 to 34, and the remaining 15% were over the age of 36 (Booth, 2011, p. 12).
Booth reported that the ethnic representation did not necessarily mirror California state
community college demographics, since some colleges skewed the overall percentages. For
example, 45% of the respondents self-identified as Hispanic, reflective of the high response rate
from East Los Angeles and Merced; the statewide Hispanic enrollment was closer to 34% in
2010. Asian students represented 19% of the respondent total while the statewide enrollment
totals for Asian students is 11%. Strong ethnic variability was evident at various campuses. At
Santa Barbara City College and Mendocino College 60% of the students self-identified as White;
at East Los Angeles College only 4% of the students self-identified as White (Booth, p. 13). The
majority of the respondents (69%) were full-time students who were completing coursework
towards transfer to a four-year institution (68%) or to complete an Associate degree (42%)
(Booth, 2011, p. 14). Although the survey sample was not an exact match with statewide
enrollment demographics, the study, which was designed as a pilot for a larger statewide study,

42

provided very useful data about California community college student attitudes and preferences
regarding libraries and technology.
Consistent with four-year college students (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2009;
Collier & Whatley, 2010; Dahlstrom, 2012; De Rosa et al., 2006) and community college
students outside of California (Collier & Whatley, 2010; Stanley, 2010), the computing and
communication media most frequently used by California community college students was textmessaging and social media (Booth, 2011). The most popular sites were Facebook, which 44%
of the students reported using all of the time; and YouTube, which 31% said they used all of the
time (Booth, 2011, p. 28). Least popular were editing a wiki and visiting a virtual world, such as
Second Life, which 26% of the students had never heard of (Booth, 2011, p. 28). Twitter was
well known by students (68%), but not widely used. Applications with the highest former usage
were MySpace (51%) and Twitter (11%) (Booth, 2011, p. 28). In almost all academic library
studies with college students, Facebook and YouTube are by far the most popular social
networking sites (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2009; Stanley, 2010). If community college
libraries want to reach students through social media, Facebook and YouTube are the sites where
they are most likely to encounter their students.
The final area addressed by the Booth’s (2011) survey was student willingness to engage
with social and mobile library technologies. When asked whether they would "like" the library
on Facebook, 9% of the students responded that they already had. Another 33% answered that
they would subscribe to a library Facebook while 25% answered with "maybe" (Booth, 2011, p.
34). The percentage of students who were interested in library Facebook in California
community colleges was lower (33% versus 38% ) than Booth's (2009) Ohio State University
study, but still high enough to be worth pursuing (Booth, 2011). Approximately 5% of the

43

students reported that they already watch library videos on YouTube; 27% answered "yes" to a
library presence on YouTube, and another 25% responded that they might watch library videos
on YouTube.
All of the other social networking sites received very low percentages of student
willingness to engage with the library. The low percentages parallel low student usage of
Foursquare, LinkedIn, Flickr, and Yelp. After Facebook and YouTube, only Twitter had more
than 10% of the students with a favorable response rate (Booth, 2011, p. 34).
Although most research demonstrated that students are interested in libraries using social
networking software and Library/Web 2.0 technologies, social networking sites are probably not
the best medium for students to receive library reference assistance, especially for students who
are concerned with privacy. For example in a survey of the entire undergraduate student
population of 2,297 at Marywood University in Scranton, Pennsylvania students, Ismail (2010)
found that when students sought librarian assistance, they preferred email reference to IM, chat,
or Facebook. Contrary to the researcher's assumptions, the students in her sample did not prefer
to seek help through chat or social networking platforms. Instead, students preferred help though
more traditional channels: in person or through email. Therefore, although some studies have
demonstrated positive student attitudes to library social media, in other studies, less than half of
the students would seek academic help through social media (Connell, 2009; Epperson &
Leffler, 2009).
Findings of a study Kent State University, which included 26 undergraduate students in
four focus group sessions, also did not necessarily support a library presence in social media
(Burhanna, Seeholzer, & Salem, 2009). The researchers concluded that although their students
were frequent users of social networking and instant messaging, they were less familiar with

44

many of the other Web 2.0 utilities. The students in the study were concerned with privacy in
social networking sites, and they expressed a preference for using closed systems like instant
messaging or Blackboard to ask library questions. Participants in the focus group at Kent State
expressed that they currently did not use Facebook for educational purposes. Instead, the
students articulated a preference for “bringing Web 2.0 technologies into the library
environment, rather than extending the library into existing Web 2.0 sites” (Burhanna et al.,
2009, p. 531).
Student interest in Library/Web 2.0 technologies had slight variations based on local
contexts, but in most studies, the majority of students were interested in a library presence
inserted in course management software like Blackboard or Moodle. Chat reference and text
reference were less popular, but enough students expressed an interest to warrant use and further
exploration. The majority of the students were also receptive to a library presence in social
media sites like Facebook and YouTube. Although upper division students were more interested
in Library/Web 2.0 technologies than lower division students (Booth, 2009; Stanley, 2010), there
was enough interest with younger college students to warrant further exploration with
undergraduate and community college students who are also heavy users of technology and
social media (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom, 2012). According to Booth (2011), social media is one of
the most inexpensive and influential technologies that libraries can use to reach students.
Student suggestions about potential uses for social media in academic libraries.
Results from studies in academic libraries indicate positive student interest in library social
media and Library/Web 2.0 technologies (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2009; Collier &
Whatley, 2010; Connell, 2009; Epperson & Leffler, 2009; Sachs, Eckel, & Langan, 2011). For
example at Western Michigan University, 90% of the student respondents (N = 123) who had

45

social media accounts agreed that Facebook was a good method for libraries to “stay in touch”
with students (Sachs et al., 2011, p. 41). Some of the potential uses for social media included
using Facebook as a method to advertise library hours, events, and services as well as a way to
direct students to library educational videos and other library information (Baggett & Williams,
2012; Sachs et al., 2011).
Besides posting information about library events, social software like IM and Facebook
could be used to help students who seek assistance with databases, research topics, or the
physical location of items in the library (Epperson & Leffler, 2009; Sachs et al., 2011). Some
innovative student suggestions included creating links on Facebook to recorded mini-lessons or
questions and answer discussions on library or research topics (Baggett & Williams, 2012).
Students generally agree that social media is an effective method for libraries to disseminate
information or share links to educational videos about the library, but students also underscore
the importance of frequent updates to library social media to keep students engaged (Baggett &
Williams, 2012).
In California community colleges, Booth (2011) reported that students indicated that
Facebook and YouTube are the dominant social media/multi-media platforms, students would be
interested in information, resources, and library news offered through these mediums. Besides
practical and traditional library functions that have been made operational for mobile devices,
students were interested in receiving updates and information about the library through social
media.
Cell phones and academic libraries. It is not surprising to anyone who has contact with
teenagers and young adult students that young adults, age 18 to 29, are the heaviest users of
wireless technologies and social media methods of communication (Lenhart et al., 2010). The

46

widespread adoption of cell phones by students and the affinity for mobile technologies provides
new opportunities for communication and dissemination of library services to college students.
According to research conducted by Collier and Whatley (2010), students with Internet-enabled
phones indicated that they would like to use text messaging as a method to renew books and
receive overdue notices, a finding which was consistent with Cassidy, Britsch, Griffin,
Manolovitz, Shen and Turney (2011). Many studies have demonstrated that students are
interested in viewing basic library information on their mobile phones, and the majority of
students would use their cell phone to look for a book or read an article from a library database
(Cassidy et al., 2011; Collier & Whatley, 2010; Seeholzer & Salem, 2011). According to Collier
and Whatley (2010), more than half of the respondents would access a library research guide or
text a librarian for help. Clearly, the use of mobile devices, whose computing power continues
to increase, is a growing trend among college students, and students are interested in library
services on their mobile phones.
In the California Community College Student Library Engagement Survey results, Booth
(2011) reported that the positive response to mobile library services far exceeded what was
anticipated. Students were queried across eleven response categories for possible mobile
technologies such as searching the library catalog, renewing books online, receiving renewal or
overdue notices, searching library databases, asking a librarian for help via chat, text messaging,
or finding library information like hours and telephone numbers. According to statistics gathered
by Booth (2011), 44% of students with Internet-enabled mobile devices would be "very likely"
to use mobile library services and another 29% indicated that they were "fairly likely" to use
these services (Booth, 2011, p. 36). The most popular mobile services were functional tasks like
finding basic library information (hours, location, and contact information), checking library

47

accounts, and renewing books. However, 80% of the students also reported that they were “very
likely” or “fairly likely” to search for articles in library databases on a mobile device, and 62%
were likely to ask a librarian for help via chat or text-messaging (Booth, 2011, p. 36). Since
community college students use their mobile phones as Internet portals to locate and read
information, community college libraries need to be mindful of this growing trend as they plan
library services to students.
The library as a physical place. Although current college students have been dubbed
the digital generation, they also value the library as a physical place with print resources (Baggett
& Williams, 2012; Booth, 2009, 2011; Ismail, 2010). In focus group research at Shenandoah
University, students stated that they preferred reading longer documents in print (Baggett &
Williams, 2012). Students liked the tactile feel of print, and they liked being able to physically
highlight text (Baggett & Williams, 2012) which was consistent with Vaidhyanathan’s (2008)
observations with his student population.
Personal communication was also reported as being very important to students (Baggett
& Williams, 2012; Ismail, 2010; Stanley, 2010). Students wanted the personal connection of
receiving in-person assistance from a librarian. In cases where students were not physically able
to visit the library, they were agreeable to using email, online chat, or video chat to communicate
with a librarian (Baggett & Williams, 2012).
In the Ohio University study, Booth (2009) concluded through correlational analysis that
although younger students may be heavier users of technology for personal use, undergraduate
students are much more likely to use the library as a physical space for study and socialization,
whereas graduate students predominantly used library technology for research (Booth, 2009, p.
99). In the California community college student survey, Booth (2011) found that students use

48

the library primarily as a physical place to study and secondarily as a place to conduct research.
Consistent with Booth (2009) and Ismail (2010), Collier and Whatley (2010) also noted that the
students valued the library “as a physical quiet place to work/study” and consequently, 63% of
the students reported physically visiting the library 2-3 times a week (Collier & Whatley, 2010,
p. 5). In resource-poor communities, the physical library, with access to books, computers, free
Wi-Fi, and quiet study spaces, is very important to students. In summary, students value the
library as a physical space and they generally prefer in-person assistance, but they are agreeable
to receiving information and updates from the library through Facebook and other forms of
electronic communication (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2011).
Summary of Student Responsiveness
A common theme in the research on student receptiveness to Library/Web 2.0 was the
continued importance to undergraduate students of the physical library as a quiet place to study
and socialize (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2011; Collier & Whatley, 2010; De Rosa et al.,
2006; Stanley, 2010). The research also indicated that most students preferred in-person
assistance from a librarian (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Ismail, 2010; Stanley, 2010), but that
when they could not visit physically visit the library, then email, chat, social media, or texting
were viable alternatives (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2011; Collier & Whatley 2010;
Stanley, 2010). Based on interpretation of student responses, most of the researchers
recommended that academic libraries pursue frequently-used social media like Facebook and
YouTube videos (Baggett & Williams, 2012; Booth, 2009, 2011; Collier & Whatley, 2010;
Ismail, 2010; Sachs et al., 2011; Stanley, 2010). An emerging trend is the importance of offering
mobile library services which could include text services on mobile devices like Internet-enabled
cell phones and tablets (Booth, 2011; Collier & Whatley, 2010; Dahlstrom, 2012). Based on the

49

findings in Booth’s (2011) study, which agreed with the findings of most of the other studies in
this section, community college libraries should be utilizing mobile library services and
frequently-used social media like Facebook and YouTube.
Librarian Perceptions of Social Media and Emerging Communication Technologies
The previous section of this literature review focused on student receptiveness to
Library/Web 2.0 technologies and social media. This section of the literature review will
examine librarian perceptions about the usefulness of social networking software and
Library/Web 2.0 technologies. Since very little research has been conducted with community
college librarians, the focus of this section is primarily on librarians at four-year colleges and
universities.
Part of the difficulty for academic librarians is the tension between traditional library
services and the siren call of shiny new technologies. Stephens (2004), an influential library
science author and professor at San Jose State University, termed the desire to adopt new
technologies as “technolust,” which he described as “an irrational love for new technology
combined with unrealistic expectations for the solutions it brings” (Stephens, 2004, p. 36).
Librarians often struggle with learning new library technologies while continuing to maintain
existing technologies which are equally time intensive. Stephens called this “technostress” as
“new tools and websites come at us daily easily creating a feeling of unease and anxiety about
how much technology we can take on” (Stephens, 2008, p. 314). This tension between existing
technologies and emerging technologies has prompted considerable dialogue in academic library
circles.
The first discussions of social media and academic libraries occurred in online blogs and
print publications. Many of the first published articles were anecdotes and reflections on the

50

usefulness or appropriateness of social media in libraries. Farkas (2007) is often cited in library
literature because of her early advice concerning social media to “go where the patrons are,” but
in an earlier blog post Farkas, the Head of Instructional Services at the Portland State University
Library in Oregon, cautioned that “there is a big difference between ‘being where our patrons
are’ and ‘being USEFUL to our patrons where they are’” (Farkas, 2006, para. 9).
When social media first arrived at the doors of academia, librarians were perplexed.
Library computers were intended for research. MySpace and Facebook certainly did not seem to
fall within the category of academic research! According to Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007),
Facebook and social media began significantly affecting academic libraries in 2005. Students
came into the library "in droves" and waited in lines to use scanners and computers,
“mesmerized and lost in what was later determined to be none other than Facebook
addiction”(Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007, p. 23).
When Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) noticed that the social media trend was
impacting how students used library resources and librarian expertise, they decided to develop a
survey to measure the impact of Facebook on academic libraries. In February 2006, the
researchers sent 244 surveys to academic librarians who were randomly chosen from the 850
colleges and universities in the Carnegie Classification Listing of Higher Education Institutions.
According to Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis, 126 surveys were returned, which was a 51% response
rate. The focus of the survey was the measurement of librarian opinions of the perceived role of
social networking in academic libraries. Results of the survey of academic librarians revealed
that 54% of the librarians in the study felt that Facebook did not serve any academic purpose;
only 12% of the respondents felt that Facebook had any “academic potential or possible benefits”

51

(Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007, p. 30). Based on these early results, most academic librarians
initially were not convinced that social media had the potential to be an academic asset.
Reviewing Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis's (2007) findings half a decade after they were
published reveals how quickly this topic is evolving. One of the major issues at Houston Cole
Library which prompted Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis's study was the overuse of the scanner to
post photographs on Facebook. Currently, many students load pictures into social media sites
directly from the cameras in their phones, so overuse of the scanner is likely no longer an issue.
In 2007, when the survey was published, only 3% of the responding libraries had Facebook
accounts, a number which has greatly increased, as measured in subsequent studies. In 2007,
19% of the librarians had never even heard of Facebook (Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007) which
seems inconceivable just a few short years later.
In a more recent study Graham, Faix, and Hartman (2009) measured academic librarian
perceptions and usage of Facebook in academic libraries. Using two listservs, 100 academic
librarians were recruited for an online survey. Whereas Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) noted
that only 3% of the academic libraries were using Facebook, two years later Graham et al. found
that 52% of the libraries were using Facebook. When the survey respondents were asked
whether or not they believed the use of Facebook was successful, the answers were evenly
distributed. Graham et al. considered this result to be “inconclusive,” especially since 27.5% of
the librarians reported feeling ambivalent about whether having a library Facebook presence was
effective (Graham et al., p. 232).
The library/social media landscape has continued to expand and evolve. Rogers (2010)
conducted a nationwide survey which included 742 academic and public library
administrators/managers, librarians, and library staff who were recruited through library listservs

52

and social media (C. Rogers, personal communication, Jan. 5, 2013). The overwhelming
majority of respondents (96.2%) called Web 2.0 tools important for marketing and promoting
library services. The majority of the library survey respondents (86.6%) reported using social
networks in their libraries, which is a significant increase from Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007)
and Graham et al. (2009).
In Roger’s research, the second most popular Web 2.0 tool, after Facebook, was blogs,
which were used by 51.8% of the libraries (Rogers, 2010). Another 39.6% of the reporting
libraries used photo sharing sites and 32.6% used online video (Rogers, 2010). This is the fourth
year that Rogers has repeated the annual survey, and the longitudinal data demonstrated a
consistent pattern of expansion and growth of social media by libraries to promote and market
library services (Rogers, 2010). Viewed chronologically, research studies demonstrate an
expanded use of social media as more academic libraries adopt Library/Web 2.0 technologies
and social media.
The use of Facebook and social networking software has continued to increase in studies
about academic libraries, from 3% in 2007 (Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007) to 52% in 2009
(Graham et al., 2009) to 86.6% in 2011 (Rogers, 2010). As more libraries have adopted social
media tools, librarian perceptions have also evolved from skepticism about the appropriateness
of social media in academia (Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007) to evenly distributed responses
that are inconclusive (Graham et al., 2009) to the perception of social media as an important
marketing and promotional tool for libraries (Rogers, 2010). In a more recent survey of
international academic libraries, Chu and Du (2013) found that the majority of academic libraries
in Asia, North America, and Europe who responded to the survey (n = 38/140) perceived social
networking to be a useful technology to enhance reference services, share information, and

53

promote library services. Attitudes toward social media in academic libraries are shifting and
more libraries are adopting Library/2.0 technologies. The next section will examine how many
academic libraries are using social media, Library/Web 2.0 technologies, and the content that is
distributed through social media.
Academic Library Usage of Library/Web 2.0 Technologies and Social Media
After a brief historical overview of libraries and technology, the first section of this
literature review considered the perception and opinions of undergraduate students towards
libraries, social software, and emerging communication technologies. The next section
examined librarian perceptions about the uses and usefulness of social software and emerging
communication technologies, predominantly in four-year colleges and research universities.
This section will review preliminary research about how academic libraries are using
Library/Web 2.0 technologies and social media to identify patterns and trends in usage.
A few case studies about social networking in academic libraries have provided some
qualitative data about the use of social networking in specific academic libraries, but the data
have been mostly anecdotal and not generalizable to other libraries. Mack, Behler and Rimland
(2007) analyzed reference statistics in 2006 and found that Facebook was heavily used at Penn
State for reference questions, a finding which has not been duplicated at other institutions.
Additional case studies suggest that Facebook and social media are useful library outreach and
communication tools (Adamich, 2008; Chu & Meulemans, 2008; Mathews, 2006; Powers et al.,
2008). The results from these limited studies suggest that using social media may increase
student awareness of library services. Based on preliminary cases studies, Facebook and social
media are predominantly being used in academic libraries for outreach to promote library
services, resources, and programs to students and the university community.

54

In the next sub-sections, existing research about the growth of Library/Web 2.0 and
social media in academic libraries will be reviewed.
Library/Web 2.0 usage. Studies of academic library websites document a pattern of
increasing usage of Library/Web 2.0 technologies by academic libraries. One of the earliest
multi-library studies was conducted by Xu, Fenfei, and Heting (2009) who reviewed 81
academic library websites in the state of New York in 2008 to look for evidence of Library/Web
2.0 applications. Xu et al. found that 42% (n = 34) of the academic libraries in New York state
used Library/Web 2.0 technologies and 58% (n = 47) did not.
Since 2008, the number of academic libraries who have adopted Library/Web 2.0
technologies has continued to increase. Recent studies of large American Research Library
(ARL) websites demonstrated that Library/Web 2.0 technologies are almost universally present
on the websites of large research universities (Aharony, 2012; Harinarayana & Vasantha Raju,
2010; Mahmood & Richardson, 2011; Phillips, 2011; Rod-Welch, 2012). Very few studies of
Library/Web 2.0 and community colleges have been conducted, but in a survey of California
community college libraries (N = 54/112), Oxford (2010), a librarian at West Hills community
college in Lemoore, found that 65% of the responding California community colleges reported
using at least one Library/Web 2.0 technology. It is interesting to note that at large ARL
libraries Library/Web 2.0 technologies are nearly universally present, whereas at California
community colleges fewer than 65% of the libraries offer Library/Web 2.0 technologies to their
students.
The growth of social media and Library/Web 2.0 tools. In preliminary research in
New York state colleges and universities, Xu et al. (2009) surmised that the majority of
academic libraries still used traditional methods like email, telephone, and library websites to

55

communicate information. Of those Library/Web 2.0 applications used by libraries , Instant
Messaging (IM) was the most prevalent Web 2.0 technology, employed by 42% (n = 34) of the
academic libraries. The second most frequently utilized Web 2.0 technology was blogs at 25%
(n = 20) and RSS at 17% (n = 14). Social networking sites were used by only 5% (n = 4) of the
sample population. Xu et al.'s results are specific to academic libraries the state of New York,
but they do give an indication of how widespread social media was in academic libraries in 2008.
Recent studies of large ARL libraries demonstrate an expansion in the use of social media
and use of Library/Web 2.0 technologies. Multiple studies revealed that the most common
Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies are chat/IM and RSS feeds (Harinarayana &
Vasantha Raju, 2010; Mahmood & Richardson, 2011; Rod-Welch, 2012). RSS (Really Simple
Syndication) feeds are used to share news and announcements, and alert library patrons to new
library acquisitions. RSS feeds are also used to link to library blogs and information literacy
instruction. IM/chat is primarily used for reference questions. In a survey of California
community college libraries, approximately 65% of the responding libraries reported using
IM/chat to answer student questions (Oxford, 2010) which is much lower than ARL libraries.
According to Mahmood and Richardson (2011), nearly 95% of ARL libraries utilize chat/IM to
answer reference questions, so community college libraries use chat much less frequently in
student interactions.
Blogs are another common Library/Web 2.0 communication technology which Xu et al.
(2009) and Harinarayana and Vasantha Raju (2010) found linked to approximately 25% of
academic library websites. Blogs were also the most widespread Library/Web 2.0 application
used by 60% of California community college libraries (Oxford, 2010), but once again ARL

56

libraries used blogs more extensively (86%) (Mahmood & Richardson, 2011) than California
community college libraries.
Examples of other frequently used Library/Web 2.0 technologies were podcasts, videos,
YouTube, text services, and photo sharing sites like Flickr (Harinarayana & Vasantha Raju,
2010; Mahmood & Richardson, 2011; Oxford, 2010; Rod-Welch, 2012). Research has shown
that Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies are widely present on four-year college and
ARL library websites. Although preliminary survey research suggests that Library/Web 2.0 and
social media are being utilized by some California community college libraries (Oxford, 2010),
there is an unexplained disparity of lower usage at California community college libraries.
Social media. One of the most controversial Library/Web 2.0 technologies is social
media, since some academic librarians question the academic appropriateness of social
networking (Charnigo & Barnett-Ellis, 2007; Hendrix, Chiarella, Hasman, Murphy, & Zafron,
2009). According to Hendrix et al. (2009), the most common reasons cited by academic
librarians for not having a Facebook presence were lack of time or the belief that Facebook did
not have any academic use; other barriers were lack of staff knowledge, discouragement by
library administrators, or lack of institutional support (Hendrix et al., 2009, p. 45).
Studies estimating the number of academic libraries who maintain social media accounts
vary widely. In early research Xu et al. (2009) found that 5% of academic libraries in New York
State had social media accounts. One year later, in national survey research with academic
librarians recruited through library listservs, 52% of respondents reported using social media in
academic libraries (Graham et al., 2009). In another national survey, over 86% of public and
academic librarians who were recruited through library listservs (N = 742) indicated that they
used social media in their libraries (Rogers, 2011). Through website analysis, Mahmood and

57

Richardson (2011) found evidence of social media accounts on 89% of ARL websites (N = 100);
whereas Rod-Welch (2012) found links to social media on less than half of the ARL websites.
Rod-Welch, who used a slightly larger sample (N = 125), found evidence that 49% of ARL
libraries had links to Facebook, and 46% maintained Twitter accounts. Once again, in California
community colleges, the number of libraries with social media accounts is much lower; 13% of
the responding libraries contributed content to social media accounts (Oxford, 2010).
As noted by Hendrix et al. (2009), the use of Facebook in academic settings is evolving.
Based on analysis of social media posts, Xu et al. (2009) posited that libraries were
predominantly using social media to build community, whereas Jacobson (2011) found that
marketing library services was the most frequent use of Facebook in academic libraries. In a
survey of academic health science librarians (N = 72/144) Hendrix et al. (2009) concluded that
the most prevalent uses of Facebook were announcements to market the library, sharing photos,
maintaining a virtual presence for students to congregate, and providing a forum for
communication. Despite conclusive evidence, Hendrix et al. envisioned the academic potential
of Facebook to provide links to databases, catalogs, multimedia, and tutorials (Hendrix et al,
2009, p. 45).
In Mahmood and Richardson’s (2011) research with ARL libraries, (N = 100), the most
common application of Facebook was to share library news, announcements, and events (99%),
which was consistent with Hendrix et al. (2009). Nearly every academic library with a Facebook
account (97%) used the social networking software to share pictures and video clips, and market
library services, which agrees with similar findings by Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) and
Hendrix et al. (2009). Facebook was less frequently used to provide reference service (14%) and
as a link to the library catalog (12%). Other than Oxford's (2010) survey about the potential use

58

of Library/Web 2.0 for information literacy instruction with distance education students, there
has not been any research conducted with California community college libraries, so it is largely
unknown how California community college libraries are using social media and Library/Web
2.0 technologies.
Content analysis of library Facebook content. Recently, some researchers have begun
to look at library social media content to examine how libraries use social media. In a
descriptive study Aharony (2012) employed qualitative research methods to review the social
media content of 10 large academic and 10 large public libraries. The 10 academic libraries
included in the sample were Yale, MIT, Cornell, Colorado Academic Library Consortium,
University of Washington, University of Texas, Harvard Law School, North Georgia State
University, a biomedical library at UCLA, and Feliciano College, a private Catholic college.
The 10 public libraries were large metropolitan libraries predominantly on the East Coast.
Aharony found that most of the library Facebook pages contained similar content such as
basic contact information. Content analysis of the Facebook wall posts revealed that 42.5% of
the messages were about the library: library collections, library services, and technology. This
was consistent with Aharony’s 2010 study about library Twitter where the majority of the posts
were also about the library. Aharony grouped the next most prevalent category (35.54%) as
“miscellaneous” which included general information, surveys, congratulations, expressions of
gratitude, and topical issues. The last content grouping, which comprised 21.95% of the posts,
included information about “exhibitions, lectures, classes, contests, conferences, guides, grants,
blogs, reports, workshops, presentations, films and competitions” (Aharony 2012b, p. 364). This
finding is consistent with Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) and with Hendrix et al. (2009), who
suggested that academic librarians could utilize Facebook to promote library events and services.

59

In the small sample of academic libraries that Aharony studied, only four used the photo section,
and three of the libraries included stationary links to search tools like JSTOR or WorldCat, a
worldwide shared library catalog (Aharony, 2012b).
Aharony (2012b) speculated that academic libraries are still unsure how to use social
media, an idea shared by Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) and Hendrix et al. (2009), who found
that many academic librarians view Facebook as tangential and outside the scope of professional
librarianship. Aharony's preliminary and exploratory study revealed that most libraries used
Facebook to disseminate information, and advertise library services, activities, and events.
However, Aharony suggested that libraries reconsider the academic uses of Facebook and social
media, since Facebook can provide interactive dialog to support student learning (Aharony, p.
369).
Using Facebook to build relationships. Whereas previous studies identified the main
use of social media as outreach and communication about library programs and services, social
media can also be used to build community. One of the first library studies that explored the use
of social media to build relationships was conducted by Phillips (2011), who completed a
qualitative content analysis of the Facebook pages of 17 four-year college libraries in Illinois to
explore how academic libraries use Facebook. Whereas previous studies focused on Facebook
as a vehicle to promote library services to students, Phillips maintained that Facebook is about
building relationships, which she acknowledged would be different than the relationships that
students built with other students or friends. Through an analysis of library Facebook posts,
Phillips identified three possible domains for relationship building: “the library, the library and
students together, and the mutual contexts of University, local community and broader society”
(Phillips, 2011, p. 513).

60

Within the library domain, a common type of message was announcements, which
comprised 22% of all of the library posts. Announcements in Facebook are generally onedirectional messages about library hours, services, policies, or the library facility (Phillips,
2011). Messages about library services were evident on all 17 of the library Facebook pages,
representing 52% of all the messages. These messages publicized library electronic resources,
library materials, special collections, workshops, and special events. Another common theme
was historic library values like reading, intellectual freedom, and civic engagement. Besides
promoting library resources and databases, libraries also disseminate information about emerging
technologies (Phillips, 2011, p. 516). Phillip’s research supported prior research that some
libraries use Facebook to promote their libraries (Harinarayana & Vasantha Raju, 2010;
Mahmood & Richardson, 2011). Phillips discovered that 13 of the libraries in her study used
Facebook for promotional purposes, and promotional posts comprised 10% of the total data.
Examples of promotional posts included sub-categories of local library pride, celebration of
libraries, self-deprecating humor, and libraries in broader culture (Phillips, 2011, p. 517).
In the student domain, as identified by Phillips (2011), libraries posted messages that
were supportive of students and attempted to build relationships or engage in dialog with
students. Phillips classified the sub-themes under this domain as supportive well wishes,
invitations, questions designed to elicit student comments, humorous posts, and pictures with
students.
The third domain, community, focused on mutual contexts like the larger university, the
community where the university was situated, and broader society. In posting information and
celebrations about the university and people associated with the university, libraries act as

61

“recorders of events, bearers of good news or concerns, and centers for university values and
history” (Phillips, 2011, p. 520) which reinforce relationships with the library and the university.
As a Web 2.0 utility, Facebook is designed to be interactive. In the Illinois library study,
roughly 23% (n = 102) of the messages elicited “likes” by students, but only 4% of the posts
garnered student comments (Phillips, 2011, p. 520). Although students may be passively reading
the library posts, far fewer students are actively participating in the conversation and interacting
with the library through social media. In a review of the literature, this type of research with
California community college library social media accounts was not found.
Another interesting finding of the study was that there did not appear to be a correlation
between the number of fans and the size of the university. In other words, a small college might
have more "fans" or subscribers than a larger college. The size of the college was not a
significant predictor of an active or large Facebook following. During the data collection period,
15 of the 17 pages experienced a growth in the number of followers (Phillips, 2011). No one has
been measuring California community college library social media accounts, so it largely
unknown how many California community college libraries have social media accounts and
whether the usage of social media is growing or declining in California community colleges.
Phillips’ (2011) main thesis is that social media fosters community and allows the
possibility of interaction with students. Phillips (2011) referenced Gall (2010) who stressed the
importance of building relationships with the students who use library services. Phillips agreed
with Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) that Facebook could help to build rapport with students,
since Facebook generates a virtual venue for libraries to strengthen a shared background with
students, which could foster connections and relationships (Phillips, 2011, p. 519). Phillips
concluded that Facebook offered a way to build relationships with students that is different than

62

other online mediums or face to face encounters; this relationship might encourage students to
become more receptive to using other library services (Phillips, 2011, p. 521). Phillips’ theory
that social media can build community and facilitate relationships with students is an interesting
theory that has not been explored in other academic library research. The three domains that
Phillips identified for relationship building through social media were library, students, and
community. These domains could be used as comparative categories for analyzing California
community college social media posts.
Summary. The use of Library/Web 2.0 in academic libraries has increased significantly
within a short time span. In early studies, Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis's (2007) found that only
3% of academic libraries were using social networking software. In research conducted in 2008,
Xu et al. (2009) found that 42% of the academic libraries in his New York state sample were
using interactive Library/Web 2.0 methods. Harinarayana and Vasantha Raju (2010) surveyed
100 prominent universities in 2010 and found that 57% of the libraries were using Web 2.0
utilities. One year later, Mahmood and Richards (2011) studied 100 American Research
Libraries (ARL) and found that 99% of the ARL libraries were using at least one component of
Library/Web 2.0. Rod Welch’s (2012) quantitative content analysis of the same ARL population
(N = 125) had similar results; 97% of the libraries utilized one or more Library/Web 2.0 method
for communication and reference work with students. The use of Library/Web 2.0
communication tools has seen rapid growth in academic libraries within the last five years.
The most frequently used Library/Web 2.0 applications by the academic libraries in the
research studies were chat and IM, which were predominantly used as a reference tools to answer
student questions. The next most commonly used Library/Web 2.0 utilities were RSS feeds and

63

blogs that were primarily used to share news and announcements, but the blog posts were also
used to provide information literacy instruction and information about new library resources.
Library/Web 2.0 technologies and social networking sites like Facebook have grown
rapidly at academic libraries. Aharony (2012) conducted a study comparing 31 current academic
library websites to historical data located in the Internet Archive database. Aharony documented
that in the year 2000, none of the libraries were using Web 2.0 technologies. By 2010, 71% of
the academic libraries in the study had Web 2.0 technologies on their websites, and 45% of the
academic libraries had links to Facebook accounts (Aharony, 2012). In their survey of academic
librarians Charnigo and Barnett-Ellis (2007) concluded that less than 3% of academic libraries
were using Facebook. Just a few years later, Mahmood and Richardson (2011) documented that
89% of the academic libraries in a similar academic library population sample had Facebook
accounts. In a nationwide survey of public and academic libraries, Rogers (2011) stated that
86.6% of the libraries in his survey reported using social networking sites.
In most of the studies which were conducted at large four year and research universities,
the primary use of social media in academic libraries was to share news, announcement, events,
pictures, videos, and to promote the library (Aharony, 2012; Hendrix et al., 2009; Mahmood &
Richardson, 2011; Phillips, 2011). Additionally, Mahmood and Richardson discovered that 14%
of the academic libraries provided reference services through Facebook, and links to the library
catalog were provided by 12% of the libraries. Phillips (2011) affirmed that one of the most
frequent uses of Facebook was to promote library services to students, but her qualitative content
analysis of academic library Facebook accounts advanced her thesis that Facebook could be used
to build relationships with students. According to Phillips, “librarians are using Facebook to

64

present themselves as approachable, in order to develop a rapport with students, which could
ultimately facilitate the delivery of services” to students (Phillips, 2011, p. 520).
Overall Summary
A review of the literature on Library/Web 2.0, social networking, and academic libraries
revealed a preliminary but growing body of research. A more specific search for research about
community college libraries and Library 2.0 yielded very few results. Even in the peer-reviewed
Taylor and Francis journal, Community & Junior College Libraries, which is devoted
specifically to community college libraries, very few research studies were located related to
Library 2.0, Web 2.0, or social networking and community college libraries. In an investigation
into publishing patterns in library and information science, Joswick (1999) discovered that most
research studies and published articles in the field of library science were authored by librarians
at large four year research universities. Winters (2004) and Poole (2000) speculated that less
research is published by community college librarians or about community college libraries
because community college faculty generally are not required to publish as part of the tenure
process. Additionally, up to 60% of the faculty librarians at community colleges are part-time
adjunct faculty who are unlikely to have the time or resources to contribute to research (Poole,
2000). Although some of the research conducted at four-year research universities is transferable
to community and junior colleges, the needs of the diverse community college population are
different than those at 4-year universities (Juchniewicz, M. M., Dagostino, L., & Carifio, J.,
2007; Winters, 2004). Winters (2004) and Poole (2000) both wrote about the lack of research
about community college libraries and consequently the need for research and publication about
community college libraries.

65

As discussed within this literature review, research primarily conducted at large four year
research universities demonstrated a rapid growth within the last five years of Library/Web 2.0
applications and social media, primarily for library promotion and outreach, but also as a method
to communicate with distance education students and students who may not be physically
present in the library. However, as evidenced by review of the literature, very few empirical
studies of community college libraries and social media have been conducted, so very little is
known about how community college libraries are actually using social media and emerging
forms of electronically-assisted communication to interact with students. Winters (2004)
surveyed California community college directors about the future of California community
college libraries; her research revealed a perception of the future that was heavily influenced by
technology, digital information, and change. Winters identified the need for electronic reference
and innovations to meet the needs of distance education students, which in turn would
necessitate continuing professional development for faculty librarians. Moore (2006) and Kenan
(2012) were both concerned with the impact of technology on community college libraries. The
themes of continual change and technological transformation emerged in both studies. Moore
(2006) discussed the growing student expectation for virtual synchronous electronic services like
IM or chat reference. The same theme emerged in Kenan’s (2012) research with Texas
community college librarians. As a suggestion for further research, Kenan questioned how
librarians are adapting to new communication technologies like chat and social media that
require constant monitoring. Kenan also suggested research into the efficacy of emerging forms
of communication technology with community college students. This study will attempt to
address both of these questions.

66

Prior research about millennial community college students and technology revealed that
community college students are a very diverse group of students who were heavily invested in
technology (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom, 2012; Stanley, 2010). Stanley (2010) found that
community college students were frequent users of social networks and text messaging services,
but they were more interested in the library as a physical space to study or receive assistance.
The students in her survey were interested in the possibility of chat reference and they were open
to a library presence in social networking sites.
At the request of the Council of Chief Librarians of California community colleges,
Booth (2011) repeated a modified version of her 2009 Ohio University study in California to
learn about “the library, information, communication, and academic technology characteristics of
California Community College (CCC) students” (Booth, 2011, p.1). Booth found that the
California community college students were an ethnically diverse group of students who used the
library predominantly as a quiet space to study and secondarily as a place to conduct research.
Fully 77% of the students agreed that technology helped them to be more productive, and 84%
agreed that technology helped them to learn (Booth, 2011). More than 74% of the students
agreed that technology helped them to collaborate with other students. The interactive Web 2.0
technologies that students used most frequently were Facebook and YouTube. The majority of
the survey respondents were favorable to “liking” the library in Facebook, or watching library
content in YouTube (Booth, 2011). Perhaps more importantly, 80% of the students also reported
that they were “very likely” or “fairly likely” to search for articles in library databases on a
mobile device, and 62% were likely to ask a librarian for help via chat or text-messaging, a
technology that over 70% of the students reported using (Booth, 2011, p. 36). Based on Booth’s
study, the majority of California community college students are heavy users of Web 2.0

67

interactive communication technologies, and as reported in the survey, the majority of the
students would use Library/Web 2.0 technology if it were available.
As demonstrated by Booth’s research, California community college students are
frequent users of Web 2.0 technology. The students are interested in mobile library technologies
like reading research articles on mobile devices and students are open to asking for help via textmessaging or chat. The majority of the students use social media like Facebook and YouTube
and many are open to a library presence in the social media realm. Although Oxford (2010)
conducted some research into how social media might be used in California community colleges
to teach information competency in distance education courses, many questions remain about
how Library/Web 2.0 applications and communication technologies are actually being used in
California community colleges. Since very little research has been published about how
community college librarians are using social media and Library/Web 2.0 technologies, library
practitioners and library directors could benefit from the results of this study, especially as they
consider future professional development. Another gap in the literature is the lack of research on
the perceptions of community college librarians on the efficacy of using social media and
emerging Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies with community college students.
Gaining insight into librarian perceptions about the usefulness of Library/Web 2.0 technologies
can be instructive in the formation of library policies and practices and the utilization of
academic librarian time, a valuable human resource. In the next chapter, the research methods,
data collection strategies, and data analysis procedures that were applied to address the research
questions will be discussed.

68

Chapter III
Method
Chapter 3 will present the research design used in this study. The first part of the chapter
will briefly review the purpose of the study and the research questions. The research design,
setting, participants, instrumentation, procedure, and data analysis plan will be described in
subsequent sections of this chapter.
Purpose of the Study
This study focused on the use of Library/Web 2.0 technologies and emerging forms of
communication technology at libraries in California community colleges. Academic faculty
librarians provide instruction, reference, and research assistance in the physical library as well as
remotely to students through various technologies. Most students in community colleges are
heavy users of mobile technology, text messaging, and social media (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom,
2012; Stanley, 2010), so social networking and emerging forms of electronically-assisted
communication may be useful as academic librarians pursue outreach and instruction to assist
students with research and information needs.
A review of the literature revealed some research about student receptiveness to
Library/Web 2.0 technologies but very little research about how community college libraries are
using Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies. Additionally, research about community
college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of social media and emerging communication
technologies with students in an educational setting is virtually non-existent. Analyzing
community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using social media and
electronically assisted forms of communication provided information that may inform practice

69

and policy and help other libraries develop outreach and information services to community
college students.
This mixed-methods study will explore how California community college libraries are
currently using social media communication (like Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube) and
librarian perceptions of the efficacy of synchronous and asynchronous methods of electronic
assisted communication, including chat reference and text services, to communicate with
students.
The specific research questions that were addressed in this study were:
1. Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California community colleges (CCC) libraries
using?
2. How are Library/Web 2.0 technologies being used by California community college
libraries to communicate with students, and to what extent are students responding as
measured by the frequency of student responses to library social media posts?
3. What are California community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using
Library/Web 2.0 technologies with community college students?
Epistemological Assumptions
The epistemological frame that guided this research was pragmatism. According to
Creswell (2009), mixed-method studies are typically rooted in pragmatism which is based on the
foundational writings of Peirce, James, Mead and Dewey (Cherryholmes, 1994). Pragmatism is
concerned with practical solutions to problems (Patton, 2002). According to Creswell,
pragmatism is not rooted in any one system of philosophy. Instead, pragmatic research uses
whichever research methods most effectively answer the research questions. Consequently,
research that is rooted in pragmatism may employ qualitative methods or quantitative post-

70

positivist methods like empirical observation and measurement; however, the emphasis is
focused less on proving a theory and more on solving a real world problem. Pragmatic research
allows the researcher to choose the qualitative and quantitative methods that most effectively
answer the research questions, since the focus is on solutions and applications (Creswell, 2009).
In this study, a mixed-methods pragmatic approach provided the researcher the best opportunity
to gather the quantitative and qualitative data that answered the research questions. In the
following section, the pragmatic mixed-methods research design of this study will be outlined.
Research Design
This descriptive mixed-methods study gathered data from multiple measures. According
to Trochim (2006), multiple measures or observations mitigate the inherent errors in any one
measure. Triangulation, which draws data from multiple sources, is a common methodology
used in mixed-methods studies (Creswell, 2009). The descriptive mixed-methods triangulation
design allowed the researcher to gather both quantitative and qualitative data through the
validating quantitative data model, which is a method to validate quantitative survey results by
including a few open ended qualitative questions in the survey (Creswell & Plano, 2007). The
triangulation design of the study allowed the researcher to converge quantitative and qualitative
data to form a more complete analysis of how Library/Web 2.0 technologies were being used in
California community college libraries (Creswell, 2009). Table 1 summarizes the research
design.
Table 1
Research Questions and Data Collection Methods
____________________________________________________________________________
Research Question

Source of Data

____________________________________________________________________________
71

1. Which Library/Web 2.0

Survey

technologies are CCC

Library website
content

libraries using?
2. How are Library/Web 2.0

Survey

technologies being used?

Library social media
content (Facebook
and Twitter posts)

3. Librarian perceptions of the

Survey

efficacy of Library/Web
____________________________________________________________________________
Setting
The study focused on public California community college libraries, the largest higher education
system in the nation with 112 colleges and an enrollment of 2.4 million students.
Participants
The participants for this study included one academic faculty librarian or library director
from each of the 112 California community colleges. The participants for the study were
gathered from an online directory maintained by the Council of Chief Librarians for California
Community Colleges. In the case of outdated directory listings, library websites, which list
email and contact information, were consulted. In smaller libraries, there may be only one
academic faculty librarian on staff, so this librarian was contacted to complete the survey. On
larger campuses with multiple librarians, one librarian was asked to complete the survey for the
institution. It is often common practice for one librarian at a site to be responsible for
technology, and these librarians were the target population for the survey. Examples of potential
participants were lead librarians, library directors, electronic resources librarians, reference

72

librarians, or instruction librarians. In some instances, a job title like Electronic Resources
Librarian made it evident which librarian would be the appropriate respondent for the survey.
When it was not clear who would be the best candidate, the survey was sent to the library
director with instructions to forward the survey to the appropriate respondent.
Instrumentation
Survey. A review of the literature informed the development of the survey for this study.
A copy of the survey can be found in Appendix A. The survey included primarily closed
response questions with the option to supply additional answers, and an open response section
that allowed comments about social media and emerging communication technologies. A five
point Likert scale was used with the closed response questions. The survey sections are
described in the following paragraphs.
Library/Web 2.0 technologies. The first section of the survey queried librarians about
which Library/Web 2.0 technologies were currently being used in California community colleges
with their student populations.
How Library/Web 2.0 technologies were used. Question 5 on the survey was designed
to solicit information to answer the second research question: how are community college
libraries using Library/Web 2.0 technologies?
Librarian perceptions. The next section of the survey had a series of statements that
were designed to collect information about librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using
Library/Web 2.0 technologies like social media and emerging forms of communication
technology with students. Most of the statements were written as positive statements that
respondents could rate on a five point Likert scale. To guard against unconscious bias and
response set, four of the items were written as negative statements.

73

Demographic data. The last part of the survey was designed to elicit basic demographic
information about the size of the student population at each institution, the number of librarians
at each library, and demographic information about the responding librarians such as age,
education level, and any specialized training in Library/Web 2.0 technologies.
The survey was validated by piloting the survey instrument with a group of academic
librarians who are familiar with Library/Web 2.0 technologies and California community
colleges. Based on input from the group of subject specialists, the dissertation committee, and
the dissertation chair, the survey was revised to ensure that the survey was clearly written and
that the survey questions were an accurate measure of the research questions.
Data Collection Strategy
Data for the study was collected in three separate phases. The initial phase of data
collection involved a visual scan and analysis of each library website. A subsequent phase of the
study involved gathering library social media posts for qualitative content analysis. The final
phase of the study, which ran concurrently with the analysis of social media, was a survey of
librarian perceptions about the use and efficacy of Library/Web 2.0 technologies with
community college students.
Web Pages. The researcher examined each California community college library
website to look for evidence of Library/Web 2.0 technologies like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
Pinterest, etc. A checklist grid, which is included as Appendix B, was created to record
Library/Web 2.0 technologies evident on each of the 112 library websites. The visual
observation of library websites was utilized to answer the first research question: which
Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California community colleges using?

74

Social Media. An additional data collection strategy was gathering the publically
available Facebook and Twitter posts of California community college libraries for a two to four
week time period during mid-September through mid-October of the fall 2013 semester. This
was a necessary step since the Facebook timelines and Twitter feeds are dynamic and
changeable. The social media posts provided data relevant to the second research question: How
are California community college libraries using emerging forms of communication technology
with students?
Survey. The survey was constructed in Survey Monkey and distributed to the survey
participants through email. An announcement about the survey was placed on the California
community college library listserv, and a letter of support for the survey from the president of the
Council of Chief Librarians was sent through email to California community college library
directors. Two weeks after the researcher's initial email, a reminder email with a link to the
survey was sent to the survey population. A reminder post card, which is depicted in Appendix
C, was sent to the library directors. As an incentive to increase the participant response rate, a
random drawing for a 50 dollar Amazon gift card was offered to those participants who were
willing to provide an email address for the purpose of the drawing. Additionally, for those
participants who expressed an interest, a summary of the findings of the study was made
available.
An electronic cover letter that explained the purpose of the study accompanied the online
link to the survey. Respondents were informed in the letter that completion of the survey was
voluntary and responses would be kept anonymous and confidential. The researcher did not
collect names; however, complete anonymity may be difficult in the data collection process since
the number of librarians at each site is relatively small and the survey data will be linked to each

75

institution if the respondents choose to provide this information. To protect the respondents,
personal data, such as age, education, or place of employment, is reported only in aggregate and
without any personal identifiers. After the study was completed, the data was destroyed.
Data Analysis Procedures
Web Page Analysis. The researcher looked for links to chat, text, or email which allow
students to post virtual information requests on the library websites. Additionally, the researcher
visually inspected library websites for evidence of other Library/Web 2.0 technologies such as
Pinterest, YouTube, or Del.icio.us, etc. A spreadsheet was created in Excel to record evidence of
each Library/Web 2.0 application that was available on each public California community
college library website. Basic descriptive statistics such as frequencies and percentages were
calculated.
Qualitative analysis of social media. After the webpage analysis, the researcher
discovered that 42 (35.5%) of California community college libraries maintain Facebook
accounts that were linked to their library webpages and that 29 (25.8%) of CCC libraries have
Twitter accounts. During a four week time period in mid-September through mid-October 2013,
Twitter and Facebook posting of the entire population of those libraries that have Facebook and
Twitter accounts were monitored. The number of posts was tallied to establish frequency of
posting. The content of the information that was posted was also qualitatively analyzed. As
categories and themes emerged, a list of categories and themes was created to record the types of
published content (Marshall & Rossman, 2011). Examples of postings were library or campus
events, special tutorial sessions, pictures, or links to instructional videos. The qualitative
analysis of Facebook and Twitter posts was designed to answer the second research question:
how are community college libraries using social media?

76

Survey. The survey responses were analyzed using descriptive statistics. Frequencies
and percentages were calculated for each survey question. A separate chart was created to record
librarian survey responses about which Library/Web 2.0 tools were being utilized. This allowed
the data collected through review of the websites and the survey to be compared. The data
generated through the open response questions was analyzed through inductive qualitative
analysis (Patton, 2002). The qualitative data was analyzed in an iterative cycle that included
immersion in the data, organization of the data, memoing, generation of categories and themes,
coding, and summarizing the findings (Marshall & Rossman, 2011).
Triangulation. Data was triangulated through use of more than one measure of the same
phenomena. For example, library websites were visually analyzed to look for evidence of
Library/Web 2.0 technologies. The survey also queried librarians about which Library/Web 2.0
technologies are being utilized with the student population. This was an important strategy
because a library could have a Facebook or Twitter account which was not linked to the library
webpage. In addition, a library might use a text messaging or chat reference service, but it might
be within an intranet that was password protected and was therefore not publically accessible. In
another example of triangulation, data about how libraries are using social media and emerging
forms of communication technology was collected in an open response question in the survey.
These responses were verified and triangulated through observation and qualitative analysis of
content publically available on library Facebook and Twitter posts. Spreadsheets were created in
Excel to compare the data from the survey and websites analysis, and the qualitative analysis of
social media and the survey responses. It was assumed that the data from the website analysis
and the survey would be complementary, but if the results were contradictory about offered
services, then preference would be given to the librarian responses, since the librarians may

77

know about library services that are not apparent on the public website. However, contradictory
results may warrant further investigation, since there may be incongruities between librarian
perceptions and researcher observations.
Summary
The purpose of this mixed-methods study was to explore which Library/Web 2.0
applications California community college libraries are using, and how California community
college librarians are using social media and emerging communication technology to
communicate with students. The survey instrument was designed to gather California
community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using social media and
Library/Web 2.0 tools. Observation of library websites and social media posts provided
additional qualitative data and quantitative data. The next chapter will contain the results of the
survey, the web page observations, and the qualitative analysis of the social media posts.

78

Chapter IV
Results
Review of Methodology
The purpose of this mixed-methods study was to explore which Library/Web 2.0
applications California community college libraries are currently using, and how California
community college librarians are using social media and emerging communication technology to
communicate with students. The survey instrument was designed to gather California
community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using social media and
Library/Web 2.0 tools, and perceived barriers to the adoption of new technologies. Analysis of
library websites and social media posts provided additional quantitative and qualitative data
about the types of communication technologies used by California community college libraries
and the frequency and content of the information posted in community college social media.
The first section of this chapter will briefly describe the demographic information related
to this study. The next sections of this chapter are organized sequentially around the findings of
the three main research questions. The final portion of the chapter summarizes and synthesizes
the research findings
The specific research questions which guided this study and provided the framework for
this chapter were:
1. Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California community college libraries
using?
2. How are Library/Web 2.0 technologies being used by California community college
libraries to communicate with students, and to what extent are students responding as
measured by the frequency of student responses to library social media posts?
79

3. What are California community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of
using Library/Web 2.0 technologies with community college students?
Demographics
The focus for this study was the 112 public community college libraries within the state
of California. The location and student population of these colleges varied greatly—from large
colleges in sprawling metropolitan areas to small colleges in rural settings. California
community colleges serve students in relatively isolated desert, coastal, and mountain
communities and in densely populated metropolitan centers like Los Angeles, San Diego, and the
Northern California bay area. There are also several community colleges that serve students
within the vast Central Valley in the interior of California. Developed by Chancellors Office of
California (2012), Figure 1 shows the location of public community colleges within the state of
California.

80

Figure 1. Map showing the location of the 112 California Community Colleges.
Student population. Based on 2012-2013 annual data gathered by the California
Community College’s Chancellor’s Office, the number of fulltime equivalent (FTE) students at
each campus ranged from 1,074 FTE students at Woodland Community College to 31,892 FTE
students at San Francisco City College. The average student population at California community
81

colleges was 9,860 FTE students (SD = 6177.15). The California Chancellors Office reported
that 2.4 million students were enrolled in California community colleges in the 2012-2013
academic calendar year.
Librarian-to-student ratio. The number of academic faculty librarians at each
California community college ranged from a minimum of 1 to a maximum of 22 with an average
of 3.75 faculty librarians (SD = 2.61) at each campus library. The faculty librarian-to-student
ratio varied across the California community college campuses from a minimum of 1:743 at
Mendocino College to a maximum of 1:6,958 students per academic librarian at the College of
the Canyons in Santa Clarita (M = 2,856.06, SD = 1,256.53). A table that summarizes the 201213 Full-time Equivalent (FTE) student population at each California community college campus,
the number of faculty librarians at each college and the librarian-to-student ratio can be found in
Appendix D.
Librarian demographics: experience and education. The education and experience of
the faculty librarians at California community colleges presented in wide variance. The survey,
which was launched in September 2013 and closed in October 2013, was specifically targeted at
faculty librarians who were most familiar with the use of technology and emerging
communication technologies at their college libraries. Librarians who responded to the survey,
but who self-reported that they did not have primary knowledge or responsibility for technology,
were exited from the survey. The survey generated 104 responses. Since 16 of the respondents
indicated that they were not the individuals at their libraries with the most knowledge about
emerging communication technologies like text reference, chat, or social media, they were
removed from the sample. Three additional responses were deleted because they were duplicate
entries from the same college. Presumably, the duplicate responses occurred because the survey

82

was advertised in the Chief Council of Librarians newsletter and the California Community
College Librarian Listserv, as well as by email invitation. In the three cases where more than
one individual responded to the survey from the same college, the completeness of the survey
response determined which entry to keep in the sample. At one campus, both librarians were
equally thorough in answering the survey questions, so preference was given to the respondent
with more experience with emerging communication technologies and the longer tenure at the
college. After deleting duplicate responses and the 16 respondents who self-reported as not
being knowledgeable about emerging communication technologies, the survey sample was
reduced to 85 valid responses, which was a 76% completion rate by the potential representative
institutional respondents (N = 85/112). The survey respondents ranged in age from 26 to older
than 65 with a mode of 36-45 years of age. Table 2 summarizes the age and education level of
the librarians who responded to the survey on behalf of their college libraries.
Table 2
Librarian Age and Education Levels (N = 85)
Age

Education

%

n

25 or younger

0.0

0

26-35

7.0

6

36-45

35.2

30

46-55

27.0

23

56-65

24.7

21

65 or older

3.5

3

No answer given

2.3

2

M.L.S.

97.6 %

83

Additional Master’s degree

24.7%

21

4.7%

4

Ed.D.

83

Ph.D.

2.3%

2

The academic librarians in the survey population were very well educated. Every
respondent in the sample had completed a Master’s degree program, with the exception of one
respondent who was currently enrolled in a Library Science Master’s degree program. In
addition to an M.L.S degree, which is considered the terminal degree for professional academic
librarians, 25% (n = 21) of the respondents had also earned additional Master’s Degrees in
subjects like the humanities, education, instructional design, English, history, music, geography,
technology, and cultural studies. Two respondents had obtained Ph.D. degrees, and four of the
respondents had earned an Ed.D. One additional librarian reported being currently enrolled in an
Ed.D. program.
Prior experience of the librarians. The librarians who responded to the survey had a
wide range of experience—from less than 1 year to 28 years in community college libraries.
Table 3 summarizes the community college library experience of the survey participants.
Additionally, over 95% of the librarians reported previous experience in other libraries.
Although 30% reported prior experience in another community college library, the most frequent
former experience reported by 49% of the respondents (n = 42) was public library employment.
Additionally, 42% of the respondents (n = 36) had prior experience in four-year universities.
Table 4 provides a summary of the previous library experience of the survey respondents.
Besides public and university experience, some community college librarians listed experience in
school libraries, law libraries, medical libraries, corporate libraries, military libraries, and
newspaper, science, engineering, museum, and ship libraries. The librarians in the sample had
rich and diverse prior library experience.

84

Table 3
Years of Experience as a Community College Librarian (N = 80)
%
Years of Experience

1-5

25.3

21

6-10

27.8

22

11-15

31.6

25

16-20

6.3

5

21-25

3.7

3

26-28

5.0

4

M

10.44

SD

6.57

Range

n

>1-28

Note. Six survey participants did not answer this question.
Table 4
Previous Professional Experience in Other Libraries (N = 85)

Experience in Other
Libraries

%

n

Public library

49.4

42

4 year college or university library

42.4

36

Another community college library

30.5

26

Specialized libraries

16.5

14

Law library

11.7

10

School library

11.7

10

Medical library

4.7

4

None

4.7

4

85

Research Question 1: Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California Community
College Libraries Using?
An analysis of all 112 California community college libraries provided data about the use
of emerging communication technologies in CCC libraries. Table 5 summarizes how many
colleges use each emerging communication technology. The data displayed in Table 5 is
predominantly limited to what is visible on publically viewable websites. When the survey
responses and library website data were compared, some discrepancies were noted. For
example, librarians reported using more emerging communication technologies than were
evident on publically viewable college library websites. It is possible that some of the libraries
use communication technologies that are only available through password protected intranets or
web portals. A search for Facebook accounts within Google and the Facebook search engine
revealed 11 additional library Facebook accounts that were not linked to library websites.
Incongruity between the survey results and the website review regarding the use of LibGuides
prompted a more thorough search through Google and Facebook’s search engine. An additional
18 California community colleges were identified with LibGuide accounts.
Email was the most frequently used communication technology, found on 77.6 % (n =
87/112) of all CCC library websites. The most common social media site was Facebook where
50.8% (n = 57/112) of CCC libraries have a presence. Twitter was used by 25.8% (n = 29/112)
of the libraries. Synchronous chat reference utilities were evident on 39.2% (n = 44/112) of the
library websites, and text message services were found on only 13.4% (n = 15) of the library
websites. Many other Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies like YouTube and blogs are
used at CCC libraries to a lesser extent; a summary of the frequencies and percentages of
communication technologies evident on CCC websites is summarized in Table 5.

86

Table 5
Frequency and Percentages of Communication Technologies Evident on California Community
College Websites (N = 112)
Communication Technology

n

%

Email

87

77.6

Facebook

57

50.8

LibGuides

57

50.8

Chat

44

39.2

Twitter

29

25.8

Text-Messaging

15

13.4

YouTube

12

10.7

QRC Codes

10

8.9

Blogs

9

8.0

Library Thing

8

7.1

Mobile Sites

5

4.4

Flickr

5

4.4

RSS

5

4.4

Foursquare

1

>1.0

Instagram

1

>1.0

Pinterest

1

>1.0

Since not all emerging communication technologies were visible on public facing
websites or discoverable through search engines, asking librarians in the survey which
Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies were being used in their libraries provided an
important source of information for verification of data. Table 6 displays librarians' responses to
which emerging communication technologies were being used in their libraries.
87

Table 6
Frequency and Percentages of Communication Technologies as Reported by California
Community College Librarians (N = 85)
Technology

n

%

Facebook

57

67.0

LibGuides

52

61.1

Chat

47

55.2

YouTube

33

38.8

Twitter

32

37.6

Blog

27

31.7

Text-messaging

17

20.0

Wikis

17

20.0

Social Bookmarking

11

12.9

RSS

11

12.9

Library Thing

10

11.7

Photo Sharing (Flicker)

9

10.5

Pinterest

5

5.8

Podcasts

5

5.8

Instagram

3

3.5

Note: In the open response section, a few librarians noted that they were also using software like
camtasia and vimeo to create instructional videos.
Barriers to the implementation of new technologies. Librarians were also asked in the
survey about obstacles to the implementation of new communication technologies. As reported
by librarians in the survey, the greatest barrier to the adoption and use of new technologies was
insufficient staff time, followed by inadequate budgets, and limited staff training. At some

88

libraries, institutional policies prevented the adoption of new technologies. The complete
findings about barriers to new technologies are summarized in Table 7.
Table 7
Barriers to the Implementation of New Technologies in California Community College (CCC)
Libraries (N = 85)
Barriers to New
Technology

Always

Often

Sometimes

Rarely

Not

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

64.0%

25.8%

7.0%

2.3%

1.1%

(54)

(22)

(6)

(2)

(1)

47.6%

27.3%

16.6%

7.1%

1.2%

(40)

(23)

(14)

(6)

(1)

Limited Staff
Training

27.3%

38.0%

23.8%

10.7%

0%

(23)

(32)

(20)

(9)

(0)

Limits of the
Technology

9.5%

30.9%

35.7%

19%

4.7%

(8)

(26)

(30)

(16)

(4)

15.5%

14.3%

34.5%

27.3%

8.3%

(13)

(12)

(29)

(23)

(7)

Limited Staff Time

Limited Budget

Institutional Policies

N

M

SD

85

1.51

.82

84

1.86

1.02

84

2.16

.96

84

2.78

1.02

84

2.97

1.17

Note. The numbers in parentheses represent the total number (n) of respondents who chose this
answer in the survey.
Lack of staff time. The most commonly cited barrier to the implementation of new
technologies was limited staff time. In the open response section of the survey, many librarians
expressed frustration about having limited time for new technologies like social media or chat
89

reference services. One librarian wrote that although social media was critical to library
outreach, it “seems to be something extra we add to our workload rather than it being considered
integral.” Several librarians commented that staff time was the biggest obstacle to the
implementation of new communication technologies, especially at small colleges with only one
full time librarian and one support staff employee. Three librarians wrote that it takes a
consistent time commitment to maintain social media accounts, which are “labor intensive” and
have to be updated frequently to be effective.
Librarian attitudes towards new technologies. “Staff acceptance issues” was another
concern which emerged in librarian comments as a possible obstacle to new communication
technologies. It is difficult to gauge how many librarians felt that staff acceptance of new
technologies was an obstacle since this was not directly queried in the survey. At least one
librarian admitted personal skepticism as to whether social media was effective with students. In
the open comment portion of the survey, 8% of the librarians, (n = 7/85) volunteered comments
about limiting attitudes towards new technologies. For example, one librarian wrote, “less than
half of the full time librarians [will] have anything to do with social media.” A couple of
librarians mentioned resistance to change by older faculty librarians “who do not see value in
using social media.” Yet another librarian wrote that some academic librarians are “openly
hostile to new technology and new ideas” and “they refuse to use chat or even answer email
reference questions.” Two librarians mentioned that the attitudes of other librarians on staff
prevented them from devoting sufficient time to Library/Web 2.0 technologies. In the words of
one of the respondents, “other librarians feel we shouldn’t spend much time on it [social media]
and this does not allow me to be as interactive as I would like.” Although librarian acceptance of
new technologies and resistance to change was not directly queried in the survey, several

90

librarians felt strongly enough about staff acceptance issues to write about it in the comments
section of the survey.
Number of librarians on staff and the use of social media. California community
college librarians perceived that limited staff time was the predominant obstacle to the
implementation of new technologies. It could be presumed that having more academic faculty
librarians at an institution would provide more staff time to devote to the implementation of new
technologies. To test this hypothesis, an independent samples t-test was performed to compare
the mean of two groups-- CCC libraries who used social media like Facebook and Twitter (n =
58) and CCC libraries who did not use social media (n = 54). Somewhat surprisingly, the
independent samples t-test did not reveal a statistically significant difference between the number
of faculty librarians on staff at each college and the use of social media.
Librarian-to-student ratio and the use of social media. One possible measure of
academic workload is the librarian-to-student ratio; a larger student population means that more
librarian time is required for instruction, reference, and other library services. The librarian-tostudent ratio varied across the California community college campuses, from a minimum of
1:743 at Mendocino College to a maximum of 1:6,958 students per academic librarian at the
College of the Canyons in Santa Clarita (M = 2,856.06, SD = 1,256.53). To test whether there
was a comparison between the librarian-to-student ratio and the use of emerging communication
tools like social media, an independent samples t-test was computed to analyze the means
between CCC libraries that used or did not use social media. No statistically significant
difference was found regarding the librarian-to student-ratio and the use of social media. In a
separate analysis of the data through an additional independent samples t-test, the size of the
college, as measured by FTEs, also did not reveal a statistically significant comparison between

91

the use of social media by CCC libraries and the size of the college as determined by the number
of FTE students at the college. Some colleges with large student populations and more academic
librarians used several emerging communication technologies like social media, chat, textreference, blogs, etc.; whereas other large campuses with similar staffing patterns used very few
emerging communication technologies. The same variance was found at small and medium
sized colleges. Independent samples t-tests confirmed that the neither the size of the college, as
defined by the student population (FTE), nor the librarian/student ratio provided a statistically
significant comparison with the use of social media by California community college libraries.
Staff development and training. Lack of training could be one possible barrier to the
implementation of emerging communication technologies. However, lack of training does not
appear to be the main barrier to the use of social media and emerging communication
technologies. Over 76% of the librarians in the survey (n = 65) disagreed with a statement in the
survey that no one on their staff had sufficient training in the use of social media. Only 11.8% (n
= 10) of the librarians in the survey felt that no one on their staff had adequate training in the use
of social media.
Staff development with Library/Web 2.0. Another question in the survey directly
asked the respondents if they had received any specialized training in Library/Web 2.0
technologies. The most frequently reported way that librarians expressed learning about new
technologies was through trial and error. Table 8 below summarizes CCC librarian responses
about how they learned Library /Web 2.0 technologies.

92

Table 8
How CCC Librarians Report Learning Library/Web 2.0 Technologies
Learning Method

%

n

Learned through trial and error

66.2

55

Watched a webinar

42.1

35

Attended a workshop

35.0

29

Learned from books or other printed materials

28.9

24

Attended a conference

26.5

22

No training

25.3

21

Participated in an online class

14.5

12

Note. Participants were allowed to choose more than one answer.
Although the majority of the librarians in the survey learned Library/Web 2.0 and
emerging communication technologies through trial and error, this may not be their preferred
learning method. According to the survey data, most CCC librarians favored online tutorials and
Webinars over learning through trial and error. Even though in the open response section several
librarians wrote about colleagues who were resistant to new technologies, and one of the
respondents referred to themselves as a Luddite (someone who fears or is resistant to new
technology), none of the survey respondents admitted to being averse to learning new
technologies. Table 9 summarizes CCC librarian preferences for learning new technologies.

93

Table 9
How CCC Librarians Prefer to Learn New Technologies
Learning Method

%

n

Online tutorials

53.5

45

Webinars

50.0

42

Learn through trial and error

44.0

37

Face to face instruction in a group setting

42.8

36

Online instructional videos

39.2

33

One on one individualized instruction

25.0

21

Do not like to learn new technologies

0.0

0

Note. Participants were allowed to choose more than one answer.
Summary of findings related to the first research question. Although librarians
reported that a shortage of staff time, limited budgets, and a lack of training were often obstacles
to the implementation of new technologies, a comprehensive analysis of CCC library websites
and survey data revealed that the majority of CCC libraries used at least one Library/Web 2.0
technology. Approximately 51% of the CCC libraries utilized LibGuides and Facebook. Other
Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies that CCC libraries used in order of prevalence
included: chat/IM reference, YouTube, Twitter, text-reference, RSS feeds, blogs, and wikis.
Some of the less commonly used Library/Web 2.0 technologies found on CCC websites or
reported by librarians in the survey were Library Thing, a shared online book catalog, social
bookmarking sites, and photo/video sharing sites like Flickr, Instagram, and Pinterest.
Research Question 2: How are Library/Web 2.0 Technologies Being Used by California
Community College libraries to Communicate with Students, and to What Extent are
Students Responding to Library Social Media Posts.

94

Data about how community college libraries used Library/Web 2.0 technologies were
gathered through the survey and through the quantitative and qualitative analysis of library
Facebook and Twitter posts. Library social media posts were downloaded and analyzed for a
period of four weeks from September 14, 2013 until October 13, 2013. During this time, the
websites of each California community college library website were also reviewed to look for
links to social networking sites like Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, and Facebook.
Approximately half of the CCC libraries have social media sites. The most widely used
social media tools were Facebook (n = 57) which was used by 50.8% of the CCC libraries and
Twitter (n = 29) which was used by 25.8% of the CCC libraries. Forty-four CCC library
websites had links to Facebook accounts. An additional 14 libraries had Facebook accounts that
were not advertised on their library websites. Although five of the college libraries reported
having Pinterest accounts, only one library had Pinterest linked to their library website.
Instagram is gaining in popularity as a social media tool to display pictures and videos, but only
three libraries reported using Instagram.
Frequency of posts to social media sites by CCC libraries. Table 10 summarizes the
number of followers or subscribers to library Facebook and Twitter feeds during the four-week
observation period and the frequency of posts by California community college libraries to
Facebook and Twitter-- the two social media sites which were most commonly used by
California community college libraries. Please see a fuller explanation of Table 10 in the
paragraphs below the table.
Table 10
CCC Library Facebook and Twitter Followers and Frequency of Posts Sept. 15-Oct. 13, 2013
M

95

SD

Min.

Max.

Facebook (n = 57)

Twitter (n = 29)

number of posts

10.00

12.00

1

51

number of followers

240.41

226.13

3

911

increase in followers

3.00

3.00

1

12

number of posts

5.33

6.21

1

41

number of followers

168.44

299.98

4

1,386

increase in followers

2.05

3.83

-2

12

Facebook. There was significant variance in the frequency of social media usage at CCC
libraries. Some libraries posted to Facebook only once or twice during the four-week period, and
other libraries contributed content to Facebook daily or several times during the week. Within
the four-week observation period, 14 (24.5%) of the libraries did not post any social media
content. Libraries that posted content frequently were more likely to gain new followers than
libraries that posted content less frequently. Surprisingly, even libraries who did not post any
new Facebook content during the four-week period gained a few new subscribers.
Twitter. Twitter saw less activity than Facebook with an average of five posts per library
during the four-week period. Additionally, 20% (n = 6) of the libraries actually lost a few
Twitter followers. Approximately 38% (n = 11) of the CCC libraries gained new Twitter
followers during the four-week observation period.
Unmanaged Facebook pages. At the campuses where libraries do not have officially
managed Facebook accounts, students still “checked in” on Facebook and “liked” the library.
For example, one small campus library without a managed Facebook account had 77 “likes” and
1,738 “check-ins.” Most of the unmanaged library Facebook accounts had hundreds of student
“check-ins,” even though no one at the library seemed to notice or pay attention to the fact that

96

students were "checking-in" at the library via Facebook. This represents a missed opportunity to
connect with students.
Reference questions and social media. In the survey, California community college
librarians were asked about the use of social media and emerging forms of communication
technology to answer reference questions. Surprisingly, 32.6% (n = 28) of the librarians
reported that students ask reference questions through social media.
Social media content posted by CCC libraries. Librarians were asked in the survey
what types of content they post through social media. These data were gathered to answer the
research question about how California community college librarians use social media. The
most frequently cited use of social media was to promote library services and events to students.
A summary of the responses is presented in Table 11.
Table 11
Types of Content that CCC Librarians Report Posting to Social Media
%

N

Promote library services

71.9

59

Promote library events

68.2

56

Post library hours or holiday closures

67.1

55

Promote library databases

50.0

41

Post library pictures

46.3

38

Advertise new library materials

37.8

31

Link to Internet articles

32.9

27

Link to library videos

19.5

16

Post humorous memes or LOLcats

18.3

15

Link to a library blog

14.6

12

Not applicable because the library does not use

20.0

18

97

social media.

Content analysis of library social media. A separate analysis of library social media
content was conducted to quantitatively and qualitatively analyze the frequency and types of
social media content CCC libraries actually contribute to publically viewable social media sites.
This additional step was taken to provide a richer data set to answer the second research question
about how CCC libraries use Library/Web 2.0 technologies to communicate with students. The
content of all 57 California community college Facebook accounts was downloaded once a week
for a total of four weeks beginning on September 14, 2013. The content from the first week was
analyzed to look for themes in the types of information and media. Initial themes and categories
that emerged from the first week’s data were notated. After the second week of data collection,
the categories were further refined and reinforced, and a couple of new themes were added.
Eventually 20 main categories of information and media were identified. The most common use
of Facebook was to promote library resources and provide general information and links to other
websites. Other frequent posts included commemorative content about Banned Books Week, or
Hispanic Heritage Month. Table 12 summarizes the types of information that libraries posted to
Facebook.
Table 12
California Community College Facebook Content, Sept. 15-Oct. 13, 2013 (N = 442)
Content

N

%

Promote library resources

61

13.8

General information and links to other websites

58

13.1

Commemorative acknowledgement

53

11.9

Library event

42

9.5

98

College information or event

33

7.4

Promote library services

25

5.6

Invitation to conversation/connection

24

5.4

Library displays

22

4.9

Information about libraries in general

20

4.5

Research help

18

4.0

Community Information

18

4.0

Humor

17

3.8

Library pictures

16

3.6

Promote library values

9

2.0

Library hours and closures

8

1.8

Quotes

5

1.1

Animal pictures

4

0.9

Link to library blog

4

0.9

Link to library instructional videos

4

0.9

Library rules

1

0.2

Student response to social media: Facebook. The second part of research question 2
asked how students responded to library social media content. Student engagement with library
social media content can be measured through growth of followers which was depicted in Table
10. Additionally, with Facebook, students can respond by clicking on the “like” button and by
posting comments. “Likes” generally signal agreement with a post, or an emotional or
intellectual connection to the visual or verbal content of the message. If a student took the effort
to comment on a post, it usually signaled a stronger response and the potential for conversation
and an exchange of ideas. Facebook “likes” were much more frequent than comments; 91.6% of
student responses were “likes” and 8.3% of the responses were comments.
99

Library pictures generated the most student responses, followed by the category best
summarized as an “invitation to conversation and connection.” Other areas of more frequent
response were commemorative posts which, during the time period that the data were collected,
included Hispanic Heritage month, U.S. Constitution week, and Banned Books week — the topic
that generated the most student responses in this category. Several of the student comments were
about banned books, and a few students made comments about favorite books that had been
banned. For example, during banned books week, one student wrote, “All of the Harry Potter
books” and another student commented, “I’m not sure if it is banned, but my all-time favorite
book is Five Little Strangers by Julia Augusta Schwartz, Copyright 1904.”
Library events and humorous posts were the next two categories that produced notable
student “likes” and comments. These comments were generally one-line comments about the
content of the picture. For example a smiling librarian posed beside the statue of a man generated
comments like “what was he whispering to you?” Other than one line humorous quips about
photographs, most of the comments by students and faculty were generally one or two brief
sentences. If one person commented on a post, then typically a second person would also
comment. Some of the comments were questions about library programs or general queries
about the college. In a few instances, a conversation thread started when a student posed a
question or a comment and the librarian responded. The two longest threads included six to eight
comments and involved three or four people.
Humor. During the four-week observation period, a few libraries posted humorous
pictures or quotes like Groucho Marx’s famous line, "Outside of a dog, a book is a man's best
friend. Inside of a dog it's too dark to read." Another library posted a picture of lizard that had

100

wandered into the library along with a humorous quip about the lizard. Students quickly liked
the picture and added additional funny sub-titles and comments about the picture.
As often happens in social media, the same humorous photograph was shared on several
different CCC library media Facebook feeds. One such picture featured four volumes of Manga
books with the title Nana juxtaposed beside one Batman book. Seen together, the five book
spines read “Nana, Nana, Nana, Nana, Batman!” Each of these humorous posts generated
student “likes” and comments that were proportionally higher than for other categories,
presumably because of the emotional and relational appeal of humor.
Invitation to conversation and connection. Libraries posted some content that could
simply be characterized as welcoming conversation. For example, librarians welcomed students
to the new semester, or greeted by name students who were new library social media followers.
Librarians invited students to meet new librarians, or asked them to come to the reference desk to
say hello. Other examples of posts in this category included scenic pictures of the campus or the
library building, along with comments about the weather or how beautiful the day was. Students
were welcomed, via social media, into the warm and cozy library on a cold day, or asked to share
their favorite spot in the library with friends. These types of comments, which could be
characterized as attempts to initiate conversation and connection, received many “likes” by
students, especially when these relational posts called out students by name, or displayed libraryrelated pictures.
Pictures. Library pictures, which libraries posted fairly infrequently, received the largest
student response. Pictures of the physical library, often with shelves of books, generated
frequent student approval, and pictures of library displays also attracted student interest.
Students who follow library social media probably already have positive feelings towards

101

libraries and books, which could explain the strong student response to visual pictures of the
local library and pictures of library displays. However, pictures of people they recognized,
librarians or students in the library, generated the most “likes” and comments of any other
category of library social media content.
It is significant to note that the categories of content that libraries most frequently posted
were not necessarily the types of information or media which generated the most student
reaction. Figure 2 juxtaposes categories of content and frequency of library Facebook content
beside student responses.

Library Rules

Link to Library Blog

Link to Videos

Animal Pictures

Quotes

Library Hours

Promote Library Values

Library Pictures

Community Information

Humor

Likes (N = 537)
Help with Research

Info About Libraries in…

Library Displays

Promote Library Services

Conversation/Connection

College Info/Event

Library Events

Commemorative…

General Information

Promote Library Resources

Number (N = 442)
Comments (N = 49)

Figure 2. Student Responses to California Community College Library Facebook Content.
Twitter content. Fewer libraries (n = 29) used Twitter than Facebook, and CCC
libraries posted less frequently to Twitter than Facebook, with the exception of a couple of
libraries who had their Twitter and Facebook accounts linked through a utility like Hootsuite, or
Tweetdeck, or a Facebook setting that allows users to simultaneously post to both platforms.
102

Similar to CCC library use of Facebook, the most frequent use of Twitter was to promote library
resources and commemorative acknowledgements like Banned Books week. Twitter accounts
were also used to announce college and library events and to provide general information about
the college. Table 13 displays the frequency of the types of content that California community
college libraries disseminated through Twitter.
Table 13
California Community College Twitter Content, Sept. 15-Oct. 13, 2013 (N = 193)
Content

N

%

Promote library resources

39

20.2

Commemorative acknowledgement

34

17.6

General information and links to other websites

30

15.5

College information or event

22

11.3

Library event

19

9.8

Invitation to conversation/connection

15

7.7

Research help

9

4.6

Library displays

7

3.6

Promote library services

7

3.6

Library hours and closures

4

2.0

Community Information

2

1.0

Humor

2

1.0

Information about libraries in general

1

0.5

Library pictures

1

0.5

Link to library instructional videos

1

0.5

103

Summary of findings related to the second research question. Approximately half of
the CCC libraries used IM/chat to answer student requests for information and about 20% of
CCC libraries utilized text message services with students to answer student questions.
Surprisingly, 32.6% of the CCC libraries reported that students also asked reference questions
through social media.
A qualitative analysis of CCC library Facebook and Twitter feeds, and a tabulation of
librarian survey responses, revealed that CCC libraries used social media primarily to promote
library services, library resources (like books and databases), and library events (like MLA
citation workshops) in support of student academic achievement. CCC libraries also contributed
social media content about the college campus and the local community, as well as links to
information that was newsworthy or of cultural significance. CCC libraries predominantly used
social media as a platform to promote library resources and services in support of academic
achievement. Although students expressed moderate interest in these traditional library
resources and services, the posts which generated the most student response were posts that were
visual, had some emotional appeal, or fostered conversation and connection.
Research Question 3: What are California Community College Librarian Perceptions
about the Efficacy of Using Library/Web 2.0 Technologies with Community College
Students?
In the survey, librarians were asked several questions about social media as it related to
the needs of their students. These statements were designed to elicit librarian opinions about the
potential usefulness of social media with their student population. The majority of the librarians
agreed that social media could be an effective platform to promote library programs and events

104

to students, and that social media could be a useful outreach tool to promote library services and
programs to students through a medium that students are comfortable using.
Of course, the opinions about the efficacy of social media with students varied, but 86%
(n = 72/84) of the librarians felt that social media could be an effective tool to promote library
events or programs, and 83% (n = 71/85) agreed that social media is an important cultural
phenomenon and librarians should enter into the conversation with students and the community
through social media. The majority of the librarians, 78% (n = 68/85) either strongly agreed or
agreed that social media is an effective outreach tool to promote library services to students.
Additional information about California community college librarian perceptions about the
usefulness of social media are summarized in Table 14 below.
Table 14
CCC Librarian Perceptions about the Usefulness of Social Media with Students
Strongly
Agree
(1)

Agree
(2)

Not
Sure
(3)

Social media is an
effective tool to
promote library
events or programs to
our students.

25.9%

60.0%

10.6%

2.4%

1.2%

(21)

(51)

(9)

(2)

(1)

Social media is an
important cultural
phenomenon, and the
library should enter
into the conversation
with students and the
community.

25.9%

57.6%

7.1%

8.2%

1.2%

(22)

(49)

(6)

(7)

(1)

Social media is an

20.9%

57.0%

16.3%

3.5%

2.3%

105

Slightly Strongly
Disagree Disagree
(4)
(5)

N

M

SD

84

1.94

.74

85

2.01

.89

85

2.10

.84

Strongly
Agree
(1)

Agree
(2)

Not
Sure
(3)

(17)

(49)

(14)

(3)

(2)

Social media is an
effective method to
promote library
services to our
students.

23.3%

52.3%

17.4%

4.7%

2.3%

(19)

(45)

(14)

(4)

(2)

Social media allows
our students to
interact with the
library on a familiar
platform where they
already spend a lot of
time.

20.9%

48.8%

17.4%

10.5%

2.3%

(18)

(41)

(15)

(9)

(2)

Having a presence in
social media makes
our librarians seem
more approachable to
our students.

25.6%

37.2%

21.1%

11.6%

3.5%

(21)

(32)

(19)

(10)

(3)

Social media is not a
good use of academic
librarian time at our
institution.

3.5%

9.4%

25.9%

30.6%

30.6%

(3)

(8)

(21)

(26)

(26)

No one on our staff
has sufficient training
in the use of social
media.

2.4%

9.4%

11.8%

40.0%

36.5%

(2)

(8)

(9)

(34)

(31)

effective outreach
tool at our institution.

Slightly Strongly
Disagree Disagree
(4)
(5)

N

M

SD

84

2.10

.89

85

2.24

.94

85

2.31

1.08

84

3.75

1.09

84

4.00

1.04

Librarian education and perceptions about the efficacy of social media. During the
analysis of the survey data, a secondary question emerged about librarian education and librarian

106

perceptions of the efficacy of using of social media with community college students. Namely,
did having more or less education correlate with more positive responses about the efficacy of
using social media with students? To answer this question, the librarians who responded to the
survey were classified into three groups: librarians with a Master’s in Library/Information
Sciences (MLS) (n = 62, M = 1.92, SD = .79), librarians with a MLS and an additional Master’s
Degree in another subject area (n = 21, M = 2.47, SD = 1.07), and librarians with a MLS and a
Ph.D. or Ed.D. (n = 6, M = 1.50, SD = .55). Most of the statements on the survey regarding
social media and emerging communication technologies did not reveal a statistically significant
difference between librarians with one master’s degree and librarians with additional master’s
degrees in fields other than library science. The small sample size of librarians who have
obtained doctorate degrees (n = 6) limits the comparisons and conclusions that can be drawn
from these results.
Summary of qualitative responses about social media. In the open response section of
the survey, 35% of the librarians (n = 30/85) provided additional comments. As previously
noted some of the comments (n = 8) addressed staff acceptance issues. Nine librarians
contributed comments about workload and expressed frustration about the lack of time to pursue
social media and other communication technologies. Approximately 43% of the librarians who
wrote comments (n = 13/30) expressed positive sentiments about social media. One librarian
wrote, “It’s fun. It keeps us current/relevant. Students tell me they think it is cool.” Another
librarian commented that our “students respond favorably to social media,” while another
respondent submitted, “it is an exciting way to communicate. Community college libraries must
find a way to be involved.” Other librarians wrote about the effectiveness of social media as an
outreach tool with students, the community, and the friends and family of students. A few

107

librarians submitted supportive comments about text and chat reference, which they considered
“great tools that have received positive student feedback.” An additional benefit of technologymediated communication was noted by a librarian who wrote that students who were shy about
approaching librarians in person at the reference desk felt “more at ease chatting or texting” with
the librarians.
Librarian perceptions about the effectiveness of Library/Web 2.0 technologies.
Librarians were asked in the survey about their perceptions of the effectiveness of the most
commonly employed Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies. Based on the analysis of
CCC libraries websites, the most prevalent Library/Web 2.0 technologies used by CCC libraries
with students were email reference, social media, text-reference, chat reference, and LibGuides,
a content management system that allows librarians to generate mobile device-friendly websites
that organize information and provide links to databases, e-books, learning videos, and online
tutorials. LibGuides can be shared through social media, and they can provide the opportunity
for communication with students through email, chat, or text-messaging.
Based on the survey data, LibGuides were perceived by CCC librarians as the most
effective communication technology followed by chat reference, and email reference. Although
approximately the same number of libraries used Facebook (n = 57) as LibGuides (n = 57), the
majority of the librarians rated Facebook as only somewhat or slightly effective; whereas
LibGuides was most commonly rated as effective or highly effective. The complete results
regarding librarian perceptions about the effectiveness of the most commonly used
communication technologies can be seen in Table 15.

108

Table 15
CCC Librarian Perceptions of the Effectiveness of Communication Technologies with Students
Don't
Use

Not
Slightly Somewhat Effective Highly
Effective Effective Effective
Effective

(0)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

34.6%

0.0%

2.5%

11.2%

26.3%

25.0%

(28)

(0)

(2)

(9)

(21)

(20)

Chat/IM
reference

33.8%

5.0%

6.3%

12.6%

24.0%

17.7%

(27)

(4)

(5)

(10)

(19)

(14)

Email
reference

10.6%

19.0%

23.8%

30.9%

11.9%

10.7%

(9)

(16)

(19)

(26)

(10)

(9)

Text
message
reference

69.3%

4.0%

4.0%

5.3%

9.3%

8.0%

(52)

(3)

(3)

(5)

(7)

(6)

Social
media like
Facebook
or Twitter

24.0%

8.8%

24.0%

29.1%

11.4%

2.5%

(19)

(7)

(19)

(23)

(9)

(2)

LibGuides

N

M

SD

80

4.13

.84

79

3.65 1.99

84

3.32 1.08

75

3.28 1.36

79

2.66

.80

Summary of findings regarding librarian perceptions of the effectiveness of
Library/Web 2.0 technologies with students. LibGuides were perceived by CCC librarians as
the most effective communication technology, followed by chat reference and email reference.
Although approximately the same number of libraries use Facebook (n = 57) as LibGuides (n =
57), the majority of the librarians rated Facebook as only somewhat or slightly effective; whereas
LibGuides, was most commonly rated as effective or highly effective.
109

Overall Summary of Findings
California community college libraries used a variety of Library/Web 2.0 technologies
with their student populations. Email, the most established asynchronous electronic
communication system, was found on 77.6% of the CCC library websites. Approximately half
of the California community college libraries had Facebook social media accounts, and slightly
less than a quarter of the CCC libraries maintained Twitter accounts. LibGuides, which are
shared with students on library websites and through links in social media, were used by over
half of the CCC libraries. Nearly 40% of the CCC libraries had live synchronous chat reference
available to their students, and approximately 20% of the libraries had text-reference services.
Links to YouTube videos were evident on approximately 10% of the library websites, but more
libraries may actually use YouTube since nearly 30% of the survey respondents indicated that
they create or share YouTube videos with students. Many other Library/Web 2.0
communication technologies like blogs, wikis, and photo sharing sites were found on library
websites, but with much less frequency than email, social media, LibGuides, Chat, or text
reference.
The main obstacles to the adoption and use of Library/Web 2.0 technologies, as reported
by CCC librarians, were limited staff time, limited budgets, limited staff training, institutional
policies, and staff acceptance of new technologies. Although limited staff time was listed as the
main obstacle to the implementation of new communication technologies, neither the size of the
college nor the librarian-to-student ratio correlated with the use of social media.
Email, chat, and text reference were used to answer student questions in CCC libraries. It
was somewhat surprisingly that 32% of the survey respondents acknowledged that students ask
questions through social media, since there were only two publically visible reference questions

110

that were asked through social media during the four-week data collection and observation
period. CCC Librarians reported that the predominant use of social media at their libraries was to
promote library services and events to students, but librarians also reported using social media to
introduce students to educational resources like databases, new library materials, and
instructional videos. During the four-week observation period, even non-active Facebook pages
gained followers and received location based “check-ins.” With a few exceptions in Twitter,
almost all of the library social media accounts gained followers during the 4-week observation
period.
Qualitative content analysis of actual library social media content showed that CCC
libraries are predominantly using social media to promote library resources and provide general
information and links to other websites. The next highest category of posts concerned
commemorative acknowledgements—which during the four-week observation period included
Banned Books Week, Hispanic National Heritage, and U.S. Constitution Week. Libraries also
provided information about library and campus events, as well as general information about the
college.
Students expressed interest that was fairly proportional to the frequency of library
postings regarding library resources, commemorative acknowledgements, library events, and
library services that provide academic support. However, three categories generated a nonproportional positively skewed response from students. On average students “liked” or
commented 3.64 times for every humorous library related post. Social media posts that were
thematically classified as invitations to conversation and connection generated a slightly larger
response (1:3.66). The premier category with the highest student response rate (1:5.50) was

111

local library pictures which included pictures of library displays, the library building, pictures of
library events, and pictures of people—which generated the most student response.
LibGuides were perceived by CCC librarians as the most effective communication
technology followed by chat reference, and email reference. Although approximately the same
number of libraries use Facebook (n = 57) as LibGuides (n = 57), the majority of the librarians
rated Facebook as only somewhat or slightly effective; whereas LibGuides, was most commonly
rated as effective or highly effective. However, the majority of the librarians who responded to
the survey agreed that social media could be an effective platform to promote library programs
and events to students, and that social media could be an effective outreach tool to promote
library services and programs to students through a medium that students are comfortable using.

112

Chapter V
Discussion
The Internet, social media, and mobile devices like cell phones and tablets have
dramatically changed the way students communicate and find information. Libraries, traditional
repositories of human knowledge, have become active participants in the technological shift in
how students access information and communicate in our wired and wireless society. To
understand how California community college (CCC) libraries utilize Library/Web 2.0 and
emerging communication technologies with students, a descriptive mixed-methods study with a
triangulation design (Creswell, 2009) was launched in August 2013 to gather both quantitative
and qualitative data through the validating quantitative data model, a method which allows
researchers to validate quantitative survey results by including a few open ended qualitative
questions in the survey (Creswell & Plano, 2007). Data were also gathered through an
examination of CCC library websites and the quantitative and qualitative analysis of library
social media content. The triangulation design of the study allowed the researcher to converge
quantitative and qualitative data to form a more complete analysis of how Library/Web 2.0
technologies were used in California community college libraries to interact with students.
Additionally, the study explored California community college librarian perceptions about the
efficacy of using social media and emerging communication technologies with students. The
three main research questions that guided this descriptive mixed-methods research study were:
1. Which Library/Web 2.0 technologies are California community college libraries using?
2. How are Library/Web 2.0 technologies being used by California community college
libraries to communicate with students, and to what extent are students responding as
measured by the frequency of student responses to library social media posts?
113

3. What are California community college librarian perceptions about the efficacy of using
Library/Web 2.0 technologies with community college students?
The findings of this study, organized around the three primary research questions, are
examined and placed within the context of other research within the field. Subsequent sections
of this chapter present conclusions and recommendations for community college libraries based
on related research and the findings of this study. In the final sections of this chapter, limitations
of the study and recommendations for further research are reviewed.
Library/Web Emerging Communication Technologies Used by California Community
College Libraries
Summary of findings. Although librarians reported that a shortage of staff time, limited
budgets, and a lack of training were often obstacles to the implementation of new technologies, a
comprehensive analysis of CCC library websites and survey data revealed that the majority of
CCC libraries used at least one Library/Web 2.0 technology. Examples of Library/Web 2.0
communication technologies that CCC libraries used in order of prevalence included: LibGuides,
Facebook, chat/IM reference, YouTube, Twitter, text-reference, RSS feeds, blogs, and wikis.
Some of the less commonly used Library/Web 2.0 technologies found on CCC websites or
reported by librarians in the survey were Library Thing, a shared online book catalog, social
bookmarking sites, and photo/video sharing sites like Flickr, Instagram, and Pinterest. Although
CCC libraries reported many barriers to the implementation of new technologies, the use of
Library/Web 2.0 and emerging communication technologies is increasing in CCC libraries, and it
is anticipated that this trend will continue.
Growth of Library/Web 2.0 in California community college libraries.
Comprehensive information about the use of Library/Web 2.0 technologies in California

114

community colleges is relatively scarce. Oxford (2010) tangentially studied social media and
emerging forms of communication technology in survey research that asked whether instant
messaging, texting, or chat could be used for library information competency instruction in
distance education. The results of Oxford’s study are somewhat difficult to compare with the
results from this study, since the response rates were lower (49%) in Oxford’s study versus 76%
for this study. In addition, Oxford did not analyze every CCC library website to look for
evidence of Library/Web 2.0 tools. Consequently, the data from this study are likely more
comprehensive.
A comparison of Oxford’s results and the results from this study indicated a pattern of
growth in the use of Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies. For example, within the
three-year time period between Oxford’s survey in 2010 and the fall 2013 semester, the number
of CCC libraries that maintained blogs increased somewhat, but the number of libraries that
utilized chat/IM and social media more than doubled.
Along with the expansion of communication technologies like chat/IM reference, there
has been a shift in the types and frequencies of Library/Web 2.0 technologies that CCC libraries
employ. In 2010, Oxford concluded that instant messaging/chat, wikis, and blogs were the most
frequently used Library 2.0 tools in California community college libraries. In the fall 2013
semester, LibGuides and social media like Facebook were the most prevalent Library/Web 2.0
technologies used in California community college libraries, followed by chat/IM, YouTube,
Twitter, blogs, and text reference. The results of this study also revealed how quickly
communication technologies change since Twitter, YouTube, LibGuides, QRC codes, Instagram,
and Pinterest either did not exist or were not prevalent enough to be considered for Oxford’s
2010 study. In contrast to Library/Web 2.0 technologies which have grown in usage, some

115

technologies, like wikis, have remained relatively small and stagnant whereas other technologies
such as social bookmarking and podcasts have waned.
The number of libraries that reported text message reference services and Chat/IM
utilities more than doubled since Oxford (2010) conducted his research. For example, Oxford
(2010, p. 69) documented that 23 of the California community college libraries had chat or
Instant Messaging utilities, and six of the CCC libraries offered text message reference to their
students. In the fall semester of 2013 when this research was conducted, the number of CCC
libraries who reported using chat/IM had increased to 47. Text-messaging services jumped from
six libraries (Oxford, 2010, p. 70) to 17 libraries in 2013. However, the largest growth in
Library/Web 2.0 technologies at CCC libraries was in social networking utilities and LibGuides,
a library specific platform that allows librarian-created content and information to be shared—
locally and globally—through social media, websites, blogs, and courseware like Blackboard or
Moodle.
Social media applications also have grown more prevalent in CCC libraries since Oxford
(2010) concluded his research. Oxford did not include Twitter in his study, nor did he include
Facebook in his list of Library 2.0 tools. Facebook is referenced in his survey as a possible tool
for information competency instruction, but only three libraries reported using Facebook in that
capacity. Many of the libraries presumably started social media applications after Oxford
completed his study since in this study over a third of the CCC libraries reported using YouTube
and Twitter, and over half of the CCC libraries had Facebook accounts. A handful of CCC
libraries utilized photo/video sharing sites like Pinterest and Instagram, and a few CCC libraries
reported experimenting with QRC codes and Library Thing, an online service that allows users
to create an online catalog of books that can be visually displayed on a library website.

116

CCC libraries compared to four-year universities. A review of the research literature
also revealed a pattern of increased usage of Library/Web 2.0 technologies by four-year
academic libraries. Library/Web 2.0 technologies were almost universally present on the
websites of large American Research Library (ARL) university websites (Aharony, 2012a;
Harinarayana & Vasantha Raju, 2010; Mahmood & Richardson, 2011; Phillips, 2011; RodWelch, 2012). The most frequently used communication technologies at large research
universities were chat and IM, followed by blogs and RSS feeds, and over 76% of academic
libraries use some form of social media (Mahmood & Richardson, 2011; Rogers, 2010; ACRL,
2013). When compared to large research universities, California community colleges offered far
fewer Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies to their student populations. With the
exception of a link to asynchronous email, which was slightly more prevalent, less than two
thirds of California community colleges had Library/Web 2.0 communication tools available to
their student populations. This represents an inequality of services for a population of students
that is traditionally underserved in higher education (Kim, 2011; Rhoades, 2012).
Obstacles to Library/Web 2.0 technologies. Overwhelmingly, CCC librarians
identified limited staff time as the greatest barrier to the implementation of new technologies. In
the open response section of the survey, many librarians expressed frustration about having
inadequate time to devote to new technologies like social media and chat reference which are
time intensive and require constant attention to be effective. Answering synchronous chat or text
reference questions requires vigilance and often librarians who answer electronic questions are
also concurrently helping students who are physically present in the library. This may be
especially true for smaller libraries with only one professional librarian on staff. However, the
number of professional academic librarians employed at each library and the use of social media

117

did not necessarily preclude the use of social media nor did the librarian-to-student ratio or the
size of the college as determined by FTEs. Some colleges with large student populations and
more academic librarians used several emerging communication technologies like social media,
chat, text-reference, and blogs whereas other large campuses with similar staffing patterns used
very few emerging communication technologies. The same variance was found at small and
medium- sized colleges. Although lack of staff time was identified as the most likely obstacle to
the implementation of new technologies, there are likely other variables that complicate the
adoption and successful execution of emerging communication technologies. Some of the
obstacles to the implementation of new Library/Web 2.0 technologies will be discussed in the
following paragraphs.
Time, money, and training. Lack of time was identified as the main barrier to the
implementation of new technologies by over 90% of the CCC librarians in the survey, but
financial constraints were also ranked highly by nearly 75% of the librarians who agreed that
limited budgets were always, or often, an obstacle to the implementation of new technologies.
However, it must be noted that many of the Library/Web 2.0 technologies are free. For example,
almost all of the social media applications including Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, and Instagram
are free, and subscriptions to LibGuides or text-message services are relatively inexpensive.
Since the survey did not provide more in-depth data about this topic, it can be assumed that
librarians perceive many new technologies, other than free social media applications, to be
expensive and labor intensive. Indeed, even if some communication technologies, like social
media, do not have a large monetary price tag, the cost of staff time to learn, implement, and
maintain new technologies must be taken into consideration.

118

There was also significant agreement by a strong majority of the librarians that a lack of
staff training presented a strong barrier to the implementation of new technologies. Additionally,
institutional policies at some colleges prevented the adoption of some technologies including
social media applications like Facebook, Twitter, and Pinterest.
Librarian attitudes. An additional barrier that emerged in the open response section of
the survey was librarian attitudes and staff acceptance issues. A few librarians wrote about their
colleagues who did not see the value of social media or who were “openly hostile to new
technology.” One librarian mentioned that some colleagues refused to answer chat and email
questions because they did not consider this part of their job. Another librarian noted that
colleagues are resentful of time spent on social media, which made it difficult to devote adequate
time to interactive technologies like social media. It is unknown how widespread these limiting
attitudes towards social media and emerging communication technology are within CCC
libraries since this question was not directly asked on the survey so this is an issue that might
warrant further investigation.
How Library/Web 2.0 Technologies are Being Used by California Community College
Libraries
Most of the existing research studies about Library/Web 2.0 and social media have
focused on large four-year universities. A review of existing research revealed that academic
libraries use Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies like social media to let students know
about library events and resources (Aharony, 2012b; Jacobson, 2011; Mahmood & Richardson,
2011; Xu, Fenfei, & Heting, 2009). Additionally, some studies have documented that
Library/Web 2.0 technologies like Instant Messaging (IM), chat reference, and text messaging

119

are being utilized to answer academic questions and provide reference services to students
(Harinarayana & Vasantha Raju, 2010; Rod-Welch, 2012; Xu et al, 2009).
There has been very little research conducted at California community college libraries
regarding Library/Web 2.0 and emerging communication technologies, but it is a timely topic
since the majority of community college students are active users of social media, texting, and
other forms of electronic communication (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom, 2012), and a pilot study at
five CCC libraries indicated student interest in library social media, in particular Facebook and
YouTube (Booth, 2011).
How CCC librarians report using social media. CCC librarians, who self-reported that
they were the individuals who were most knowledgeable about emerging communication
technologies like chat reference or social media at their libraries, were asked in the survey what
types of information or media they contribute to social media. The preponderance of content that
librarians acknowledged distributing through social media can be interpreted as information that
is supportive of students’ educational success. Most librarians reported promoting library
services and library programs through social media. Examples of the library events that were
advertised through social media were instructional sessions and tutorials in support of academic
achievement. About half of the librarians agreed that they used social media to promote library
databases in support of student research and projects, and a few librarians also reported
advertising library instructional videos through social media. All of these types of social media
content, including advertising library hours, can be classified as attempts to support students
academically.
Results of the analysis of library social media content. The results of the quantitative
and qualitative analysis of CCC library social media validated that the most frequent use of

120

social media was to promote traditional library resources. For example, many of the posts were
about books—new books that were recently added to the library or books that were in the library
collection that were seasonally or topically appropriate. Libraries advertised textbooks, reserve
books, educational videos, and reference books that students might need for class assignments
and research.
Social media in support of academic achievement. Libraries also promoted electronic
resources and library services that were targeted at helping students with their academic
assignments. For example, libraries promoted the availability of e-books and databases like
EBSCO that provide online content in support of student research. Additionally, libraries posted
information about librarian-designed content like new library websites and LibGuides that were
engineered to support subject specific research. Most of the posts about library resources
advertised the availability of resources that were supportive of students’ academic achievement.
Advertising library events and classes that support student academic achievement.
Library events were the second highest content category that librarians reported in the survey,
and analysis of library social media confirmed that many libraries advertised library events
through social media. Several of these library events provided academic support for students
such as workshops about research and citation of sources in MLA or APA format. Since some
CCC librarians teach courses for college credit, these classes were also advertised through social
media channels.
Libraries as cultural centers. Libraries often serve as cultural centers and, as evidenced
by the analysis of the data, CCC libraries used social media to advertise cultural events. For
example, libraries promoted author visits, movie screenings, poetry readings, and other literary
events. Under the category of health, libraries provided physical space for health screenings,

121

secular meditation sessions, and even salsa and merengue dance lessons. Contests and studentled fundraisers for children’s library books were another type of library event that was frequently
advertised through social media. Some of the competitions that were advertised during the fourweek observation period included essay, poetry, art, and photography contests. CCC libraries
provided space for cultural events and community building activities that support students on
multiple human levels, and libraries used social media to advertise these opportunities.
Libraries disseminate cultural and newsworthy content through social media. During
the four-week observation period, the category which can be summarized as publicizing cultural
or newsworthy information was the second highest category of content that CCC libraries shared
through social media. This category had some similarity with the domain that Phillips (2011)
characterized as the shared context of broader society. For example, if librarians found an
interesting article about science or technology, they posted an Internet link in the library’s
Facebook or Twitter feed. A few concrete examples during the observation period were links to
information about Alice Munro, who was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 2013,
information about the Affordable Healthcare Act, and information about registering to vote. A
related category was commemorative acknowledgements. Examples during the observation
period included content about U.S. Constitution Week, National Hispanic Heritage Month,
National Coming Out Day, and Banned Books Week, which celebrates the intellectual freedom
to read. Many libraries also created library displays for these commemorative events, which they
photographed and displayed through social media.
Libraries promote connections through social media. By linking to events in the wider
campus and municipality, CCC libraries help to foster community. Some social media content-like pictures of students or library staff, humorous posts, and invitations to conversation-- can be

122

interpreted as attempts to build connections with students. Connections mediated through social
media and technology can help build community and aid the learning process (Siemens, 2004).
Student response to library social media. During the four-week period that CCC
library social media was analyzed, almost every library saw an increase in followers or
subscribers to library social media content. Libraries with a social media presence gained an
average of three new Facebook subscribers and two new followers in Twitter. Libraries who
posted more content were more likely to gain followers, but even libraries with inactive accounts
during the observation period gained new followers. If libraries do not post content regularly or
if they do not have a social media presence, then they may be missing an opportunity to
communicate with students and form connections that may aid student learning.
Unmanaged Facebook pages. While looking for additional Facebook pages that were
not linked to library webpages, several unclaimed CCC library Facebook pages were found.
These unofficial pages typically contained no pictures and very little content other than an
address and a brief description. The phenomenon of unclaimed Facebook pages occurs when
students use location-based applications to “check in” to a location that does not have an official
social media page. At the campuses where libraries do not have Facebook accounts, students are
still “checking in” on Facebook and “liking” the libraries. For example, one small campus
library with an unmanaged Facebook account had 77 “likes” and 1,738 “check-ins.” Most of the
unmanaged library Facebook accounts had hundreds of student “check-ins.” This represents a
lost opportunity to reach students who are “checking in” at CCC libraries. Additionally, a new
Facebook policy lets social media users add photos and content to unclaimed place pages
(Darwell, 2013). This means that unless someone who is officially associated with the college
library claims the library Facebook page, anyone can add photos, create content, and edit content

123

on the un-administered Facebook pages. This allows the potential for unmonitored and incorrect
information to be published about CCC libraries, and, more importantly, it represents a missed
opportunity to communicate and connect with students.
Measuring student engagement with library social media. Besides monitoring the
growth of library social media followers, another way to measure student engagement with
library social media is to analyze the response to library social media content. For example in
Facebook, subscribers may click on the “like” button or contribute comments. “Likes” may
signal agreement with a post or an emotional or intellectual connection to the visual or verbal
content of the message. When someone takes the initiative to comment on a post, it allows the
potential for conversation or the exchange of ideas. Facebook “likes”-- which require less
commitment and effort-- were much more numerous than comments on library social media
content.
The most frequent type of library social media content posted by CCC libraries was the
promotion of library resources and services to students. These posts generally advertised new or
existing books, the availability of physical resources like study rooms, library databases, or
research and citation workshops. Often there was no discernible student reaction to this type of
library social media content. Other posts in this category generated enough “likes” or comments
to make the number of likes roughly equal to the number of library posts in this category. This
seemed to signal moderate student interest in library social media content about library resources
and library services.
Pictures and an invitation to conversation and connection. It is significant to note that
the content that libraries most frequently posted was not necessarily the information or media
which generated the most student reaction. Library pictures generated the largest student

124

response followed by the category best summarized as an “invitation to conversation and
connection.” Other areas of frequent response were commemorative posts which, during the
period that the data were collected, included Hispanic Heritage Month and U.S. Constitution
Week. Banned Books Week generated the most numerous student reactions in this category,
presumably because of the emotional impact of seeing favorite books and popular novels that
were challenged or banned in schools or public libraries in the United States.
Analysis of CCC library social media content demonstrated that CCC libraries were
predominantly using social media as a platform to promote library resources and services in
support of academic achievement. Although students expressed moderate interest in these
traditional library resources and services, the posts which generated the most student response
were posts that were visual, had some emotional appeal, or fostered conversation and connection.
In summary, the findings of this study validated that social media can be a platform for
promoting traditional library services in support of academic achievement, and social media may
also be a medium for promoting connections with students (ACRL, 2013; Phillips, 2011).
According to Phillips (2011), social media can be used to build community and foster
relationships that support the educational experience of students (Phillips, 2011). This study
demonstrated that students who are library social media followers respond positively to library
social media content that promotes library resources and library programs that support academic
achievement, but students responded most frequently to visual and relational content like humor,
invitations to conversation and connection, and pictures of people they know in the library. If
community college libraries want to attract students’ attention with social media posts that have
the potential to build community and foster connections that may aid learning, then in addition to
providing information about library programs and services, libraries should also post content that

125

students “like.” Based on the results of this study, students responded most frequently to visual
and relational content like humor, and invitations to conversation and connection. It is
significant to note that pictures of local places (like the library) and pictures of familiar people
generated the most student reaction.
California Community College Librarian Perceptions About the Efficacy of Using
Library/Web 2.0 Technologies with Community College Students
CCC librarian perceptions about the usefulness of social media. Similar to results of
research conducted at North American libraries and national and international academic libraries
(Chu & Du, 2013; Rogers, 2011), a strong majority of CCC librarians (86%) felt that social
media could be an effective tool to promote library events or programs. Nearly as many CCC
librarians (83%) also agreed that social media is an important cultural phenomenon and that
librarians should enter into the conversation with students and the community through social
media. Additionally, over two thirds of the librarians indicated that social media is an effective
outreach tool to promote library services to students. The majority of the librarians also thought
the use of social media could be a good use of academic librarian time.
Librarian perceptions about the effectiveness of Library/Web 2.0 technologies.
When CCC librarians were asked whether specific Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies
were actually effective with their student population, the answers were somewhat different.
Based on an analysis of CCC libraries websites, the most prevalent Library/Web 2.0
technologies used by CCC libraries were email reference, social media, text-reference, chat
reference, and LibGuides. Less than a quarter of the librarians perceived email to be effective
with students. Slightly more than half of the libraries reported using IM/chat reference, but the
librarians’ assessment of the effectiveness of IM/chat was tepid—fewer than half reported that

126

IM/chat reference was effective with students. Text message services were used by a relatively
small number of CCC libraries, but the majority of libraries who used text reference found it to
be effective with their students. Although approximately the same numbers of libraries use
Facebook as LibGuides, the majority of the librarians rated Facebook as only somewhat or
slightly effective, whereas LibGuides was most commonly rated as effective or highly effective.
Based on an analysis of librarian responses, CCC librarians perceived LibGuides as the most
effective of the five most prevalent communication technologies used by CCC libraries.
The research data did not provide further clarification as to why librarians perceived
LibGuides to be more effective than Facebook. However, LibGuides is an academic platform
that allows librarians to curate and arrange information, including websites, e-books, databases,
and instructional videos for specific subjects or classes. The business of classifying and linking
information is traditional library work, albeit in electronic format, so it is familiar territory for
academic librarians. Facebook and social media are platforms that are designed for
communication and promoting connections between people. This is less familiar terrain for
academic librarians. So although librarians use social media in support of student academic
achievement by promoting library services, resources, and events, there is a perhaps a perception
among some librarians that social networking is less important than producing traditional library
work. This idea is supported by a few comments in the open response section of the survey
where a few librarians wrote about staff acceptance issues and the limited availability of time to
devote to social media applications.
However, the argument can also be made that social networking utilities promote a sense
of community and allow libraries to make valuable connections with students. Libraries and
librarians may be great founts of knowledge, but unless there are open avenues of

127

communication students may remain unaware of the resources that libraries and librarians
provide. Facebook and other social networking utilities can be additive channels to connect with
students. As one librarian noted, social networking is “an exciting way to communicate” and
“community college libraries must find a way to be involved.” Another librarian wrote, “the
students get more digitally-literate every year. We need to reach them where they are (online)
when they are not in the library.” So although LibGuides are within the comfort zone of
traditional academic librarians, social networking, a non-library specific platform, is within the
comfort zone of the vast majority of college students.
Technostress and resistance to Library/Web 2.0 technologies. Librarians often
struggle with learning new library technologies while continuing to maintain existing
technologies, which are often equally time intensive. Stephens, an influential library science
author and professor at San Jose State University, termed this “technostress” as new technologies
“come at us daily easily creating a feeling of unease and anxiety about how much technology we
can take on” (Stephens, 2008, p. 314). The tension between existing technologies and emerging
technologies was evident in some of the comments of librarians in this study who wrote about
colleagues who were skeptical, resistant, and even hostile towards new technology. Other
librarians wrote that it would be difficult to add social media to the library since librarians were
already “stretched thinly” between existing traditional libraries services and chat reference
services. This sentiment was echoed by one librarian who stated he/she was open to social
media but was doubtful whether their library had the “wherewithal to do it well.” This frustration
emerged in a comment by one librarian who wrote that “social media was critical to library
outreach” but it is “something extra we add to our workload…. and less than half of the FT [fulltime] librarians will have anything to do with social media.” Although the majority of the

128

librarians in the survey were positive towards Library/Web 2.0 technologies, technostress and
resistance to social media and emerging communication technologies still existed at some CCC
libraries.
Most of the librarians in the survey thought that using social media could make librarians
seem more approachable to students. In the open response portion of the survey, some librarians
reported that students responded favorably to social media. For example, one librarian wrote that
social media is “fun” and it keeps the library current and relevant. The same librarian added,
“students tell me they think it’s cool.” Yet another librarian added they had very positive student
response to their text/chat service and their Facebook account. Therefore, although librarians did
mention obstacles to new technologies, like colleague resistance and lack of time, the majority of
the librarians perceived social media to be a good use of academic librarian time to promote
library events, programs, and services to students using communication technologies that are
frequently used by students.
Limitations
California community college libraries were chosen for this study since this is the largest
higher education system in the nation with a very diverse student population, and as a researcher,
I also have personal knowledge and a commitment to the California community college system.
To keep a comparable sample of subjects, four-year colleges and universities were not included
in the study. Private and for-profit colleges and universities were also excluded from the study
for similar reasons. Consequently, the findings of this study are relevant only to public
community colleges whose mission it is to provide undergraduate academic instruction to
degree, vocational, remedial, community services, and transfer students.

129

Although more ambitious studies may be able to survey and study the large and
extremely diverse 2.4 million student population in the California community college system,
this was beyond the scope of this study which was limited to the analysis of library websites,
publically available CCC library social media and librarian perceptions of the efficacy of using
social media and emerging communication technologies with community college students.
Student response was measured by tracking the growth or decline of student subscribers to social
media and through analysis of which types of social media content received the most student
reaction. Students were not directly surveyed or interviewed for this study which restricted the
findings of the study. This study was limited to an analysis of publically available social media,
library websites, and librarian perceptions of the efficacy of using social media and emerging
communication technologies with community college students as measured through a survey
instrument.
Another possible limitation of the study was the survey population. One librarian at each
California community college library, who self-identified as the person who was most
knowledgeable about emerging communication technologies like chat-reference or social media,
was asked to fill out the survey for their library. Consequently, the survey results are not
necessarily representative of all California community college librarians, but only of those
librarians who self-identified as being knowledgeable about social media and emerging
communication technologies.
Since the focus of the study was confined to California community college libraries, the
results of the study are not generalizable to other populations. However, the findings of the
study may provide useful information to other similar academic library populations.

130

Conclusions and Recommendations for Practice
Students and Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies. Students are heavy users
of technology, and increasingly that technology is accessed through portable handheld devices
like tablets and smartphones. Recent research by the Pew Research Center demonstrated what
many librarians observe and intuitively know—that over 86% of Smartphone owners, and
students, use their cellphones for instant access to information to solve problems in “real time”
(Rainie & Fox, 2012). The most recent Pew Internet and American Life research confirmed that
the use of social media is still growing, particularly among the traditional college age
demographic of 18-29 years of age, and the vast majority of the of these young adults use
Facebook, often daily (Duggan & Smith, 2013).
Although less predominant than Facebook, the use of Twitter and Instagram is also
rising. Approximately a third of young adults utilize Twitter and Instagram (Duggan & Smith,
2013). According to recent national Pew Research Center research, Twitter and Instagram
appear to be most engaging to urban dwellers, young adults, and non-Whites (Duggan & Smith,
2013), populations who are core constituencies at community colleges. Research conducted with
California community college students and undergraduate students confirmed that the majority
of community college students are indeed active users of social media, texting, and other forms
of electronic communication (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom, 2012), and a pilot study at five CCC
libraries indicated student interest in library social media, in particular Facebook and YouTube
(Booth, 2011).
The findings of this study demonstrated a student interest in library social media content.
Students “liked” content that promoted academic support, but they responded most strongly to
messages that sought to build connections and community through humor, local pictures of the

131

physical library, pictures of themed library displays, pictures of local people in the library, and
invitations to conversation and connection. Figure 3 below describes the recommended social
media content that California community college students responded to in order of frequency.


Pictures of familiar people (students, librarians, and faculty)



Pictures of special events in the library, preferably featuring
people



Pictures of the interior and the exterior of the library



Pictures of visually appealing library displays



Invitations to conversation and connection



Welcoming new social media subscribers by name



Commemorative events with some emotional appeal like
Banned Books Week or Hispanic Heritage Month



Humorous posts with pictures



Promotion of library resources and services



Promotion of library events


Figure 3. Recommended social media content for libraries.
Students want more than reference answers from librarians. They also want human
connections, andthey
respond toofemotional
and social content like local pictures in library social
Promotion
library events
media. If, as Siemens’ (2004) theory of connectivism suggests, it is important to nurture and
maintain connections to aid continual learning, then social media and other forms of electronic
communication, like texting that are available on handheld mobile devices, may be important
tools to foster connections and assist students in the learning process. One of the interesting

132

findings of this study is that when libraries do not have officially administered social media sites,
students still “check-in” with social media applications. If libraries do not define themselves and
claim their virtual territory within the social media realm, other individuals outside the library
may supply pictures or information on un-administered Facebook pages (Darwell, 2013).
Unmanaged Facebook accounts allow the potential for misinformation and represent a missed
opportunity to inform students through social media about helpful academic support, library
resources, and professional academic librarian assistance that is available to students.
Consequently, it is advisable for CCC libraries to claim their social media territory and claim
their unmanaged Facebook profiles in an effort to reach out to students through Facebook and
other social media applications.
Equality of access. When considering whether or not CCC libraries should use social
media and emerging communication technologies, it is important to consider that the majority of
community college students reported using small mobile devices for research (Booth, 2011), and
for many students, particularly Black and Hispanic students, other than public access computers
in libraries, cell phones may be their only Internet portal (Smith, 2012). Students still value in
person instruction in the physical library building (Booth, 2011), but CCC libraries who do not
currently use Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies, like texting and social media,
should consider adding these communication tools for students who prefer technology-mediated
communication and for students who are not physically located in the library building.
Library/Web 2.0 technologies are almost universally present on the websites of large
four-year university library websites (Aharony, 2012; Harinarayana & Vasantha Raju, 2010;
Mahmood & Richardson, 2011; Mahmood & Richardson, 2013; Phillips, 2011; Rod-Welch,
2012). When compared to large four-year universities, California community colleges offer far

133

fewer Library/Web 2.0 communication technologies to their student populations. This results in
an inequality of services for a population of students that is often already disadvantaged and
overcoming many obstacles on the path to graduation or transfer to a four-year college (Kim,
2011; Rhoades, 2012).
Community college students are often first-generation college students from lower-socioeconomic backgrounds with little social or economic capital. Since most community college
students live off-campus and many community college students work, either part-time or fulltime, community college students may have difficulty forming on-campus connections that are
beneficial to college success. Libraries can help these students by providing more
communication channels to connect with the library and faculty librarians. In addition to
traditional instruction in the library, CCC librarians can communicate with students, who may be
off-campus or in the library building but reluctant to approach a librarian, through modern
technologies like text-messaging and social media. Whether in person, or mediated through
technology, students are seeking human connection.
Based on the results of this study, it is highly recommended that CCC libraries explore
and use multiple communication channels to reach students including email, chat, the library
web-page, text-messaging, LibGuides, YouTube, and social media applications. Figure 4 below
provides a highlight of some of the key findings of related research and the results of this study
regarding community college students and Library/Web 2.0 and social media.

134



College students are heavy users of mobile technologies like Smartphones and textmessaging services.



The majority of college students use social media like Facebook and YouTube.



Students seek connections through social media.



Community college students should have equitable access to the rich array of
Library/Web 2.0 technologies that are available to students at 4-year university libraries.



In preliminary survey research, the majority of California community college students
would use library social media if it were available (Booth, 2011).



Text-messaging and social media are the communication mediums most commonly used
by college students (Booth, 2011; Dahlstorm, 2012; Duggan & Smith, 2013).



Facebook and YouTube are the social media applications most frequently used by
California community college students (Booth, 2011).



Community college students use location based applications to “check-in” to the library
whether or not librarians notice or maintain officially administered Facebook pages.



Librarians should consider providing services to students through mobile technologies
including social media since many college students are comfortable with this type of
communication.



Facebook, Text-messaging, and YouTube provide libraries valuable opportunities to
connect and communicate with students.

Figure 4. Why libraries should use Library 2.0 technologies and social media.
Suggestions for Future Research
Research specific to community colleges. Very few research studies focus on the
specific needs of community college libraries and community college students. Joswick (1999)
135

discovered that most published articles in the field of library science were authored by librarians
at four-year research universities. Winters (2004) and Poole (2000) speculated that less research
is published by community college librarians or about community college libraries because
community college faculty are usually not required to publish as part of the tenure and retention
process. Although some of the research conducted at four-year research universities is
transferable to community colleges, the needs of the diverse community college population are
different than those at 4-year universities (Juchniewicz, M. M., Dagostino, L., & Carifio, J.,
2007; Winters, 2004). Consequently, there is a need for research and publication about
community college libraries. Since community college librarians in this study identified
LibGuides as the most effective Library/Web 2.0 technology, further research at community
college libraries to identify best pedagogical practices with LibGuides would be beneficial to
faculty librarians and ultimately students.
Librarian attitudes towards new technology. This study also explored barriers to the
implementation of new technologies. Librarians identified lack of staff time and limited budgets
as the main obstacles, but in the open response section of the survey, a few librarians also wrote
about the attitudes of colleagues who were resistant to new technologies. Since this was not
directly queried in the study, it is unknown how widespread this problem is, so further research
into community college librarian attitudes towards new technologies and receptiveness to change
would be informative. At community colleges where resistance to new technologies is an issue,
adaptive leadership techniques and site specific action research could be used to facilitate
positive change.
Direct research with students. The scope of this study included website analysis,
quantitative and qualitative social media analysis of all 112 California community college

136

libraries, and survey research with CCC library leaders who had specific site based knowledge
about how Library/Web 2.0 technologies were being used at their campus libraries. Student
responsiveness to library social media was indirectly measured through an increase or decrease
in student subscribers to Twitter and Facebook and through student engagement with library
social media. What is missing from this study was direct research with students. In other words,
librarians were asked which Library/Web 2.0 technologies were effective with their students, but
students were not directly contacted for their opinions about the usefulness of Library/Web 2.0
communication technologies. It was beyond the scope of this study to coordinate large scale
research of all 2.4 million California community college students at 112 different college
campuses. However, this would be very useful information!
At the request of the California Community College Council of Chief Librarians, Booth
(2011) conducted a pilot study of students at five California community college libraries.
Published as the California Community College Student Library Engagement Survey, Booth’s
(2011) study measured student technology ownership, engagement with Web 2.0 applications,
and student willingness to engage with mobile library technologies and library social media. It
has been challenging for the Council of Chief Librarians of California Community Colleges
(CCLCCC) to coordinate a statewide survey of students at all 112 campus; however, it is a
continuing CCLCCC goal to implement a statewide longitudinal study based on Booth’s pilot
study. In a period of rapid growth of emerging communication technologies coupled with scarce
funding for higher education, it is important to identify how best to support learning with limited
staff time and dwindling resources. As identified in the pilot study, California Community
College Student Library Engagement Survey, further research is needed to understand local
student needs, technology device ownership, and technology related learning preferences in

137

order to best support student learning (Booth, 2011). With limited availability of human and
financial resources, it is wise to prioritize and refine services and identify which Library/Web 2.0
technologies that librarians and students find to be most useful. Research to answer this question
aligns with the Library 2.0 goal of continual research to evaluate services and facilitate
purposeful change that empowers students through interactive and participatory services (Casey
& Savastinuk, 2007). Research with students and faculty librarians is necessary to refine the
library services that connect students, regardless of physical location or communication
technology, to the people and information resources that foster community and academic
success.
Conclusion
It seems paradoxical that within the billions of bits and bytes of information available on
the open web (and hidden in proprietary databases), and with the cacophony of printed and
recorded voices, that the Internet can still feel like a lonely place. Human beings are social
creatures who crave conversation and connection. We post pictures and status updates to social
media because we want to be seen and heard. We are also infinitely curious about other people.
This may explain why Facebook is one of the most popular destinations on the Internet. For
most college students, technology mediated communication fosters a sense of connection to the
university and the wider world (Dahlstrom, 2012; Phillips, 2011).
According to the theory of connectivism (Siemens, 2004), learning occurs when
information nodes, which may be mediated through technology, are connected, so the ability to
see links between fields, ideas, and concepts is critical. Librarians are information node
specialists who facilitate student learning by connecting students with current, accurate
information in a shifting information landscape. Library/Web 2.0 and social media are interactive

138

communication technologies that allow librarians to connect and communicate with students and
foster learning.
The majority of the librarians in this study, who self-identified as the person in their
library who was most knowledgeable about technology, agreed that social media is an effective
tool to promote library programs, services, and events to students. Most of the librarians also
agreed that social media is an important cultural phenomenon and that librarians should enter
into the conversation with students and the community using familiar social media platforms
where students already spend a lot of time.
Approximately half of the California community colleges have active Facebook pages. A
quantitative and qualitative analysis of CCC library social media posts and student responses to
library social media revealed that students responded most frequently to social media content
that sought to build connections and community through pictures of people in the library,
pictures of the physical library, pictures of local library events and displays, humorous content,
and invitations to conversation and connection. An additional finding of the study was that
students “check-in” through Facebook even when California community college libraries do not
have officially maintained Facebook pages. This represents a missed opportunity to connect with
students.

Since most college students believe that technology enhances learning, helps them
achieve educational outcomes, and prepares them for the workforce (Booth, 2011; Dahlstrom,
2012), it is a dis-service to community college students if community college students do not
have equal access to technology, including emerging forms of communication technology like
LibGuides, text reference, chat reference, and social media which has the dual use of providing

139

information and fostering a sense of community. Based on student response to library social
media, and the analysis of librarian perceptions of the efficacy of Library/Web 2.0 technologies,
it is highly recommended that California community college libraries consider the specific
recommendations on pages 132 and 135 and continue to explore and implement Library/Web 2.0
technologies like social media, LibGuides, text reference, and other emerging communication
technologies that support connection and community and foster student learning.

140

References
Academic Senate for California Community Colleges. (2010). Standards of practice for
California Community College library faculty and programs. Retrieved from
http://asccc.org/sites/default/files/Library-paper-fall2011.pdf
ACRL 2012 Academic Library: Trends and Statistics Masters Baccalaureate Volume. (2013).
American Library Association.
Adamich, T. (2008). The “Facebook” effect on FDLP communication: Using social networking
tools in a new context: A Pennsylvania-based approach. DttP, 36(2), 29-32.
Aharony, N. (2010). Twitter use in libraries: An exploratory analysis. Journal Of Web
Librarianship, 4(4), 333-350.
Aharony, N. (2009). Web 2.0 use by librarians. Library & Information Science Research 31(1),
29-37. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2008.06.004
Aharony, N. (2012a). An analysis of American academic libraries' websites: 2000-2010. The
Electronic Library, 30(6), 764 – 776.
Aharony, N. (2012b). Facebook use in libraries: An exploratory analysis Aslib Proceedings,
64(4), 358-372. doi:10.1108/00012531211244725
Anderson, C. (2006). The long tail: Why the future of business is selling less of more. New
York, NY: Hyperion.
American Library Association. (2012). Virtual reference: An annotated bibliography. Retrieved
from http://www.ala.org/tools/libfactsheets/alalibraryfactsheet19
Baggett, S., & Williams, M. (2012). Student behaviors and opinions regarding the use of social
media, mobile technologies, and library research. Virginia Libraries, 58(1), 19-22.
Beloit College. (2012). The mindset list. Retrieved from http://www.beloit.edu/mindset/
Bidgoli, H. (2004). The internet encyclopedia: 2. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Booth, C. (2009). Informing innovation: Tracking student interest in emerging library
technologies at Ohio University. Association of College and Research Libraries, Chicago,
IL. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/
publications/booksanddigitalresources/digital/ii-booth.pdf
Booth, C. (2011). California community college student library engagement survey. Retrieved
from http://www.cclccc.org/ccl-lib-tech-surv-finalreport2011.pdf
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210-230. doi:10.1111/j.10836101.2007.00393.x
141

Burhanna, K.J., Seeholzer, J., & Salem, J. Jr. (2009). No natives here: A focus group study of
student perceptions of Web 2.0 and the academic library. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, (35)6, 523-32.
California Community Colleges. (2011). Student success task force report. Retrieved from
http://www.californiacommunitycolleges.ccco.edu/PolicyInAction/StudentSuccessTaskF
orce.aspx
California Community Colleges Chancellors Office. (2012). Management information systems
data mart. Retrieved from http://datamart.cccco.edu/DataMart.aspx
California. (n.d.). California education code. Retrieved from http://www.leginfo.ca.gov
Casey, M.E., & Savastinuk, L.C. (2007). Library 2.0: A guide to participatory library service.
Medford, N.J: Information Today.
Cassidy, E., Britsch, J., Griffin, G., Manolovitz, T., Shen, L., & Turney, L. (2011). Higher
education and emerging technologies: Student usage, preferences, and lessons for library
services. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 50(4), 380-391.
Charnigo, L., & Barnett-Ellis, P. (2007). Checking out Facebook.com: The impact of a digital
trend on academic libraries. Information Technology & Libraries, 26(1), 23-34.
Cherryholmes, C. H. (1994). More notes on pragmatism. Educational Researcher, 23, 16.
doi:10.2307/1176282 correct year? cite in text says 1992 (p. 71)
Chu, S., & Du, H. (2013). Social networking tools for academic libraries. Journal of
Librarianship & Information Science, 45(1), 64-75. doi:10.1177/0961000611434361
Chu, M., & Meulemans, Y.N. (2008). The problems and potential of MySpace and Facebook
usage in academic libraries. Internet Reference Services Quarterly, 13(1), 69-85.
doi:10.1300/J136v13n01-04
Clemmitt, M. (2006, July 28). Cyber socializing. CQ Researcher, 16(27), 625-648.
Clemmitt, M. (2010, September 17). Social networking. CQ Researcher, 20(32), 749-772.
Collier, E., & Whatley, A. (2010). Take the template and run: Austin Community College’s
Student Library and Technology Use Study. In the Library with the Lead Pipe. Retrieved
from http://www.inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe.org
Connell, R. (2009). Academic libraries, Facebook and MySpace, and student outreach: A survey
of student opinion. Portal: Libraries & the Academy, 9(1), 25-36
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods
approaches. Los Angeles: SAGE Publications.

142

Creswell, J. W., & Plano, C. V. L. (2007). Designing and conducting mixed-methods research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Dahlstrom, E. (2012). ECAR study of undergraduate students and information technology, 2012.
Louisville, CO: EDUCAUSE Center for Applied Research. Retrieved from
http://www.educause.edu/ecar
Darwell, B. (2013, May 20). Facebook now lets users suggest photos for place pages. Retrieved
from http://www.insidefacebook.com
De Rosa, C., Cantrell, J., Hawk, J., & Wilson, A. (2006). College students’ perceptions of
libraries and information resources: A report to the OCLC membership. Retrieved from
http://www.oclc.org/us/en/reports/perceptionscollege.htm
Douglass, J. A. (2000). The California idea and American higher education: 1850 to the 1960
master plan. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Duggan, M., & Smith, A. (2013, December). Social media update 2013. Pew Internet &
American Life Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/SocialMedia-Update.aspx
Eberhart, G. M. (2006). The whole library handbook 4: Current data, professional advice, and
curiosa about libraries and library services. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Eisenstein, E. L. (1979). The printing press as an agent of change: Communications and cultural
transformations in early modern Europe. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Epperson, A., & Leffler, J. J. (2009). Social software programs: Student preferences of librarian
use. New Library World, 110(7/8), 366–372.
Facebook. (2012). Facebook [Facebook page]. Retrieved October 1, 2012 from
http://www.facebook.com
Farkas, M. (2006). Libraries in social networking software. Information Wants to Be Free.
Retrieved from http://meredith.wolfwater.com/wordpress/2006/05/10/libraries-in-socialnetworking-software/
Farkas, M. (2007). Going where patrons are. American Libraries, 38(5), 27.
Fichter, D., & Wisniewski, J. (2008). Social media metrics: Making the case for making the
effort. Online, 32(6), 54-57.
Foster, N. F., & Gibbons, S. (2007). Studying students: The undergraduate research project at
the University of Rochester. Chicago, IL: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Gall, D. (2010). Librarian like a rock star: Using your personal brand to promote your services
and reach distant users. Journal of Library Administration, 50(5/6), 628-637.
doi:10.1080/01930826.2010.488928
143

Gibbons, S. (2007). The academic library and the net gen student: Making the connections.
Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Glazer, H. (2009). Clever outreach or costly diversion? An academic library evaluates its
Facebook experience. College & Research Libraries News, 70(1), 11-19.
Gleick, J. (2011). The information: A history, a theory, a flood. New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Graham, J. M., Faix, A., & Hartman, L. (2009). Crashing the Facebook party: One library's
experiences in the students' domain. Library Review, 58(3), 228 – 236.
Hafner, K. (2001, December 6). Billions served daily and counting. New York Times. Retrieved
from http://www.nytimes.com/2001/12/06/technology/circuits/06EMAI.html
Harinarayana, N., & Vasantha Raju, N. (2010). Web 2.0 features in university library websites.
The Electronic Library, 28(1), 69-88. doi: 10.1108/02640471011023388.
Hendrix, D., Chiarella, D., Hasman, L., Murphy, S., & Zafron, M. L. (2009). Use of Facebook in
academic health sciences libraries. Journal of the Medical Library Association, 97(1), 4447. Hoover's Inc. (2012, September 25). Facebook INC. Hoover's company records - in depth records. Retrieved October 10, 2012, from Lexis Nexis Academic database.
Hoover's Inc. (2012, September 25). Facebook INC. Hoover's company records - in - depth
records. Retrieved October 10, 2012, from Lexis Nexis Academic database.
Huwe, T. K. (2007). Surfing the Library 2.0 wave. Computers in Libraries, 27(1), 36-38.
Ismail, L. (2010). What net generation students really want: Determining library help-seeking
preferences of undergraduates. Reference Services Review, 38(1), 10-27.
doi: 10.1108/00907321011020699
Jacobson, T. B. (2011). Facebook as a library tool: Perceived vs. actual use. College & Research
Libraries, 72(1), 79-90.
Johnson, M. (2010). This book is overdue!: How librarians and cybrarians can save us all. New
York, NY: Harper.
Jones, S., Madden, M. A., & Clarke, L. N. (2012). The Internet goes to college: How students
are living in the future with today's technology. Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet &
American Life Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2002/PIP_College_Report.pdf.pdf
Joswick, K. E. (1999). Article publication patterns of academic librarians: An Illinois case study.
College & Research Libraries, 60(4), 340-349.
Juchniewicz, M. M., Dagostino, L., & Carifio, J. (2007). Beginning with literacy needs:
Community college program development that considers individual students' contexts.
Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 31(3), 199-215.
144

Kang, C. (2012, October 11, 2012). Number of cell phones exceeds U.S. population: CTIA trade
group. Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/posttech/post/number-of-cell-phones-exceeds-us-population-ctia-tradegroup/2011/10/11/gIQARNcEcL_blog.html
Kenan, S. K. (2012). Perceptions of personnel at selected Texas community colleges regarding
the impact of technology on their libraries. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. (1012121200).
Kim, Y. (2011). Minorities in higher education: 24th Status Report. Washington, D.C: American
Council on Education.
Kvavik, R. B. (2005). Convenience, communications, and control: How students use technology.
In D. G. Oblinger, J. L. Oblinger, (Eds.), Educating the Net Generation, (pp.7.1-7.20).
Retrieved from http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/pub7101g.pdf
Khosrowpour, M. (2007). Dictionary of information science and technology. Hershey, PA: Idea
Group Reference.
Landis, C. (2010). A social networking primer for librarians. New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickuhr, K. (2010). Social media & mobile internet use
among teens and young adults. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-Young-Adults.aspx
Light, B., & McGrath, K. (2010). Ethics and social networking sites: A disclosive analysis of
Facebook. Information Technology & People, 23(4), 290-311.
doi:10.1108/09593841011087770
Mack, D., Behler, A., Roberts, B., & Rimland, E. (2007). Reaching students with Facebook:
Data and best practices. Electronic Journal of Academic and Special Librarianship, 8(2).
Retrieved from http://southernlibrarianship.icaap.org/content/v08n02/mack_d01.html
Mahmood, K., & Richardson, J. (2011). Adoption of web 2.0 in US academic libraries: A survey
of ARL library websites. Program: Electronic Library and Information Systems, 45(4), 365375.
Mahmood, K., & Richardson, J. (2013). Impact of web 2.0 technologies on academic libraries: A
survey of ARL libraries. Electronic Library, 31(4), 508-520.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1605/01.301-0024038962.2013
Maness, J. (2006). Library 2.0 theory: Web 2.0 and its implications for libraries. Webology, 3(2),
Article 25. Retrieved from http://www.webology.org/2006/v3n2/a25.html
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2011). Designing qualitative research. Los Angeles, CA:
SAGE Publications.

145

Mash, S. D. (2010). Decision-making in the absence of certainty: A study in the context of
technology and the construction of 21st century academic libraries. Chicago, IL:
Association of College and Research Libraries.
Mathews, B. S. (2006). Do you Facebook? Networking with students online. College &
Research Libraries News, 67(5), 306-307.
Moore, K. A. (2006). The impact of technology on community college libraries. (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. (304913130).
Naylor, S., Stoffel, B., & Van Der Laan, S. (2008). Why isn't our chat reference used more?
Finding of focus group discussions with undergraduate students. Reference & User
Services Quarterly, 47(4), 342-354.
Nicholas, D., Watkinson, A., Rowlands, I., & Jubb, M. (2011). Social media, academic research
and the role of university library. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 37(5), 373375.
O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next
generation of software. Retrieved from http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web20.html
Oxford, R.L. (2010). Library 2.0 and information competency in California community college
distance education programs: A descriptive study. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. (3424359)
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications.
Phillips, N. (2011). Academic library use of Facebook: Building relationships with students.
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 37(6), 512-522.
Poole, C. E. (2000). Importance of research and publication by community college librarians.
College & Research Libraries, 61(6), 486-489.
Powers, A. (2010). “Librarian's anxiety”? How community college librarians feel about their
reference desk service. Community & Junior College Libraries, 16(1), 54-70.
doi:10.1080/02763910903466202
Powers, A., Schmidt, J., & Hill, C. (2008). Why can't we be friends? The MSU libraries find
friends on Facebook. Mississippi Libraries, 72(1), 3-5.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants part 1. On the horizon, 9(5), 1-6.
Purcell, K. (2011). Search and email remain the top online activities. Pew Internet &
American Life Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Search-and-email/
146

Rainie, L. & Fox, S. (2012, May 7). Just-in-time information through mobile connections.
Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Just-in-time.aspx
Reference and User Services Association. (2012). Definitions of reference. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/rusa/resources/guidelines/definitionsreference
Rhoades, G. (2012). Closing the door, increasing the gap: Who’s not going to
(community)College. Center for the Future of Higher Education Policy Report #1.
Retrieved from
http://futureofhighered.org/uploads/ClosingTheDoorFINAL_ALL32812.pdf
Roberts, L. G. (1988). The APRANET and computer networks. In A. Goldberg, (Ed.), A
history of personal workstations (pp. 141-172). New York, NY: ACM Press.
Rochlin, G. I. (1997). Trapped in the net: The unanticipated consequences of
computerization. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.
Rod-Welch, L. J. (2012). Incorporation and visibility of reference and social networking
tools on ARL member libraries' websites. Reference Services Review, 40 (1), 138 –
171. doi: 10.1108/00907321211203694
Rogers, C. E. (2010). Social media, libraries, and Web 2.0: How American Libraries are using
new tools for public relations and to attract new users –– third survey. Retrieved from
http://www.slideshare.net/ crr29061/social-media-libraries-and-web-20-how-americanlibraries-are-using-new-tools-for-public- relations-and-to-attract-new- users-third-surveynovember- 2010
Sachs, D. A., Eckel. E.J., & Langan, K.A. (2011). Striking a balance: Effective use of Facebook
in an academic library. Internet Reference Services Quarterly, 16(1/2), 35-54.
Seeholzer, J., & Salem, J. A. (2011). Library on the go: A focus group study of the mobile web
and the academic library. College & Research Libraries, 72(1), 9-20.
Sekyere, K. (2009). Too much hullabaloo about Facebook in libraries! Is it really helping
libraries? Nebraska Library Association Quarterly, 40(2), 25-27.
Siemens, G. (2004). Connectivism: a learning theory for a digital age. Elearnspace. Retrieved
from http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/connectivism.htm
Smith, A. (2012). Cell Internet use 2012. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved from
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Cell-Internet-Use-2012.aspx
Sodt, M., & Summey, T. (2009). Beyond the library's walls: Using library 2.0 tools to reach out
to all users. Journal of Library Administration, 49(1/2), 97-109.
doi:10.1080/01930820802312854
Springshare. (2012). LibGuides. Retrieved from http://springshare.com/libguides/
147

T. C. (2010). Leading edge technologies in a community college library setting: Identifying
disconnects of academic libraries and their users. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. (759825796).
Stephens, M. (2004). Technoplans vs. technolust. Library Journal, 129(18), 36-37.
Stephens, M. (2008). Taming technolust: Ten steps for planning in a 2.0 world. Reference and
User Services Quarterly, 47(4), 314-317.
Stevens, N.D. (1990). A popular history of library technology. In N.M. Nelson (Ed.), Library
technology 1970-1990: Shaping the library of the future. Westport, CT: Meckler.
Stevens, W. R. (2000). TCP/IP illustrated: 1, the protocols. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Transue, B. M. (2013). Connectivism and information literacy: Moving from learning theory to
pedagogical practice. Public Services Quarterly, 9(3), 185-195. doi:
10.1080/15228959.2013.815501
Trochim, W.M. (2006). The research methods knowledge base, 2nd Edition. Retrieved from
http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/
Vaidhyanathan, S. (2008). Generational myth: Not all young people are tech-savvy. The
Chronicle of Higher Education, 55(4), B7-B9.
Valenzuela, A. (1999). Subtractive schooling: U.S.-Mexican youth and the politics of caring.
Albany, NY: State University of New York.
Wan, G. (2011). How academic libraries reach users on Facebook. College &
UndergraduateLibraries, 18(4), 307. doi:10.1080/10691316.2011.624944
Winters, L. S. (2004). California community college libraries in the 21st century. (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. (305034068).
Xia, Z. (2009). Marketing library services through Facebook groups. Library Management,
30(6), 469-478. doi:10.1108/01435120910982159
Xu, C., Fenfei, O., & Heting, C. (2009). The academic library meets Web 2.0: Applications and
implications. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 35(4), 324-331.

148

APPENDICES

149

Appendix A:
Survey Instrument

Emerging Communication Technologies in California
community college libraries
I would like to invite you to complete a survey about emerging communication technologies like
social media and electronic reference services like text messaging and chat reference.
It should take you about 10 minutes to complete the survey. There is a minimal risk that the
researcher may be able to identify the survey participants based on the location of the college. To
protect your identity and anonymity, all of the data will only be reported only in aggregate. No
institutional names will appear in the report and institutional data will also only be reported in
aggregate. I assure you that if you choose to participate, every attempt will be made to keep your
written responses anonymous. By returning the survey, you are giving your consent to participate
in my study.Your participation is voluntary and you may choose to withdraw at any time or
choose not to answer every question. I assure you that if you choose to participate, your
responses will remain strictly confidential and anonymous and your survey responses will not be
connected to your personal information.
In gratitude for participating in the study, you will be eligible to be entered into a drawing for a
$50 Amazon gift certificate. In order to keep your responses anonymous, at the end of the
survey, you will be prompted to complete a separate entry that is not connected to your survey.
Once I collect the information, the data will be analyzed with the assistance of my dissertation
chair. I will then present and discuss the results at Saint Mary’s College. You are welcome to ask
me for a copy of my report when it is completed.
If you feel that another librarian at your site is more qualified to complete the survey, please
forward the email with the survey link to them.
Should you have any questions or concerns at any point during the duration of my study, please
feel free to contact me by email at nancy.golz@mccd.edu. You can also contact my chair, Dr.
Sawako Suzuki, at ss12@stmarys-ca.edu. Thank you in advance for your assistance with my
research!
Sincerely,
Nancy Golz

150

1. By clicking the "accept" button below you affirm that you have read and
understood the above information and consent to participate in the survey.
Accept

2. Are you the person at your library who is most knowledgeable about emerging
communication technologies like chat reference or social media? If you believe
there is someone at your library who is more qualified to complete this survey,
please forward the email with the survey link to that person.
Yes
No

3. Please check all of the Library / Web 2.0 technologies used at your library.
Check all that apply.
Chat or Instant Messaging
Social Networking sites (Facebook, MySpace)
Twitter
YouTube
Photo sharing site (like Flickr)
Blog
Instagram
Tumblr
LibGuides
Library Thing
Wiki
RSS
Text-messaging service (like Text-a-Librarian)
Pinterest
Online Virtual Worlds (like Second Life)
Social bookmarking (del.icio.us or Technorati)
Podcasts
Other (please specify)
151

4. Have you received any specialized training in the Library / Web 2.0
technologies that were listed in the previous question?
No
Watched a webinar
Attended a workshop
Attended a conference
Participated in an online class
Learned from books or other printed material
Learned through trial and error
Other (please specify)

5. How do you prefer to learn new technologies?
Webinars
Face to face instruction in a group setting
One on one individualized instruction
Learn through trial and error
Online tutorials
Online instructional videos
I do not like to learn new technologies
Other (please specify)

6. Most libraries face various obstacles in implementing technology. How much is
each of the following an obstacle at your library?
Always a
great obstacle

Often an
obstacle

Limited staff time
Limited staff
training
Institutional
policies
Limited budget

152

Sometimes an
obstacle

Rarely an
obstacle

Not at all an
obstacle

Always a
great obstacle

Often an
obstacle

Sometimes an
obstacle

Rarely an
obstacle

Not at all an
obstacle

Limits of the
technology

7. If your library has social media accounts like Facebook or Twitter, what types
of information or media do you post on your social media accounts? Please check
all that apply to your library.
Promote library events
Promote library services
Promote library databases
Advertise new library materials
Advertise campus events
Link to library videos
Link to a library blog
Link to Internet articles
Post library pictures
Post library hours or holiday closures
Post humorous memes or LOL cats
Not applicable because our library does not use social media.
Other (please specify)

8. Next, we would like to know how effective various technologies are in serving
the specific needs of your students.
Not
effective

Slightly
effective

Somewhat
effective

Text message
reference
Chat/IM
reference
LibGuides
Social media like
Facebook or
153

Effective

Highly
effective

We don't
use this
technology

Not
effective

Slightly
effective

Somewhat
effective

Effective

Highly
effective

We don't
use this
technology

Twitter
Email reference

9. Next, we’d like to ask about social media (Facebook, Twitter, Library Thing,
etc.) as it relates to the specific needs of your students. Even if your library does
not use social media, we are still interested in your opinions!
Strongly
Not Slightly Strongly
Agree
agree
sure disagree disagree
Social media allows (could allow) our students to
interact with the library on a familiar platform
where they already spend a lot of time.
Social media is not a good use of academic librarian
time at our institution.
Social media is (could be) an effective method to
promote library services to our students.
My library does not have sufficient staff time to
devote to social media.
Social media is (could be) an effective tool to promote
library events or programs to our students.
Having a library presence in social media makes
(could make) our librarians seem more approachable
to our students.
No one on our staff has sufficient training in the use
of social media.
Social media can help our students to develop a
positive relationship with the library.
Social media is (could be) an effective outreach tool
at our institution.
Social media is an important cultural phenomenon,
and the library should enter into the conversation
with students and the college community.

10. Our students ask the librarians questions through social media.
154

Yes
No
Please answer the following questions about the community college library where you are
employed.

11. What is the approximate size of student enrollment at your institution
(F.T.E)?
1,000 or less

7,001-10,000

1,001-3,000

10,001-15,000

3,001-5,000

15,000 or more

5,001-7,000

12. What is the name of the California community college where you are
employed? (optional)

13. How many full-time faculty librarians work at your library?

14. How many part-time librarians work at your institution?

Please answer the next questions which are about you and your educational background.

15. How many years total have you been employed as a community college
librarian?

155

16. Have you worked as a professional librarian in any other library before your
current position at the community college? Please check all that apply.
No
Another community college library
4 year college of university library
Public library
School library
Law library
Medical library
Other (please specify)

17. What is your age?
25 or younger
26-35 years
36-45
46- 55
56- 65
65 or older

18. What is your educational background? Please check all that apply.
B.A. or B.S.
M.L.S.
Additional Master’s Degree
EdD.
PhD.
If you have a 2nd Master's degree what is the subject area?

19. Do you have anything that you would like to share about your experience
using social media or other technologies with your community college students?

156

If you wish to be entered into the drawing for the gift card and/or receive the results of this study
please copy and paste the following link into your web browser.
http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/cclibraryreward
Thank you for taking the time to respond to this survey!
Note: This survey is not linked to the responses in the first survey in order to protect the
anonymity of the survey respondents. The hyperlink to this survey can be found at the bottom of
the first survey. The purpose of this survey is to award the gift certificate and to distribute survey
results to interested survey participants.
1. If you would you like to be entered into the drawing for the $50 gift card please enter
your email so that I may contact the winner.

2. If you would like a copy of the study results please enter your email address into the box
below.

Thank you for participating in the survey! The winner of the gift card will be notified by email.
Done

157

Appendix B:
Website Checklist
Colleges (N=112)
Total Number

Facebook LibGuides Chat Twitter
57
57
44
29

Allen Hancock

x

x

American River

x

x

Antelope Valley

x

x

Berkeley City

x

x

Butte

x

Cabrillo

x

x

Canada

x

x

Cerritos

x

x

Cerro Coso

x

x

Text YouTube
15
13

Blog
9

x
x

Bakersfield
Barstow

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

Chaffey

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Chabot

Citrus

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

City College SF
Coastline
College of Alameda

x

x

x

x

College of Marin
College of San Mateo

x

College of the Canyons

x

College of the Desert

x

x

x

158

x

Colleges (N=112)
College of the Redwoods

Facebook LibGuides Chat Twitter
x
x

Text YouTube

Blog

x

College of the Sequoias
College of the Siskiyous
Columbia College
Camino College
Contra Costa College
Copper Mountain

x

x
x

Cosumnes River College
Crafton Hills
Cuesta College

x

x

Cuyamaca

x

x

Cypress College

x

x

De Anza

x

Diablo Valley

x

x

x

x

E. Los Angeles

x

x

x

x

El Camino

x
x

x

Evergreen

x

x

Feather River
Folsom Lake

x

Foothill

x

Fresno City

x

Fullerton

x

x

x

x

Gavilan
Glendale College
Golden West

x

x

159

x

Colleges (N=112)
Grossmont
Hartnell Salinas

Facebook LibGuides Chat Twitter
x
x
x
x
x

Imperial Valley College
Irvine Valley

Text YouTube
x

x

Lake Tahoe

x

Laney College

x

Los Positas
Lassen
Long Beach

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

L. A. City College
L. A. Harbor

x

L. A. Mission

x

L. A. Pierce

x

L. A. Southwest

x

x

L.A. Trade Technical
L.A. Valley
Los Medanos

x

x

Mendocino
Merced

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Merritt College
Mira Costa
Mission College

x

Modesto

x

Monterey Peninsula

x

x

Moorpark

x

Moreno Valley

x

x

x
160

x

x

x

Blog
x

Colleges (N=112)
Mt San Antonio College

Facebook LibGuides Chat Twitter

Text YouTube

Blog

x

Mt San Jacinto
Napa Valley

x

Norco

x

x

x

x

Ohlone
Orange Coast Costa Mesa
Orange Coast Oxnard

x

x

Palo Verde

x

Palomar

x

x

Pasadena

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

Porterville
Reedley
Rio Hondo

x

Riverside City

x

Sacramento City

x

x

x

x

Saddleback

x

San Bernardino

x

San Diego City

x

x

x

San Diego Mesa

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

San Diego Miramar
San Joaquin Delta

x

x

x

San Jose City College

x

Santa Ana College

x

Santa Barbara

x

Santa Monica College

x

x

x
x

x

161

x

x

x

x

Colleges (N=112)
Santa Rosa

Facebook LibGuides Chat Twitter
x
x
x
x

Santiago

x

x

Shasta

x

x

x

Sierra College

x

x

x

Text YouTube
x

Blog

x

x

Skyline
Solano

x

Southwestern College

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

Taft College
Ventura College

x

Victor Valley

x

West Hills College
West Los Angeles

x

West Valley

x

Woodland

x

Yuba College

x

x

x

x

Note: The data for this table were collected in August 2013.

162

x

APPENDIX C

163

Appendix C:
Post card reminder

Note: Photo credit, Friedhelm Golz. Used with permission.

164

APPENDIX D

165

Appendix D
California Community Colleges and Academic Faculty Librarians (N = 112)
College
Alameda
Allan Hancock
American River
Antelope Valley
Bakersfield
Barstow
Berkeley City
Butte
Cabrillo
Canada
Canyons
Cerritos
Cerro Coso
Chabot Hayward
Chaffey
Citrus
Coastline
Columbia
Compton
Contra Costa
Copper Mountain
Cosumnes River
Crafton Hills
Cuesta
Cuyamaca
Cypress
Deanza
Desert
Diablo Valley
East LA
El Camino
Evergreen Valley
Feather River
Folsom Lake
Foothill

FTE
3,954.97
9,598.75
21,827.09
10,593.90
12,174.48
2,664.64
4,011.91
11,110.18
10,372.38
4,578.87
13,917.29
17,852.12
2,906.75
9,202.68
13,236.81
10,736.78
5,714.04
1,730.64
5,476.55
5,783.03
1,743.81
9,775.80
3,960.49
8,258.60
4,744.49
12,008.09
19,787.14
7,494.35
16,943.21
20,446.09
17,503.12
6,613.01
1,774.83
5,634.56
12,837.64

#Librarians
3
3
8
3
4
1
3
2
4
2
2
6
1
6
4
2
1
1
5
4
1
4
4
3
3
3
5
2
6
7
8
4
1
5
5
166

Librarian: Student
1,318
3,199
2,728
3,531
3,043
2,664
1,337
5,555
2,593
2,289
6,958
2,975
2,906
1,533
3,309
5,368
5,714
1,730
1,095
1,445
1,743
2,443
990
2,752
1,581
4,002
3,957
3,747
2,823
2,920
2,187
1,653
1,774
1,126
2,567

College
Fresno City
Fullerton
Gavilan
Glendale
Golden West
Grossmont
Hartnell
Imperial Valley
Irvine Valley
LA City
LA Harbor
LA Mission
LA Pierce
LA Southwest
LA Trade
LA Valley
Lake Tahoe
Laney
Las Positas
Lassen
Long Beach
Los Medanos
Marin
Mendocino
Merced
Merritt
Mira Costa
Mission
Modesto
Monterey
Moorpark
Moreno Valley
Mt San Antonio
Mt. San Jacinto
Napa Valley
Norco College
Ohlone
Orange Coast
Oxnard
Palo Verde

FTE
16,419.36
16,882.36
5,501.97
13,354.31
9,624.88
11,404.82
7,056.51
6,289.47
9,082.84
11,894.55
5,887.07
5,262.27
12,520.67
3,898.90
10,657.21
10,789.70
1,694.79
8,056.26
6,327.14
1,750.07
19,640.88
7,661.85
4,740.39
2,972.07
9,591.79
4,119.64
11,123.44
7,386.71
11,590.23
6,869.85
11,307.68
5,752.07
30,531.32
10,150.33
4,971.42
5,758.51
8,839.75
16,675.09
4,806.93
1,377.47

#Librarians
6
5
2
5
5
4
3
2
2
4
4
4
4
1
2
5
1
3
4
1
7
3
3
4
4
3
7
4
4
4
4
1
6
4
1
1
3
5
2
1
167

Librarian: Student
2,736
3,376
2,750
2,670
1,924
2,851
2,352
3,144
4,541
2,973
1,471
1,315
3,130
3,898
5,328
2,157
1,694
2,685
1,581
1,750
2,805
2,553
1,580
743
2,397
1,373
1,589
1,846
2,897
1,717
2,826
5,752
5,088
2,537
4,971
5,758
2,946
3,335
2,403
1,377

College
FTE
#Librarians
Librarian: Student
Palomar
19,122.88
7
2,731
Pasadena
20,218.54
8
2,527
Porterville
2,953.22
1
2,953
Redwoods
4,396.27
1
4,396
Reedley College
9,910.51
2
4,955
Rio Hondo
13,207.73
4
3,301
Riverside
14,195.55
6
2,365
Sacramento City
16,213.06
7
2,316
Saddleback
17,256.85
6
2,876
San Bernardino
9,412.13
3
3,137
San Diego City
9,932.00
5
1,986
San Diego Mesa
14,892.19
4
3,723
San Diego Miramar
6,344.75
2
3,172
San Francisco
31,892.00
22
1,449
San Joaquin Delta
14,880.80
4
3,720
San Jose City
6,832.49
4
1,708
San Mateo
8,196.98
3
2,732
Santa Ana
24,123.11
4
6,030
Santa Barbara
17,455.00
5
3,491
Santa Monica
25,098.45
7
3,585
Santa Rosa
18,661.22
9
2,073
Santiago Canyon
10,853.12
7
1,550
Sequoias
8,711.26
3
2,903
Shasta
7,290.87
2
3,645
Sierra
14,326.46
4
3,581
Siskiyous
2,626.71
1
2,626
Skyline
8,459.99
3
2,819
Solano
7,193.94
4
1,798
Southwestern
14,306.38
6
2,384
Taft
2,605.23
1
2,605
Ventura
10,514.32
2
5,257
Victor Valley
9,196.39
2
4,598
West Hills Coalinga
2,363.25
1
2,363
West Hills Lemoore
3,248.06
1
3,248
West LA
5,960.18
3
1,986
West Valley Saratoga
8,447.36
4
2,111
Woodland
1,074.49
1
1,074
Yuba
4,587.39
1
4,587
Note. The FTE count in this table is based on 2012-2013 annual data found in the California
Community College’s Chancellor’s Office Management Information Systems Data Mart.
168

169

