A Dissertation
entitled
The Influences of Community College Library Characteristics on Institutional Graduation
Rates: A National Study
by
Lindsay S. English
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty as partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
Doctor of Philosophy Degree in Higher Education

________________________________________
Dr. David Meabon, Committee Chair
________________________________________
Barbara Floyd, Committee Member
________________________________________
Dr. Ronald Opp, Committee Member
________________________________________
Dr. Renay Scott, Committee Member
________________________________________
Dr. Patricia R. Komuniecki, Dean
College of Graduate Studies

The University of Toledo
December 2014

ProQuest Number: 3726857

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 3726857
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Copyright 2014, Lindsay S. English
This document is copyrighted material. Under copyright law, no parts of this document
may be reproduced without the expressed permission of the author.

An Abstract of
The Influences of Community College Library Characteristics on Institutional Graduation
Rates: A National Study
by
Lindsay S. English
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty as partial fulfillment of the requirements for the
Doctor of Philosophy Degree in
Higher Education
The University of Toledo
December 2014
Given the national and growing attention on community college learning
outcomes, this study examines the influences of libraries’ or learning commons’
characteristics on institutional graduation rates. The theoretical and conceptual
frameworks used to support this study are Astin’s Theory of Involvement and his I-E-O
Model respectfully; however, based on the results future researchers should consider
exploring expenditure models. The data set used was created by using 5 different
national sources including 4 IPEDs surveys and the Library Statistics Program, also
conducted by the National Center of Educational Statistics. The significant predictors of
institutional graduation rates were then used to create a blocked regression model to
determine influence. The results indicated that three of the original 41 independent
variables did have a significant predictive power over institutional graduation rates. The
three variables included the percentage of students under the age of 25, total expenditures
for other information resources (including fees for database searches such as DIALOG
and Nexis-Lexis), and total expenditures for current serials (ongoing subscription
commitments such as periodicals, newspapers, etc.).
iii

For Phil, my husband. Your love, support, and belief in me has made this work possible.
I am forever grateful. Thank you.

iv

Acknowledgements
As most doctoral students acknowledge, the dissertation study could not have
been completed without the amazing and never-ending support of family and friends. My
experience was no different. I am forever grateful for the words of support, calls of
encouragement, and simply the patience to listen to me time and time again when I
needed to discuss my work.
First and foremost, I thank my immediate and extended family for their interest
and support. My husband, Phil, and children, Catherine, Laura and Drew, were so patient
and understanding when I needed to prioritize my work over other events and were my
most ardent cheerleaders. I also thank my mother and my in-laws for always sharing an
encouraging word and their never-ending faith in my ability to finish.
I would like to share my appreciation and thanks to my dissertation committee for
their support over the years. To my chair, Dr. David Meabon, I thank you for sharing
your wisdom and expertise. I especially appreciated your humor, patience, and kind
words. To my other committee members, Barbara Floyd, Dr. Ronald Opp and Dr. Renay
Scott, thank you for sharing your amazing knowledge and talents with me in shaping this
work. With your support, I am very proud of this dissertation.
And finally, to my fellow class-mates, the Zebras. When we began this journey
together I knew I’d only finish through the wonderful support and friendships we earned
and gained together. Each and every one of you are amazing professionals. I learned so
much from you.

v

Table of Contents
Abstract

iii

Acknowledgements

v

Table of Contents

vi

List of Tables

x

List of Figures

xi

List of Abbreviations

xii

I. Introduction and Background of the Problem

1

A. Statement of Problem

3

B. Purpose of Study

4

C. Significance of the Problem

4

D. Definition of Terms

5

E. Theoretical and Conceptual Frameworks

7

F. Introductory Literature Review and Background of Problem

9

G. Research Questions

12

H. Methodology

12

I. Limitations

14

J. Delimitations

15

K. Assumptions

16

L. Summary

16

II. Literature Review

18

A. Introduction

18
vi

B. Community Colleges in America: History and Present
a.

Accountability from external sources

20
22

C. Academic Libraries and the Learning Commons

23

a. The Community College Library

24

b. The Learning College

26

c. Information Literacy in Community Colleges

27

D. Library and Institutional Mission

27

E. Library Impact on Graduation or Retention

29

F. Library Impact on Academic Performance

32

G. The Academic Library and Student Engagement

35

H. Persistence in Higher Education

38

a. Community College Graduation Rates
I. Theoretical Framework

40
40

a. Astin’s Theory of Involvement

41

J. I-E-O Model

42

K. Summary

43

III. Methodology

45

A. Introduction

45

B. Research Design

46

C. Survey Instruments

48

a. Non-Response Bias

50

D. Dependent and Independent Variables
a. Dependent Variable

50
50

vii

b. Independent Variables

51

E. Data Analysis Procedures

58

a. Data Access and Preparation

58

b. Assumptions

59

F. Limitations of the Study

59

a. Threats to Internal Validity

59

b. Threats to External Validity

60

G. Summary

61

IV. Results

62

A. Introduction

62

B. Description and Characteristics of the Sample and Population

63

a.

Institutional Characteristics

C. Statistical Results

63
65

a. Two-tailed Pearson correlation

65

b. Regression Analysis

66

D. Discussion of the Results

69

a. Student Input Characteristics

69

b. Between-Institution Characteristics

69

c. Library Characteristics

69

E. Summary

70

V. Discussion, Recommendations, and Conclusions

71

A. Introduction

71

B. Overview of Study

71
viii

a. Theoretical and Conceptual Frameworks

72

b. Research Questions and Data Set

73

c. Methodology

74

C. Discussion of the Findings

75

D. Implications for Practice and Theory

79

a. Implications for Theory

79

b. Implications for Practice

81

c. Areas of Future Research

84

E. Conclusion

85

References

87

ix

List of Tables
Table 1

Block One: Input Variables. ..........................................................................53

Table 2

Block Two: Environmental Between-Institution Variables. ..........................53

Table 3

Block Three: Environmental Library Characteristics ....................................55

Table 4

Output on Institutional Graduation Rates ........................................................58

Table 5

Regions of Country Represented in Sample (N=638) .....................................65

Table 6

Significant Correlations of Independent Variables ..........................................67

Table 7

Significant Predictors of Institutional Graduation Rates .................................68

x

List of Figures
Figure 1

I-E-O model application indicating interrelationships between institutionallevel student inputs, between-institution, library characteristics and
institutional graduation rates. Adapted from Astin (1992) ...............................9

Figure 2

Fishbone schematic (also known as an Ishikawa diagram) to guide the
literature analysis. Adapted from Dale, Barrie, et al. (2007). Managing
Quality. 5th ed. .................................................................................................20

Figure 3

Conceptual I-E-O model with dependent and independent variables ..............52

Figure 4

I-E-O model application indicating interrelationships between institutionallevel student inputs, between-institution and library characteristics, and
institutional graduation rates. Adapted from Astin (1992). ............................73

Figure 5

Future research topics inserted in fishbone diagram…………………......…..86

xi

List of Abbreviations
AACC ........................American Association of Community Colleges
ACRL .........................Association of College and Research Libraries
ALS ............................Academic Library Survey
ARL............................Association of Research Libraries
CCSSE .......................Community College Survey of Student Engagement
FTE ............................Full-time Equivalent
I-E-O ..........................Input-Environment-Output
IPEDS ........................Integrated Post-secondary Educational Data System
LRC ............................Learning Resource Center
NCES .........................National Center of Educational Statistics
NSSE ..........................National Survey of Student Engagement

xii

Chapter One
Introduction and Background of the Problem
Higher education in the United States is a formidable enterprise (Thelin, 2004).
According to the Federal Reserve Bank (2013), it is an established industry representing
approximately 3% of the gross national product. President Obama and virtually every
governor across the nation describe colleges and universities as critical to the nation and
each individual state’s economic and cultural development. As a system, it includes
more than 4,000 accredited institutions, 15 million students, and confers in excess of 2
million degrees annually (The White House, 2013).
In contrast to the higher education systems in Europe which developed outward
from a central, government-supported university, the higher education system in the
United States began, grew, and evolved in response to state and local needs,
demographics, religion, and changing social contexts (Thelin, 2004). The result has been
a system characterized by a variety of individual institutional goals and missions, types of
degrees offered, finance and governance structures, and even curricula, course contents
and instructional methodologies.
The most well-established classification system for categorizing postsecondary
institutions in the United States was developed by the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching and has come to be known as the “Carnegie Classification”.
Originally published in 1973, this classification system was designed to serve research
needs. It has since been updated several times, most recently in 2010. It is the
framework most often used in describing institutional diversity in the United States and is

1

relied upon by researchers and educational leaders to ensure appropriate comparison
between and among colleges and universities (Cohen & Brawer, 2008).
The current basic classification divides institutions into six main categories
including doctoral/research institutions, master’s colleges and universities, baccalaureate
colleges, associate’s colleges, specialized institutions, and tribal colleges. For the
purposes of this dissertation, the researcher will focus on two specific categories: the
doctoral/research institution, which includes institutions that have awarded at least 20
research doctoral degrees per year; and the associate’s college, or community college,
which includes institutions where all degrees are at the associate’s level, or where
bachelor’s degrees account for less than 10% of all degrees (Carnegie, 2013).
The differences between doctoral/research institutions and the associate’s degree
institutions are significant. The doctoral/research institution typically offers a full range
of baccalaureate programs, is committed to graduate education through the doctorate, and
gives a high priority to research (Thelin, 2004). In addition, Thelin (2004) describes the
typical student at a doctoral/research institution as one that is academically prepared,
traditional age, and residential. In direct comparison, the community college typically
offers both non-credit/workforce development and credit/transfer programs culminating
in certificates and two-year degrees. Thelin (2004) further explains that the typical
student attending a community college is under-prepared, of non-traditional age, and
commutes to campus.
In both types of institutions, the academic library is an integral component of their
teaching/learning missions (Emmons & Wilkinson, 2011). In fact, it is difficult to
envision any higher educational institution without a library. In many ways, it is the
2

physical manifestation of academic values and lifelong learning. However, because the
doctoral/research institution and the community college serve such different missions and
types of students, the academic library, defined by its programming, staffing levels,
collections, etc., are also very different from one another. The traditional research library
offers large and significant print collections, online databases, and primarily serves two
complementary purposes: supporting the university’s curriculum, and supporting the
research of the university faculty and students. The community college library, in
contrast, provides traditional library services (e.g., collections, online databases, etc.)
with an emphasis in media and instructional support for both students and faculty and,
more importantly, plays an integral role in developing student information literacy skills
(Navarro, 2005). Many such libraries call themselves Learning Commons to address
differences in purpose and programming (Whitmire, 2002).
In the remaining sections of this chapter, the discussion will define the problem to
be addressed and will continue to build an argument as to its significance. In addition,
the researcher will define terms and identify both assumptions and limitations present in
the study and research design.
Statement of Problem
The general purpose of this study is to extend research conducted first by Mark
Emmons and Frances C. Wilkinson (2011) who examined the impact of academic library
characteristics on student persistence. Their study exclusively focused on research
universities. This researcher plans to conduct similar research on the effects of library or
learning commons characteristics, but at the community college level. More precisely,
she plans to examine the influences, among others, of staffing levels of
3

professional/librarian staff and all other staff, the number of individual and group
reference consultations, if the library/learning commons offers virtual reference support,
if the institution’s mission includes information literacy, the expenditures on various
library materials, the number of weekly public service hours, the gate count in a typical
week, and various other library characteristics on institutional graduation rates in the
associate’s degree Carnegie classification. In doing so, the researcher will address the
gap in current research that does not address the impact of community college libraries,
or learning commons, on institutional student success outcomes such as graduation rates.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to examine the influences of community college
library characteristics on institutional graduation or completion rates. The results will be
an important early step in demonstrating if there is an impact of community college
library characteristics on graduation rates. It will also address the significant gap in
research pertaining to the community college learning commons and the unique student
body it serves. Given the national and growing attention on community college learning
outcomes (AACC, 2012), this research will provide a launching point for additional
research on community college learning commons and the services they provide.
Significance of the Problem
According to Kuh & Gonyea (2003), the shift from a teaching to a learning
paradigm, first introduced by Barr and Tagg (1995) and then by O’Banion (2000), is
gaining importance in all categories of higher educational institutions. Furthermore, Kuh
and Gonyea (2003) identified accreditation, funding formulas, and accountability
standards as a few of the additional areas in which this paradigm shift has traction. The
4

library or learning commons as an integral component of the student experience should
make a direct or indirect contribution to the learning outcomes of the institution.
In fact, this paradigm shift has resulted in research to identify different and more
relevant measures of library success. The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) and
the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) have created measures that
focus on institutional outcomes. Subsequent research (Smith, 2001 & Weiner, 2005)
supported learning outcome models that tied campus vision, mission, and goals with
library resources (including collections, personnel and budgets), capacity, and services.
Though these studies did bring emphasis to learning outcomes, they remained
primarily focused on the library itself, not on the outcomes of the unique needs of the
student body it serves. More importantly these studies did not address community
colleges. The result is a lack of cohesive and comprehensive research findings that
address the influences of community college libraries on their primary clients, the
students. In turn, this reduces the empirical support college administrators need to refine
their focus on current and relevant measures of library success.
Finally, the results from this study will inform the practice of community college
administrators as they strive to provide educational environments and services that
positively impact student success. Particularly as financial support from the states and
tax payers dwindle and instructional costs increase, administrators are encouraged to
make data-informed resource decisions; ones that directly and positively impact the
success of their students and institutions.
Definition of Terms
To provide clarity, this study provides definitions of key terms, theories, and models.
5



Academic libraries
An academic library is defined by the National Center for Educational
Statistics (2013) as the library associated with a degree-granting institution
of higher education in which they are a part and provide (a) an organized
collection of printed and other materials or a combination of both, (b) a
staff trained to provide and interpret such materials as required to meet
informational, cultural, recreational, or educational needs of clientele, (c)
an established schedule in which services of the staff are available to
clientele, and (d) the physical facilities necessary to support such a
collection, staff, and schedule.



Information literacy
Tenets of information literacy include the ability to (a) determine the
nature and extent of information needed, (b) access and use needed
information effectively and efficiently, (c) evaluate information and its
sources critically, and incorporate selected information into one’s
knowledge base and value system, (d) use information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose, and (e) understand many of the economic,
legal, and social issues surrounding the use of information (AACC, 2003).



Learning commons
According to the American Association of Community Colleges (2003), a
learning commons is a set of programs and services that provide an
organized universe of knowledge to users. The learning commons
continues to be a physical place as long as students need assistance to
6

conquer the digital or informational divide and there is a need to house
and provide access to materials not available electronically.


Librarian
According to the Association of College and Research Libraries (2013), an
academic librarian provides expertise that satisfies a multifunctional role
within the Academy. He/she imparts knowledge and skills in research and
information literacy to students and faculty alike, is involved in research
functions for his or herself or other faculty, participates in the governance
of an institution, and has faculty status.

Theoretical and Conceptual Frameworks
This study will research the influences of community college library
characteristics on institutional graduation rates. Astin’s Theory of Involvement and the IE-O Model (1984) provide the theoretical and conceptual frameworks respectively.
Astin’s theory states that the more students are involved in both the academic and social
aspects of the collegiate experience, the more they will gain from their studies. Student
involvement is defined by Astin (1984) as devoting significant energy to academics,
spending time on campus, participating actively in student organizations and activities
and interacting often with faculty. Astin found in his research that the most persuasive
types of involvement are academic involvement, involvement with faculty, and
involvement with student peer groups (1996).
Interestingly, Astin did not specifically address interactions or involvement with
the library in his research. However, as most community college librarians are faculty,

7

one might apply his theory by hypothesizing that the more involved students are with
their librarians, the more their student learning will increase.
Astin’s I-E-O Model (1996), Figure 1, provides the visual or conceptual
representation for this study. Generally the I-E-O model provides for the comprehensive
assessment of environmental impact on student outcomes, controlling for input
differences. Inputs are defined as characteristics of students at the time they enter college
and function as control variables. Examples include demographic information,
educational background and degree aspirations. Environment factors refer to the
programs, policies, faculty, peers, and educational experiences to which students are
exposed. The output factors refer to student characteristics after exposure to the
environment and include examples such as grade point average, retention and degree
completion (Astin, 1996).
Applying Astin’s model to this study, and as further described in the methodology
chapter, the researcher will control for student input characteristics such as race/ethnicity,
gender, and age. Environmental input characteristics will include the betweeninstitutional variables of degree of urbanization (e.g., city, suburban, rural), institutional
size (as defined by FTE of students using instructional activity), if the community college
is comprised of a single or multiple campuses, region of the country, library expenditures
on various types of materials, institutional type (e.g. tribal, historically black, etc.), and
whether or not the institution articulates learning outcomes or informational literacy in its
mission or strategic plan. Other environmental factors will include library characteristics
such as the number of librarian and professional staff, the number of other staff, the
number of individual and group reference consultations, if the library offers virtual
8

reference consultations, the number of weekly public service hours, and the typical gate
count reported. Output results will be measured using institutional graduation rates.

E

Between
Institutions and
Library
Characteristics

I

O

Institutional-Level
Student
Characteristics
Institutional
Characteristics

Institutional
Graduation
Rates

Figure 1. I-E-O model application indicating interrelationships between institutionallevel student inputs, between-institution and library characteristics, and institutional
graduation rates. Adapted from Astin (1992).
Introductory Literature Review and Background of Problem
There are very few studies that examine the relationship or effects between library
characteristics and student persistence factors such as retention and graduation rates.
There are even fewer that focus on the community college. Most impact studies this
researcher found attempted to measure the library outcomes of the 4-year academic
library with the college mission rather than with learning outcomes of its student body.
Of the few relevant studies found, two studies completed by Whitmire (2001 & 2002)
analyzed library factors that influenced the development of critical thinking skills in
undergraduates. In her first study, she found students engaged in focused library
activities reported a significant impact on their critical thinking development. In her
expanded second study, she found that libraries with greater resources had a significant

9

impact on students’ self-reported gains in critical thinking.
Her studies on critical thinking, as well as others (Mezick, 2007; Astin, 2001;
Porter, 1990; and Murtaugh, 1999), focus on measures that may only indirectly influence
student retention and graduation rates. They also almost exclusively rely on data from 4year institutions and students. Still, the correlations are encouraging, indicating that there
is a relationship between library characteristics and student success outcomes.
R.R. Powell (1992) summarized evidence that student use of the library correlated
with student grades. However, he based his conclusions on studies that, for the most part,
did not control for student ability or institutional factors such as selectivity. His study
also did not include community colleges. In contrast, a more recent study at Glendale
Community College in California (2001) found that students who participated in library
workshops had much higher pass rates in English and English as a Second Language.
Turning to the broader literature base for student persistence, the most
comprehensive study is that by Alexander Astin (2001) where he examined how students
change and develop in college and the factors that help them persist and graduate. His
study found that factors such as peer group, socioeconomic status, and faculty orientation
to teaching as significant to student success. He also found institutional factors such as
diversity, student-faculty ratio, and living on campus had impact. Astin’s study did not
include the library as a possible factor.
Researchers such as Carey (2004) and Pike, Smart, Kuh, & Hayek (2006)
identified additional institutional variables with significant influence on student success,
such as financial resources, type of institution and degree programs offerings.
Furthermore, student characteristics such as race, socioeconomic status and gender are
10

often featured as primary variables in related research studies (Emmons & Wilkerson,
2011).
Lastly, there a several studies that investigate factors that influence undergraduate
library use. Grimes and Charters (2000) found that women and African American and
other minority undergraduates spent more time in the library, as did undergraduates with
lower ACT scores and those who lived on-campus. The three library factors that
influenced the time undergraduates spent in the library included using it as a place to
study, using it as a place to socialize, and using it for its reference services. This study
did not include community college students.
Jiao and Onwuegbuzie (1997) studied the reasons why undergraduates use the
library or access its services and found that the primary reasons were to study for a test,
to read current newspapers, to read their own textbooks, to use computerized indexes and
online facilities, and to meet friends. Similar studies conducted by Williams (1995) and
Harrell (1988) found that the most important factor in library use was program
characteristics and grade point average. Both of these studies, although dated, did
include community college students.
The preceding synopsis of empirical research illustrates two key problems that
directly affect the theoretical knowledge base and the ability of higher education
professionals to engage in intentional practice towards increasing student success
outcomes. First, this researcher found no multi-institutional study of library
characteristics and the effects on student persistence or graduation in the community
college arena. While there have been studies conducted on library outcomes and student

11

persistence across institutional characteristics, there are none that contribute to greater
understanding of the community college and the unique population it serves.
Second, and as mentioned previously, most research conducted has focused on the
alignment of library outcomes to institutional mission, not institutional rates of student
success. The result is a lack of research on how the library influences the student, and of
particular interest to this study, the community college student.
Research Questions
The research questions to be addressed in this study include:
1. What influence, if any, do institutional-level student input variables such as
the percentage of racial/ethnic groups, the percentage of female and male
students, and the percentage of students under and over the age of 25, have on
institutional graduation rates?
2. What influence, if any, do between-institutional variables (e.g., degree of
urbanization, institutional size, single/multiple campuses, region of country,
and total library expenditures) have on institutional graduation rates?
3. What influence, if any, do library or learning commons variables (e.g.,
number of professional staff/librarians, the number of other staff, the number
of individual and group reference consults, if virtual consults are available, the
number of weekly service hours, and typical weekly gate count) have on
institutional graduation rates?
For the purposes of this study, graduation rate is defined as 150% of normal time
to completion or 3 years for community colleges (NCES, 2013).

12

Methodology
For the purposes of this expanded study, both descriptive statistics and a blocked,
step-wise multiple regression model were used. The researcher computed basic statistics
for all variables. She first conducted basic correlations to determine significance, and
then performed a step-wise multiple regression analysis using 3 blocks. She chose this
methodology because it allows by design for independent variables to be added to the
regression one after the other. In effect, the regression tested institutional-level student
input variables first for significance against institutional graduation rates. Next, between
college variables were added and then, lastly, the library variables.
These techniques allowed her to incorporate several independent variables and
analyze their effects on the dependent variable relative to one another. Secondly, since
this technique provides predictive power (Freedman, 1997), it provided the researcher
with an instrument for predicting institutional graduation rates given different
characteristics of the community college library or learning commons.
The data set to be examined was drawn from five sources conducted by the
National Center for Educational Statistics. The first four sources included data from the
Integrated Post-Secondary Data System (IPEDS) and the fifth or last source from the
Library Statistics Program. In all cases, only associate’s degree institutions were used
and any missing data was replaced with mean values.
The data provided by the Library Statistics Program is collected biennially from
approximately 3,700 degree-granting post-secondary institutions. To be classified an
academic library, it must provide an organized collection of print or other materials, a
staff trained to provide and interpret such materials, an established schedule in which
13

services of the staff are available to students, faculty, and staff and physical facilities
necessary to support such a collection, staff and schedule.
The most recent data set includes 3,689 U.S. academic libraries of which 1,371 are
classified as Associate using the Carnegie classification system. The web-based survey
was administered during fall 2011. The response rate overall was 86% and for Associate
classified libraries specifically 84.5% (NCES, 2010). There were 32 independent
variables taken from this data set in support of this study. Examples of variables include
the number of librarian/professional staff employed, the FTE (full-time equivalent) of
other staff, the annual number of individual and group reference transactions, if the
institution offers virtual reference support, expenditures on various library resources, the
number of weekly public service hours, and the typical weekly gate count. In addition
from this data set, the researcher will used between institutional variables including, but
not limited to, region of country and degree of urbanization.
The 2011 IPEDS data sets include 1,642 Associate-degree granting institutions
and will provide the data to determine institutional-level student input variables of race,
gender, and age and the between- college characteristics of institutional size and if the
institution is a single or multiple campus college. The dependent variable of institutional
graduation rates will also be provided by this dataset. The graduation rate for community
colleges is defined as the number of completers within 150% of the normal time to
graduation or 3 years.

14

Limitations
The study has a few limitations that are not under the control of the researcher and should
be taken into account when interpreting the findings or on the generalization of the
results:


The sample in this study is represented by public community colleges. While this
sample includes the vast majority of two-year institutions, it does not represent
private community colleges or two-year institutions housed within a university
system or a 4-year institution that also grants associate’s degrees.



Data used in this study from IPEDs and the Library Statistics Program are selfreported by each institution. Because it is self-reported, there may be inaccuracies
or mistakes due to the interpretation of questions, and the soundness and/or
availability of institutional data at the time of the survey completion.



There are inherent statistical and design problems with multiple regression
studies. A specific area of concern in this study is the possible existence of
multicollinearity or where two or more of the independent variables are highly
correlated with one another (Freedman, 1997). Future studies may design for this
limitation by eliminating one of the highly correlated variables.



By definition, library or learning commons with less than $10,000 in total
expenditures are not included in the sample.

Delimitations
Most community colleges by definition and practice provide non-credit or
workforce development opportunities. These programs may include a wide array of
innovative, high-value programs such as organizational and professional development,
15

career assessments and coaching, leadership, information technology, advanced
engineering and manufacturing, industry credentials, and apprenticeship programs. Since
these services are often part of the community college mission, the learning
commons/library is called upon to also serve these programs and students. However, for
the purposes of this study, the researcher is choosing to not address how the
characteristics of the learning commons influence the graduation or completion rates of
this unique population.
Assumptions
According to the AACC (2013), the current definition of graduation rates, 150%
of time for first-time, full-time students, being used by IPEDS and other governmental
agencies is incomplete and does not tell the full story of community college graduation.
The regulation, established by the Department of Education, is much more aligned with
traditional, residential 4-year colleges than the transient and part-time student populations
served by community colleges. Yet, for the purposes of this study and in support of the
data sets chosen, the researcher will assume the traditional graduation rate definition.
Summary
In summary, this chapter describes conducting a study of the influences of library
characteristics such as staffing levels, and information services on institutional graduation
rates in associate’s degree classified institutions. The purpose of this study is to address
the research gap in empirical knowledge relating to student success outcomes and the
community college library, also known as a learning commons. In a higher education
environment of increasing accountability by funders and accreditation agencies, this

16

study provides a foundation for additional research on student success in the community
college arena.
As stated earlier, this study expands on an existing study by focusing on a new
and different environment. The methodology used included standard statistical analyses
with a step-wise regression model in order to determine if there are any influences of
library characteristics on institutional graduation rates. The analysis was conducted using
secondary data from IPEDs and the Library Statistics Program, both from the National
Center of Educational Statistics.
The following chapters will discuss in more depth the existing literature on library
characteristics and institutional graduation rates, the descriptive statistics and step-wise
multiple regression model used, and the results of the analysis. Lastly, a discussion on
the implications and opportunities for future research will be addressed.

17

Chapter Two
Literature Review
Introduction
Community colleges have long been recognized as open-door institutions with an
emphasis on providing a wide range of students with access to higher education. In
recent years; however, policymakers, educators, and researchers have brought increased
attention to the outcomes of community college students with particular emphasis on
graduation rates (AACC, 2013). Despite numerous research studies on retention, authors
generally agree that there are “no magic formulas” for retaining students through
completion of their degrees and graduation (Bell, 2008). They acknowledge that the
many student characteristics that do predict student dropout rates are not within
institutional control (Tinto & Pusser, 2006). However, higher education institutions can
control some environmental factors as suggested by research conducted by Astin (1985),
Tinto (1975) and Pascarella (2005) that may be key to keeping students focused on
completing a degree.
The factors that may contribute to graduation include the climate of expectations
established by members of the institution, the amount of feedback provided to the
student, and the educational and social involvements in and outside the classroom (Tinto
and Pusser, 2006). According to Alexander Astin (1985), one of the most important
factors may be the interactions students have with people including faculty, advisors, and
students. In other words, students who graduate develop personal connections within
their institutions (Kuh, 2008).

18

The purpose of this study is to examine the influences of community college
library characteristics on institutional graduation rates. Since librarians are typically
faculty positions within the institution, one can assert their engagement with students and,
consequently, students’ use of the library may also affect graduation rates. There are few
studies that examine this particular relationship and there are even fewer that focus on the
community college and the unique student body it serves.
The literature review provides a comprehensive analysis of the existing research
on the community college library or learning commons and its impact on institutional
graduation rates (see Figure 2). The review will structure and build identifiable gaps in
current research to build significance for this study.
As shown in the fishbone schematic (see Figure 2), the analysis will begin with a
review of the history of both community colleges and the evolution of its library to a
learning commons structure. It will include the current empirical base that demonstrates
how the learning commons supports student success and institutional outcomes such as
graduation rates. It will then summarize the work of library associations, such as the
Association of Research and College Libraries, on documenting value and support of
institutional outcomes.
The discussion will next move to research conducted on student success factors
such as the paradigm shift from teaching to learning, increased focus on graduation rates,
and the importance of learning outcomes. The focus of this discussion will be on the
impact of library characteristics such as number of librarians, number of individual and
group reference consultations, and the typical number of student visitors to the library, on
student success factors.
19

Lastly, this chapter will document and analyze the work of Alexander Astin’s
Theory of Involvement and his conceptual framework called the I-E-O Model. Generally
speaking, this model provides for the comprehensive assessment of environmental impact
on student outcomes while controlling for input differences (Astin, 1996). The review in
this chapter will focus on evidence found in research that supports both this model and
the application of environmental variables such as the library characteristics mentioned
above.

Figure 2. Fishbone schematic (also known as an Ishikawa diagram) to guide the
literature analysis. Adapted from Dale, Barrie, et al. (2007). Managing Quality. 5th ed.
Community Colleges in America: History and Present
A true American invention, the development of community colleges evolved from
the growth in demand for higher education in the twentieth century and from the
increased need for trained workers (Cohen, 2008). In its earliest form, the Junior
College, which provided both needs, was seen as a buffer between high school and
scholarly research. One, in which, could provide and support students through the
foundational courses or provide job training such as nursing. This notion was very
20

popular in the early 1900s where by 1919 there were over 170 junior colleges in thirtyseven of the forty-eight states and by 1930, there were 440 institutions in all but 5 states
(Cohen, 2008).
Most of the growth in junior colleges came through the efforts of public
universities that wanted to expand their feeder institutions. However, according to Cohen
(2008) the single most important factor for access to the junior colleges was proximity.
Universities were drawing the majority of their students from within a short radius not
from their supported junior colleges up to several hundred miles away.
Access to higher education became a central theme when President Truman called
his Commission on Higher Education to articulate the value of higher education for the
country’s citizens; thus, opening the door for the development of community colleges.
As federal and state funding became available, community colleges grew rapidly in
densely populated areas which in turn fueled a large increase in the percentages of
students beginning college (Cohen, 2008).
The functions of community colleges usually included academic transfer
preparation, vocational-technical education, continuing education, developmental
education and community service. These functions remain largely intact today.
The American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) defines the
contemporary community college as a two-year public and post-secondary institution that
provides preparation for advanced study, career and technical education, guidance,
developmental education, general education and community service. The ranks of
community colleges today have increased to over 1,200, which serve over 3 million
students, and confer over 200,000 degrees per year (The White House, 2013).
21

Today’s community colleges come in many shapes and sizes. Some institutions
have single campus locations and serve primarily small and local populations with
technical and career programs; others are much larger, multiple campus institutions that
offer broad ranges of transfer and technical programming to tens of thousands students.
However, their goals remain similar: to provide equal access to educational opportunities
to citizens of their service area; prepare or retrain individuals for employment or for
further education; and to contribute to the lifelong learning opportunities through on- and
off-campus educational programming (Cohen, 2008).
Through this evolution, though, challenges remain for community colleges. One
of the primary current issues includes effectively serving an increasing population of
students underprepared for college-level work. This challenge manifests itself in low
retention and graduation rates.
Accountability from external sources. Over the past three decades,
policymakers have become very concerned about finding ways to secure better
performance from higher education institutions, including community colleges, whether
in the form of greater access and success for less advantaged students, lower operating
costs, or improved responsiveness to the needs of state and local economies (Dougherty,
Hare, & Nutow, 2009).
One of the key incentives that policy analysts have argued for and some state
governments have implemented is a state performance accountability system, whether in
the form of requiring reports on performance outcomes or tying state funding to an
institution’s performance on specific indicators such as rates of retention, graduations and
job placement (Ewell & Jones, 2006). Meanwhile, the American Association of
22

Community Colleges (AACC) and the Association of Community College Trustees, in
partnership with the College Board, have also launched an effort to develop a Voluntary
Framework of Accountability for Community Colleges. Driving this effort has been a
concern that the aforementioned systems, while useful, are tailored to four-year colleges
and may not be wholly applicable to community colleges and the unique populations they
serve.
Academic Libraries and the Learning Commons
The history of academic libraries parallels the history of higher education. The
role of the library has also evolved as the priorities of institutions have evolved (Weiner,
2005). The first academic library was established when John Harvard donated
approximately 300 of his books to Harvard University. Characteristic of that time, the
colonial college libraries were described as small, eclectic collections of donated books.
Most were theological works, as well as classics and standard textbooks in philosophy,
logic and history (Weiner, 2005).
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, changes in scholarship and
learning greatly affected libraries (Dain, 1990). Printing became much easier and the
emphasis on publishing results of research led to a proliferation of journals and scholarly
monographs and the need for primary source materials (Weiner, 2005). Library
endowments became popular legacies and, in most cases, stand-alone buildings were
constructed to house increasing collections. Hanson (1989) reported that by the end of
the nineteenth century the typical small college library held 6,000-20,000 volumes
comprised mostly of donations.

23

At the turn of the twentieth century, a shift occurred from emphasizing
conservation and protection to increasing accessibility and encouraging students and
faculty to use the materials. Collection building became competitive particularly in
research universities. By World War I, most academic libraries had reference
departments with a specific purpose to instruct and guide users. After World War II,
federal funding became available for research and for academic libraries to increase their
collections of published materials. There was an underlying assumption that library
collections were a resource of value to the institution and country (Weiner, 2005).
Changes in technology also created major increases in the availability of
electronic resources. Databases and shared consortia emerged as colleges and
universities began to share resources. According to Weiner (2005), increased economic
pressures on university administrators at this same time caused some to question the role
and function of the traditional academic library.
The community college library. The academic library in the community college
has also changed in response to internal and external influences. A community college
library must provide a full range of learning resources to support transfer, career and
technical programming and lifelong learning needs, although it is less concerned with
developing collections that support faculty research. In addition, it must meet the needs
of diverse student populations.
The term, learning resource center (LRC), is generally used to differentiate the
traditional academic library from one that is meeting the unique needs of community
colleges. Differences may include more direct involvement in instructional programs,
increased emphasis on the use of information (information literacy), space provided for
24

self-paced and tutoring support services, and technology resources. In many cases,
community college LRCs also provide faculty with technology support for learning
objects designed to augment seat based or online classes (Smith, 1978).
The term learning commons has become more popular since the 1990s (Heitsch &
Holley, 2011) as community colleges began to explore the space configurations of their
libraries and learning resource centers. Many institutions today, including four-year, use
space within these areas to encourage student-to-student and student-to-faculty
interactions while also providing access to technology (or perhaps more importantly,
electricity for student owned devices). In fact, according to ACRL, many institutions
now provide less and less space for book collections or have made them less accessible
by placing them on different floors within the library. The emphasis has moved to
engagement with electronic resources, websites, and instructional materials.
The focus of a learning commons goes beyond helping students manage
information to helping them manage their learning (Beagle, 2004). Rather than
highlighting access to computers, software, and multi-media support, a learning
commons emphasizes a range of programs and services to support students in their
learning tasks. According to Beagle (2004), a learning commons should recognize not
only the needs of the learner are paramount, but that the nature of that learning is
changing, including a greater emphasis on collaborative learning pedagogies.
Some libraries have moved beyond the concept of a learning commons to provide
space and tools that encourage effective group work incorporating flexible furniture and
seating arrangement as well as coffee shops and other amenities to promote and
encourage academic socializing (Matthews, 2012). Gayton (2008) has suggested that the
25

values of the traditional library (studious, contemplative, and quiet) focus on the
individual as a solitary activity while the values of the learning commons focus on group
activities. Although not the purpose of this literary review, Nitecki (2011) has offered a
framework for the purposeful assessment of library space in order to better understand
how various factors and different paths will affect the results of student achievement.
The learning college. The learning college concept was developed by Terry
O’Banion in the 1990s on the premise that if the community college were to survive in
education, it had to develop a particular focus that no other kind of institution offered.
O’Banion extracted elements from various education reform theories (Navarro, 2005) for
his learning-college concept’s primary tenet: “Student learning is at the center of
educational process” (p.52).
Historically, community colleges emphasized teachers and teaching; however, the
learning college concept changes the emphasis over to students and student learning.
AACC (2013) documented that by 2010, 97% of its community college members claimed
they are learning-centered. This change in emphasis also effected the community college
library or learning commons (Navarro, 2005).
To institute this concept, according to Navarro (2005), libraries or learning
commons in community colleges faced a significant challenge. First, many found it
necessary to move beyond the concept of library instruction to helping students better use
the library and its resources. This concept, as explained by Navarro (2005), is more
about information literacy skill development.
Second, the learning college concept also requires libraries and librarians to
determine to what extent their guidance actually helps students find information that
26

leads to student learning. This concept requires that the librarian become deeply involved
in partnership with faculty (Navarro, 2005). Data from Navarro’s study (2005) indicate
that very few community college libraries or learning commons have successfully
integrated the learning college concept into their organizational practices.
Information literacy in community colleges. Much of the literature about
community college students’ information habits focuses on what libraries and librarians
can do to teach community college students information literacy (Fry, 2009). The articles
discuss learning communities, bibliographic instruction, and information technology.
Although these topics are important, more focus is needed on community college
students themselves.
Several significant studies explore the information needs of university students,
high school students and graduate students (Fry 2009). Community college students,
however, differ vastly from these student populations. In general, community college
students are more ethnically, culturally, and socioeconomically diverse than other types
of students. As such, studies of university students cannot and should not simply be
applied to community college populations.
Library and Institutional Mission
Institutions of higher education, including community colleges, have similar
goals. They want to recruit and retain students, faculty and staff; and they want to
support teaching and learning that results in high levels of student engagement and
graduation rates. Some institutions also place mission emphasis on job placement, test
scores, research and grant funding (Poll & Payne, 2006). As an important part of

27

institutions, libraries “do not exist for themselves” (p. 9, Goetsch, 2009); rather, they
exist to promote institutional missions.
Because institutional missions can vary, the methods by which academic libraries
contribute value vary as well. According to Roger (2009), “a library is successful if it
serves the needs and priorities of its host institution, whatever those may be” (p. 46).
Oakleaf (2010), on behalf of the Association of Academic and Research Libraries,
produced a comprehensive summary of the available research pertaining to the value of
academic libraries. The Oakleaf Report also demonstrated potential areas of correlation
between the uses of library collections and services and the impact on students including
retention and graduation. She pointed out the possible correlation between libraries and
faculty research and institutional reputation and prestige. As she and Matthews (2007)
have noted, however, the vast majority of this research is difficult to generalize since the
literature reports on the details of case studies typically focused on one group of students
in one class or of several classes over one semester. Theses micro-level studies may
reflect a narrow perspective and reflect a particular slice in time, which limits their
generalization.
Franklin (2012), in a position article titled “Surviving to Thriving: Advancing the
Institutional Mission”, found that academic research libraries can employ several
approaches to advance the institutional mission. Of particular interest, she states that
libraries should align their campus plan more deliberately to supporting the institution’s
mission. For example, she suggests libraries reorganize their units to reflect direct
support to first-year experiences, undergraduate research, information literacy, critical
thinking skill development, research, scholarship, and creative activity of faculty.
28

There is need for further research that demonstrates the value of libraries to the
institutional mission and to improved student outcomes.
Library Impact on Graduation or Retention
Evidence tying academic libraries to student graduation rates is at best scarce and
nearly non-existent for community college libraries, LRCs or learning commons. To
compensate, this researcher also includes a review of studies associated with retention
and persistence since one might argue that graduation rates are dependent on retention
and persistence.
Pierard and Graves (2007) reviewed the higher education and library literature on
retention and found only a handful of studies. Their goal was to develop a framework
that academic librarians could use as a guide to assist in retention efforts. Poll and Payne
(2006) argue that the “library’s mission and goals must be adjusted to those of its parent
institution, including retention and graduation” (p.550). Bell (2008) argued that library
directors should make the case that the academic library could be valuable in boosting
retention through the use of a variety of strategies such as emphasizing personal attention,
focusing on building student research skills, and using perks/incentives to engage
students. More recently, the Association of College Research Libraries (ACRL) called
upon librarians to demonstrate the value of academic libraries by exploring all types of
impact measures, including retention and graduation (Oakleaf, 2010).
Early studies found tended to examine individual institutions. In the earliest study
identified, Kramer and Kramer (1969) found a significant correlation between persistence
and students who checked out at least one book in their first year at California State
Polytechnic College in Pomona versus those that did not check out books. They noted,
29

“of the students who used the library, 73.7% returned. By contrast, the fate of those
freshmen who never used the library was that only 57% returned” (p.312). Theirs was
part of a larger study that also found that library use correlated with higher grades
(Barkey, 1965).
Only recently has research looked directly at the relationship between academic
libraries and persistence across multiple institutions. Mezick (2007) studied the
relationship between traditional library input and output measures of expenditures,
materials, and salaries with fall-to-fall retention rates and found that there was a moderate
correlation, with the strongest correlations occurring at doctoral institutions. Mezick did
not control for any non-library factors other than institutional type, although her study did
not include community colleges. Despite this shortcoming, her study did find intriguing
results that point to input and output measures potentially related to persistence.
Emmons and Wilkinson (2011) explored the relationship between traditional
library input and output measures of staff, collections, use, and services with fall-to-fall
retention and six-year graduation rates. A linear regression model found that, controlling
for ethnicity and socioeconomic status, a change in the ratio of library professional staff
and students predicted a statistically significant positive relationship with both retention
and graduation rates. Once again, this study did not include community colleges.
Other multi-institutional research has looked at the library under the broader
umbrella of expenditures. Gansemer-Topf and Schuh (2006) investigated how
institutional expenditures contribute to retention and graduation. They “found that there
is a relationship between organizational behavior (i.e. resource allocation and institutional
selectivity) and retention and graduation rates” (p.629). Among others, their “study
30

verified that academic support expenditures positively contributed to retention and
graduation rates” (p.632). Noting that the library, along with advising and academic
computing are part of academic support, they go on to state that it is difficult “to
determine if the separate functions within academic support expenditures contributed to
retention or graduation rates equally of if some have more influence on retention and
graduation rates than others” (p. 632).
Unfortunately, most studies examining expenditures took the same approach,
finding that spending on academic support services improved retention, but not
separating out the various types of support services or including community colleges
(Astin, 1993, Ryan, 2004). Their reluctance is understandable, as the category of
academic support services spending defined by the National Center of Educational
Statistics (NCES) and the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) does
not separate library expenditures from other academic support areas.
In contrast, the researcher did find two expenditure studies that separated out the
library from support services. Hamrick, Schuh, and Shelley (2004) developed a
statistical model using multiple regression on institutional expenditures. They found that
a direct relationship, second to only increasing per student expenditures on instruction, of
increasing library expenditures provided a very “robust and statistically significant
explanation of graduation rates (f=230.422, p<.001, R2 = .343). For example, every 10%
per student headcount increase in library expenditure resulted, on average, in an
additional 1.77 percentage points of graduation rates” (p. 11).
At the University of Tennessee, as part of a larger study on the impact of campus
facilities upon the retention of student from their first to their second year, Mallinckrodt
31

and Sedlacek (2009) found “that students who use the library are more likely to stay in
school” (p.569). In particular, there was evidence that students who studied in the
library, used the library for research, and who spent more hours in the library were
significantly more likely to return for their second year. For African-American students,
statistical significance was limited to studying in the library.
The existing research tying academic library impact to student persistence,
retention or graduation is limited but encouraging. It demonstrates a positive relationship
with library resources, services, or use of the library with increasing student success
measures. While there is little research on impact, there are several studies (detailed in
the next section) that address the impact of the library on individual student performance.
This literature continues to not address the specific population of community college
libraries and the students they serve.
Library Impact on Academic Performance
Most academic library impact studies focus not on persistence or graduation, but
on student achievement and learning or on evaluation of programs with the intention of
making programmatic improvements. The earliest empirical study found was research
conducted at Monteith College (Knapp, 1966). Faculty at Montieth College were
interested in learning more about the “methods of developing a more vital relationship
between the library and college teaching” (p.11). With that in mind, the librarians
planned courses with faculty that “required extensive and meaningful use of the library”
(p.12) and found that students who participated made better use of the library and
performed better in classes. They used their findings to call for the development of

32

instructional partnerships between librarians and instructional faculty, playing a key role
in the development of library programs such as bibliography instruction.
Several studies focused on the library impact on student learning. Whitmore
(1998, 2002) analyzed library factors that contribute to the development of critical
thinking skills. In the first study, she found students “who engaged in more focused
library activities reported a significant impact on their critical thinking development”
(p.7). In her second more recent study (2002), she found that libraries with greater
resources had a significant impact on students’ self-reported gains in critical thinking.
Julien and Boon (2004) conducted research on the impact of informational
literacy instruction in a Canadian university. They gave pre- and post-tests on
information literacy skills before and after students participated in librarian-led
information literacy workshops and established that library instruction contributes
positively to student overall success in school.
Other single institution studies looked at the relationship between library use and
student success. Bolt (1987) compared students who failed program major competency
examinations and subsequently took a library instruction course to students who
successfully passed the competency exam. This study found no discernible difference on
test scores, implying that the course did not impact student performance.
At Miami University, Erekson (1992) studied the impact of student effort in
studying, using the library, and working with faculty had on achievement. He found that
“library effort did not have a significant effect on GPA” (p. 441) and neither did
studying. The only statistically significant relationship was that time with faculty
positively impacted student achievement. Richland College found that students who had
33

completed the Certificate of Information Literacy (a five course sequence) had higher
grades and a better retention rate than students who did not (Ferguson, 2000).
De Jager (2002) correlated book borrowing with better scores on exams.
Dickerson (2006) surveyed undergraduates and faculty to determine how academic
libraries in Colorado impact student learning. While the student survey focused primarily
on how they used the library rather on their learning, one part of the faculty survey did
find that most faculty felt the library contributed to their teaching. Zhong and Alexander
(2007) surveyed students who responded that access to library facilities and to technology
and online resources contributed to their academic success. This was the only study
found that included community college students in its population.
At Arizona State University, Churchill and Iwai (1981) examined the impact
campus facilities had on retention of students with high and low grades. The library was
one of nine campus facilities in a large conglomerate that included “campus housing,
campus food services, recreational facilities, academic advisement, career services,
financial aid, student health services, and the university counseling service” (p.356).
They found that “for students with low GPAs, the use of campus facilities is correlated
with continuance in school” (p.361). Unfortunately, they were interested in looking at
campus facilities holistically and did not separate out the impact of the library or any
other services in their analysis.
Some studies did not find positive impact or relationships. Ayres and Bennett
(1983) studied institutional factors “including library facilities, financial resources,
curriculum design, student body attributes, and faculty quality” and found that “no
measure of library facilities is strongly related to achievement difference” (p.521). The
34

researchers explained further that the “absence of a strong relationship is, however, more
an indictment of the aggregate measure than an indication of the unimportance of books”
(p.522). Their library indicators included the number of books, number of periodicals,
and annual acquisition budgets.
The ACRL regularly produces SPEC Kits which help librarians learn about
current practices in research libraries, implement new practices and technologies, manage
change and improve performance. In late 2010, the ACRL completed a SPEC Kit on
impact measures. Based on this framework, Poll and Payne (2006) developed a survey
that found “despite the urgency the library community has felt in recent years to justify
its value, the responding libraries reported shockingly little work that focuses on
investigating whether use of library resources correlate with the measures of success for
library users” (p. 9). Using the same resource, Koltay and Li (2010) found that only 34%
of the library respondents reported having conducted research on their library’s impact.
The Academic Library and Student Engagement
Several researchers have found student engagement a major factor in student
success or performance and retention or graduation. Chickering and Gamson (1991)
developed their Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education based
upon 50 years of educational research. Two of the principles that promote success are
contact with faculty and cooperation among students. Astin (1993) noted that
involvement, especially with peers and faculty in the pursuit of education, is critical to
student success.
In their exhaustive landmark review of how college affects students, Pascarella
and Terenzini (2005) found that integration, involvement, and interaction improved
35

persistence and academic performance. In a review of literature entitled “What Matters
to Student Success”, Kuh, Kinzie, Buckley, Bridge and Hayek (2006) found that, along
with the characteristics students bring with them to college such as gender, race, and
ethnicity, academic preparation, educational aspirations, and socioeconomic status,
student engagement was the single most important factor in student success and
engagement. Though these researchers use different terms, the literature reviews each
found student engagement was among the most critical student success factors.
There are only a few studies that directly connect the library to student
engagement. Kuh, Boruff-Jones, and Mark (2007) reviewed the literature on student
engagement and explored the conditions under which libraries can engage students. They
defined engagement simply as “the more students do something, the more proficient they
become” and examined the library’s role in light of two features: “the amount of time
and effort students put into their studies” and “how a school deploys its resources” (p.18).
They argued that libraries could promote student engagement by minimizing library
anxiety, involving librarians in first year programs, and meeting with students outside of
class time. Their research led them to then focus on approaches to teaching information
literacy skills to first year students.
Kuh and Gonyea (2003) used data from the College Student Experience
Questionnaire (CSEQ) to analyze the relationship between academic libraries and student
learning. Though they found that “on balance, library experiences do not seem to be
directly related to information literacy, overall gains in college, or satisfaction with the
college experience” (2003, p. 9), they went on to highlight correlations between library
indicators and other measures of success that suggest that there might be indirect
36

relationships. For example, students who more frequently use the library reflect a
studious work ethic and engage in academically challenging tasks that require higherorder thinking. They also note that although certain student background characteristics
(race, major, year in school, transfer status, access to computers) affect the nature and
frequency of students’ library activities, the library appears to be a positive learning
environment for all students, especially members of historically underrepresented groups.
Mark and Boruff-Jones (2003) analyzed the National Survey of Student
Engagement (NSSE) in order to develop a process for local academic libraries to use in
analyzing and setting benchmarks for their library instruction programs. Their particular
interest was to correlate survey questions from the NSSE with the ACRL Information
Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education for the purpose of librarians to
assess their work.
Gratch-Lindauer (2008) reported on a project to include two experimental
questions related to information literacy behaviors on the 2006 NSSE. An analysis of the
results corroborated that eight of the ten questions showed moderate to high correlations
between information literacy scales and NSSE questions.
Nelson-Laird and Kuh (2005) conducted a similar NSSE study with experimental
questions about the use of information technology. Several of their questions asked about
using technology to obtain resources for academic work, accessing the library (or web),
making judgments about the quality of information, or asking a librarian questions.
Overall, they found a moderate to strong “positive relationships between academic uses
of information technology and engagement, particularly academic challenge, studentfaculty interaction and active and collaborative learning” (p.230).
37

While most of these studies did not address community colleges, one study
conducted by Whitmire (2002) did focus on the relationship between undergraduate
background characteristics and library use. The students in the study were freshmen and
sophomores and more closely parallel student characteristics found in community
colleges. Whitmore found that women and African American minority undergraduates
spent more time in the library; however, the time dropped significantly if the student held
a part-or full-time job. Furthermore, the variables with the strongest impact on library
use were student-faculty and peer interactions, writing activities, and being assigned term
papers.
Lastly, Zhong and Alexander (2007) conducted a survey of 1,295 undergraduates
(none from community colleges) asking students about their perspectives on how the
library impacted their learning. Significantly, they found the notion that academic
libraries and library initiatives were viewed by students to directly and positively impact
their academic engagement and success. Students felt most engaged by libraries that
promoted academic and social integration, encouraged library use and supported studentto-student and student-to-faculty connections. This group identified the library website
and electronic periodicals and databases as most important over the physical print
collections and placed high value on access to computer workstations. Lastly, the results
indicated that of all reference factors, the level of friendliness of the staff influenced
student engagement in the service.
Persistence in Higher Education
Whereas persistence is not studied in great depth in relation to the academic
library, it is studied in great depth in higher education. Pascarella and Terenzini (1991)
38

reviewed “roughly 2,600 pieces of research” (p. xi) on the influence of college upon
students. They devoted an entire chapter of their book to listing hundreds of studies
about educational attainment, a category essentially equivalent to persistence or
graduation. They wrote a follow-up with another decade of research, citing nearly as
many studies in one decade as in the previous two decades combined (Pascarella &
Terenzini, 2005). Once again, they devoted a whole chapter adding hundreds of studies
to educational attainment.
Tinto (2006, 2007), one of the pioneers in student persistence, reviewed the
history of student retention research. He noted, “40 years ago, student attrition was
typically viewed through the lens of psychology. Student retention, or the lack thereof,
was seen as the reflection of individual attributes, skills, and motivation” (p. 2). He then
tracked the addition of the environment as an influential factor and his own work in
developing a longitudinal model that emphasized the student’s integration into the
environment. Much subsequent research built upon his model and his idea of integration
in what he terms the “age of involvement” (p. 3) with studies focusing on the importance
of involving the student in the life of the college, especially in the first year. He then
described the maturing of the field of retention research with a fine-toothed focus on
different types of institutions and students from different backgrounds.
Building upon the work of Pascarella and Terenzini (1991, 2005), Reason (2005)
thoroughly reviewed the literature on student persistence in higher education. Using a
framework he created with Terenzini (Terenzini & Reason, 2005), he examined research
published in the areas of student precollege characteristics and experiences, the

39

organizational context, and the peer environment that includes individual student
experiences in and out of class.
Community college graduation rates. According to Bailey, Calcagno, Jenkins,
Leinbach and Kienzi (2006), one common measure of community college performance is
the graduation rate for students within 150% of the time in which they would be expected
to complete a degree or certificate (if they attended full-time and were ready for collegelevel coursework). This rate is also known as the Student Right to Know (SRK) rate and
is based on an entering cohort of all first-time students who attend full-time when they
initially enroll.
In the study completed by Bailey, Calcagno, Jenkins, Leinbach and Kienzi (2006)
the results indicated a negative relationship between enrollment size and completion. In
addition, colleges with a high share of minority students, part-time students, and women
have lower graduation rates. Another significant finding among institutional
characteristics is that greater instructional expenditures per FTE is related to a greater
likelihood of graduation. Lastly, the state in which the college is located is significantly
related to its graduation rate, suggesting that a state’s policy environment as a strong
bearing on the measured performance of colleges.
In summary, these reviews of the literature demonstrate that persistence and
graduation rates are a much-studied phenomenon in higher education although there are
fewer related to the specific challenges faced by community colleges.
Theoretical Framework
Research on college students shows that the time and energy students devote to
educationally purposeful activities is the single best predictor of their learning and
40

personal development (Astin, 1993, Kuh et al, 2007). What students do during college
generally matters more to what they learn and whether they persist to graduation than
who they are or even where they go to college. Furthermore, Pascarella and Terenzini
(2005) reaffirmed the finding that the impact of college is determined primarily by
individual student effort and involvement in the curricular and co-curricular offerings on
a campus, though the total impact is also influenced by the campus itself. These findings
support the premise of this researcher’s work which will examine the effects of library
characteristics on student graduation rates in community colleges.
Astin’s Theory of Involvement. Astin (1984) defined involvement as the
amount of physical and psychological energy a student devotes to his/her academic
experience. This involvement can be both academic and social, though much of the
research using the theory of involvement has tended to focus on extracurricular
involvement (Hernandez, Hogan, Hathaway & Lowell, 1999). Astin (1984) hypothesized
that the more involved the student is, the more successful he or she will be in college. He
suggested that involvement is the investment of psychological and physical energy,
which occurs along a continuum, with different students investing different amounts of
energy. Astin (1984) added that involvement is both qualitative and quantitative, is
related to learning, and can be encouraged by institutions to enhance educational
effectiveness.
The concept of involvement was first formally introduced in Astin’s (1975) book,
Preventing Students from Dropping Out, and was later presented more formally in his
1984 article. According to Astin, “The 1984 article, in its draft form was used by the
National Institute of Education Study Group that produces the widely cited report,
41

Involvement in Learning. The Study Group embraced the involvement construct as the
centerpiece of its national report on the state of higher education in the United States,
which helped to popularize the concept” (p. 63).
Involvement theory (Astin, 1984,1991) states that the more involved students are
with their undergraduate experience, the higher chance they will persist towards
graduation. Astin argues that while student characteristics (inputs) are useful in
predicting the outcomes of students (e.g., college GPA, retention), the activities a student
participates in while in college (environmental factors) are also important in shaping the
outcomes of a student’s college career.
While Astin’s theory of involvement has been used to examine community
college persistence, there is very limited research applying environmental factors such as
library characteristics to graduation rates (output measures) using his approach.
Furthermore, while he found student interaction with faculty a positive factor in
graduation and persistence, he and others did not apply this conclusion to library faculty.
Testing Astin’s theory on the community college student graduation rate and interaction
with the library will be a significant contribution to the literature on understanding the
factors that influence community college students.
I-E-O Model
Involvement theory is typically utilized in research using the Input-EnvironmentOutput (I-E-O) Model proposed by Astin (1984). This model was conceptualized to
show the effects of college on undergraduate students. According to Astin (1984), inputs
refer to the characteristics of the student at the time of initial entry to the institution;
environment refers to the various programs, policies, faculty, peers, and educational
42

experiences to which the student is exposed; and the outcomes refer to the student
characteristics after exposure to the environment. Change or growth in the student during
college is determined by comparing outcome characteristics with input characteristics.
Activities such as working on campus, living on campus, engaging with peers,
being a member of a club, and socializing with faculty members are the types of
involvement typically measured using this framework. A variety of outcome measures,
including graduation, have been linked to extracurricular involvement (Pascarella &
Terenzini, 2005). However, although both extracurricular and academic involvement are
important, research shows that academic involvement (e.g., hours spent studying and
doing homework, asking questions in class, studying with other students) has more
significant effects than other types of involvement (Astin, 1993).
For the purposes of this dissertation, input characteristics will include student
variables such as race, gender and age. The environmental variables will include both
between institutional variables and characteristics of library or learning commons such as
number of professional staff/librarians, number of group reference consults, etc.
Summary
In summary, this chapter provided a comprehensive synthesis and analysis of
existing research on libraries and the empirical evidence of their impact on institutional
mission, student information literacy, academic performance, student engagement and
graduation rates. The majority of the studies discussed emphasized four-year institutions
and traditional-aged students. The evidence from these studies suggest that the academic
library does have an impact on student success factors but there is much to learn in terms
of how best to utilize this resource to positively impact student learning.
43

Unfortunately, very few of these studies address the community college
environment, its learning commons, and the specific population of students they serve.
This vacuum in targeted research provides the significance to this study by demonstrating
the gap in research relating to student success outcomes and the community college
library or learning commons.
Given the national and growing attention of community college completion and
graduation rates, this study will provide a launching point for additional research and an
empirical basis for community college librarians and administrators to address their value
and impact on institutional missions and goals.

44

Chapter Three
Methodology
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to determine what influence, if any, do community
college library characteristics have on institutional graduation rates. In this chapter, the
research design of a blocked step-wise multiple regression will be explained. In addition,
the chapter will include sections on: a) the description of the survey instruments used to
gather data, b) a description of the sample used for analysis, c) a description of the
dependent variable and the independent variables, d) an overview of the statistical
procedures conducted, and e) a discussion of the limitations and threats to the validity of
the results.
The research questions to be addressed by this study are as follows:
1. What influence, if any, do institutional-level student input variables such as
the percentage of different racial/ethnic groups, the percentage of female and
male students, and the percentage of students under and over the age of 25,
have on institutional graduation rates?
2. What influence, if any, do institutional variables (e.g., degree of urbanization,
institutional size, single or multiple campuses, region of country, and total
library expenditures) have on institutional graduation rates?
3. What influence, if any, do library or learning commons variables (e.g.,
number of professional staff/librarians, the number of other staff, the number
of individual and group reference consults, if they offer virtual consultations,

45

the number of weekly service hours, the typical weekly gate count) have on
institutional graduation rates?
For the purposes of this study, graduation rate is defined as 150% of normal time
to completion or 3 years for community colleges (NCES, 2013).
Research Design
This study used a quantitative, non-experimental correlational research design to
examine specific community college library characteristics in order to determine what
influence, if any, they have on institutional graduation rates. For the purposes of this
study, the SPSS software was used to provide descriptive statistics and to run a blocked
form of a step-wise multiple regression analysis to examine the research questions.
The researcher began by computing basic Pearson correlational statistics for all
variables in order to determine significance. She then performed a step-wise multiple
regression analysis using 3 blocks. This model first tested student input variables for
significance against institutional graduation rates, then between college variables, and
lastly, specific library variables.
This model is appropriate for this study based on Creswell’s (2012) explanation of
correlational research that indicates this methodology is used when one seeks “to relate
two of more variables to see if they influence each other” (p. 338). Furthermore,
Creswell explains in this type of research “the researchers do not attempt to control or
manipulate the variables as in an experiment; instead they relate, using the correlation
statistic, two or more” (Creswell, 2012, p. 338).
As explained in Cohen, Cohen, West and Aiken (2003), “multiple regression is a
technique that enables researchers to determine a correlation between a criterion variable
46

and the best combination of two or more predictor variables” (p. 76). A predictor, or
independent, variable, as defined by Creswell (2012) “is a variable used to make a
forecast about an outcome in correlational research” (p. 341), and the criterion, or
dependent, variable is “the outcome being predicted” (Creswell, 2012, p. 341).
A stepwise regression was chosen because the “purpose of stepwise regression is
to reduce the set of independent variables down to the most important predictors”
(Stephens, 2004, p. 175). In this type of blocked regression analysis, the most significant
variable is added at each step until the best model is created. In other words, “each time a
predictor is added to the equation, a removal test is made of the least useful predictor. As
such, the regression equation is constantly being reassessed to determine whether any
redundant predictors can be removed” (Stephens, 2004, p. 213). This technique is in
alignment with the purpose of this study in determining what library characteristics, if
any, influence institutional graduation rates.
In addition, Field (2009) suggested variables be set with a p-value of less than
0.05 within the SPSS software to remain included in the regression analysis, while those
with a p-value of 0.10 or above be excluded. Field (2009) continued his support for
stepwise regression by stating “this method takes many important methodological
decisions out of the hands of the researcher. What’s more, the models derived by the
computer often take advantage of random sampling variations and so decisions about
which variables should be included will be based upon slight differences in their semipartial correlation” (p. 213).
Thus, the use of a stepwise regression design allowed the researcher to
incorporate several independent variables of community colleges and their learning
47

commons to analyze their effects on institutional graduation rates relative to one another.
Secondly, since this technique provided predictive power (Freedman, 1997), it provided
the researcher with an instrument for predicting student success given different
characteristics of the community colleges and their learning commons.
Survey Instruments
The data used in this study came from the National Center for Educational
Statistics (NCES), which is the primary federal entity for collecting and analyzing data
related to education in the United States. The NCES organization is located within the
U.S. Department of Education and the Institute of Education Services.
The Integrated Post-secondary Data System (IPEDS) is a system of interrelated
surveys conducted annually that is required for institutions to be applicants for federal
student financial aid programs (NCES 2013). According to the NCES website (2013),
more than 7,500 institutions complete IPEDS surveys each year, including research
institutions, state colleges and universities, private religious and liberal arts colleges, forprofit institutions, community and technical colleges, and non-degree granting
institutions. The data gathering was authorized by the Higher Education Act of 1965 to
include data on enrollments, program completions, graduation rates, faculty and staff,
finances, institutional prices, and student financial aid.
This study used data from 5 specific surveys found within IPEDS. The first four
IPEDS surveys included the provisional release data from the Enrollment Fall 2012A
survey which provided gender, the Enrollment Fall 2012B survey which provided age
and degree of urbanization variables, the Institutional Characteristics survey which
provided several of the between-institution variables such as region of the country and
48

institutional size, and the Graduation Rate 2011 Survey which provided institutional
graduation rates.
The last data source used was called the 2012 Academic Libraries Survey (ALS),
which is part of the Library Statistics Program also found within IPEDS. NCES began
the nation-wide library statistics program in 1989, and it now includes the Academic
Libraries Survey (identified for purposes of this research study) and the School Library
Media Center Survey. The Academic Libraries Survey collects data biennially from about
3,700 degree-granting post-secondary institutions in order to provide an overview of
academic libraries nationwide (NCES, 2013).
For the purposes of the ALS, an academic library is the library associated with a
degree-granting institution of higher education and must meet the following criteria: a)
total expenditures that exceed $10,000, b) an organized collection of printed or other
materials or a combination thereof, c) a staff trained to provide and interpret such
materials as required to meet the informational, cultural, recreational, or educational
needs of clientele, d) an established schedule in which services of the staff are available
to clientele, and e) the physical facilities necessary to support such a collection, staff, and
schedule (NCES, 2013).
According to NCES (2013), the survey universe from 2012 was comprised of all
two- and four-year degree granting postsecondary institutions with a library. The survey
file contains final data on 3,177 of the 3,996 academic libraries in the United States,
representing an 86.1% response rate. Specific to this study, the universe was comprised
of 1,326 associate-degree institutions with 1,120 participating for an 84.5% response rate.
The data was collected over the Internet via a web-based reporting system. The web
49

application included a user guide and tutorial that explained its features and operation, the
survey instrument, and the edit check tool. The reporting period for the 2012 survey is
defined as any 12-month period starting between June 1 and September 30, 2011 that
corresponds with the institution’s fiscal year.
Non-response bias. NCES is directed by the Office of Management and Budget
to evaluate nonresponse bias if a survey’s unit response rate falls below 80% (Graham
2006). The Academic Library Survey for 2012 did have a unit response rate above 85%,
but experienced numerous item response rates of less than 80%; therefore based on
NCES statistical standards, a nonresponse bias study was required.
The purpose of the nonresponse bias study was to identify areas of potential
nonresponse bias and to make recommendations for mitigating the bias. Because the
Academic Library Survey is a census (i.e., units have equal weights of one), any
nonresponse is an indicator of bias. In the 2012 survey, four cells were consistently
below the 80% including private institutions, FTE less than 1,000, and specialized and
not-classified Carnegie classifications. Of these 4 cells, only the FTE less than 1,000
may affect this study on libraries at associate-degree institutions.
Dependent and Independent Variables
This section will discuss the dependent and independent variables selected for this
study. The variables are displayed in Figure 3.
Dependent variable. The dependent variable, institutional graduation rates, is
reported in the IPEDS data. It is defined as the number of students entering the
institution as full-time, first-time, degree/certificate-seeking undergraduate students in a
particular year cohort, by race/ethnicity and gender; the number completing their program
50

within 150% of normal time (IPEDS, 2013). In the case of associate-degree institutions,
150% of normal time is 3 years.
While a few studies such as Pierard and Graves (2007), Bell (2008), and Mezick
(2007), determined a relationship between retention and persistence with library
characteristics, evidence tying academic libraries to student graduation rates is scarce and
nearly non-existent for community college libraries or learning commons. Emmons and
Wilkerson (2011) explored the relationship between traditional library input and output
measures of staff, collections, use, and services with fall-to-fall retention and six-year
graduation rates. They used a linear regression and found, controlling for ethnicity and
socioeconomic status, a change in the ratio of library professional staff and students
predicted a statistically significant positive relationship with both retention and
graduation rates. The fact this study did not include community colleges is the primary
basis for this study.
Independent variables. Both the literature and the Emmons and Wilkerson
study (2011) provided the basis for the inclusion of forty-one independent variables for
this study. The variables were entered into the regression analysis using a three-block
model seen in Figure 3.
Astin’s (1993) I-E-O conceptual model informs the blocks of the step-wise
regression analysis and the variables within each block. As stated in Astin & Sax (1998),
“the I-E-O model was designed to address the basic methodological problem with all
non-experimental studies in the social sciences, namely the nonrandom assignments of
people (inputs) to programs (environments)” (p. 252).

51

Using the I-E-O model, it is important to control for student input characteristics
before examining the effects of the environmental factors on the dependent variable,
because variability in outcomes “may simply represent difference in the characteristics of
students” (Astin & Sax, 1998, p. 252). The same logic is expanded to the between
institutional characteristics since the dataset included various community colleges.
While figure 3 provides a visual display of the conceptual model for this study
including the various blocks, tables 1-3 list the specific variables and their respective
codes from IPEDS and the Academic Library Statistics surveys. The input variables
were entered into the analysis first, then the two environmental blocks (betweeninstitutional variables and library characteristics), to explore their influence, if any, on the
output variable.
Environmental Block #2:
Between-Institution
Variables
Environmental Block #3:
Library Characteristic
Variables
Output Block:
Institutional Graduation Rates

Input Block #1:
Institutional Student
Characteristics
Input variables

Figure 3. Conceptual I-E-O model with dependent and independent variables.
The input block of student characteristics included institutional-level figures of
race/ethnicity, gender, and age. IPEDS (2013) defines race/ethnicity as the group to
which individuals belong, identify with, or belong in the eyes of the community. The
category does not denote scientific definitions or anthropological origins. Definitions of
gender and age are self- evident. Race and gender figures are found in annual IPEDS
52

data and were represented in the 2012 data sets retrieved for this study. Age, however, is
collected by NCES in odd-years requiring the data to be pulled from 2011.
The codes from the IPEDS survey that denote each input characteristic are found
in Table 1. In some cases the variables needed to be dummy coded before entering into
the regression analysis.
Table 1
Block One: Input Variables
Variable Code/Dummy
Code if needed

Variable Description

Variable Location

EFAGE 2

Under 25 years of age

Fall Enrollment 2011-12B
IPEDS data

PCTFEMALE

Female

Fall Enrollment 2012-13A
IPEDS data

PCTMIN1
PCTMIN2
PCTMIN3
PCTMIN4

Black, Non-Hispanic,
American Indian/Alaskan
Asian/Pacific Islander,
Hispanic

Academic Library Survey
2012 data

The environment block of between institution characteristics included eight
variables representing various ways institutions vary from one to another. Table 2
denotes the descriptions and primary codes/dummy codes from the ALS Survey 2012 or
IPEDS 2012-13.
Table 2
Block #Two: Environmental Between-Institution Variables
Variable Codes
LOCALE

Variable Description
Degree of urbanization
based on school address.
53

Variable Location
Fall Enrollment 2012-13B
IPEDS data

DUMMY_CITY
DUMMY_SUBURB
DUMMY_TOWN
DUMMY_RURAL
INSTSIZE
DUMMY_UNDER 4999
DUMMY_UNDER 9999
DUMMY_UNDER 19999
DUMMY_OVER 20000
CCBASIC
DUMMY_SINGLE
OBEREG
DUMMY_NE-Region
DUMMY_MW-Region
DUMMY_GL-Region
DUMMY_PL-Region
DUMMY_SE-Region
DUMMY_SW-Region
DUMMY_FW-Region
EXTOT
INSTTYPE
DUMMY_HBCU_YES
DUMMY_TRIBAL_YES

Population 100,000 or
higher
Outside primary city
boundaries
Outside urban cluster by at
least 10 miles
Outside urban cluster by
more than 10 miles
Size of institution based on
headcount of students
enrolled for credit
Institutions with 0-4999
students
Institutions with 50009999 students
Institutions with 1000019999 students
Institutions with 20000 or
more students

Institutional
Characteristics 2012
IPEDS data

Single/Multiple
Campus(es)
Institutions with one
campus/site
Region of country by code

Academic Library Survey
2012 data

Institutions in the New
England region
Institutions in the Midwest
region
Institutions in the Great
Lakes region
Institutions in the Plains
region
Institutions in the
Southeast region
Institutions in the
Southwest region
Institutions in the Far West
region
Total library expenditures
Institutional type
Historically black college
or university
Tribal institution
54

STLEARNYN

Student learning outcomes
articulated in
mission/strategic plan
DUMMY_STLEARN_YES Student learning outcomes
are articulated in
mission/strategic plan
INFLITOUTYN
Information literacy
outcome
DUMMY_INFLITOUTThere is no information
NO
literacy outcome

Academic Library Survey
2012 data

The second environment block in the analysis was for the addition of library
characteristics. As Table 3 indicates, there are 30 variables. Once again, the variable
name, dummy code if necessary, the description, and the data source are provided.
Table 3
Block Three: Environmental Library Characteristics
Variable Code
STLIBPRO

Variable Description
Number of librarian and other
professional staff

STOTH

Number of other staff (not
student assistants)

TOTSERATT

Total number of in-person
reference transactions,
attendance at presentations, and
in-person consultations

SUPPVIRTYN

Library supports virtual
consultations

DUMMY_SUPPVIRT-NO

Library does not support virtual
consultations

HOURS

Number of weekly service hours

GATECT

Typical weekly gate count

LIBREFYN

Reference service by email
55

Variable Location
Academic Library
Survey 2012 data

DUMMY_LIBREF-NO

Library does not provide
reference through email

TECHYN

Library provides technology to
assist disabilities

DUMMY_TECH-NO

Library does not provide
technology to assist disabilities

EMAILREFYN

Library utilized email reference

Library does not provide email
DUMMY_EMAILREF-NO reference
COMSERYN

Library utilizes chat for
reference services

DUMMY_COMSER-NO

Library does not use chat for
reference services

INSTMESYN

Library utilizes instant
messaging for reference services

DUMMY_INSTMES-NO
SORTMESYN

DUMMY_SORTMES-NO

Library does not use instant
messaging for reference services
Library utilized text messaging
for reference service
Library does not use text
messaging for reference service

SUPPVIRTYN

Library supports virtual
reference service

DUMMY_SUPPVIRT-NO

Library does not support virtual
reference service
Number of professional
librarians

STLIBS
STOTHPRO

Number of professional staff
(not librarians)

STASST

Number of student assistants

STTOT

Total FTE staff
56

Academic Library
Survey 2012 data

EXBKS

Expenditures for books

EXELBKS

Expenditures for electronic
books

EXAUD

Expenditures for audiovisual
materials

EXCUSER

Expenditures for current serials

EXELSER

Expenditures for electronic
resources

EXDEL

Expenditures for document
delivery/interlibrary loan

EXPRES

Expenditures for preservation

EXOTHIR

Expenditures for other
categories

EXCOMP

Expenditures for computer
hardware

EXBIB

Expenditures for bibliographic
utilities

CRGEN

Number of general circulation
transactions

CRRSV

Number of reserved circulation
transactions

PRESEN

Number of presentations by
librarians

ATTEND

Total attendance at presentations

Academic Library
Survey 2012 data

The output block will represent the dependent variable of institutional graduation
rates as defined by IPEDs (see Table 4).

57

Table 4
Output of Institutional Graduation Rates
Variable Code
GR

Variable Description
Graduation rate as a
percentage of first-time,
full-time students in 150%
of time

Variable Location
Graduation Rates 2012
IPEDs data

Data Analysis Procedures
The following sections describe the data analysis procedures used in this study. A
discussion of steps taken to access, clean and prepare the data is provided, followed by a
description of the assumptions and the statistical methods used in this study.
Data access and preparation. The 2012 IPEDS and 2012 ALS survey data are
publicly available on the NCES website. The data was downloaded to the researcher’s
computer in Excel file formats.
The researcher reviewed the data to ensure readability and that the variables were
coded for regression analysis. The data was cleaned by NCES prior to release to identify
valid responses and imputation was used when possible to replace missing data with valid
response data.
In order to combine data from the five different surveys, the researcher began by
sorting all databases by the Carnegie classification for associates’ degree institutions.
Since this group also included private two-year institutions and only public two-year
institutions were desired, the researcher also cut the data by sector which resulted in
1,237 institutions from the IPEDS surveys and 838 from the Academic Library Survey.

58

The researcher then used the unique institutional identification codes provided by
NCES to combine all datasets. Any institution that was missing relevant data from the
Academic Library Survey was removed (200 institutions). This action resulted in a final
sample of 638 pubic, two-year institutions with both complete IPEDS and Academic
Library Survey data. This sample represents 53% of the original universe of all two-year
associates’ degree institutions.
Assumptions. In order to make conclusions based on the results of this study,
certain assumptions must be tested and demonstrated to be true (Field, 2009). One
important assumption is that there is a linear relationship between the independent and
dependent variables. The researcher conducted a Pearson correlation to ensure that
predictive independent variables were correlated with the dependent variable. If any of
the independent variables were found to be not significantly related to the dependent
variable, they will be reviewed to determine if they should remain in the study, or be
eliminated.
Another assumption that was tested is that there should be no multicollinearity or
singularity, meaning that no two independent variables are too correlated, or redundant,
of one another. If this is the case, Tabacknick and Fidell (2001) suggest eliminating one
of two variables using correlations above .90. This instruction was used and any strong
correlations found were reviewed to determine if they should remain in the study.
Limitations of the Study
Every study is faced with limitations or restrictions. This section will identify and
discuss the limitations specific to this study.

59

Threats to internal validity. Internal validity, according to Cohen, Cohen, West
and Aiken (2003) refers to the ability to determine cause and effect relationships within a
research study. As a result, causation will be difficult to determine because independent
variables cannot be randomly assigned. Because this researcher used a blocked form of
multiple regression, she selected variables and placed them in blocks based on groupings
intended to reflect the I-E-0 model developed by Astin (1993). However, the research
findings may have been due to other factors such as reverse causation, circular causation,
or from the effects of other variables not considered in this analysis.
An additional threat to the internal validity is the accuracy and completeness of
the data provided by IPEDS and the ALS. As with any survey-based research,
respondents could misinterpret questions or omit information which may skew results.
As mentioned previously, the ALS data did have some items identified for non-response
bias.
Lastly, due to the collection cycles for both IPEDS and the ALS survey, the
researcher was forced to use different annual surveys for some information. For
example, most of the IPEDS data came from the 2012-13 collection period but the
researcher needed to use 2011-12 data to gather age data.
Threats to external validity. External validity refers to the generalizability of
the research findings to other populations in other settings and over time (Cohen, Cohen,
West, & Aiken, 2003). According to these authors, one of the best ways to ensure
external validity is to draw a representative sample using random selection and achieving
high response rates. In the case of this study, the data was pulled from national data sets

60

with greater than 80% response rates, which will increase the ability to generalize the
findings to other populations.
Another threat to external validity in this study is the use of secondary data.
While using secondary data can be beneficial in several ways, it can also impose several
limitations (Smith, 2008). For example, the reason the secondary data was collected is
usually different than subsequent research studies. In the case of this study, the data was
first collected by NCES for governmental reporting purposes, not to specifically
determine if library characteristics influence graduation rates at community colleges. In
addition, secondary data may be full of errors, although IPEDS and ALS have internal
correction mechanisms to guide the survey respondent if answers fall outside identified
parameters. Lastly, since the data is secondary, the researcher was not able to develop
specific survey items pertinent to the research questions.
Summary
Chapter three provided an overview of the purpose of the proposed study and the
methods that were used to explore the research questions. The research design and the
specific research techniques were discussed. The IPEDS and ALS surveys were
explained, including non-response bias found in the ALS survey. The variable section
included descriptions of the independent and dependent variables used in the regression
analysis. Finally, data analysis procedures and limitations were discussed. The results of
the regression will be examined in the following chapter.

61

Chapter Four
Results
Introduction
Previous studies of the influences library characteristics may have on institutional
graduation rates have primarily focused on four-year institutions. This dissertation is the
first known study to examine what influence, if any, library characteristics have on
institutional graduation rates at the community college level or two-year, public
associates degree institutions.
Based on the research design, a total of 41 independent variables were used in the
analysis process to determine if any predicted graduation rates, the dependent variable.
The variables were organized into three blocks, including (a) student input measures,
such as age, gender, and race/ethnicity, (b) between-institutional characteristics, such as
region of country, single or multiple campuses, and institutional size, and (c) library
characteristics, such as including number of librarians, professional staff, and other staff,
the typical hours open and gate count per week, and total reference service provided faceto- face, by email, text, chat and instant messaging.
This chapter first reiterates the research questions below. It then presents and
discusses relevant descriptive statistics of the sample used in this study. Lastly, it
discusses the regression model used and the results achieved.
The research questions are as follows:
1. What influence, if any, do institutional-level student input variables, such as
percentage of different racial/ethnic groups, percentage of female and male

62

students, and the percentage of students under or over the age of 25, have on
institutional graduation rates?
2. What influence, if any, do between-institutional variables have on institutional
graduation rates?
3. What influence, if any, do library or learning commons variables have on
institutional graduation rates?
Description and Characteristics of the Sample and Population
The data used for this study was provided by NCES, the primary federal entity for
collecting and analyzing data related to education in the United States. Data was pulled
from five publicly available IPED surveys. The researcher used the unique institutional
identification codes provided by NCES to combine all datasets. Any institution that was
missing relevant data was removed. This action resulted in a final sample of 638 pubic,
two-year institutions with complete data. This sample represents 53% of the original
universe of all two-year associates’ degree institutions.
Institutional Characteristics. Analyzing the data from the sample at the
institutional level provides some insight. This section will review the basic
demographics found, including student characteristics and institutional characteristics.
As mentioned above, the sample includes 638 public, two-year institutions.
Within the sample institutions, 44% of the students were male and 56% of the
students were female. The majority of students were over 25 years of age (59%). White,
Caucasian students represented the majority of the sample (65%). Other races found in
the sample include Black, Non-Hispanic (14%), American Indian/Alaskan Native (2%),
Asian/Pacific Islander (4%), and Hispanic (15%).
63

The majority of the institutions represented were institutions with 1,000-4,999
students (n=253 or 39.7%). Institutions with 5,000-9,999 students represented the next
largest segment (n=186 or 29.2%). Very small institutions, those with less than 1,000
students, represented a very small portion of the sample (n=17 or 2.8%), as did the very
large institutions with over 20,000 students (n=55 or 8.4%). Nearly two-thirds of the
sample represented single campus institutions (n=423 or 66.4%).
The location of the sample institutions represent all IPEDS categories including
city, suburb, town, and rural. The majority of institutions were in cities with populations
over 100,000 (n=216 or 33.9%). A close second were those institutions found in rural
areas, or more than 10 miles from an urban cluster. There were 202 institutions in this
category representing 31.7% of the sample. The remaining institutions fell almost
equally between suburb and town locations.
Table 5 depicts the regions of the country represented in the sample. All regions
were represented, although the New England and Southwest regions may be
underrepresented, and the sample may be skewed to the Southeast and Far West.
The percentages of tribal or historically black institutions were very small within
the sample used. There was only one institution that represented tribal institutions (<1%
of sample) and 10 (1.6% of sample) representing historically black institutions.
In summary, based on the descriptive statistics described above, the average
institution included for analysis reported a higher percentage of white, female students
with an average age over 25 years. In addition, the majority of institutions represented in
the sample are found in the southeast, in large cities (populations of at least 100,000),
have single campuses and a student body of 1,000-4,999.
64

Table 5
Regions of Country Represented in Sample (N=638)
Region of Country with State
Abbreviations*
New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT)

Number in
Sample
30

Percentage
in Sample
4.7%

Percentage
in Universe
5.9%

Mideast (DE, DC, MD, NJ, NY, PA)

66

10.4%

15.4%

Great Lakes (IL, IN, MI, OH, WI)

76

11.9%

15%

Plains (IA, KS, MN, MO, NE, ND, SD)

46

7.2%

10%

Southeast (AL, AR, FL, GA, KY, LA, MS,

169

26.4%

24.8%

Southwest (AZ, NM, OK, TX)

80

12.6%

9.2%

Rocky Mountain (CO, ID, MT, UT, WY)

28

4.4%

4%

Far West (AK, CA, HI, NV, OR, WA)

143

22.4%

14%

NC, SC,TN,VA, WV)

Note. Categories identified from IPEDS data.
Statistical Results
This section provides the results of the Pearson correlation and stepwise
regression.
Two-tailed Pearson correlation. The results of the two-tailed Pearson
correlation are shown in Table 6 and indicate that 10 of the 41 independent variables
were significantly correlated with the dependent variable of institutional graduation rates.
The first five variables, including percentage of students under the age of 25,
expenditures for electronic serials, number of general circulation transactions, number of
presentations made by librarians, and the total attendance at presentations, were all
significant at the p>.05 level. The remaining five variables, including number of staff
65

(non-professionals), expenditures on books, current serials, and other information
resources, and the total library expenditures, were all significantly correlated with
institutional graduation rates at the p>.01 level. The remaining 31 variables were
removed from the regression equation because there was no significant correlation found
with the dependent variable.
The researcher examined the two-tailed Pearson correlations to determine if
multicollinearity was a factor and found the two variables of PRESENT (number of
presentations by librarians) and ATTEND (total attendance at presentations) were closely
related with a correlation of .927. Based on research conducted by Tabachnick and Fidell
(2001), the researcher removed the PRESENT variable from the final regression
equation.
Regression Analysis. Once the major assumptions were tested, a 3-block
stepwise multiple regression analysis was performed to determine if any of the remaining
predictor variables had an influence on institutional graduation rates. A total of nine
independent variables were included in the final regression. The results of the analysis
are displayed in Table 7. The first column of the table indicates the name of the variable
that proved a predictive influence on institutional graduation rates. The second column
indicates from which block the variable entered during the stepwise regression analysis.
The third column, Zero r, indicates the correlation between that variable and the
institutional graduation rate. The fourth column, step β weight, indicates the weight in
which that variable entered in the model. The fifth column indicates the β weight for that
variable in the final model. Lastly, in the sixth column is an F value. The F value
represents a ratio of explained variance to unexplained variance (Cohen, et al 2003).
66

Table 6
Significant Correlations of Independent Variables
Independent Variable
EFBAGE2 (percentage of
students under age 25)

Two-Tailed Pearson
Correlation
.082

Significance Level
p>.05

EXELSER (expenditures
on electronic serials)

.098

p>.05

CRGEN (number of
general circulation
transactions)

.082

p>.05

.080

p>.05

ATTEND (total attendance
at presentations)

.093

p>.05

STOTH (number of nonprofessional staff)

.104

p>.01

EXTOT (total library
expenditures)

.111

p>.01

EXBKS (expenditures on
books)

.118

p>.01

EXCUSER (expenditures
on current serials)

.110

p>.01

EXOTHIR (expenditures
on other information
resources)

.127

p>.01

PRESENT (number of
presentations provided by
librarians)

Note. Multicollinearity to be discussed more fully in chapter 5.

67

The stepwise regression analysis produced three models where a new independent
variable entered as significant each time. Two variables indicated significant beta (β)
weights in the last model, including expenditures on other information resources and
expenditures on current serials.
Table 7
Significant Predictors of Institutional Graduation Rates
Variable

Block

Zero r

Step β

Β

F

EFBAGE2
Block 1:
.082*
.082*
-.015
4.257*
(percentage
Student
of students
Characteristics
under the age
of 25)
EXOTHIR
Block 3:
.127**
.116***
.130***
6.285**
(expenditures Library
on other
Characteristics
information
resources)
EXCUSER
Block 3:
.110**
.119*
.119*
6.155***
(expenditures Library
on current
Characteristics
serials)
Note. Sample size n=638, R2=.028, Adjusted R2=.024; *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001
The adjusted R2 for the final model is .024, indicating that the three significant
variables explained approximately 2.4% of the variance in institutional graduation rates.
In addition, the R2 indicates a small effect size, or in other words, a low level of
magnitude on the dependent variable.
Discussion of Results
The following section discusses the results of the three block stepwise multiple
regression analysis by each research question.

68

Student input characteristics. The first research question addressed if the input
characteristics of students including age, gender and race influenced institutional
graduation rates. The percentage of students under the age of 25 was the only predictor
variable found with a significant correlation to institutional graduation rates and,
therefore, used in the stepwise blocked regression. At the beginning of the model, the
variable of students under the age of 25 had a positive correlation with the dependent
variable of r(636)=.082, p<.05 level. In the final model, the variable of students under the
age of 25 was a negative predictor (β=-.015) and no longer significant at a p <.05 level.
Between-institution characteristics. The second research question of this study
asked if between-institutional characteristics had any influence on institutional graduation
rates. The variables first considered included institutional size, single or multiple
campuses, region of country, degree of urbanization, type of institution, total library
expenditures, and if the college’s mission articulated student learning outcomes or
informational literacy. Total library expenditures was the only between-institutional
variable that significantly correlated with the dependent variable at r(636)= .111, p<.01.
The other variables were not used in the stepwise regression model. In the final model,
total library expenditures was no longer a significant predictor of institutional graduation
rates.
Library Characteristics. The third research question of this study was what
library characteristics, if any, influence institutional graduation rates. Originally 30
variables were identified from the Academic Library Survey. After applying a two-tailed
Pearson correlations test, eight variables emerged as significantly correlating with
institutional graduation rates, including the total number of other staff, expenditures on
69

books, current serials, electronic serials, and other information resources, and number of
general circulation transactions and the number of presentations provided by librarians
and the number of attendees. Checking for multicollinearity resulted in the researcher’s
decision to exclude the variable of number of presentations.
In the final model, two variables emerged as significant predictors of institutional
graduation rates. The two variables were total expenditures on other information
resources (β =.130, p<.001) and expenditures on current serials (β =.119, p<.05).
Summary
This chapter provided an overview of the statistical analyses that were conducted
in order to answer the research questions of this study. The results of the blocked
stepwise regression analysis, based on the sample of two-year public associates’ degree
institutions, were discussed by each research question.
The data resulted in 2 of the original 41 independent variables having significant
influence on the dependent variable. The 2 variables included total expenditures for other
information resources (β =.130, p<.001) and total expenditures for current serials (β
=.119, p<.05). The final model explained 2.4% of the variation in institutional
graduation rates.
The implications of these findings deserve further discussion with particular
attention to the advancement of research and theoretical knowledge, policy development
and professional practice on the impact of the library on increasing institutional
graduation rates. These implications will be discussed in the next chapter.

70

Chapter Five
Discussion, Recommendations, and Conclusions
Introduction
Chapter Four presented the results of the analyses that were conducted in attempt
to find answers to the three research questions of this study. Chapter Five provides an
overview of the study, including the purpose and methodology, and then examines the
findings in detail by research question. Implications for policy and practice are also
addressed, followed by recommendations for future research. A final summary of the
study concludes this chapter.
Overview of Study
The purpose of this study was to extend research conducted first by Mark
Emmons and Frances Wilkinson (2011), who examined the impact of academic library
characteristics on student persistence. Their study exclusively focused on research
universities. This study, in contrast, examined the influences of library or learning
commons characteristics on the institutional graduation rates of community colleges.
More specifically, this study examined several characteristics of community college
libraries or learning commons, such as staffing levels of professional librarians and other
staff, the number of individual and group consultations, library expenditures on various
library materials, and access and use of virtual services. In doing so, this study addressed
the current gap in research that addresses the community college library and its impact on
institutional graduation rates.
The library or learning commons, as an integral component of the student
experience, should make a direct or indirect contribution to the outcomes of the
71

institution. Recognizing this challenge, the ARL and ACRL have created measures that
focus on institutional outcomes. Subsequent research by Smith (2001) and Weiner
(2005) supported learning outcome models that tied campus vision, mission, and goals
with library resources (including collections, personnel, and budgets), capacity, and
services. But because these studies and resources remained focused on the library itself,
not the outcomes or the unique needs of the student body, this researcher chose to focus
this study on institutional graduation rates within the community college arena.
Theoretical and Conceptual Frameworks. Astin’s Theory of Involvement and
the I-E-O Model (1984) provided the theoretical and conceptual frameworks respectively.
Astin’s theory states that the more students are involved in both the academic and social
aspects of the collegiate experience, the more they will gain from their studies.
Interestingly, Astin did not specifically address interactions or involvement with the
library in his research. However, this researcher felt that since most community college
librarians are faculty, one might apply his theory by hypothesizing that the more involved
students are with their librarians and library resources, the more their student learning
will increase.
Astin’s I-E-O Model (1996), Figure 4, provided the visual or conceptual
framework for this study. Applying this model to this study, the researcher controlled for
student input characteristics, such as race/ethnicity, gender, and age. The environmental
input characteristics included between-institutional variables, such as degree of
urbanization, institutional size, region of the country, and library expenditures on various
types of materials. Other environmental factors included the specific library
characteristics. Examples of library characteristics include number of professional
72

librarians and other staff, the number of individual and group consultations, weekly gate
counts, and the number of virtual consultations using various mediums, such as text
messaging and email.

E

Between
Institutions and
Library
Characteristics

I

O

Institutional
Institutional-Level
Graduation
Student
Rates
Characteristics
Institutional
Characteristics
Figure 4. I-E-O
model application indicating interrelationships between institutional-

level student inputs, between-institution and library characteristics, and institutional
graduation rates. Adapted from Astin (1992).
Research Questions and Data Set. The research questions this study addressed
included:
1. What influence, if any, do institutional-level student input variables such
as percentages of different racial/ethnic groups, percentages of female and
male students, and percentages of students under or over age 25, have on
institutional graduation rates?
2. What influence, if any, do between institutional variables have on
institutional graduation rates?
3. What influence, if any do library or learning commons variables have on
institutional graduation rates?

73

It was determined that existing data from five sources conducted by the National
Center of Educational Statistics (NCES) could be used to answer the questions above.
The first four sources included data from separate IPEDS data sets. The fifth source was
provided by the Library Statistics Program. In all cases, only associate’s degree
institutions were used. The 2011 and 2012 IPEDS data sets included 1,642 institutions,
and provided several of the independent variables, such as student and betweeninstitution characteristics. The IPEDS data also included the dependent variable of
institutional graduation rates. The data provided by the 2012 Library Statistics Program
included 1,371 associate’s degree academic libraries. This data set provided the
independent variables that categorized libraries or learning commons.
Methodology. For the purposes of this study, both descriptive statistics and a
blocked, stepwise multiple regression model were used. The researcher computed basic
statistics for all variables, including two-tailed Pearson correlations to determine
significance. Of the 41 independent variables, 10 were significantly correlated with the
dependent variable. The first five variables, including the percentage of students under
and over the age of 25, expenditures for electronic serials, number of general circulation
transaction, number of presentations made by librarians, and the total attendance at
presentations correlated significantly with the dependent variable at the p<.05 level. The
remaining five variables, including number of staff (non-professionals), expenditures on
books, current serials, and other information resources, and the total library expenditures,
were also significantly correlated with institutional graduation rates, but at the p≤.01
level. Because the remaining 31 variables did not significantly correlate with the
dependent variable, they were removed from the regression model.
74

A 3-block stepwise multiple regression analysis was then performed to determine
if any of the remaining predictor variables had an influence on institutional graduation
rates. Two of the variables (expenditures on other information resources and
expenditures on serials) proved to be significant influences on institutional graduation
rates. The adjusted R2 for the final model was .024, meaning that the 2 variables
mentioned above explained approximately 2.4% of the variance in graduation rates.
Discussion of the Findings
The first research question addressed the input characteristics of students,
including age, gender, and race. The percentage of students under the age of 25 was the
only institutional-level student predictor variable found with a significant correlation to
institutional graduation rates and, therefore, used in the stepwise blocked multiple
regression. At the beginning of the model, the variable of the percentage of students
under the age of 25 had a positive correlation with the dependent variable. In the final
model, the variable became a negative predictor and was no longer significant.
It is important to reiterate that graduation rates, as defined by IPEDS, is based on
the fall entering cohort of first-time, full-time students that graduate with an associate’s
degree or certificate in 150% of normal time, or three years. Because this cohort
represents a small percentage of community college students, this measurement may not
be a true predictor of student success or completion for community colleges. The
majority of community college students are older, non-traditional and attend part-time
(AACC, 2013). The researcher used IPEDS graduation rate since this was the variable
available, but future researchers should explore different graduation definitions by

75

incorporating new and trial measures, such as those developed by the Voluntary
Framework of Accountability (AACC, 2014).
Based on the Pearson correlation results, the percentage of students under the age
of 25 had a positive correlation with graduation rates. On first examination, this makes
sense. Younger students may be more likely to attend full-time and, therefore, be able to
complete their degree within the 150% of time. However, as the regression model
advanced, this variable became a negative predictor (and no longer significant). Since
most community college students attend part-time to balance other responsibilities,
younger students are more likely to withdraw or stop in and out of school, delaying their
graduation date beyond the 3 years tracked by IPEDS.
In addition, the analyses of the sample found that it represented the national
community college student profile (AACC, 2014) of age and gender but did not of race.
AACC (2014) states that the national profile of Black, Non-Hispanic, public, two-year
institutions represent 34%. The sample used in this study only had a representation of
14%. This is explained by the representation of regions of the country found in the
sample and may not have been a significant predictor in the regression model due to
underrepresentation. More importantly, an analysis of the sample against the IPEDS
population indicated it closely represented the population. Age, gender and race all
aligned within 1-3 quality points except for the percentage of Hispanic students. This
race/ethnicity was represented by 15% in the sample, where in the population, Hispanics
represent only 10.8%.
The second research question asked if between-institutional characteristics had
any influence on institutional graduation rates. The variables first considered included
76

institutional size, single or multiple campus(es), region of country, degree of
urbanization, type of institution, total library expenditures, and if the college’s mission
articulated student learning outcomes or information literacy. The only variable that
significantly correlated with the dependent variable in this block was total library
expenditures. In the final block, the variable, total library expenditures, was no longer a
predictor of institutional graduation rates.
Total library expenditures, as a variable from the Academic Library Survey,
included all expenses, including staff and professional salaries. While a correlational
relationship does not suggest cause and effect, if a library incurs more expenses by
providing more services to students and faculty, it is likely to positively influence student
success in courses and, thus, the institutional graduation rate. However, since this
variable did not prove significant in the final regression model, it calls into question the
value of increasing library expenditures.
Lastly, the sample characteristics of between-institutional variables represented
the universe of public, two-year community colleges well, with the exception of a few
characteristics, including region of the country, type of institution and location. While
the percentages and number within the sample of size of the institution and
single/multiple campus characteristics mirrored statistics from AACC (2014), the sample
had a disproportionate number of institutions from the Southeast and Far West, a very
low representation of tribal or historically black institutions, and may have been skewed
to large city or rural locations. The comparison of the sample against IPEDS population
found similar results noting that once again the sample may have had underrepresentation

77

of tribal and historically black institutions. Future research should consider these
variables and their influence on institutional graduation or other success factors.
In the final and third question, the study examined if specific library
characteristics had any influence on institutional graduation rates. Originally, 30
variables were identified from the Academic Library Survey for examination. After
applying the two-tailed Pearson correlation test, only eight variables emerged as
significantly correlating with the dependent variable. These variables included total
number of other staff, expenditures on books, current serials, electronic serials, and other
information resources, the number of general circulation transactions, the number of
presentations provide by librarians, and the number of attendees. Due to multicollinearity
found between the number of presentations and the number of attendees, the researcher
decided to exclude the variable indicating the number of presentations.
In the final model, two variables from this block emerged as significant predictors
of institutional graduation rates. The two variables were total expenditures on other
information resources, and expenditures on current serials. The Academic Library
Survey defines current serials as ongoing subscription commitments. Serials may include
periodicals, newspapers, annuals (reports, yearbooks, etc.), memoirs, proceedings and
transactions of societies. The survey defines other information resources as expenses not
covered in other categories, such as cartographic materials, manuscripts, copyright fees,
and fees for database searches such as DIALOG, and Lexis-Nexis (ALS, 2014). While
these materials also exist in 4-year, research libraries, it is asserted that these materials
are used more frequently by community college students and their faculty, making them
more influential than resources such as professional journals. It is also possible that
78

community college students tend to access resource materials via database search engines
and, since these materials are available through electronic means, they are accessible
without physically entering the library or learning commons.
In summary, the data analysis resulted in two of the original 41 independent
variables having a significant predictive influence on the dependent variable. The two
variables included the total expenditures for other information resources, and total
expenditures for current serials. The final model explained 2.4% of the variation in
institutional graduation rates.
These results add to the current research base and provide the first direct
examination of library or learning commons characteristics and their influence on
institutional graduation rates. As community colleges continue to explore effective ways
to positively impact completion and graduation rates, this information will be relevant in
decisions affecting budgetary support for libraries and in the library’s organizational
structure or deployment of resources.
Implications for Practice and Theory
The purposes of conducting research are to advance current theory or influence
the development of new theory while also impacting practice in the field. The following
section will address these areas.
Implications for theory. The theoretical framework that supported this study
was Astin’s theory of involvement (1984). His theory states that the more students are
involved in both the academic and social aspects of the college experience the more they
gain from their studies. He defines involvement as devoting significant energy to
academics, time on campus, and interacting with faculty. Using this theory, one might
79

assume the more involved students are, the more success they have in their studies and,
thus, graduate at a higher rate, which positively influences the institution graduation rate.
The findings from this research study indicate that entering the library, attending
presentations by librarians, or interacting with them through virtual or personal
consultations does not influence community college student graduation rates, even
though librarians are considered faculty at most institutions. Furthermore, the number of
times students enter the library or learning commons, assumedly to study or use
resources, also does not influence graduation rates.
However, this study did find that the library expenditures on current serials and
other information sources did positively impact graduation rates. This result indicates
that the more students used or interacted with these types of resources, the more
successful they were in their studies, resulting in graduation within the IPEDS three year
time period. Using serials and other sources such as databases is a type of involvement
with academic resources and advocates for increased time on studies both of which
support Astin’s theory of involvement.
Lastly, the findings from this study support that the percentage of younger
students (age 25 and under) negatively influences an institution’s graduation rate. Based
on Astin’s theory of involvement, if these students became more involved they would be
more successful and graduate. However, because community college students typically
have unique factors that impact their ability to become fully involved in their studies,
such as the need to work at least part-time, under-preparedness for college-level work,
and have multiple family obligations, future researchers should examine other theoretical
models that are based on the community college student.
80

Another implication of this study is the need for an expanded student outcomes
model that includes interactions with the library and other college services. This model
should not rely solely on the number of volumes or expenditures on information
resources on institutional level student outcomes (e.g. graduation rates), but should
expand to include the quality of student interactions with these services. Furthermore,
this model should look to include direct measures of student learning, such as student
learning outcomes or assessment measures.
According to Astin (1993), interactions with faculty and other students are a
couple of the most significant contributors to student persistence. Future research should
examine the interactions students have with librarians. What can students tell us about
these interactions and how do these interactions make them more likely to remain in
school and graduate? What do student-to-student interactions look like in the library?
What programming designed by librarians or the availability of library resources might
impact student-to-student or student-to-faculty interactions?
Implications for practice. This study provides several implications for practice
at the institutional level. First, using the IPEDS definition for institutional-level
graduation rates may not be the best benchmark for community colleges. Given the high
level of accountability required by the accreditors, and federal and state governments,
community colleges do, however, need to find an appropriate measure for student success
and completion that their missions support.
Community colleges are responding to this challenge in several ways. The
AACC is supporting a new set of measures defined by the Voluntary Framework of
Accountability (VFA). This framework, developed through a nationally funded project,
81

is designed to develop a set of sector-appropriate measures to determine how well
community colleges are serving their students. Measures include an analysis of cohorts
of students (typically those that entered in 2006) and what percentages moved
successfully through developmental education in one year, or what percentage moved
through their first college-level English or mathematics course within one year.
While this framework is new and is currently being piloted by many community
colleges, institutions will need to further explore the impact of services, such as library or
career centers, on their measures. Other institutional surveys such as the Community
College Survey of Student Engagement (CCSSE) and the Noel Levitz Survey of Student
Satisfaction may also provide additional information to practitioners, as they may include
information on the quality of interactions students have with the library or library
services.
It is incumbent on community college administrators and library or learning
commons directors to plan now for a future that impacts these measures. Directors need
to understand and appreciate that the library or learning commons is only part of a larger
community college system, yet it is their responsibility to continuously scan the larger
system and identify ways their areas can specifically impact outcome measures.
Secondly, the results of this study support expenditures for serials and other
information resources held in the library or learning commons as a significant predictor
of graduation rates. While budgets are being decreased across institutional departments,
higher education administrators should think twice about decreasing library support in
these areas. Since other library or learning commons characteristics did not prove to be
significant predictors, there would be other areas to consider for decreased funding.
82

Areas not found to be significant include expenditures on books, periodicals, and
technology.
Community colleges are comprehensive higher education environments
committed to providing a full array of educational programs. Support services, such as
the library or learning commons, should offer students the resources and services needed
to succeed. Among these students is a growing number who learn by distributed learning
(AACC, 2014) which, by definition, includes those who take advantage of distance
learning methodologies, some in remote locations, and some without ever coming to
campus.
Libraries or learning commons should provide access to organized online library
resources, and plan to service distance learners and remote users with the same level of
access and customer service afforded on-ground users. Directors and librarians should
explore new paradigms, identify benchmarks, seek partnerships, invest in technology, and
design technology infrastructure, and train and develop instructional faculty and staff to
provide support to existing and growing virtual needs. The results of this study support
this additional attention and resources to information and serials.
Thirdly, community college faculty, including librarians, need to consider how to
adapt practices to promote student involvement with the library and/or its resources.
Librarians have a unique and varied teaching role. In addition to teaching traditional
credit courses, they also provide students with one-on-one instruction at the reference
desk and collaborate with other faculty to teach discipline-based research methods.
Clearly, librarians see their role as supporting student success. While current methods
may be helpful to individual students, community college faculty, including librarians,
83

need to establish and assess their practices to impact institutional-level student
enrollment, retention and graduation rates. To this end, librarians should integrate library
services and resources with high-impact educational strategies (Kuh, 2008) such as firstyear seminars and experiences, learning communities, writing intensive courses,
collaborative assignments and projects, and undergraduate research.
One way to do so would be to assess the impact of course-integrated instruction.
In this approach, librarians partnering with instructional faculty, teach students to access,
evaluate, critically analyze information to successfully complete course assignments.
The challenge, of course, is to move this practice past individual and one-on-one faculty
relationships to systemic and integrated practice across the curriculum. Future
researchers should investigate and explore the relationships between librarian-enhanced
practices and student learning or completion and graduation rates.
Areas of future research. While this study is an important early step in
demonstrating that characteristics of community college libraries do influence
institutional graduation rates, it raises many questions that future research might address.
Why do expenditures for serials and other resources impact graduation? How do serials
and other resources impact student learning? What percentage increase in expenditures
would predict an increase in graduation rates? Is there an optimal level of resources?
Indeed, future researchers should extend beyond traditional assessment measures
of libraries (such as circulation and gate counts) to how libraries and learning commons
support institutional missions and goals for completion and graduation. National surveys
that focus on community colleges, such as CCSSE, should incorporate more questions

84

that address how students engage with the library and librarians in support of greater
learning and success.
In contrast, future researchers should incorporate more relevant measures of
institutional graduation rates. As the debate continues at the national level to identify
better measures of success for community colleges, researchers might incorporate the
measures defined by the Voluntary Framework of Accountability. In this framework,
institutions track their success (beyond graduation rates) to the number of full- and parttime students that complete developmental education and milestones such as completion
of the general education core. Other measures such as successful transfer to a four-year
institution are just as relevant and may be influenced by library characteristics as well.
Future researchers would be served to pay close attention to the national debate and
incorporate institutional success measures that community colleges see as relevant.
As community colleges strive to provide a quality education to thousands of
students that results in higher graduation and completion rates, practitioners need more
information on the impact and influences of the students’ full learning experiences,
particularly from areas proven, such in this study, to positively impact graduation rates.
Scholarly research, both qualitative and quantitative, would help fill the gaps in research
that currently exist.
Future researchers should also consider other theoretical and conceptual
frameworks that focus on expenditures versus involvement. The results of this study
found no involvement factors. While this could also be a function of the data used, it is
more likely that a change in theoretical framework would lead to different conclusions.
Future researchers should apply theoretical frameworks from higher education finance
85

such as expenditure theories and its application to maximum social balance and
satisfaction of users (students and faculty).
As seen in figure 5, the original literature review diagram has been expanded to
identify the possible research topics and directions discussed throughout this chapter.
The research and current literature base should be expanded to include deeper
examination of community college students and how they interact with the library, and
how the library effects community college student outcomes, such as persistence and
graduation. Furthermore, new measures that more accurately identify the impact of the
library and its librarians on institutional goals need to be explored and identified.
The area, based on previous research, which shows the most promise is to explore
ways librarians can enhance their pedagogical practices, such as embedding librarians in
instructional classes, and measuring its impact on student learning. Lastly, extending the
research findings of this study, future researchers should explore the impact of specific
library expenditures to determine if there is a specific formula to guide spending on
library resources.

Figure 5. A fishbone diagram demonstrating opportunities for additional research topics
based off of current study conclusions.

86

Conclusions
This study makes contributions to the limited body of research, particularly at the
community college level, on the topic of the library’s influence on graduation rates and
student success. The results presented included a small, but significant predictive power
(2.4%) of two library or learning commons characteristics on institutional graduation
rates. The characteristics found to be influential included total expenditures on
information resources, and total expenditures on current serials.
Astin’s theory of involvement (1993) and his I-E-O model helped shape this study
into a practical piece of work that can assist an institution in assessing the library’s
impact on institutional graduation rates. It also provides an environment rich with the
need for additional research, both in and out of the community college arena, leading to
greater understanding of how academic libraries influence institutional and student level
outcomes. Most notably, future researchers should explore expenditure theories and
models that may lend additional insight into the findings.
While the academic library or learning commons may be perceived by most
students and faculty as an integral component of the college or university, this study
found that it had a small impact on institutional outcomes, such as graduation rates. Due
to the heightened scrutiny on community colleges by accreditors and funders, it is
imperative that institutions focus efforts on areas that have significant impact on outcome
measures. Libraries and their faculty need to further explore ways they can measure the
impact of their resources and services, while finding new ways to integrate with practices
that have significant and positive impacts.

87

References
American Association of Community Colleges. (2003). Position Statement on Library
and Learning Resource Centers. Washington, D.C.
American Association of Community Colleges. (2014). National characteristics.
Retrieved from http://aacc.org/statistics/
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2011). Standards for Libraries in Higher
Education. Chicago IL.
Astin, A.W. (1984). Student involvement: A developmental theory for higher education.
Journal of College Student Personnel, 25, 297-308.
Astin, A.W. (1985). Achieving educational excellence. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass
Publishers.
Astin, A.W. (1999). Student involvement: A developmental theory for higher education.
Journal of College Student Development, 40, 518-529.
Astin, A. W. (2001). What matters in college? Four critical years revisited. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Astin, A.W., & Sax, L.J. (1998). How undergraduates are affected by service
participation. Journal of College Student Development, 39(3), 251-263.
Bailey, T. C., Calcagno, J., Jenkins, D., Leinbach, T.,& Kienzl, G. (2006). Is
student right to know all you should know? An analysis of community college
graduation rates. Research in Higher Education, 47(5), 491-519.
doi: 10.1007/s11162-005-9005-0
Bennett, S. (2009). Libraries and learning: A history of paradigm change. portal:
Libraries and the Academy, 9(2), 181-197.
88

Brown, K. M., & Malenfant, K. (2012). Connect, Collaborate, and Communicate: A
Report from the Value of Academic Libraries Summit. New York: Association of
College and Research Librarians.
Carey, K. (2004). A matter of degrees: Improving graduation rates in four-year colleges
and universities. Educational Trust, Washington D.C. Accessed at
www2.edtrust.org
Cohen, A., & Brawer, F. (2008). The American community college (5th ed.). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S., & Aiken, L. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed). New York,
NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.
Cox, B., & Jantti, M. (2012). Discovering the impact of library use and student
performance. EDUcause Review. 27-34.
Dougherty, H., & Nutow, R. (2009). Performance Indicators for Community Colleges.
New York: Community College Research Center.
Emmons, M. (2012). The academic library impact on student persistence: Two models
(Doctoral dissertation). University of New Mexico, New Mexico.
Emmons, M., & Wilkinson, F. C. (2011). The academic library impact on student
persistence. College & Research Libraries, 72(2), 128-149.
Feret, B. M., & Marcinek, M. (1999). The future of the academic library and the
academic librarian: A dephi study. Library Career Development, 7(10), 91-107.
Field, A.P. (2009). Discovering Statistics Using SPSS (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Fike, D., & Fike, R. (2008). Predictors of first-year student retention in the community
89

college. Community College Review, 30(2), 68-88.
Flowers, L. (2004). Examining the effects of student involvement on African American
college student development. Journal of College Student Development, 45(6),
633-654.
Fry, L. (2009). Information behavior of community college students: A survey of
literature. Community & Junior College Libraries, 15, 39-50.
Funk, T. A. (2009). Identification of academic and social expectation anxieties and selfefficacy issues experienced by non-traditional students and examination of their
effects on student success (Doctoral dissertation). TUI University, Texas.
Goeheken, E.A. (2011). The literature of American library history, 2008-2009.
Libraries & the Cultural Record, 46(4), 412-441. doi: 10.1353/lac.2011.0021
Graham, J. (2006). Guidance on Agency Survey and Statistical Information Collections.
Washington D.C: Office of Management and Budget.
Gratch- Lindauer, B. (1998). Defining and measuring the library's impact on
campuswide outcomes. College & Research Libraries, 59, 546-570.
Gratch- Lindauer, B. (2008). College student engagement surveys: Implications for
information literacy. New Directions for Teaching and Learning, 114(6), 101114.
Grimes, P.W., & Charters, M.F. (2000). Library use and the undergraduate economics
student. College Student Journal, 34, 557-570.
Groce, H. (2008). Information seeking habits and information literacy of community and
junior college students: A review of literature. Community & Junior College
Libraries, 14(3), 191-282.
90

Haras, C., & McEvoy, S. (2006). Making the bridge: Testing a library workshop for a
summer bridge learning community. Research Strategies, 20, 257-270.
Harrell, C.B. (1988). The use of an academic library by university undergraduates.
College and Research Libraries, 38, 345-56.
Hayward, M. S. (2012). Adult learner graduation rates at four U.S. community colleges
by prior learning assessment status and method. (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertation database. (No. 3529173)
Heitsch, E., & Holly, R. (2011). The information and learning commons: Some
reflections. New Review of Academic Librarianship, 17, 64-77.
Holley, E. (1999). Academic libraries over twenty-five years. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 25(2), 79-81.
Jiao, Q. & Onwuegbuzie, A. (1997). Library anxiety: Characteristics of at risk college
students. Library and Information Sciences Research 18(2), 151-163.
Johnson, W. (2004). Information literacy standards and library instruction. Community
& Junior College Libraries, 13(1).
Kuh, G., & Gonyea, R. (2003). The role of the academic library in promoting student
engagement in learning. College & Research Libraries, 72(2), 128-149.
Lau, L. K. (2003). Institutional factors affecting student retention. Education, 124(1),
126-136.
Marchione, S. M. (2012). Improving learning outcomes, persistence, and graduation
rates of academically underprepared students: A case study of Alexander
Community College and its developmental education effort (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertation database. (No. 12953)
91

Matthews, J. (2008). Valuing information, information services and the library:
possibilities and realities. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 8(4), 91-112.
Matthews, J. (2012). Assessing library contributions to university outcomes: The need
for individual student data. Library Management, 33(67), 289-402.
Mezick, E.M. (2007). Return on investment: Libraries and student retention. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 33(5), 561-566.
Moore, M. (2012). A study of the relationship among student involvement, academic
performance, rates of retention, and rates of departure for African-American
students enrolled at three rural Alabama community colleges (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertation database. (No.3547445)
Murtaugh, P.A. (1999). Predicting the retention of university students. Research in
Higher Education, 40, 355-371.
Navarro, L. A. (2005). The learning college library concept: The role of the
community college library in a learning college environment. Community &
Junior College Libraries, 13(4), 49-79. doi:10.1300/J107v13n04_08
Oakleaf, M. (2010). The value of academic libraries. Chicago, Illinois: Association of
College & Research Libraries.
Patterson, D. (2009). Information literacy and community college students: Using
new approaches to literacy theory to produce equity. Library Quarterly, 79(3),
343-361.
Perret, R., & Young, N. (2011). Economic status of academic libraries. portal: Libraries
and the Academy, 11(2), 703-715.
Pike, G., Smart, J., & Kuh, G. (2006). Educational expenditures and student engagement:
92

When does money matter? Research in Higher Education, 47, 847-872.
Poll, R. (2003). Measuring impact and outcomes of libraries. Performance
Measurement and Metrics, 4, 5-12.
Poole, C, & Emmett, D. (2011). Technological change in the workplace: A statewide
survey of community college library and learning resource personnel. College
& Research Libraries (November), 19-23.
Porter, O.F. (1990). Undergraduate completion and persistence at four-year colleges and
universities: Detailed findings. National Institute of Independent Colleges and
Universities. Washington, D.C.
Powell, R.R. (1992). Impact assessment of university libraries: A consideration of issues
and research methodologies. Library & Information Science Research, 14, 245258.
Richmond, J. (1986). The importance of student involvement: A dialogue with Alexander
Astin. Journal of Counseling and Development, 65(October), 92-95.
Rozaklis, L. (2012). The academic library in the life of undergraduate: An investigation
of undergraduates' academic information behaviors in the digital age (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertation database. (No. 345987)
Schmidt, N., & Kaufman, J. (2007). Learning commons: Bridging the academic and
student affairs divide to enhance learning across campus. Research Strategies, 20,
242-258.
Simon, M. (2004). Redefining the facilities of community college libraries and learning
resource centers in the 21st century. Community & Junior College Libraries,
12(2), 71-80. doi: 10.1300/J107v12n02_08
93

Smith, B. (1978). The impact of the community college on academic libraries and
librarians. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 3(6), 338-341.
Snavely, L. (2012). Student Engagement and the Academic Library. Santa Barbara:
Libraries Unlimited.
Tabachnick, B.G., & Fidell, L.S. (2001). Using multivariate analysis (4th ed.). Boston,
MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Thelin, J. R. (2004). A History of American Higher Education. Baltimore: The John
Hopkins University Press.
Tinto, V. (1998). Colleges as communities: Taking research on student persistence
seriously. The Review of Higher Education, 21(2), 167-177.
Trowler, V., & Trowler, P. (2010). Student engagement evidence summary. The Higher
Education Academy, 45(3), 156-167.
Warren, I. A. (2006). Information literacy in community colleges: Focused on learning.
Reference & User Services Quarterly, 45(4), 297-303.
Weiler, A. (2004). Information seeking behavior in generation Y students: Motivation,
critical thinking, and learning theory. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(1),
46-53.
Weiner, S. G. (2005). The history of academic libraries in the United States: A review
of the literature. Library Philosophy and Practice, 7(2), 1-12.
Whitmire, E. (1999). Racial differences in the academic library experiences of
undergraduates. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 25(1), 33-37.
Whitmire, E. (2001). The influence of academic library experiences on undergraduates
critical thinking during three years of college. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved
94

from ProQuest Dissertation database.
Whitmire, E. (2001). A longitudinal study of undergraduates academic library
experiences. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 27(5), 379-385.
Whitmire, E. (2001). The relationship between undergraduates background
characteristics and college experiences and their academic library use. College &
Research Libraries, 62(6), 528-540.
Whitmire, E. (2002). Academic library performance measures and undergraduates' library
use and educational outcomes. Library & Information Science Research, 24, 107128.
Williams, P.A. (1995). Conceptualizing academic library use: Results of a survey of
continuing education undergraduates in a small Canadian undergraduate
university. Canadian Journal of Higher Education, 25(3), 31-48.
Wolf-Wendel, L., Kelly, W., & Kinzie, J. (2009). A tangled web of terms: The
overlap and unique contribution of involvement, engagement and integration to
understanding college student success. Journal of College Student Development,
50(4), 407-428.
Wood, P., & Walther, J. (2000). The future of academic libraries: Changing formats and
changing delivery. The Bottom Line: Managing Library Finances, 173-181.
Zachary, I. (2010). The effect of information literacy competency on student learning and
success in three California community colleges (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved
from ProQuest Dissertation database. (No. 3421710)

95

Zhong, Y., & Alexandra, J. (2007). Academic success: How library services make a
difference. Paper presented at the ACRL 13th National Conference, Baltimore,
MA.

96

