MIAMI UNIVERSITY
The Graduate School
Certificate for Approving the Dissertation
We hereby approve the Dissertation
of
Candi Pierce Garry
Candidate for the Degree:
Doctor of Philosophy
__________________________________________
Director
Dr. Thomas Poetter
__________________________________________
Reader
Dr. Lisa Weems
__________________________________________
Reader
Dr. Kathleen Knight-Abowitz
__________________________________________
Graduate School Representative
Dr. William Boone

ABSTRACT

SELECTION OR CENSORSHIP?
SCHOOL LIBRARIANS AND LGBTQ RESOURCES
by Candi Pierce Garry
All students, including those who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or queer
(LGBTQ), need quality library books which reflect their experiences. This mixed-method
research project examines whether public high school library professionals are self-censoring
their library collections when it comes to materials with LGBTQ themes. Quantitative data were
collected from 120 Ohio public high school libraries, while 12 school librarians were
interviewed. The study found that school libraries tended to have significantly fewer LGBTQthemed books than titles with other kinds of controversial content, but that certain factors,
including schools with large number of students; schools with a racially diverse student body;
schools located in liberal-leaning communities; and schools that employ certified librarians, are
present in schools with more inclusive LGBTQ collections. Qualitative findings supported the
quantitative analyses and stressed the importance of a supportive community and administration
when developing a quality, inclusive library collection.

SELECTION OR CENSORSHIP?
SCHOOL LIBRARIANS AND LGBTQ RESOURCES
A Dissertation
Submitted to the Faculty of
Miami University in partial
fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Educational Leadership

by
Candi Pierce Garry
Miami University
Oxford, Ohio
2014
Director: Dr Thomas Poetter

UMI Number: 3670819

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3670819
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

©
Candi Pierce Garry
2014

Table of Contents
Chapter 1:

Introduction and Review of the Literature

1

Chapter 2:

Theoretical Framework

7

Chapter 3:

Methodology

11

Chapter 4:

Method

14

Chapter 5:

Phase One and Two Results

20

Chapter 6:

Phase Three Results

29

Chapter 7:

Analysis of the Instrument

46

Chapter 8:

Discussion

52

References

54

Appendix I: Young Adult Books with Prominent LGBTQ Themes

57

Appendix II: Popular Young Adult Novels Commonly Found in High School Libraries 59
Appendix III: Freedom to Read Statement

61

iii

List of Tables
Table 5.1

The LGBTQ List Titles from Easiest to Adopt to Most Difficult

Table 5.2

The Control List Titles from Easiest to Adopt to Most Difficult

Table 5.3

Rasch Measures for Sampled School Libraries

Table 5.4

Correlations Among Variables Affecting the Purchase of LGBTQ Books (N = 60)

Table 7.1

LGBTQ Content of LGBTQ List Titles

Table 7.2

Common Reasons for Controversy for Control List

iv

Chapter 1: Introduction and Review of the Literature
In July, 2010, a 15-year-old blogger named Brent created a stir among school librarians
when a recent posting from his blog The Naughty Book Kitties was published in School Library
Journal (SLJ). In it, Brent explained just how important books were to him and to other young
adults as they were coming to terms with their sexuality. He and his friends combed bookstores
and public libraries looking for gay and lesbian characters, but when he turned to his own school
library, his school librarian informed him that, “This is a school library. If you’re looking to read
inappropriate titles, go to a bookstore” (Limited Shelf Life, 2010). Librarians around the world
were aghast, and letters to the editor of SLJ and to Brent’s blog from librarians concerned for
Brent’s school library poured in. Brent’s closing statement was a wake-up call to many school
librarians:
The world needs more librarians who are devoted to finding the right book to put in the
right person’s lap, not librarians who think they can decide what’s “inappropriate” and
what’s not based on their personal prejudices. There are tons of gay teens struggling to
find a group to fit into. LGBT YA lit helps us realize that no, we aren’t alone, and no, we
aren’t worthless. It helps us discover that we are part of the LGBT group, which includes
tons of brilliant people, doing brilliant things. (Limited Shelf Life, 2010)
Most school librarians can attest to the thrill of pairing students with the perfect book,
introducing teens to characters that will inspire them, comfort them, challenge them, excite them,
and move them beyond their limited experiences. Students who are struggling to find a place to
belong so often take solace in books; therefore, it is vital that all students have access to stories
which validate their experiences. It is this desire that all students have access to high-quality,
inclusive school library collections that motivated this study.
LGBTQ Literature is Vital to School Library Collections
The need for welcoming, informative and inclusive library collections is particularly
pertinent for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered and questioning (LGBTQ) students, who often
find school libraries to be safe havens and use libraries to locate information, despite the fact that
information can easily be accessed elsewhere (Whelan, 2006). In fact, Whelan (2006) argues in
“Out and Ignored” that consequences for ignoring LGBTQ literature and excluding it from the
library can be severe. She asserts that a strong gay literature collection could discourage teasing
and bullying in schools and help create a climate of tolerance and acceptance (Whelan, 2006).
Manfredi advocates the use of LGBTQ literature in schools because it helps teen patrons from all
walks of life, arguing that including such titles “could potentially offer guidance or support to
teens that might otherwise choose to remain silent about the prevalence of LBGTQ-related issues
within their own respective lives” (Manfredi, 2009, p. 28). She further asserts that teens that do
not have LGBTQ leanings will also benefit from reading these works, as they may become allies
– “heterosexuals who are committed to ideals of equality and dedicated to fighting homophobia”
(p. 28). Martin also recommends providing LGBTQ collections to create “safe, welcoming
environments” and to inspire the formation of gay-straight alliances (GSAs) to create dialogue
and combat homophobia (Martin, 2006, p. 39). Kevin Jennings, founder of the Gay, Lesbian and
Straight Education Network (GLSEN), described his own experience with libraries: “The library
was also the first place I found any information about gay people that was objective and gave me
1

a sense that I might have a future. I probably would not be exaggerating to say libraries saved
my life” (Jennings, 2006, p. 22).
School Climate and Safety
Maintaining a quality LGBTQ collection could literally save lives by helping create an
environment of tolerance and acceptance. A 2012 study revealed that students who attended
schools that supported LGBTQ students with resources such as Gay Straight Alliances (GSAs)
perceived their schools to be safer than those who attended schools without such clubs. Those
students reported witnessing fewer incidences of harassment and were more likely to believe that
students with non-normative gender identity were safe at school. Students who attended schools
without supportive policies and organizations claimed to witness acts of bullying and
intimidation, particularly towards males who were perceived to be gay (Toomey, McGuire &
Russell, 2012). This type of aggression is well documented in schools. A 2003 survey
conducted by the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Educational Network (GLSEN) found that schools
can be a very hostile environment, especially for LGBTQ teens.
Of the students surveyed who attended Ohio schools, approximately three-quarters
reported hearing homophobic and sexist language from other students some of the time. Even
more appalling, a small but significant number of students reported hearing homophobic
comments from teachers and staff, and unsurprisingly, in schools where staff members made
anti-gay remarks, considerably more students made those types of comments as well. In
addition, 40% of students claimed that teachers and staff almost never corrected students when
they uttered homophobic or sexist remarks. The inaction of teachers in the face of homophobia
creates a very bleak environment for students who identify as LGBTQ. On a bright note, the
survey did echo what Toomey, McGuire and Russell (2012) found – schools with LGBTQ
resources and supports, including the presence of GSAs, were half as likely as schools without to
have serious bullying and harassment problems in their schools. Unfortunately for Ohio, very
few (7%) students reported that their school had some type of supportive organization in place
for the LGBTQ students (Kosciw, 2004). In schools such as those, a good LGBTQ YA
collection may be one of the only means of support for these students.
They Ask for Them by Name
Possibly the most important reasons that school libraries need to include LGBTQ books
in their collection is that students are demanding these titles. Like the aforementioned young
blogger Brent, teens both queer and straight are actively searching for stories to help them
understand their often chaotic and confusing reality. Keith Oatley, a professor of cognitive
psychology at the University of Toronto, praises realistic fiction as a way for young adults to
experiment with life, and with others’ thoughts and feelings. “Just as computer simulations can
help us get to grips with complex problems such as flying a plane or forecasting the weather, so
novels, stories and dramas can help us understand the complexities of social life” (Paul, 2012, p.
6).
In a 2001 study of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students in American schools, Sanelli and
Perreault (2001) compiled a list of reforms that queer students would like to see implemented in
education, and high on the list was a request for materials with gay characters. According to a
student surveyed, “…we read love stories all the time in English, but there’s never anything on
2

lesbian love or there’s not like gay love stories” (p. 74). Alexander and Miselis (2007) found
that libraries were heavily used by LGBTQ teens, and “that this group was seeking information
about understanding their gay identities, coming out, learning gay social ‘rules,’ and where to
connect with others like them” (p. 45). For LBGTQ students, such novels might act as a mirror,
but they can also serve as a window to straight students, allowing them the opportunity to
experience vicariously some of the struggles and sense of confusion LGBTQ teens face (Rauch,
2011). “Friends and family of the [LGBTQ] community, as well as teachers, counselors, clergy,
and in fact, any professional that works with the public, all have a need for accurate information
about this group of people” (Alexander & Miselis, 2007, p. 44).
Are Librarians Censoring LGBTQ Resources?
With such compelling reasons to build strong, quality LGBTQ collections, why then, do
so many school librarians seem to balk at including books with homosexual themes? According
to a 2009 survey on self-censorship by School Library Journal, 70% of the library professionals
who responded claimed that concern over possible parent reactions gave them pause when
considering controversial titles (Whelan, 2009b). Other groups of concern to librarians in the
survey included administrators, community members, and students. Apprehension was
significantly higher among those who had previously faced a censorship challenge in their
library, one of the most stressful and harrowing experiences a school librarian can face (Whelan,
2009b). As a result, author David Levithan points out that librarians say that “fear, not principle,
guides their choices, which is deeply unfair to the teens they serve” (quoted in Whelan, 2009a, p.
29). Some librarians are so adamant about avoiding controversy that they resort to subversive
ploys, advising other librarians to “spend your entire budget on regular (which is to say, noncontroversial) materials. Then when someone comes asking why you don’t have And Tango
Makes Three, you can just say you’re out of money” (Maycock, 2011, p. 11).
Books with LGBTQ themes, while not officially the most challenged group according to
the American Library Association, still warrant their own category, because “people have a very
rigid, narrow view of what kinds of sexuality are allowed to exist,” explains author Jordan
Sonnenblick, spokesperson for a group of authors supporting intellectual freedom (quoted in
Whelan, 2009a, p. 28). Indeed, children’s and young adult books with such themes have been
questioned and attacked at the state and national levels, generally on the premise that including
such books promote homosexuality and are anti-family. In 2005, Oklahoma attempted to have
all materials with homosexual themes moved to “areas exclusively for adult access and
distribution” (Oder, 2005, p. 16). More recently, conservative students in Virginia, encouraged
by Focus on the Family, sought to include “gay cure” books in their school libraries. These
Christian titles assert that homosexuality is a choice that can be overcome, and that
homosexuality is shameful and sinful. Librarians rejected these offerings (L., 2008). Even U.S.
Senators have attempted to stifle LGBTQ materials with a proposed, but not implemented, 1994
amendment to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA). Under the terms of the
amendment, schools stood to lose funds for any action that encouraged acceptance of
homosexuality, including the inclusion of LGBTQ-friendly books in the school library
(Sadowski, 1994).
One subversive manner in which some library professionals “censor” books is by limiting
access to them. Clyde and Lobban (2001) found that locating and acquiring books with LBGTQ
themes could be very complicated. They had difficulty locating many of the books on a list of
3

books with homosexual characters and themes in library catalogs or bookstores, and despite their
best efforts, some titles never were found. Gough and Greenblatt (1998) remarked on this
phenomenon, writing in A Book Selector’s Toolkit:
The abundance and variety of books written by, for and about lesbians and gay men has
increased enormously within the past 30 years. Neither this abundance nor this variety is
reflected in most library collections, however. Recent studies show this to be the case
regardless of the type of library collection examined or the availability of reviews for the
materials. (p. 151)
Some of the ways that librarians limit access to YA books with LGBTQ themes is by
shelving them in the adult section or placing them on restricted shelving where students cannot
access them without special permission. Others “hide” them by removing references to
“homosexuality” or other identifiers in the catalog record, so that young patrons searching for
such books by subject would not discover them, and so that potential censors might not realize
that some titles in the collection had LGBTQ themes (Clyde & Lobban, 2001). Author Maureen
Johnson finds this type of subversive, quiet censorship just as damaging as removing the books.
“Gay characters can’t be relegated to some dark corner of the shelf that you need a map to find
and an ID to check out. To do so is basically saying to the gay kids, ‘There’s something dirty
about you.’ Anyone who would say that is the true filthmonger” (Rauch, 2011, p. 15).
The Ethics of the Profession
Nonetheless, while there are valid and understandable concerns, librarians are bound by
the ethics of their profession to include materials for all patrons; hence rejecting books on the
grounds that they might cause problems is a violation of professional ethics. In addition, it could
even be a violation of the United States Constitution. Several federal rulings, including the
landmark 1982 Board of Education, Island Trees Union Free School District v. Pico, have ruled
repeatedly that students have first amendment rights, and that removing age-appropriate books
from students who would benefit from them because their content might be objectionable
violates students’ constitutional rights and amounts to censorship (Whelan, 2009a).
Censorship is, to be succinct, “the removal, suppression, or restricted circulation of
literary, artistic, or educational materials – of images, ideas, and information – on the grounds
that these are morally or otherwise objectionable in light of standards applied by the censor”
(Reichman, 2001, p. 2). In a school setting, censorship occurs when materials are removed from
the curriculum, classroom, or library. Selection, by contrast, is the procedure by which books
and materials are procured and included in the library or curriculum. Some have argued that
librarians in fact censor by omission when they select some books over others. The important
distinction is that libraries cannot purchase every book available, and therefore trained, certified
librarians need to make careful decisions based on the needs of the library. Selection is
inclusive, while censorship is exclusive. Or as Lester Asheim wrote in 1953, “selection is
democratic while censorship is authoritarian, and in our democracy we have traditionally tended
to put our trust in the selector rather than the censor” (Burress, 1989, p. 10).
For most school libraries, the materials selection process is outlined in a district materials
selection policy. These policies can vary by district, but the vast majority of them designate the
certified school librarian as the person in charge of selection. These policies also outline the
process and requirements of materials selected, as well as provide a procedure for the
reconsideration of materials. In most policies, the librarian is given significant freedom to select
4

materials within the limits of the policy. Some of those “limits” might include requirements such
as positive professional reviews, certain types of bindings, or personal examination and approval
by the librarian. These selection policies are meant to help librarians build high quality
collections and protect them from arbitrary censorship. The Library Bill of Rights and The
Freedom to Read Statement (see Appendix IV) are often included in selection policies as a
reminder of the importance of diverse and inclusive collections.
Previous Studies on Self-Censorship
Self-censorship is considered a “dirty little secret” among librarians. It’s impossible to
know exactly how rampant it is, because those who engage in it are generally unwilling to admit
it, no one is monitoring it, and there is no open discussion regarding it (Whelan, 2009a).
However, there have been a few studies that have examined apparent self-censorship of library
materials. Burke (2008) examined public opinion trends over time related to removal of gaythemed materials from libraries by examining the 1973-2006 General Social Survey. She found
that, overall, the public has become less inclined to have objectionable material removed from
libraries. Moody (2004) studied Australian librarians and their self-censorship habits via
questionnaire, finding that while the majority of librarians profess to fight censorship, they often
avoid controversial materials. Freedman and Johnson (2001) studied the attitudes of teachers
and classroom censorship when using Young Adult literature, and found that teachers were
extremely likely to censor their classroom collections if they knew that some of the books were
controversial. Alexander and Miselis (2007) surveyed librarians to inquire about LGBTQ
programming in their libraries and to speculate as to why their LGBTQ materials are not
challenged by community members. In 2009, Whelan and SLJ conducted a survey of librarians
about self-censorship, the most specific study to date regarding the censoring practices of library
professionals. However, these studies have all relied on self-reported information via surveys.
Perhaps a better way to study potential censorship would be to examine the holdings of libraries
for LGBTQ materials to check if they are being purchased and circulated.
A handful of quantitative studies have been conducted, using online public access catalog
records to objectively gauge whether or not libraries are circulating certain controversial titles.
The first of these studies was conducted in 2002 in Texas, when Ken Coley examined the
holdings of 100 randomly chosen schools to search for a list of 17 potentially controversial
books. He found remarkably high levels of self-censorship, but also noted the many limitations
of his study, including a small sample and the nonexistence of controls for extraneous factors
including the library’s book budget (Coley, 2002). Two years later, Jennifer Cook used Coley’s
method of searching catalogs specifically for LGBTQ books, this time searching 42 public
libraries in Indiana for inclusion of some of the 24 well-reviewed LGBTQ titles. Cook found
that very few public libraries were purchasing these titles (Cook, 2004). Finally, Nicholas
Bellows attempted to replicate Coley’s work in 2005, this time incorporating a control list. In his
study of 102 Florida high school libraries, Bellows did find plenty of evidence of self-censorship,
but found the control list to be invalid and ineffective as a control for budget lists, mainly due to
the subjective determination of what qualified a book as “controversial” (Bellows, 2005).
While there have been a variety of small studies conducted intended to uncover whether
or not school librarians self-censor books, including some that specifically addressed materials
with LGBTQ content, no one had yet undertaken a large scale research project that incorporates
both quantitative and qualitative methods. There is a need to ascertain to what degree librarians
5

may be self-censoring their collections, as well as to understand their philosophies about library
collection development and justifications for their selection decisions. This project seeks to
provide that knowledge.

6

Chapter 2: Theoretical Framework
Students who identify as LGBTQ have the same right as any others to feel safe and
accepted in school, and to that end, school libraries should provide resources that provide
visibility, knowledge, and enjoyment to all students, regardless of gender or sexuality. Queer
theory promotes the inclusion and celebration of multiple possibilities.
Queer theory “focuses on mismatches between sex, gender and desire” (Jagose, 1996,
p.3). However, one of the most distinguishing characteristics about queer theory is its resistance
to definition – what queer theory “is” is constantly in flux, adapting and evolving to new
possibilities and realities. Queer theory has roots in post-structural feminism, which is
concerned primarily with discourse, and asserts that individuals (or subjects) are constructed
through social discourses of gender and race. Post-structuralists eschew the concept of fixed
linguistic categories and binaries to simplify gender and sexuality, preferring to recognize that
identities are fluid and intersectional (Bengtson, 2005). Queer theorist Michael Warner (1993)
defines the concept:
Almost everything that would be called queer theory is about ways in which texts – either
literature or mass culture or language – shape sexuality. Usually, the notion is that
fantasy and other kinds of representations are inherently uncontrollable, queer by nature.
This focus on messy representation allows queer theory, like non-academic queer
activism, to be both assimilationist and anti-separatist; you can’t eliminate queerness,
says queer theory, or screen it out. It’s everywhere. (p. 19)
Queer theory combines aspects of the gay liberation movement with lesbian feminism to
move forward with some specific goals: to critique the societal structures that normalize
heterosexuality, to emphasize the diversity and multiplicity of sexuality, and to understand
gender as institutional rather than personal (Jagose, 1996). If queer theory were to have a core, a
center of some sort, it would be “about resisting categorization, for itself and for its subjects”
(Leckey & Brooks, 2010, p. 1).
Heteronormativity – The Hidden Curriculum
Homophobia and heterosexism are “especially intense in the field of education, a highly
conservative and often reactionary field” (Pinar, 1998, p. 2). In the language of curriculum
theory, queer education is relegated to the “null curriculum,” meaning that issues and ideas
related to homosexuality are unspoken and ignored. This concept of silence about queer
sexualities is one of the most significant aspects of heteronormativity. This term was first used
by Michael Warner in 1993, and was more fully defined by Lauren Berlant and Michael Warner
(1998):
By Heteronormativity we mean the institutions, structures of understanding and practical
orientations that make heterosexuality seem not only coherent – that is organized as a
sexuality – but also privileged. Its coherence is always provisional, and its privilege can
take several (sometimes contradictory) forms: unmarked, as the basic idiom of the
personal and the social; or marked as a natural state; or projected as an ideal or moral
accomplishment. (p. 548)
7

Heteronormativity limits thinking about gender and sexuality to perpetual binaries;
gender expressed simply as male or female, while sexual identity is generally reduced to
heterosexual (the normal) or homosexual (the deviant “other”). Throughout history, schools
have reproduced and reinforced heteronormative thinking as a “hidden curriculum” through
discourses and traditions and through both informal and official policies. Students who do not
identify with traditional, normative gender or sexual identities are often marginalized, ostracized
and silenced as outsiders. Heteronormativity as it is often expressed in schools is described by
Renee DePalma and Elizabeth Atkinson, directors of the No Outsiders project. They describe
the effects of heteronormativity as “convey(ing) to outsiders that they have no place in ‘our’
society: a message conveyed not only by explicit acts of discrimination but also by simply doing
nothing” (DePalma & Atkinson, 2009, p. vii). In addition to strongly reinforced gender roles and
heterosexism, it is this invisibility, this un-seeable and un-thinkable of any gender or sexual
identity other than the dominant, normative heterosexual identities, that is most prevalent in
schooling.
Heteronormativity in Teaching and Reading Materials. Heteronormativity is
embedded into all aspects of our society and particularly in the educational system. A
significant portion of schooling entails the use of instructional textbooks and library
materials. For the most part, topics pertaining to non-normative sexualities are virtually
invisible in educational textbooks and library materials (Rowell, 2007), while at the same
time heterosexual relationships are consistently reinforced and celebrated (Lester, 2007).
Textbooks. In a 2011 study, Smolkin and Young (2011) examined the content of six
newly-published children’s literature textbooks and found very few examples of or
references to non-normative gender identities. Their findings reflected a range of
“silences, stealth inclusions and missed opportunities” (p. 223). “Silences” refers to the
invisibility – the complete lack of inclusion – of GLTBQ content. The authors argue that
this amounts to “erasure,” or the elimination of populations that might offend the
dominant culture. Further, they argue that “anyone who writes a children’s literature
textbook, anyone who prepares future teachers, anyone who teaches elementary school
must be aware that schooling is about all of America’s children; we must ensure that all
children can find themselves and their families in the books available to them” (p. 223).
Some of the textbooks did contain excerpts or references to some LGTBQ works, but
neglected to mention that these stories contained LGBTQ content. The authors call these
“stealth inclusions” that are meant to fly under the radar of potential censors while still
being introduced to students. While any inclusion is preferable to silencing the issue
altogether, the authors suggest that perhaps society is prepared for more openness about
these issues. Finally, the authors recognized several “missed opportunities” in that the
textbooks neglected to mention instances of intersectionality, particularly in the author
profiles. For example, Jacqueline Woodson, an African-American, lesbian writer, was
described as an African American, or as an author that wrote about “sensitive issues of
sexuality” but the descriptions never combined to reveal her as a whole person (Smolkin
& Young, 2011).
Children’s Literature. Children’s literature has traditionally been mostly devoid of any
non-normative sexuality, often claimed on account of children being too young to be
exposed to any discussion of sexuality, despite the fact that nearly every fairy tale that
8

exists ends up with the protagonists living “happily ever after” in a heterosexual
marriage. Children’s literature has a long, deliberately heteronormative history – original
children’s stories were explicitly didactic, designed to indoctrinate children about the
moral and socially responsible way to behave, and what it means to be a girl or a boy
(Lester, 2007).
When non-normative sexualities are addressed in children’s literature, they are
generally limited to references to same-sex parents and rarely touch on the child’s
emerging sexuality. Books that present families in all their diversity are important, even
vital, to the increasing number of students that are being raised in families headed by gay
or lesbian parents, who long to see their family structures validated in the books they read
(Rowell, 2007). However, even books that celebrate gay and lesbian-headed families are
not without criticism. Esposito (2009) critically analyzed five popular children’s books
about children and their lesbian parents, and identified four themes that ran through the
stories: the problem of not having a daddy; the “de-queering” of lesbianism; the
implication of children living with closeted parents; and the goal of teaching
heterosexuals to be more tolerant. These criticisms were largely based on the idea that
few of them were truly child-focused, nor did they really reflect the child or family’s
experiences. Rather, they were more about showing how the lesbian family was pretty
much the same as the heterosexual family – that they were acceptable because they were
very much like “normal” families (Esposito, 2009).
Very rare indeed are children’s books that focus on the homosexuality of the
protagonist. DiHaan and Nijland’s (2002) controversial King & King, translated from the
Dutch and published in the United States, was the first major picture book that featured a
Prince who desires to (and finally does) live happily ever after with his true love, another
Prince. King & King created a firestorm of controversy and became one of the most
challenged books, according to the American Library Association. Two years later, a
sequel appeared featuring the two Kings as they start a family. Even more controversial,
according to ALA’s Challenged Book list (2011), is Parnell and Richardson’s And Tango
Makes Three, a high quality picture book based on true events in which two male
penguins hatched and raised baby Tango in New York’s Central Park Zoo. These highly
controversial but groundbreaking titles provide readers with a firsthand account of love
and family in a non-normative yet identifiable manner.
Young Adult Literature. Young Adult (YA) literature – material written specifically for
adolescent audiences – is mostly celebratory of heterosexual romances. However, since
1969, there has also been a significant number of titles published that reflect the lives and
experiences of LGBTQ teens. This new genre of teen literature brought enlightenment
and empathetic viewpoints to many students, but also instigated religious conservatives
and prompted a considerable number of library challenges. Still, there is a great demand,
and need, for LGBTQ YA literature. “In this quintessential literature of the outsider, who
is too often rendered invisible by society, there is also the need to see one’s face reflected
in the pages of a book and thus to find the corollary comfort that derives from the
knowledge that one is not alone in a vast universe, that there are others ‘like me’” (Cart &
Jenkins, 2006, p. 1).
9

Prior to 1969, there were no books written specifically for young adults that
addressed LGBTQ issues. The few that did exist were shelved in the adult section and
generally contained stereotypical depictions of homosexual characters. This all changed
with the 1969 publication of John Donovan’s I’ll Get There. It Better Be Worth the Trip:
A Novel, a coming-of-age story of a 13-year-old boy’s first homosexual relationship.
This novel is not without its flaws (e.g. reinforcement of gay stereotypes and negative
view of homosexual experiences), but is still groundbreaking in that it paved the way for
future LGBTQ novels. Nancy Garden’s Annie on My Mind, published in 1982, was the
first LGBTQ teen novel to focus on a romantic relationship between adolescent girls.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, more and better quality novels with LGBTQ themes
were published, and in the past century, there has been an explosion of young adult
literature featuring diverse and multi-dimensional characters with non-normative gender
and sexual identities (Cart & Jenkins, 2006).
Nothing is Normal – Everything is Queer
While resistance to heteronormativity is one important aspect of queer theory, it is
important to note that the opposite effect, the normalization of homosexuality, is specifically not
a goal of queer theory. Queer theory goes beyond the binary of heterosexuality and
homosexuality to include and celebrate all possibilities of sexuality. All types of normalization
and categorization, including heteronormativity and its logical binary (the normalization of
homosexuality) are resisted in queer theory. Processes of normalization, in the classroom and in
other spaces, are seen as oppressive and queer theory serves as a form of “critical or subversive
intervention in oppressive classroom relations” (Luhmann, 1998, p. 142).
Combatting heteronormativity, then, is not about trying to reverse the process, making
other sexualities seem “normal” and heterosexuality deemed “abnormal” or deviant. Rather,
guaranteeing access to LGBTQ inclusive reading materials to all students serves the purpose of
modeling a wide range of ways to express sexuality, and sets the tone for a queer curriculum,
whereby nothing is normalized (and hence privileged) and everything is queer!

10

Chapter 3: Research Questions and Methodology
The review of the literature illustrates the necessity of quality, comprehensive, and
inclusive high school library media collections which include materials with Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender, and Questioning/Queer (LGBTQ) themes. Unfortunately, the literature
also reveals a tendency for some school librarians to avoid purchasing certain types of resources,
including LGBTQ materials. The objectives of this study are to ascertain whether there is
evidence to suggest that such self-censorship may be occurring in high school libraries; to
determine if the existence of certain variables regarding the librarian, school, or community may
correlate with higher or lower incidents of self-censorship; and to seek firsthand accounts of
library professionals in order to understand their values, priorities, and attitudes about collection
development and the inclusion of items with LGBTQ characters or themes.
Research Hypotheses
Phase one. More than half of the sampled schools will show evidence that suggests that
school librarians are censoring their collections.
Phase two. There will be certain variables about the librarian, school, and/or community
(e.g., the age of the librarian, student enrollment in a school, Ohio Department of
Education (ODE) ranking or the local political climate) that will correlate with higher or
lower instances of self-censorship.
Phase three. Some factors that may cause librarians to self-censor books with LGBTQ
themes include past experiences with material challenges, personal belief systems, and/or
pressure from administrators to avoid controversy.
Research Questions
Phase one. What is the evidence that suggests school librarians may be practicing selfcensorship when it comes to including library materials with gay, lesbian, bisexual, or
transgender content?
Phase two. What is the evidence that suggests certain attributes of the librarian, school,
or community may correlate with higher or lower instances of self-censorship?
Phase three. What actual professional and personal experiences affect how school
librarians approach collection development and materials selection? What internal or
external factors influence their decisions during the selection process?
Methodology
This project incorporates a sequential, mixed-methods approach using a combination of
interpretive and critical methodology. Phases one and two entail quantitative data collection and
analysis, while phase three uses a qualitative approach, interviewing school librarians in order to
reveal underlying attitudes, values, and justifications pertaining to library collection
development.
There is a wide variation as to what “interpretive discourse” means in research. For this
study, “interpretive refers to those discourses in which the main task of research is to understand
how others make meaning of their world….” (Quantz, 2013a, p. 1). In this study, the selection
11

decisions of librarians are examined closely in an attempt to understand first whether selfcensorship seems to be occurring, but more important, how librarians themselves define selection
and censorship, and how they make purchasing decisions for school libraries while considering
the many conflicting interests they face.
This study is also influenced by critical discourses as developed by the philosophers of
the Frankfurt School, and referring to research “designed to encourage transformation” (Quantz,
2013b, p. 1). Critical scholars agree with the interpretivist’s claim that issues and meanings of
class, race, gender and sexuality are constructed socially, but disagree that they exist only in
meaning. Rather, critical theorists believe that such things “also exist in our economies and our
institutions and our codes and work on people whether or not they recognize their existence”
(Quantz, 2013b, p. 2). The literature review illustrated that heteronormativity is deeply ingrained
in the school experience, and that a long pattern of suppression of materials relating to nonnormative sexuality and gender identity exists. This research project is designed to highlight
these inequities in an effort to effect change and encourage librarians to develop more inclusive
library collections.
Ontology
Censorship has a clear, real-world definition as it applies to libraries – it is the
suppression of materials that are deemed indecent, obscene, or controversial (Whelan, 2009b).
However, among librarians, the line between what qualifies as selection and what is censorship is
much hazier, and librarians often reconstruct their ideas about censorship through experience and
perspective. From an interpretivist standpoint, this study attempts to understand how some
librarians define censorship and selection, and how they reconcile their beliefs and
understandings about censorship in their practice. However, this study also adopts a critical
perspective, in that it seeks to determine if books that support and acknowledge LGBTQ issues
are being censored, with the understanding that suppression of these materials causes harm to
students. While librarians may struggle with the issue of whether the choices they make amount
to selection or censorship, the critical scholar would argue that the interpretation is irrelevant and
that censorship occurs whether or not the librarians choose to interpret it as such.
Epistemology
This study is utilizing a critical-interpretivist paradigm with a mixed methods approach.
The first part of this research entails the collection and analysis of quantitative data, which is
more often associated with positivist methodologies. However, in this study, the empirical
evidence, paired with the narratives provided by librarians during the third phase, leads to a more
complete illustration of self-censorship and what it means. It examines the librarian’s
professional practice by both word and deed, and helps the interpretive researcher better
understand how librarians define and practice censorship and selection. From a critical
perspective, the empirical data helps build a case that censorship is indeed occurring (despite
how the evidence is interpreted by librarians) and may constitute the ammunition needed to
effect change. This study would not be complete with only the quantitative data, which creates
an incomplete illustration. Combining the empirical data with qualitative narratives from
interviews in this mixed methods study will result in a deeper, more complete understanding of
self-censorship.
12

Ethics
Phases one and two of this project entail only the collection and analysis of publically
available data, so usual concerns about ethical human subject research are not applicable in these
phases. Typical ethical research practices, including recording accurate data and maintaining
confidential and secure records, do apply and will be strictly followed. Phase three does involve
the use of human subjects, as some school librarians will be interviewed to uncover underlying
values and practices as they relate to selecting materials for a school library. As human
subjects, these librarians would normally be subject to Internal Review Board (IRB) for Human
Subjects Research protections. However, as all subjects are adults who are established in their
careers, they are not considered a vulnerable population, nor should the subject matter of the
interview pose a significant stress, and as a result, this study met the criteria for, and received,
IRB exemption. This study examines the professional behavior of librarians as it pertains to
materials selection, and as such has the potential to expose potentially embarrassing or careerdamaging information. As an ethical consideration, utmost care was given to protect the
identities of the subjects. All school libraries and school librarians were identified only through
pseudonyms. Care was also taken during the interviewing process to make certain that
discussing possible instances of self-censorship did not overly distress the interviewee.

13

Chapter 4: Method
A sequential, mixed-methods research design is the ideal method for this study. This
mixed approach to research allows for the collection and analysis of quantitative data, which
tends to produce strong, defensible results that will be more likely to be taken seriously by
policymakers while at the same time providing strong qualitative data to explain and expand on
what the quantitative results uncovered. In this study, the quantitative analysis delivered solid
empirical data, but was simply not able to tell the whole story; the narratives were vital to more
completely understand reasons behind self-censorship and selection decisions, which will be
instrumental to those who hope to use this research to effect change.
Phase One
The objective of the first phase was to collect and analyze library collection data to
determine which libraries, if any, show signs of self-censorship by the school librarian. The
collections of 120 public high school libraries across the state of Ohio were evaluated using an
instrument created by the researcher. This instrument consists of two lists, one of high quality
young adult books with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgendered or Questioning (LGBTQ)
content, which is used to check for self-censorship. The second list contains high quality, award
winning, controversial books which are commonly included in high school library collections
that do not contain LGBTQ content. The second list is a control list, used to determine whether
the librarian is purchasing popular but controversial titles for teens that do not have LGBTQ
content while at the same time either selecting or rejecting LGBTQ titles. This instrument is
explained in detail later in this chapter.
Sample. The sample for the first phase consisted of 120 Ohio public high school
libraries. Using the Ohio Department of Education (ODE) database to sort the schools by
typology, 20 high school libraries were randomly selected from each of the eight
typologies. These typologies were developed by ODE to sort schools for research
purposes, and as such groups schools by size and income. ODE’s eight typologies
include:
1. Rural – high student poverty and small student population
2. Rural – average student poverty and very small student population
3. Small Town – low student poverty and small student population
4. Small Town – high student poverty and average student population
5. Suburban – low student poverty and average student population
6. Suburban – very low student poverty and large student population
7. Urban – high student poverty and average student population
8. Urban – very high student poverty and very large student population
The first 15 libraries selected in each typology were intended as the sample, and the final
five were alternates in case any of the original sample had to be excluded. By using
stratified sampling and a relatively large sample, it became extremely likely that the
sample would include libraries that serve urban, suburban, small town, and rural students
from all socioeconomic backgrounds and from all sectors of Ohio. This sampling method
does not specifically control for the varied funding available to school libraries, and the
existence and number of certified library media specialists managing these libraries or
14

“community standards” that vary from location to location, but it is believed that the size
of the sample may even out some of those factors.
Because access to the school library’s Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC) is
crucial to this project, each of the selected schools must be automated and have an online
catalog available. In a few cases, the selected schools did not have a publicly available
OPAC to search their collection remotely; they were removed from the project and
replaced with one of the alternate schools selected that was in the same typology as the
removed school. Confirmation that each selected library had an OPAC occurred during
the sampling process and before the study began.
Conceptualizaton. Young Adult (YA) Literature refers to books that are written for a
teenage audience, told from a teenage perspective and generally shelved in an area
specifically for teenage patrons. LGBTQ is an acronym for a group of people that
identify with sexualities other than heterosexuality and stands for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
Transgendered or Questioning. The “Q” can also stand for Queer, an acceptable
umbrella term used by the LGBTQ community that includes the gamut of sexualities
other than heterosexuality. Books with LGBTQ content prominently feature characters
that may identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual, questioning, or any other
sexuality other than heterosexuality. The LGBTQ characters may be the teenage main
character, or might be supporting characters including friends, parents, or other family
members of the teen main character. Selection refers to the involved process in which
library professionals select and purchase materials for a library. Self-censorship as
defined in this study occurs when the professional responsible for selecting, managing,
and defending library materials (assumed for the purposes of this study to be a certified
librarian – a person with a degree in Library Science and training in library
management) deliberately elects not to purchase potentially controversial material.
Library materials refer to books, videos, DVDs, e-books, and other material purchased
with library funds and intended to be circulated among library patrons.
The Instrument. In this project, the library collections will be measured with an
instrument created by the researcher, a certified librarian with extensive knowledge of
YA literature, with the assistance of a variety of literature and websites dedicated to
quality LGBTQ literature, including Lesbian and Gay Voices by Frances Ann Day
(2000), The Heart Has Its Reasons by Michael Cart and Christine A. Jenkins (2006), and
the American Library Association website. The list includes some of the best known and
respected titles with LGBTQ content. The list was further reviewed by other librarians
across Ohio via the Ohio Educational Library Media Association (OELMA) listserv, and
some revisions were made based on advice received. The instrument consists of two lists
of young adult titles, one of which includes only titles with LGBT content (see Appendix
I) and a control list which excludes such books, while including titles controversial for
other reasons (see Appendix II). In order to maintain an “apples to apples” comparison,
both lists contain the same number of titles and are limited to contemporary young adult
fiction. The books on both lists are similar in length and reading level, and all are
intended for high school students. Most of the titles have been published in the past two
decades, making it unlikely that they would have been weeded (i.e., removed from the
collection) for age. The significant difference between the two lists is the inclusion of
15

LGBTQ content in all of the books on the experimental list and complete lack of LGBTQ
content in the control list titles.
The LGBTQ List. The experimental list consists of 28 titles, all of which contain
LGBTQ content. Each of these books is considered a young adult title, meaning
that it is targeted to young adults and has been positively reviewed in library
journals as appropriate for high school students. In order to qualify for this list,
the book must contain at least one significant character who identifies in some
manner as LGBT or Q, and issues relating to that character’s sexuality or gender
difference must be germane to the plot. In these books, the LGBTQ character is
generally the teenage main character or a character close to the main character
(e.g. parent, sibling, or friend). While the researcher is personally familiar with
every title on the list, each of the books included in the instrument has been
recognized as an LGBTQ book by outside sources as well, in one of three ways:
by having been a recipient of ALA’s Stonewall Award (5 titles); been included on
ALA’s Rainbow List (15 titles); and/or by having been formally challenged in a
school due to LGBTQ content (10 titles). The Stonewall Book Award is
sponsored by ALA’s Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transsexual Round Table and
has been in existence since 1971. Historically, the Stonewall Award winners are
books targeted to adults, but in recent years, titles specifically for children and
teens were also included. The Rainbow List is sponsored jointly by the Gay,
Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Round Table and the Social Responsibilities
Round Table; both groups are formally associated with the American Library
Association. This list “presents an annual bibliography of quality books with
significant and authentic GLBTQ content, which are recommended for people
from birth through eighteen years of age” (About Rainbow List, n.d.). Finally,
titles that have been challenged in the past appear on ALA’s Frequently
Challenged Books lists. Ten of the titles included in the instrument have been
challenged or banned in high schools, and the persons initiating those challenges
cited “homosexuality” or “sexual content” as the reason for concern. A diverse
range of queerness is represented by the books on the list, as the characters
featured include those who identify as gay, lesbian or bisexual, as well as those
who are transgendered or dealing with gender differences.
The Control List. A second list of controversial titles was created as a control
list. This was designed to determine whether a librarian was not selecting titles
with LGBTQ content while still purchasing books with other types of
controversial content. The 28 titles on the control list are all considered young
adult fiction, all positively reviewed by library journals as appropriate for high
school students, and all have been formally challenged in school or public
libraries. A book is considered “formally challenged” if a citizen has filled out a
Request for Reconsideration Form, which usually sends the book to a committee
for review. Some of the books were subsequently banned, while others were
retained and returned to the library. The ALA keeps records of book challenges
and whether the books were removed or retained. None of the books on the
control list is considered an LGBTQ book, which means that the main character
16

does not identify as LGBTQ, nor are there any mention or inclusion of characters
or events in the story relating to LGBTQ issues. As all of the books have been
challenged, there are a number of other often-controversial elements in these
books, including violence, drug use, heterosexual sexual content, mentions of the
occult, profanity, or religious issues.
Measurement. In order to measure whether or not a collection shows signs of librarian
self-censorship, each library’s collection was measured by the two separate lists of titles.
Findings that a library possesses a large percentage of books on the Control List but very
few of the books on the LGBTQ List would indicate that self-censorship may be
occurring. Specifically, libraries that possess less than a quarter of the titles on the
LGBTQ list are likely experiencing some degree of librarian self-censorship of LGBTQ
materials, especially if the same library contains a large percentage of the Control List
titles.
The dependent variable in this study, self-censorship, is measured by the presence
or lack of LGBTQ materials in a library collection when compared to the LGBTQ List.
There are extraneous variables at play that are not being measured but may have an effect
on whether LGBTQ materials are purchased, the primary one being funding. The second
list is meant as an attempt to measure whether or not the librarian is purchasing other
potentially objectionable materials, which would indicate whether the school has
adequate funds for new books. The independent variable is the actual books on the lists,
as their existence serves to indicate whether self-censorship is occurring.
Phase Two
There are multiple extraneous variables that may influence a librarian’s tendency to selfcensor the collection. The objective of phase two is to collect and analyze demographic and
other data about the librarian, the school, and the community in order to look for patterns
indicating that any of the variables appear to influence self-censorship. Using publicly available
information resources, pertinent data will be recorded for approximately sixty schools.
Sample. The school libraries studied in phase one were ranked according to the findings
from the most likely to be censored to the least. The top and bottom 25% of this list
comprised the sample for phase two – specifically the quarter of schools with outcomes
suggesting high instances of self-censorship (30 schools) and the quarter of schools that
showed the least evidence of possible self-censorship (30 schools).
Measurement. The Ohio Department of Education (ODE) maintains a comprehensive
web site that disseminates a wide variety of information about Ohio Schools.
Demographic information about each school district studied in this project was collected
earlier in the project during the sampling process, as it was provided along with the
typology information for each school. Ohio issues each school and district an annual
State Report Card, which provides publically available information about the school and
district including its standardized test scores, ODE designation and specific demographic
information for the school including enrollment, student diversity by ethnicity, and
average socio-economic status of the district’s families. This information was recorded
17

for each of the sampled schools. Information about each school’s librarian was also
located on the Ohio Department of Education’s website. The Educator Search feature
allows interested parties to access publically available information about educators,
including their Ohio professional certifications and their date of birth. To ascertain the
identity of each librarian, the researcher telephoned each school and simply inquired as to
the name of the high school librarian. The name, date of birth and valid certificate
information was recorded for each librarian. Finally, the Ohio Secretary of State’s
website archives extensive election data. The political climate of the community served
by each school was determined by the county’s 2012 Presidential election results.
Procedure. Using online resources, information about the variables listed above was
collected and recorded. A Pearson correlation coefficents analysis was run including
each of the listed variables to search for correlations between the data and the tendency to
self-censor or not.
Phase Three
During the first phase, several libraries were revealed in which librarians may be selfcensoring their collection. Phase two examined other variables regarding librarians, schools, or
communities might influence self-censorship. However, numbers alone do not tell the whole
story, so the objective of phase three is to delve deeper into the practices of some of the
librarians whose libraries were scrutinized in this study.
Sample. Twelve school librarians were selected from the phase two schools, six each
from two groups created in phase two. The librarians were selected for a variety of
reasons, including interesting information regarding their libraries gleaned during the
prior phases or their unusually high or low placement on the Rasch model. When it
became apparent that five of the selected librarians were not responding to requests for
interviews, seven alternates were selected. Among the 19 total candidates, 14 responded
to the request to be interviewed, and 12 librarians completed the process.
Interviews. The purpose of the interviews was to explore how librarians make selection
decisions, particularly when it comes to controversial topics. The interviews were mostly
conversational, but each included the following open-ended questions:
 How many years have you been a librarian? Have you always taught in public
schools? Are you certified as a school librarian? What other jobs have you had in
education? Are you a member of ALA, AASL, OELMA or any local library
associations?
 Do you have an annual budget for books? How much do you allot for fiction?
Nonfiction? Other resources?
 How do you handle selection? Do you have a selection policy? Do you have
final say over selection, or does someone else approve selections? What does you
policy dictate when it comes to self-selected fiction?
 Is your administration supportive of your library program? Do they generally
support academic freedom?
18







Have you ever had a reconsideration challenge? What happened? Has it affected
the way you select materials for your library?
How do you distinguish between selection and censorship when it comes to
purchasing age-appropriate titles for high school collections? What is your
philosophy regarding selection and inclusion of fiction for self-selected reading in
high school?
Do you know if your collection includes books with LGBTQ themes? Do you
promote these books? How do students who might want books on this topic find
them?
Does your school have any programs to support LGBTQ students, such as a
GSA?

Procedure. The selected librarians were contacted by email to inform them of the study.
The librarians who expressed interest in the study were then contacted again to arrange a
time for a telephone interview, projected to last for approximately 30 minutes. Those
librarians were also sent an email attachment with the list of questions in advance, so that
they could begin thinking about selection and censorship and be better prepared to
discuss these topics in the interview. To ensure that participants were fully informed of
their rights and consent to be interviewed, they were also sent the Research Consent
Form. The interviews were conducted in person (4), over the phone (5), and via email
conversations (2). Notes were taken during the interview, and a full written account of
the conversation was written immediately following the interview. All participants
agreed to be contacted later if necessary in order to verify or expand on any information
gleaned during the interview.

19

Chapter 5: Results: Phase One and Two
Phase One
Over a two week period in January 2014, the online public access catalogs (OPACs) of
the 120 selected school libraries were searched for the 58 titles on the LGBTQ list and the
control list. For each school, the researcher notated a 1 if the title was owned by the library in
any format (e.g. book, paperback, eBook) and a 0 if the library contained no record of the title.
The raw scores were totaled for each library and for each title. Overall, the 120 libraries
combined owned 465 of the LGBTQ titles and 1,236 of the control titles. On average, the
libraries had just over one LGBTQ title for every three control titles on the list. Almost 70% of
the libraries held less than a quarter of the titles on the LGBTQ list, while only 2% contained less
than a quarter of the control list titles. Conversely, 80% of school libraries owned more than half
of the control list titles, while only 8% of them shelved more than half of the LGBTQ titles. On
the surface, it certainly appears that libraries are selecting significantly more controversial titles
that are devoid of LGBTQ-themed content.
However, each book is unique, and raw scores do not distinguish between more or less
controversial titles on the two lists. It was readily apparent upon examination of the totals that
certain titles seemed to be adopted by many schools, while others were included in very few. In
other words, some seemed “easy” for schools to adopt, while others seemed more “difficult.” In
order to sort the titles by “adoptability,” a Rasch model test was run for each list. This statistical
model, a commonly used method in item response theory, is often used in educational research in
part to determine the difficulty of test items, allowing researchers to sort items from easiest to
most difficult. The measures will vary in ranges with a midpoint of 0, with very wide ranges
indicating larger differences of degrees of difficulty (Keeves & Alagumalai, 2005). Using this
model, a score was calculated for each title, with higher scores indicating books that were more
difficult to adopt, or least often found in the school library catalogs. It is important to note that
the Rasch measures for each list are calculated using only the various adoption rates of that
particular list and the scores from one list cannot be compared to those of another. In other
words, an LGBTQ title with a Rasch measure of 1 should not be considered to have the same
ease or difficulty of adoption as a Control title with a measure of 1 – it is not an “apples to
apples” comparison. The Rasch measures for the titles on each list are shown in Tables 5.1 and
5.2.

20

Table 5.1
The LGBTQ List Titles from Easiest to Adopt to Most Difficult
Title
Crutcher, Chris. Athletic Shorts.
Chbosky, Stephen. The Perks of Being a Wallflower.
Plum-Ucci, Carol. What Happened to Lani Garver?
Sones, Sonia. one of those hideous books where the mother dies.
Green, John and David Levithan. Will Grayson, Will Grayson.
Bray, Libba. Beauty Queens.
Hopkins, Ellen. Tricks.
Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind.
Myracle, Lauren. Shine.
Beam, Cris. I am J.
Peters, Julie Anne. Luna.
Going, K. L. King of the Screw-ups.
Hyde, Catherine Ryan. Becoming Chloe.
Hartringer, Brent. The Geography Club.
Ferris, Jean. Eight Seconds.
Cohn, Rachel and David Levithan. Naomi and Eli’s No Kiss List.
Lo, Malinda. Ash.
Levithan, David. Love is the Higher Law.
Moore, Perry. Hero.
Sanchez, Alex. Rainbow Boys.
Homes, A.M. Jack.
Reynolds, Marilyn. Love Rules.
Wittlinger, Ellen. Parrotfish.
Geerling, Marjetta. Fancy White Trash.
Hurwin, Davida Wils. Freaks and Revelations.
Peters, Julie Anne. Keeping You a Secret.
Johnson, Maureen. The Bermudez Triangle.
Klise, James. Love Drugged.

21

Rasch Measure
-3.29
-2.72
-1.19
-1.19
-1.04
-0.72
-0.67
-0.55
-0.50
-0.12
-0.05
0.10
0.10
0.17
0.33
0.42
0.42
0.60
0.69
0.69
0.80
0.91
0.91
1.02
1.02
1.15
1.29
1.44

Table 5.2
The Control List Titles from Easiest to Adopt to Most Difficult
Title
Collins, Suzanne. The Hunger Games.
Meyer, Stephenie. Twilight.
Hinton, S.E. The Outsiders.
Anderson, Laurie Halse. Speak.
Lowry, Lois. The Giver.
Cormier, Robert. The Chocolate War.
Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
Dessen, Sarah. Just Listen.
Crutcher, Chris. Whale Talk.
Myers, Walter Dean. Fallen Angels.
Sebold, Alice. The Lovely Bones.
Pullman, Phillip. The Golden Compass.
Cooney, Caroline. The Face on the Milk Carton.
Greene, Bette. Summer of My German Soldier.
Asher, Jay. Thirteen Reasons Why.
Alexie, Sherman. The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian.
Going, K.L. Fat Kid Rules the World.
Duncan, Lois. Killing Mr. Griffin.
Collier, James Lincoln and Christopher Collier. My Brother Sam is Dead.
Klause, Annette Curtis. Blood and Chocolate.
Rennison, Louise. Angus, Thongs and Full Frontal Snogging.
Guterson, David. Snow Falling on Cedars.
Mackler, Carolyn. The Earth, My Butt, and Other Big Round Things.
Sones, Sonya. What My Mother Doesn’t Know.
Blume, Judy. Tiger Eyes.
Myracle, Lauren. ttyl.
Reynolds, Marilyn. Detour for Emmy.
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Dangerously Alice.

Rasch Measure
-2.99
-2.36
-2.21
-1.53
-1.44
-1.27
-0.98
-0.56
-0.51
-0.45
-0.45
-0.35
-0.10
-0.10
-0.01
0.17
0.25
0.47
0.63
0.75
0.96
1.00
1.00
1.03
1.12
1.86
2.49
3.59

After each title was assigned a Rasch score, another Rasch score could also be generated
for each library according to the specific titles each held, creating scaled scores that could then
be used to more accurately compare the libraries. These new library Rasch scores were based
not only on how many titles the collection contained, but also on each of those titles’ adoptability
score according to the Rasch model. Two scores were generated for each library, one for the
LGBTQ titles and a separate one for the Control titles. Rasch measures range from negative
numbers to positive numbers, with 0 as the midpoint, so in order to make the scores easier to use,
for this project the Rasch scores were adjusted to make all the scores a positive number.
Libraries with high scores for both lists are considered to have diverse collections containing a
22

considerable number of titles that other schools are hesitant to adopt. Libraries with low scores
on the LGBTQ list but higher than average scores on the Control titles show signs of censorship
of LGBTQ titles. Libraries with low scores on both lists are not of interest – their lack of current
titles in general more likely represents a lack of funding than potential censorship.
The 120 schools and their original and adjusted Rasch measures are listed in Table 5.3.

23

Table 5.3
Rasch Measures for Sampled School Libraries
School (Coded)
1A
1B
1C*
1D
1E*
1F*
1G
1H*
1I*
1J*
1K*
1L*
1M
1N
1O
2A
2B
2C*
2D*
2E
2F
2G
2H*
2I*
2J*
2K*
2L*
2M
2N
2O
3A
3B*
3C
3D
3E*
3F*
3G*

LGBTQ List
Rasch measure Adjusted
-3.23
468.85
-2.47
543.33
-3.80
414.50
-2.17
571.79
-3.80
414.50
-4.67
330.15
-2.47
543.33
-4.67
330.15
-0.36
747.10
-3.80
414.50
-4.67
330.15
-4.67
330.15
-3.80
414.50
-2.17
571.79
-3.23
468.85
-2.81
509.92
-1.91
596.85
-4.67
330.15
-3.80
414.50
-2.17
571.79
-3.80
414.50
-2.47
543.33
-4.67
330.15
-3.23
468.85
-4.67
330.15
-4.67
330.15
-6.01
200.38
-3.23
468.85
-2.17
571.79
-1.91
596.85
-3.23
468.85
-3.80
414.50
-2.17
571.79
-2.81
509.92
-3.80
414.50
-6.01
200.38
-3.80
414.50
24

Control List
Rasch measure Adjusted
-2.66
507.98
0.84
826.64
-0.43
710.70
1.11
850.67
-0.04
746.41
-0.24
728.40
1.11
850.67
-0.43
710.70
1.75
909.10
-0.43
710.70
-1.21
639.67
-0.63
693.16
-0.98
661.40
1.75
909.10
0.38
784.29
0.16
764.96
1.75
909.10
-1.01
657.81
0.60
804.71
1.11
850.67
-0.63
693.16
-0.43
710.70
-1.01
657.81
1.11
850.67
0.16
764.96
-1.64
601.44
0.16
764.96
0.16
764.96
1.41
877.68
1.41
877.68
0.38
784.29
-0.04
746.41
-0.82
675.58
-0.04
746.41
1.11
850.67
-1.21
639.67
-0.04
746.41

3H
3I
3J*
3K
3L*
3M*
3N
3O*
4A*
4B*
4C*
4D
4E*
4F
4G*
4H*
4I*
4J
4K*
4L*
4M*
4N
4O
5A
5B*
5C*
5D`
5E*
5F*
5G
5H
5I*
5J*
5K
5L
5M*
5N
5O
6A
6B
6C*
6D*

-2.17
-2.81
-0.53
-2.47
-1.46
-1.91
-2.81
-3.23
-3.80
-3.80
0.35
-3.23
-4.67
-3.23
-4.67
-4.67
-4.67
-2.47
-3.23
-1.07
-1.26
-2.81
-2.47
-2.81
-1.46
-0.19
-2.17
-4.67
-0.71
-2.17
-2.47
-0.53
-1.68
-1.91
-3.80
-0.71
-2.81
-1.68
-2.81
-3.23
-0.36
-0.01

571.79
509.92
730.32
543.33
640.31
596.85
509.92
468.85
414.50
414.50
816.00
468.85
330.15
468.85
330.15
330.15
330.15
543.33
468.85
678.33
659.81
509.92
543.33
509.92
640.31
763.87
571.79
330.15
713.38
571.79
543.33
730.32
619.47
596.85
414.50
713.38
509.92
619.47
509.92
468.85
747.1
780.82

1.11
0.16
0.38
2.17
0.16
-0.82
-0.04
0.38
0.38
-0.24
2.17
0.16
-0.04
-1.01
-1.24
-1.24
-0.63
-0.24
1.41
1.41
0.60
-0.43
0.60
0.16
-0.04
1.11
0.60
0.84
3.60
0.38
0.84
1.41
-1.42
1.11
-1.01
0.16
0.16
0.60
-0.04
-0.24
2.17
1.75
25

850.67
764.96
730.32
947.45
764.96
675.58
746.41
784.26
784.29
728.40
947.45
764.96
746.41
657.81
620.95
620.95
693.16
728.40
877.68
877.68
804.71
710.70
804.71
764.96
746.41
850.67
804.71
826.64
1077.31
784.29
826.64
877.68
620.95
850.67
657.81
764.96
764.96
804.71
746.41
728.40
947.45
909.1

6E
-3.23
6F*
-1.26
6G*
1.51
6H
-1.68
6I*
-0.36
6J*
-1.26
6K
-2.47
6L*
-1.26
6M*
-1.68
6N*
-1.46
6O
-3.23
7A
-2.81
7B*
-0.53
7C
-2.47
7D
-2.17
7E
-3.23
7F
-3.80
7G
-2.81
7H*
-3.80
7I*
-0.19
7J
-2.47
7K*
-1.68
7L*
-3.80
7M
-2.17
7N
-1.68
7O*
-3.23
8A
-3.23
8B
-2.47
8C*
-1.26
8D
-2.17
8E
-2.17
8F
-3.23
8G
-2.17
8H
-3.80
8I*
0.71
8J*
-1.68
8K
-2.47
8L
-2.17
8M*
-0.71
8N*
0.54
8O
-1.91
*School Libraries selected for Phase 2

468.85
659.81
928.1
619.47
747.1
658.81
543.33
659.81
619.47
640.31
468.85
509.92
730.32
543.33
571.76
468.85
414.50
509.92
414.5
763.87
543.33
619.47
414.50
571.79
619.47
468.85
468.85
543.33
659.81
571.79
571.79
468.85
571.79
414.50
713.38
619.47
543.33
571.79
713.38
834.71
596.85

-1.21
-0.24
1.11
0.84
1.75
0.84
-0.43
0.84
-0.43
0.84
0.16
-0.24
1.11
1.41
-0.43
-0.24
-1.01
0.84
-0.24
1.11
-0.63
-0.43
0.60
1.11
0.60
0.84
-2.66
-1.21
0.16
0.16
2.73
-1.01
0.84
-1.86
0.84
-0.43
0.38
1.11
0.60
2.73
0.84
26

639.67
728.4
850.67
826.64
909.10
826.64
710.70
826.64
710.70
826.64
764.96
728.40
850.64
877.68
710.70
728.40
657.81
826.64
728.40
850.67
693.16
710.70
804.71
805.67
804.71
826.64
507.98
639.67
764.96
764.96
998.14
657.81
826.64
580.84
826.64
710.70
784.29
850.67
804.71
998.14
826.64

Upon close examination of the two sets of measures, the schools with high LGBTQ
measures and high Control List scores were considered least likely to be censoring LGBTQthemed books from their collections, while schools with lower LGBTQ measures, especially
when paired with higher measures for the control list, appear to have some occurrence of such
censorship. For the next phase, the sample of 120 school libraries was pared down to 60. The 30
school libraries with the least evidence of censorship and the 30 schools with the most evidence
of censorship were selected to become the sample for Phase 2, while the school libraries in the
middle were removed from further study. The selected libraries are indicated with an asterisk in
Table 3.
Phase Two
Phase two involves the study of additional variables that may have an impact on whether
a library collection will have a diverse young adult collection. The large sample used in phase
one was cut in half, and additional data were collected for 60 schools – 30 of which showed
evidence of self-censorship and 30 which had high numbers of books with LGBTQ themes.
Correlation coefficients were computed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
(SPSS) software among the scales for Number of LGBTQ Titles, Political Lean of County of
School, Age of Librarian, Certification of Librarian, School Student Enrollment, School
Percentage of Minority Students, School Percentage of Economically Disadvantaged Students,
and the ODE Designation of the school. Using the Bonferroni approach to control for Type I
error across the 7 correlations, a p value of less than .007 (.05/7 = .007) was required for
significance. The results of the correlational analyses presented in Table 5.4 show that 4 of the 7
correlations were statistically significant and had Pearson correlation coefficients greater than
.35.

27

Table5. 4
Correlations Among Variables Affecting the Purchase of LGBTQ Books (N = 60)
Pearson
Correlation
Political Lean of County of School
.41
Age of Librarian
-.01
Type of Certification Held by Librarian
.37
Number of Students Enrolled in the School
.59
Percentage of Minority Students
.39
Percentage of Economically Disadvantaged Students
-.20
ODE Designation of School
.22

Significance
(2-tailed)
.001
.932
.003
.000
.002
.124
.091

The correlation between the political lean of the county in which the school resides and
the number of LGBTQ books held by the library was significant, r(58) = .41, p = .001.
Specifically, the tendency of the citizens to vote for the Democratic candidate for President in
2012 correlated positively with higher number of LGBTQ books in the school library. The
correlation between the type of certification held by the librarian and the number of LGBTQ
books in the school’s library collection was significant, r(58) = .37, p = .003. Librarians certified
in school library media were more likely to have larger numbers of LGBTQ books in their
library collections than library workers who are certified in areas other than library media or,
more often, who are educational aides. The correlation between the number of students enrolled
in the school and the number of LGBTQ books held by the library was significant, r(58) = .59, p
< .001. Larger schools tended to have more LGBTQ titles than smaller schools. Finally, the
correlation between the percentage of minority students enrolled in the school and the number of
LGBTQ books held by the library was significant, r(58) = .39, p = .002. Unsurprisingly, the
more diverse the students in the school, the more diverse the collection seemed to be.
Some other factors that I expected to have in impact on selection decisions did not have a
statistically significant effect on whether or not librarians tended to purchase LGBTQ-themed
materials. Although I hypothesized that older librarians would be more likely to censor than
younger ones, that schools with poor students would have fewer LGBTQ materials, and that
schools with favorable ODE designations (i.e. excellent or effective) would have more LGBTQthemed books, there were no significant correlations between the age of the librarian, percentage
of economically disadvantaged students, or ODE designation.

28

Chapter 6: Results: Phase Three
Young adult book selection can be a daunting task for high school librarians, and there
are a number of complicated factors that impact how diverse the YA collection can be. Realities
vary for every school librarian, as do local community priorities and individual librarian
philosophies. In phase three, twelve librarians were interviewed between mid-April and early
June, 2014. These discussions centered on how selection decisions were made in their school
library. Four librarians were interviewed in person during a visit to their school library, five
were interviewed over the telephone, and three, due to various circumstances, were only able to
communicate via email. The interviews were conversational in nature, and no recording devices
were used. For the face-to-face and telephone interviews, I took notes during the interview and
wrote a report from notes and memory immediately after. During each of the interviews, I made
an effort to cover the following open-ended questions:
 How many years have you been a librarian? Have you always taught in public
schools? Are you certified as a school librarian? What other education-related
jobs have you had? Are you a member of ALA, AASL, OELMA or any local
library associations?
 Do you have an annual budget for books? How much do you allot for fiction?
Nonfiction? Other resources?
 How do you handle selection? Do you have a selection policy? Do you have
final say over selection, or does someone else approve selections? What does you
policy dictate when it comes to self-selected fiction?
 Is your administration supportive of your library program? Do they generally
support academic freedom?
 Have you ever had a reconsideration challenge? What happened? Has it affected
the way you select materials for your library?
 How do you distinguish between selection and censorship when it comes to
purchasing age-appropriate titles for high school collections? What is your
philosophy regarding selection and inclusion of fiction for self-selected reading in
high school?
 Do you know if your collection includes books with LGBTQ themes? Do you
promote these books? How do students who might want books on this topic find
them?
 Does your school have any programs to support LGBTQ students, such as a
GSA?
While I initially contacted equal numbers of librarians in the two groups of libraries
(those who appeared not to censor LGBTQ titles and those who did appear to censor LBGTQ
titles), I received significantly more responses from the group with the diverse LGBTQ
collections. The first eight interviews described were from the first group, while the final four
librarians manage collections that show some degree of censorship.
Judy Blume High School
The first interview took place on a Saturday morning in April. Judy Blume High School
is located in a suburb of a major city in southwest Ohio, a small district of 1,500 students, half of
whom attend Blume High. The library serves students in grades 7-12, but the librarian maintains
29

a separate young adult fiction section available only to students in grades 9-12. Over a third of
the students are economically disadvantaged, and just under half are minority. The district was
rated Excellent in 2012 (Archived Reports, n.d.). The librarian, Margaret Simon, is an
enthusiastic teacher with 8 years of experience in the library; on the Saturday morning of our
meeting, she had a library full of students working on various projects. A former English
teacher, she is now a well-respected school librarian and a longtime member of the Ohio
Educational Library Media Association (OELMA), Ohio’s association for school librarians,
having joined while still in graduate school to obtain her library certification. She oversees all
the libraries in the district, which also include two K-2 primary school libraries and one 3-6
elementary library. The lower school libraries are each managed by an educational assistant.
Each of the four school libraries receives an annual budget of about $10,000 for all
library needs, but most of that is spent solely on books. Ms. Simon does not make conscious
decisions to allot certain amounts to various genres; rather, materials are purchased according to
teacher and student needs and requests. The recent move to Common Core State Standards
(CCSS) has resulted in more targeted selection in nonfiction – “I’ve gotten pickier” (M. Simon,
personal interview, April 18, 2014) – but has not impacted the purchase of fiction. As the only
certified librarian in the district, Ms. Simon is completely in charge of selection for the Blume
High library as well as for the lower schools. The aides in the lower schools do offer input, but
she has final say. Recently, Ms. Simon wrote a detailed selection policy, which includes
selection criteria, directions for dealing with requests for reconsideration, and appropriate
forms. It was her hope to have the school board officially approve the policy, but the Blume
High School principal did not feel that it was necessary and halted the process. There is no
administrator who oversees the librarian at a district level. Ms. Simon reports that the building
principal is extremely conservative, but seems to be supportive of the program and respects the
librarian’s professionalism, while the new assistant principal doesn’t seem to know much about
libraries at all.
There has never been a formal request for reconsideration during Ms. Simon’s tenure,
although there were some cases of informal complaints that were never followed through. She
thoroughly prepared for the potential challenges by collecting reviews and preparing defenses for
the books, but no official request ever materialized. However, Ms. Simon does continue to
worry about potential challenges, and attempts to safeguard the integrity of her collection by
maintaining a separate young adult collection for high school students and making certain that
students who check out edgier, controversial titles are given “fair warning” about the content, so
that they are making informed choices. Finally, she ensures that all of the “racier” books she
purchases are positively reviewed and deemed appropriate for grades 9-12, and that all genres of
fiction are represented in the collection.
Margaret Simon is very aware that the collection contains books with LGBTQ themes; in
fact, she makes an effort to include them in book talks and other forms of promotion. She
prefers a matter-of-fact approach to book promotion in order not to sensationalize the topic or
provide fodder for immature, homophobic reactions. She simply promotes them as great books
that all students should read. While students have not asked her specifically for LGBTQ books,
she has recommended them to students who enjoyed other LGBTQ-friendly books. Ms. Simon
reports that while Blume High School did have a Gay Straight Alliance (GSA) in the past, the
current principal, who is very conservative, quashed the club this year by not allowing the club to
30

make announcements, hang posters, or advertise in any manner, and the club just fizzled
out. The faculty does include one teacher who is very outwardly homosexual, and there is at
least one transgendered student, so she is hopeful that the club will be resurrected in the future.
Chris Crutcher High School
The second face-to-face interview occurred toward the end of May on a rainy Wednesday
afternoon. Chris Crutcher High School is located in a suburb several miles north of a large city
in southwestern Ohio. The district serves approximately 2,200 students (11% minority and 20%
economically disadvantaged) and was rated Excellent in 2012 (Archived Reports, n.d.). The
Crutcher High School library serves students in grades 2-12, although the area is spatially
divided into two distinct areas with separate entrances within the building, as well as a common
entrance from the outside. The one certified librarian oversees the junior/senior high school side
(grades 6-12), while the educational aide manages the elementary (grades 2-5) side of the
library. The librarian, Angus Bethune, a self-professed “married, Christian, heterosexual
progressive” (A. Bethune, personal interview, May 30, 2014), has five years’ experience in the
library, which follows 20 years of teaching fifth grade, and is a member of many professional
organizations, including ALA, AASL, OELMA and a local book-reviewing group.
Crutcher High School does have a budget for the library, although Mr. Bethune refers to
it as “a constant source of frustration” (A. Bethune, personal interview, May 30, 2014). Previous
superintendents greatly valued the library media program and generously funded it, but in recent
years and with a new superintendent, the budget has been slashed considerably, from around
$62,000 per year for the three library collections two years ago to around $16,000 for all three
today. As a result, Mr. Bethune’s selections are made strictly according to need, with little
attention paid to balancing fiction and nonfiction. Mr. Bethune also pursues other funding
sources, and recently procured a grant to buy nonfiction that relates to CCSS. Therefore, he
prioritizes budget money for fiction, specifically “any books that students will want to read.”
As the sole certified librarian, Mr. Bethune has full responsibility for selection and does
not have to obtain approval from any higher-ups. In past years it was standard practice to send
orders to the board for approval, but the current superintendent does not require this. There is a
very generic district selection policy that requires librarians to maintain a balanced collection,
consider community stakeholders and base selection on reviews in reputable library
journals. Despite the apparent leeway Mr. Bethune enjoys pertaining to book selection, the
administrators do not seem to be terribly supportive of the library program or of academic
freedom in general. Mr. Bethune asserts that the current high school administration at Crutcher
High School believes themselves to be champions of academic freedom, but they are in reality
very censor-oriented and not particularly supportive, and that most teachers are apprehensive
about teaching anything potentially controversial.
There have been frequent reconsideration challenges (3 in the past 5 years), but
fortunately the district selection and reconsideration policy is strong, and there is a good
reconsideration committee already in place. In every case that went before the committee, the
book was retained by the district, although in some cases the material was moved to an older age
group. Unfortunately, Mr. Bethune is aware of a case in which an elementary principal ordered
the library aide to remove a book from the library without following procedure, and that book
31

was removed. He also related stories about teachers sneaking books out of the library when they
didn’t agree with them, rather than deal with the reconsideration process. Mr. Bethune claims
that the reconsideration requests do not affect his purchasing decisions. Rather, he deliberately
tries to keep a balanced mind and consider community standards, realizing that not all students
are reflective of “the community” as a whole, and that those students have needs, too. Believing
that balanced views help students to make decisions for themselves, he makes a concentrated
effort to compile as many views and voices as possible in the collection.
Mr. Bethune is aware that the collection contains many books with LGBTQ
themes. Efforts are made to include those books, along with other quality books, when making
recommendations to students. Students can find them via the online catalog, although some
students feel comfortable enough to simply ask him for such books. Crutcher High does not
have a GSA. The staunchly conservative principal will not allow it (the librarian describes him
as proudly macho), but there is always a possibility that one may develop in the future. Mr.
Bethune is hopeful that attitudes toward supporting LGBTQ students are slowly improving and
that soon GSA clubs will not be controversial.
John Green High School
While collecting data in earlier phases, two schools stood out as particularly interesting,
and I found it worth the time to make a trip to central Ohio to meet the librarians in person in
early June, and to see these libraries firsthand. The first was John Green High School, which is
located in a suburb of a large city in central Ohio. The district serves over 7,000 students, 2,200
of whom attend the high school. Approximately one third of the students are minorities, and
22% are economically disadvantaged. The school earned the ODE designation of Excellent in
2012 (Archived Reports, n.d.). The librarian has taught at John Green for 13 years, the first five
as an English teacher and the last 8 years as librarian. Margo Roth Spiegelman is energetic and
appears to be younger than her 34 years. Due to rising membership costs, she is not a member of
any professional library organizations, although in the past was a member of the National
Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) and often enjoys attending the Assembly on Literature
for Adolescents for the NCTE (ALAN) conferences.
The John Green High School library has a rather generous budget of approximately
$20,000 per year. Ms. Spiegelman spends the money judiciously, but is more concerned about
the wants and needs of the students and staff than on strict percentages of fiction and
nonfiction. She says that nonfiction for research and young adult fiction tend to get the most
attention as they are the most heavily utilized sections of the library. She was not able to locate a
recent selection policy, but still operates under the older, rather generic one. The district claims
to be updating the policy. “They’re working on it,” Ms. Spiegelman says, shooting me a
knowing grin (M. R. Spiegelman, personal interview, June 3, 2014). Nevertheless, she feels
confident about ordering pretty much anything the students ask for, pointing out that high school
students are young adults and old enough to make choices about what they want to read. Her
qualifications for fiction selection are straightforward; if the book is listed as Young Adult in the
review, it is ordered without reservation. For adult titles, she is a bit more selective, and relies on
reviews, familiarity with the author, appeal to young adults, and other factors before purchasing
it. She considers familiar authors, reviews in professional library journals, award winning books,
and student and teacher requests while selecting materials for the library.
32

Ms. Spiegelman boasts that administrative support at John Green High School is
outstanding, as the former principal and now superintendent of the district is a former English
teacher. The diverse, local community proudly embraces open-mindedness and eschews
censorship. Margo Spiegelman has never had a formal challenge in the library, nor has the
school been challenged on curricular novels, despite the fact that the English teachers at this
school teach several controversial titles. A middle school librarian was informally challenged
over an LGBTQ title, which was ultimately retained, and students occasionally ask for
alternative titles to study in the English department, but that does not faze the confident librarian,
who professes her willingness to go to bat for every book on the shelf.
Margo Roth Spiegelman is acutely aware of the LGBTQ-friendly books in the collection,
and promotes them equally with other YA titles. This library was unique (and interesting!) in
that it was the only library collection in the study which possessed more of the LGBTQ titles
than control titles in Phase 1, owning 24 of the 28 LGBTQ titles and only 22 of the 28 control
titles. She promotes LGBTQ-themed novels alongside other high interest books by booktalking
them to students, displaying them prominently in the library, and including them in the teacher
book club. Students can use the online catalog to locate LGBTQ books, or as happens more
frequently, students can simply ask the librarian for help. There is a GSA at John Green High
School, and this year the club was formally recognized by the Board as an official school club.
Nancy Garden High School
The second school I visited was located about 20 minutes away from John Green High
School, in a neighboring suburb of the same major city in central Ohio. Nancy Garden High
School is the lone high school in a district which serves 2,100 students; 650 attend the high
school. Only 18% of the students are minorities, and even fewer students, 10%, are
economically disadvantaged. This school is rated Excellent by the ODE (Archived Reports,
n.d.). Garden High’s librarian, Andy Kenyon, has been in his current position for 18 years, but
taught English language learners in the district for several years, and also teaches English as a
second language at a local university. Mr. Kenyon is a member of OELMA.
Garden High has a budget for materials, but it has dwindled from previous years and now
amounts to approximately $6,500.00. Mr. Kenyon prioritizes books over other materials, and
tends to buy according to need, which he freely admits can be very haphazard and varies from
year to year. The district does have a selection policy which gives the certified librarian
authority over what is purchased. Mr. Kenyon orders anything that he feels will circulate and
pretty much anything that the students request. He concedes that there is a line of
appropriateness that cannot be crossed, but also acknowledges that the line is constantly in flux;
that there are a number of titles in the library today that never would have been acceptable 20
years ago. In accordance with the selection policy, Mr. Kenyon reads and utilizes reputable
library journals for book reviews, as well as award winners and book lists developed by the
American Library Association. Nonfiction purchases are usually driven by student and
curricular need, as well as motivated by hot topics and current events.
Andy Kenyon feels that the administration is supportive of the library media program and
of academic freedom in general. He relates that the administration is relatively hands-off and
that they seem to trust his professional judgment. The Garden High School community is also
33

very close-knit, he shares, and he feels confident that his personal relationships with Board
members, staff, and students and their families is critical in defusing any potential censorship
issues that may arise. “I know these families, and I know what will fly with them and what
won’t,” he says (A. Kenyon, personal interview, June 3, 2014). In Mr. Kenyon’s 18 years at
Garden High, there has never been a book challenge. A few years ago, a Social Studies teacher
faced a bit of a similar-type challenge when a parent complained to the school board about an Rrated film about war being shown in the classroom. While the film was relevant to the
curriculum, the controversy resulted in a policy that teachers obtain parental permission before
showing R-rated movies. Most of the community supported the use of the film, and Mr. Kenyon
recalls that, as a whole, the school community was very upset at the idea of censorship. As a
result, he is not overly concerned about challenges, and only considers his professional opinion
on appropriateness for the school library when selecting materials. He eschews the word
“censorship,” feeling that it is an alarmist word, opining that if books are appropriate for age,
connect to the high school curriculum, and don’t seriously violate community values, they
should be included in the library, and books that do not meet that criteria should not, and their
exclusion should not be considered censorship.
Mr. Kenyon is fully aware of LGBTQ-themed books in the library. Garden High School
was unique (and interesting!) because this was the only school library in the study in which
LGBTQ books were actually identified on the OPAC as part of a special LGBT collection. The
library catalog features several “collections” so students can easily search for categories
including Sports, Psychology, Classics, and LGBT, among others. The special categorization
was created based on student and teacher request and developed by Mr. Kenyon’s aide, a former
English teacher. Garden High School also has an active GSA, and its members utilize the library
quite often. Andy Kenyon has made many purchases based on requests from club members.
The club is recognized as an official club by the school board. Relates Kenyon, “A few years
back, the Board decided that they were going to make a progressive statement in favor of
tolerance and acceptance for LGBT persons,” and with that, the club was formally founded (A.
Kenyon, personal interview, June 3, 2014).
Sherman Alexie High School
Sherman Alexie High School is located in an urban area in the southern half of Ohio in a
district serving 3500 students, with over 1000 of them attending the high school. Only 20% of
the students are minorities, but just over half of the student body is considered economically
disadvantaged. Alexie High was rated Effective by the ODE in 2012 (Archived Reports, n.d.).
The relatively young librarian, Mary Spirit, is in her seventh year as a school librarian, after
teaching language arts for seven years in a small town district in western Ohio. She is a member
of OELMA and also active in Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA), a division of
ALA. Ms. Spirit and I spoke by telephone in mid-May, 2014.
The library receives a generous budget (the librarian did not specify amounts) that varies
from year to year, and Ms. Spirit purchases according to need, without regard to specific
percentages of fiction or nonfiction. The district selection policy gives authority for selection to
the professional librarian and stipulates the use of reviews and professional selection aides,
supports the Library Bill of Rights, promotes multiple viewpoints, and generally seems favorable
to maintaining a wide variety of items in the library. She solicits opinions from teachers and will
34

always buy what they ask for, and she also does her best to honor student requests as well.
While she is required to submit her order to central office for approval, that list has never been
altered or denied in any way.
Mary Spirit feels very comfortable with the administration of Alexie High School, and
feels that she can take issues to them, that they see the merit of the library program and are
supportive of academic freedom in general. She had never had a reconsideration challenge,
although one parent came to her concerned about the religion section. After fully explaining the
variety of volumes in that section of the library, and showing the parent the comprehensive
collection, the parent was satisfied and actually impressed. Ms. Spirit does keep potential
censors in mind when selecting books, but does not stress about it too much. She tries to keep in
mind what she would approve for her own child, if she had a high school age child. Ironically,
she defines censorship as exclusion based on her PERSONAL views and values, while selection
she sees as choosing age-appropriate materials without consideration of controversy regarding
religion, homosexual characters, or the librarian’s personal opinion of the content.
She is very aware of her LGBTQ-friendly books and promotes them in a variety of ways,
such as featuring some as Book of the Week. She also keeps a binder of good books by genre
for the students to peruse, and LGBT is one of the genres. That is the easiest way students find
LGBTQ books, but she points out that they also could check the OPAC, and many students feel
comfortable enough to simply ask the librarian for them. Alexie High School has had GSA clubs
in the past, but she reports that they have not been very visible this year. She said they are
primarily student run, so are more active some years than others. She is friends with the
advisors, and the students have come to her for resources in the past, which she provided.
J.K. Rowling High School
J. K. Rowling High School is located in a small town in northern Ohio, a district serving
2,800 students, about a quarter who attend the high school. Only 10% of the students are
minorities, and approximately 44% are economically disadvantaged. Rowling High was rated
Excellent by ODE in 2012 (Archived Reports, n.d.). Irma Pince, the librarian, has served in her
present position for 16 years, and was previously taught English for 14 years. She is a member
of the OELMA, NCTE and is very involved with the ALAN conference, helping to organize the
event every fall. Ms. Pince and I spoke by phone one afternoon in May, 2014.
The budget for the Rowling High library is very small, less than $2600 per year, so Ms.
Pince does not purchase materials with specific percentages of fiction or nonfiction in mind but
rather buys based on recognized library needs, teacher requirements and requests and curricular
demands. She does attempt to get at least half fiction. Despite her small school library budget,
she is very adept at finding great deals at the ALAN conference and once got over $5000 worth
of new books for only $700, so she makes sure to take plenty of money to that conference every
year.
The district has a rather generic selection policy that puts her in charge of selection,
although she is required to have her principal and the School Board approve her orders. She
shares that her selections have never been questioned or denied and that the administration seems
to respect her professional judgment. She selects books for curricular needs, which includes self35

selected reading. She often looks for popular and familiar authors, reads reviews in a variety of
library journals, solicits student requests, seeks books with cultural interest and reads as many
actual books as she can. Ms. Pince feels that reading the books herself gives her a connection
with the young adult readers, and makes her feel more confident about the books in her
collection. While there has not been a book challenge in the high school during her tenure, she
does recall an event that took place in the middle school. A parent had complained to the middle
school principal about the age-appropriateness of a title. In violation of the selection policy’s
reconsideration process, the principal simply ordered the certified librarian to remove the book
and the librarian did so without protest. The title remains in the high school. The librarian does
keep in mind potential challenges, which she says does not affect her purchasing habits but does
impact her behavior a bit – she will let students know if the book they are planning to check out
has potentially objectionable material and makes sure the student is okay with the content. She
considers this to be full disclosure, which allows students to make informed decisions. She feels
that she wards off censorship by judging each book as a whole and on a case-by-case basis.
When faced with books with potentially problematic content, she considers whether that content
is integral to the story or if it is gratuitous. She considers the overall content of the book, and
whether the book might be different or less powerful without the questionable content. Finally,
she considers students’ age, which is why there are several books shelved in the high school that
she would consider inappropriate at the middle school.
Irma Pince is aware of her LGBTQ-friendly books, and she promotes them alongside
other novels, not singling them out, but not excluding them either. She feels that kids are open to
great stories, and she booktalks them just as she would any other. She says students can find the
books using the OPAC, and she makes sure that information about the LGBTQ content is
included in the record. She also says that some students simply come to her and ask for them.
The school currently does not have a GSA, although Ms. Pince herself was an advisor in the past
(she was forced to give it up due to time restraints), and another teacher has been recently
discussed the possibility of getting the club going again. She feels that J. K. Rowling High
School has a pretty good climate and tends to be accepting of diversity.
Alex Sanchez High School
Alex Sanchez High School is located in a large urban city in central Ohio. This very
large district serves over 14,000 students, and Sanchez High School, with 98% minority and 86%
economically disadvantaged, has a student population of 560. The school’s students struggle
academically; Sanchez High School was placed on Academic Watch in 2012 (Archived Reports,
n.d.). The librarian, Kyla Meeks, a 26 year veteran, has also taught language arts and social
studies in the past, and currently teaches developmental English at a local community college.
She is a former member of OELMA, and currently very active in her teachers’ union, serving at
the local, regional and state level. We had planned to meet in mid-May, but that meeting was
cancelled due to her sudden illness. Instead, we communicated via email.
Sanchez High library had a robust book budget in the past, but in recent years it has
dwindled to almost nothing. When she had a large budget, Ms. Meeks made a conscious effort to
spend about 60% on fiction and 40% on nonfiction, but now she spends whatever money comes
her way on whatever is most needed. Her district selection policy requires her to find two
scholarly reviews from reputable library journals. For fiction, she makes sure the language is
36

appropriate and that questionable content is handled well and is reviewed for students in grades
9-12. She is also expected to purchase nonfiction items with reading levels appropriate to age in
order to find rigorous informational text required by CCSS. She keeps logs of all student and
teacher requests and purchases as many of those as she is able, and while she generally has final
say over selection, she is required to have her selections approved by her principal and
supervisor, who largely trust her judgment. Overall, she feels that her administrators are
supportive of the library media program and of academic freedom in general.
Ms. Meeks has had one library challenge, early in her career. There was a volume on
magic and mythology that was purchased specifically for research for a certain project
undertaken annually by a history class. The book was kept on reserve for that class and was not
available for checkout. A student stole the book from the library, and when the parent saw it, the
parent brought it in to the Superintendent complaining about the content. Ms. Meeks was able to
explain how the book was used and that the child did not check it out but rather stole it. The
superintendent decided in favor of the book, and it remained in the collection for use by future
history classes. Ms. Meeks does keep potential challenges in mind when ordering, but also
checks reviews and makes certain that if any of her books are challenged, she will have strong
evidence of its value to back it up. She is concerned that she may be “dancing on the edge of
censorship” because there are certain things she won’t purchase for the library, and books she
finds violent, sexually explicit, or vulgar are often not selected, although she does recommend
students wanting those titles utilize the quality public library system. She is aware of her
LGBTQ collection, and promotes the books when students ask for them, but she usually doesn’t
promote romance books at all, LGBTQ or not. She said the books are not hard to find using the
catalog, and that many students simply ask her for them. Sanchez High does have a club to
support LGBTQ students, called the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN).
The members utilize the library a great deal, and Ms. Meeks provides materials for them.
Lauren Myracle High School
Lauren Myracle High School is located in a small district serving 2,200 students in
northern Ohio. Ninety-six percent of the student body is white, and about a fifth of the students
are economically disadvantaged. The ODE rating for Myracle High is excellent (Archived
Reports, n.d.). There are no certified school librarians in the district, and the outgoing district
librarian, Cat Robinson, had not been with the district an entire year. Ms. Robinson is actually a
public librarian hired by the school district to oversee the educational aides that run the libraries,
and the district librarian she replaced also held a Masters in Library Information Science (MLIS),
but was not a certified school librarian. As a public librarian, she is a member of ALA and some
other professional library organizations, and has had some involvement with OELMA. As she
was in the process of vacating her office with the district to take a new position with the public
library, she preferred to communicate electronically, and we exchanged several emails over the
course of a few days in early May.
Myracle High School has an annual budget of about $5,500 for books, and Ms. Robinson
claimed that it was common practice to purchase about 60% fiction and 40% nonfiction. With
the onslaught of CCSS, it was expected that the need for nonfiction would spike, but
surprisingly, the opposite was found true. Teachers and students seemed to prefer to find their
nonfiction resources online, and the demand for fiction has never been higher.
37

Ms. Robinson reports that there is neither a selection nor a de-selection policy on file in
the district and that she alone, as the district librarian, is considered the “expert” on selection and
is the only decision maker for purchases. While educational aides operate the libraries, Ms.
Robinson says that they do not select books and rarely offered input. The aides, she explained,
simply check materials in and out and shelve books.
Ms. Robinson maintains that the district does not seem to support the library program,
and that her frustration with it all led her to resign as the district librarian. “The overall inability
to hire an additional staff member at the elementary, general inconsideration when using the
library for non-library events, and a limitation on the district librarian hours were all indicators
that they weren’t vested. The position I had was going down to 2 days a week in the 2014-2015
school year, if being an open position at all. The value and potential really wasn’t seen there by
the administration” (C. Robinson, personal e-mail, May 5, 2014).
The library has not had a book challenge in recent memory. As a public librarian, Ms.
Robinson feels very strongly about open access and not wanting any materials censored. At the
elementary level, she requires students below sixth grade to obtain parental permission before
checking out young adult fiction, but for high school students, she strongly believes that they
have the right to select and read what they want. Her selection decisions are never based on fear
of a challenge; rather, she buys what she feels the school needs. “If we needed books on gays or
suicides then I bought it” (C. Robinson, personal e-mail, May 5, 2014). She bases her selections
on which publishers are known for high quality content and age-appropriateness, and used
library selection tools such as Booklist and School Library Journal, as well as input from her
teenage helpers, to make most of her decisions about young adult fiction.
Cat Robinson knows of the LGBTQ-themed books in her collection, and buys them
willingly, although she suspects they are probably promoted more in other schools than in hers –
she describes Myracle High as rural and not particularly progressive. She does promote those
which she feels are very well written; her focus on promoting books prioritizes extremely high
quality regardless of theme. Myracle High School does not have a GSA or any other clubs
supportive of LGBTQ students.
David Levithan High School
David Levithan High School is located in a large urban district of over 6,000 students in
west-central Ohio. Approximately 2,000 students attend Levithan High, with over a third of
them minority and 37% economically disadvantaged. Levithan High School received an
Effective rating from the ODE in 2012 (Archived Reports, n.d.). Noah Paul, a veteran teacher
and former longtime football coach, has been the Levithan High School librarian for 15 years.
He is a former member of OELMA, but dropped membership when the school board ceased the
benefit of paying professional dues for teachers. At one point, he used to enjoy attending the
OELMA conference each fall, but in recent years he’s found it difficult to take the time off, as he
feels that the library is the hub of the school, and students and teachers get upset whenever it is
closed. Mr. Paul and I spoke by telephone after school one day in May, 2014.
The school board allots a budget Mr. Paul describes as “decent” into five sections for
various library needs, one of which is for books. He buys strictly according to what he feels the
38

library needs, which is largely based on teacher and student requests. He is knowledgeable about
the school curriculum and always makes sure that curricular needs are met. He uses a
subscription service to purchase fiction, so that the library always has high quality and recently
published fiction. The district does not have a selection policy that he is aware of, and he says
the administrative is pretty much hands-off as far as selection. He says he has complete freedom
to purchase what he needs. “After 15 years, they pretty much trust me” (N. Paul, personal
interview, May 14, 2014). Mr. Paul believes that the administration is very supportive of the
library program, and that the library is considered by all to be the hub of the school. When asked
about academic freedom, Mr. Paul said that teachers have some leeway, but the administrators
do clamp down tightly on curriculum and make certain that it’s being taught.
Levithan High School has had only one book reconsideration of which Mr. Paul is aware.
In this scenario, a substitute teacher checked out an award-winning novel that he found
offensive. The substitute took the book directly to the principal, who looked it over, agreed with
the substitute teacher, and ordered it removed. As there is no selection or de-selection policy in
place, the principal felt that it was within his authority to remove offensive books from the
collection. Mr. Paul said he continues to select books as he always has, which includes using
multiple professional reviews to guide purchases. He claims to have cleaned up the collection
during his tenure. He asserts that the library was full of “junk” books when he took over at
Levithan High, and that he replaced them with better reviewed materials. He liked to buy titles
that people recommend (after reading reviews, of course). He reads a great deal of them himself;
he says he enjoys young adult literature and he likes to know what the kids are reading. His
philosophy regarding selection was influenced by a professor who taught him in graduate school,
“It’s not my job to decide what the kids read; it’s up to them” (N. Paul, personal interview, May
14, 2014). He says he’s “liberal enough” and he has a much-used suggestion box in the library.
Mr. Paul believes that his collection includes books with LGBTQ themes (in reality, the
Levithan High School library owned only 2 of the 28 on the research instrument). He says he
does not promote them to all students, but “you can get to know your readers and if they’re
looking for those types of books you can aim them in that direction” (N. Paul, personal
interview, May 14, 2014). He says he has had a few that have asked him for them, and that
students who wanted them could type LGBTQ keywords in the OPAC and those books would
come up. He is not aware of a GSA or any other LGBTQ type of club at Levithan High School.
Ellen Hopkins High School
Ellen Hopkins High School is located in a small town in northwest Ohio. This small
district serves just over six hundred students in a single K-12 building. Ninety-seven percent of
the students are white and just over a quarter are economically disadvantaged; the school has a
2012 ODE rating of effective (Archived Reports, n.d.). The librarian, Eden Streit, is a young and
vibrant teacher who has been operating the library for the past seven years. Ms. Streit has a
Master’s degree in education but does not have library certification; after three years of teaching
English, she took over the Hopkins High library and continues to teach English a few periods of
the day. There is an educational aide who mostly handles the K-6 side of the library, but the aide
has other duties as well, so there are large periods of time that the library is unsupervised. While
not an active member of OELMA, Ms. Streit does follow the OELMA listserv and attends the
39

annual conference when she is able. Eden Streit and I spoke by telephone at the beginning of
May, 2014.
Hopkins School no longer has a designated library budget. In the past, the library
received about $2,000 per year, but now Ms. Streit has to appeal directly to the superintendent
for funds; sometimes she gets book money and sometimes she does not. She is able to raise
money and get free books for the elementary library by holding vendor-supplied book fairs, but
is at the mercy of the superintendent for the high school collection. Therefore, she purchases
strictly according to need, as determined by what teachers and students request. The district does
have a selection policy that gives her full authority for purchasing materials. She reads reviews
and uses vendor websites to make selection decisions.
Ms. Striet feels that the building principals are supportive of academic freedom, but does
not believe that the district-level administrators are. Hopkins is in a very conservative area, and
the teachers tend to know what they can and cannot do, and they behave accordingly. While
Hopkins School library has not had a reconsideration request in the seven years she has managed
it, she does recall serving on a committee to decide a curricular book challenge. A parent wanted
a certain title removed from the curriculum, but not necessarily from the library, but ultimately
the book remained and is still being taught today. Ms. Streit feels that her collection is severely
limited by funds, so she needs to make every purchase count. With her very conservative
community, she feels the pressure to make sure the titles are age-appropriate. She often will
refer students asking for more risqué books to try the public library and has even taken the extra
step to go to the library herself to procure a book for a student. She also feels limited by having
a K-12 library all in the same room. While the library is divided into an upper grades side and a
lower grades side, there are no areas that are off limits to any student, and kids are free to check
out any book they want. She said that has not been a problem so far; when parents are displeased
with a book their child checked out, they just send it back and the student selects something else.
Ms. Streit is very aware that her school district’s collection contains very few LGBTQthemed titles, and she places the blame on the superintendent. When she was being interviewed
for her current library position, the superintendent specifically stated that he felt that any books
that “promoted homosexuality” were inappropriate for a school library, and Ms. Streit’s early
selection decisions were strongly influenced by his mandate. However, she is starting to make
an effort to add LGBTQ-friendly titles slowly and quietly. She realizes that doing so is
subversive and not very brave, but explains, “I could stand up to him, but they’d just fire me and
replace me with someone who will do what they want. So I play nice, add to the collection
slowly and wait for the community to catch up” (E. Streit, personal interview, May 1, 2014).
She has not had any students ask for LGBTQ titles, but she can think of several students who
would likely enjoy them. Hopkins School does not have a GSA or any other type of support for
LGBTQ students, although Ms. Striet says it’s obvious that there are some students who identify
as LGBTQ. It is simply not discussed in the district.
Ray Bradbury High School
Ray Bradbury High School is located in the Appalachian region of southeastern Ohio.
This school district of just over 1000 students consists of a single K-12 campus. The district has
few to no minority students (listed as 0 on State Report Card). Approximately a third of the
40

students are economically disadvantaged. The district was rated Excellent by ODE in 2012
(Archived Reports, n.d.). Mildred Montag is the only certified librarian in the district. She is
retiring at the end of the school year, having taught 30 years, 26 of them in her current position
as the K-8 librarian. Bradbury’s high school library is managed by an educational aide. When I
contacted the aide for an interview, she deferred to Ms. Montag, who consented to an interview.
She was kind enough to review some of the questions in advance with the aide so that she would
be able to give both the aide’s perspective and her own during our conversation. We spoke by
telephone in late April, 2014.
Due to a thriving local industry which provides copious tax revenue to the district, the
Bradbury library has an extremely generous annual budget of about $38,000 for each of the two
libraries. She tends to order according to needs and wants rather than limit herself to strict
percentages for each genre. Since their library is a member of a consortium which shares
resources, she tends to buy more fiction than nonfiction. She purchases nonfiction that ties to the
school curriculum and orders through the consortium for other needs. The educational aide in
the high school has been in that position for a very long time and advises Ms. Montag on
ordering for the high school. The aide’s recommendations are based mainly on
recommendations and gut instinct. The district has a selection policy, but Ms. Montag says she
and the aide tend to avoid buying books with controversial subjects, but will sometimes order
those books if there is a big demand. She cited a few titles that were on the control list of the
research instrument as examples of books that had been made into movies and that the students
requested. Ms. Montag can recall only two instances in which a parent was upset over a book.
Both of those were resolved informally when the principal and librarian simply removed the
books from the collection. Ms. Montag feels that the administration is supportive of the library
program and academic freedom because he did take the time to read the book in question before
ordering it removed. Ms. Montag also had a “restricted shelf” of books that she keeps in a back
room and she requires parental permission for students to check them out. She says these are
mostly nonfiction titles on controversial subjects like abortion and drugs. There have not been
any challenges in the high school library that she is aware of.
Ms. Montag is not aware of any LGBTQ books in either library collection, because she
deliberately does not purchase any books with homosexual themes based on her belief that kids
won’t read them. She took the time to explain that Bradbury is in a very conservative county,
that they don’t have any gay people that they are aware of, and that kids are very limited in what
they will read, which includes anything on hunting or books recently made into a movie. She
went so far as to state that she also doesn’t buy books with ethnic characters because the school
is nearly all white and they aren’t interested in that sort of thing; that this was a “closed county”
where residents will not sell property to someone they don’t know. Ms. Montag is smugly
comfortable with the fact that the library has no LGBTQ-themed books. “If they want to be that
way, fine, but I’m not supporting it. Don’t want those kinds of books in the library” (M.
Montag, personal interview, April 28, 2014). Obviously, Bradbury School does not have a GSA
or any other type of support for its invisible LGBTQ students.
Phillip Pullman High School
Phillip Pullman High School is located in the northwestern corner of Ohio, a small
district of only 730 students who attend a single K-12 school; only 3% are minorities but almost
41

half are economically disadvantaged. Pullman received an Effective rating from ODE in 2012
(Archived Reports, n.d.). Lyra Belacqua is a part-time educational aide who oversees both the
elementary and secondary libraries, which are housed in separate but adjacent rooms. The
district’s certified librarian retired three years prior, and the other part-time aide position was cut
a year later, so for the past two years, Ms. Belacqua has attempted to run two libraries working
part time, but is required to focus her attention on the K-4 students. She’s spent many unpaid
hours trying to keep up because the libraries are so important to her, but she’s exhausted and
overwhelmed.
The high school library was never officially closed, and although it is left unsupervised,
teachers and students still use the space regularly to use computers or take out books (sometimes
to be returned, sometimes not). The library budget, which was at one time sufficient, has
dwindled to $800 a year, although the Parent Teacher Organization (PTO) is very generous and
provides additional funds a couple times a year for the elementary collection. Ms. Belacqua has
stopped purchasing titles for the high school library since it is unsupervised and students and
teachers alike simply help themselves to the shelves with no accountability.
As Ms. Belacqua has never really managed the high school library, we did not discuss
selection policies or LGBTQ books. She simply expressed her extreme frustration with the
current state of her beloved library: “Isn’t it pathetic for a school library to be unavailable to the
student body? But don’t worry – we have a new weight room! As you can see, you’ve touched
a nerve. Thanks for listening” (L. Belacqua, personal email, May 12, 2014).
Common Traits of Libraries
Each of the 12 librarians had unique circumstances, experiences, and perspectives that
affected how selection decisions were made in their school libraries. The quantitative data
analysis from the second phase of this study suggested that four variables strongly correlate with
the tendency of school to own a diverse LGBTQ collection. Those four factors (having a
certified school librarian in the library, being located in in a politically “blue” county, having a
diverse student body, and having a large student enrollment) were reflected in nearly all the
library programs studied in the third phase of the study.
Library Media Certification. Statistical analyses during the second phase showed a
strong, positive correlation between the presences of a certified library professional and a
larger LGBTQ book collection. During phase three, it was confirmed that in seven of the
eight libraries considered to have diverse LGBTQ collections, the professional in charge
of the high school library was certified in library media, while only one of the four of the
libraries with few or no LGBTQ-themed novels employed a full time, certified high
school librarian. It is interesting to note that in the case of Myracle High School, the
school library with a diverse collection yet managed day-to-day by an educational aide,
the school and district had been serviced by a series of district librarians with MLIS
degrees and significant experience as public librarians. As credentialed librarians, public
librarians generally have the same strong commitment as school librarians to the Library
Bill of Rights, including a moral obligation to ensure their patrons have access to ideas
and information.
42

Community values. Nearly every librarian interviewed discussed the community their
libraries served, and those community values seemed to directly impact the degree to
which the librarian felt comfortable providing potentially controversial materials to the
students. John Green High School and Nancy Garden High School both had librarians
that spoke very highly of their communities and how much those communities valued
open mindedness and resisted censorship. They both felt extremely supported by their
communities and felt no trepidation about providing a diverse collection of materials for
their students. The librarian at Crutcher High School, while acknowledging that his
district was rather conservative, still mentioned the pride the community had in its small,
independent school district, and that the community valued the library. Although his
library saw far more reconsideration cases than any other in the study, he expressed faith
in the selection policy and reconsideration committee, and pointed out that the people that
challenged materials represented only a small fraction of the community, which was still
largely supportive of the library. Librarians with sparse LGBTQ collections also pointed
to community values and support to explain the low numbers of LGBTQ materials. The
library aide at Pullman High School lamented the complete lack of support for the
libraries in her school, while the librarians at Bradbury and Hopkins High Schools
mentioned that the strong conservative values in their small rural location created a rather
hostile climate for LGBTQ-themed materials.
Large Minority Population. The statistical analyses performed earlier in the study
showed a strong positive correlation between diverse student bodies (as demonstrated by
percentage of minority students on the ODE State Report Card) and more LGBTQfriendly library collections. The library demographics for the libraries studied in the third
phase definitely supported that finding, as all of the schools who held strong LGBTQ
collections had a significant minority populations (with one exception), while three of the
four schools with sparse LGBTQ collections had almost no minority populations.
Perhaps it stands to reason that schools with students representing a variety of ethnicities
would need a variety of books; Ms. Montag of Bradbury School actually justified her
lack of LGBTQ diversity in her collection due to her perception that there were no
LGBTQ students in her school, pointing out that she also doesn’t buy books with African
American characters because they don’t have any black students, either. Conversely, Mr.
Bethune from Crutcher High School maintains a very diverse collection, even though his
students are almost 90% white. He points out that not all students are the same as the
majority, and that their needs are important, too. He also made the very valid point that
sometimes we read beyond our own experiences, and that is how we learn.
Large Student Enrollment. The strongest statistical correlation during the second phase
was the positive relationship between large student bodies and diverse LGBTQ
collections. This link was strongly supported by the demographics of the schools studied
in the third phase, as all eight schools with strong LGBTQ collections had at least 650
students, while three of the four schools with weaker LGBTQ collections had less than
330 students in the entire high school. Those three schools were also K-12 schools,
meaning that their school was generally the only school in the district, and while there
was some distinction between the elementary and high school collections, in many cases
the district maintained a single library for all the students from kindergarten through
43

twelfth grade. It is likely that the constant presence of younger students caused some
trepidation on the part of the librarian when it came to purchasing books targeted only to
more mature students.
Funding. Student poverty was not found to correlate to either the presence or lack of
LGBTQ-themed books in the library. However, the level of student poverty does not
always reflect a school district’s financial situation and how much money is available to
fund the libraries. I was surprised to find that the level of funding that the librarians
received in their annual budget did not seem to play a role in whether or not the librarian
purchased LGBTQ-themed materials. I expected that librarians with limited funds might
be so judicious with their meager dollars that they might avoid controversial titles, while
libraries with money to spare would put those extra dollars to use creating a large,
diverse, comprehensive collection. That expectation was not supported by the data
gathered in the interviews. For instance, the most generously funded library (i.e.,
Bradbury High) employed a librarian who proudly censored the collection, while many
sparsely funded school libraries (e.g. Rowling High, Garden High, Sanchez High) still
managed to have some diversity in the shelves. And in some cases, libraries with diverse
LGBTQ collections had generous budgets while their less diverse counterparts had very
small ones. The development of a diverse collection seemed to have more to do with the
librarian’s commitment to building one and the community’s decision to support the
library than how much or how little funding the library receives.
Outliers
One library in each of the two categories deviated from the norm quite a bit. Levithan
High School’s demographics (nearly two thousand students with over a third minority located in
a blue county and boasting a certified librarian) suggest that the library collection would be
diverse. Additionally, the librarian spoke valiantly about his beliefs that students should have the
right to select what they read, and proudly affirmed that his library owned several LGBTQthemed novels. The disparity between what the quantitative data revealed (only 2 of the LGBTQ
titles but 20 control titles; Rasch scores of 414.5 for LGBTQ and 804.71 Control) and what one
would expect from the librarian’s responses was so great that I actually double-checked the data
by accessing the library’s OPAC and searching again for the titles on the two lists. After I
confirmed that the data gathered in January was indeed accurate, I was left to ponder the
inconsistency. One possibility is that Mr. Paul was responding like a “good librarian,” keeping
in mind the tenets of the profession and giving me the answers he perceived to be “correct.”
This is a common phenomenon in survey research, which is one reason I opted to do a mixed
methods study in which both quantitative and qualitative data combine for a complete story.
Another possible scenario is that he considers his collection to be “diverse” if it includes multiple
genres and features a variety of ethnicities, even if it is nearly devoid of LGBTQ materials. It is
probable that he never considered the LGBTQ population when selecting materials.
The other mismatched school library was the one at Myracle High School, which has a
relatively small student body in a rural area of a conservative county and is managed by an
educational assistant, but had a fairly robust LGBTQ collection (14 LGBTQ titles and 19 Control
titles; Rasch scores of 730.32 for LGBTQ and 730.32 for Control). However, this district was
unique in that for several years it has employed public librarians to serve as district librarians.
44

These district librarians were fully responsible for selection in their libraries, so unlike many
school libraries staffed by educational aides, Myracle High’s books were actually selected by
people trained in selection and well versed in ALA’s Library Bill of Rights.
Conceptualizing Censorship
Each of the 12 librarians had a slightly different philosophy about collection. Some
librarians were extremely liberal and felt that students should have access to pretty much
anything. The school librarians at Green and Garden High schools willingly purchased pretty
much anything their students asked for, with full confidence in both their community and
administrative support and belief in their selection policies. The former public librarian who
oversaw the library at Myracle High school based her beliefs about student access to information
on her experience in public libraries. Others admittedly walked the line, such as Kyla Meeks at
Sanchez High School who expressed concern with books containing profanity and other
potentially objectionable material, and promoted use of the public library to avoid purchasing
such books herself. However, the Sanchez library still owned a great deal of controversial
books, which suggests that Ms. Meeks still has a pretty liberal professional opinion about what is
age appropriate for high school students. Ms. Streit is aware of her tendency to censorship in the
Hopkins High library, which she attributes partly to having to ask individually for everything she
wants to buy, but primarily due to her principal’s specific command that she not purchase
LGBTQ materials for the library. Ms. Streit does recognize that her unwillingness to purchase
the items amounts to censorship, but justifies her actions as necessary to keep her job, believing
that from within can she slowly effect change. Finally, Ms. Montag shared the most
conservative perspective toward collection development, believing that only materials that
reflected her community’s very limited experience were appropriate for her students. She
considered her choices to be part of selection, and not that of censorship.

45

Chapter 7: Analysis of the Instrument
Validity
The credibility of this study hinges on the validity of the measurement instrument. The
two lists of books against which the library collections were measured were developed over
several months with considerable consultation with other librarians and book experts. The
resulting list of high quality, LGBTQ-themed books included some of the most important books
written for young adults in the past few years. The addition of a control list was vital as it
separated librarians who were not selecting any controversial books from those who were buying
controversial titles but may or may not have been purchasing LGBTQ-themed titles. The ability
of the instrument to distinguish which libraries fell into which categories suggests that it was
indeed an effective instrument. However, if I were to replicate this experiment, I would probably
make some minor changes.
As carefully as the titles were selected for the list, I still found myself reconsidering
several titles once the project was underway. Some titles were found in very few schools, which
made me wonder if the book was truly objectionable, or if it was simply not a recognizable title.
In order to conclude that a librarian is deliberately not purchasing a book because it is an
LGBTQ-themed title, it is necessary to believe that the librarian has the information to know
which titles have LGBTQ content. During the interviews, all of the librarians claimed to use
selection tools (professional journals with book descriptions and reviews) and read reviews
carefully, and rarely is the existence of significant LGBTQ-content not included in a book
review, particularly if such content is germane to the plot. Still, not every librarian reads every
journal, so it’s still possible that some of these titles were simply unfamiliar. To test this theory,
I conducted a very unscientific experiment in which I created a Google Form listing all of the
titles and invited librarians and other book aficionados on the OELMA listserv and on my
Facebook friends list (which consists primarily of librarians, teachers, authors and rabid readers)
to take the survey, which asked them to identify if each of the 56 titles listed alphabetically had
LGBTQ content, did not have LGBTQ content, or if they were unfamiliar with the book. Of my
convenience sample of 37 respondents, 27 were librarians, 1 was an educational aide who
worked in a library, 6 were teachers and 3 simply identified as “fans of YA.” I was pleasantly
surprised that for most of the books, the respondents correctly identified which books had
LGBTQ content and which did not. I also confirmed my suspicions in that seven titles listed had
a very high number of respondents claim that they were unfamiliar with the novel; not
surprisingly, these were the same seven titles that were owned by fewer than 10 of the 120
library collections searched. This informal survey suggests that more attention might need to be
given to a future instrument to ensure that the librarians are familiar with the titles. Only then
can we be fully convinced that librarians are deliberately selecting and rejecting LGBTQ-themed
books. That said, the majority of the titles were very familiar to my convenience sample, and
during the interview process, the librarians I spoke to all seemed to be very aware of
contemporary LGBTQ titles, so I do not believe that the seven unfamiliar titles had a detrimental
impact on the study.
What type of content is most objectionable?
When the titles on the lists were given Rasch scores based on their adoptability, and
placed in order from most often obtained by school libraries to least purchased, I became curious
46

as to which types of controversial content librarians seemed to prefer or avoid. For the LGBTQ
books, I considered the LGBTQ content. A very brief summary of the LGBTQ content included
in the novels is described in Table 7.1:

47

Table 7.1
LGBTQ Content of LGBTQ List Titles
Title
Crutcher, Chris. Athletic Shorts.
Chbosky, Stephen. The Perks of Being a Wallflower.
Plum-Ucci, Carol. What Happened to Lani Garver?
Sones, Sonia. one of those hideous books where the
mother dies.
Green, John and David Leviathan. Will Grayson, Will
Grayson.
Bray, Libba. Beauty Queens.

Rasch
Measure
-3.29
-2.72
-1.19
-1.19

LGBTQ Content

-1.04

Gay parents
Gay best friend
Gender issues
Gay parent

Hopkins, Ellen. Tricks.

-0.67

Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind.
Myracle, Lauren. Shine.
Beam, Cris. I am J.
Peters, Julie Anne. Luna.
Going, K. L. King of the Screw-ups.
Hyde, Catherine Ryan. Becoming Chloe.
Hartringer, Brent. The Geography Club.
Ferris, Jean. Eight Seconds.
Cohn, Rachel and David Levithan. Naomi and Eli’s
No Kiss List.
Lo, Malinda. Ash.
Levithan, David. Love is the Higher Law.
Moore, Perry. Hero.
Sanchez, Alex. Rainbow Boys.
Homes, A.M. Jack.
Reynolds, Marilyn. Love Rules.
Wittlinger, Ellen. Parrotfish.
Geerling, Marjetta. Fancy White Trash.
Hurwin, Davida Wils. Freaks and Revelations.
Peters, Julie Anne. Keeping You a Secret.
Johnson, Maureen. The Bermudez Triangle.
Klise, James. Love Drugged.

-0.55
-0.5
-0.12
-0.05
0.1
0.1
0.17
0.33
0.42

Gay main character,
Gay best friend
Lesbian, transgender,
bisexual
Gay characters,
prostitution
Lesbian main character
Gay best friend
Transgender
Transgender
Gay family member
Gay best friend
Gay main character
Gay main character
Gay main character

0.42
0.6
0.69
0.69
0.8
0.91
0.91
1.02
1.02
1.15
1.29
1.44

Lesbian main character
Gay main character
Gay main character
Gay main character
Gay parents
Lesbian best friend
Transgender
Gay best friend
Gay main character
Lesbian main character
Lesbian best friend
Gay main character

-0.72

The four most often purchased novels feature heterosexual main characters; the LGBTQ
characters are secondary characters whose sexuality impacts the main character in some manner.
The rest of the titles seemed to fall in random order; there seems to be no pattern that would
indicate that one “type” of LGBTQ (e.g. gay, lesbian, transgender) is any more objectionable
than any other. Rather, the ones that were more often selected were by well-known authors
48

(Crutcher, Green, Bray and Hopkins are generally respected by librarians) or had recently been
made into a movie (i.e. The Perks of Being a Wallflower). The evidence suggests that familiarity
with the author or the title influenced librarian selection more than the specific content.
The control list was comprised of titles that were controversial (identified as such by
being formally challenged in the past for one reason or another) but did not have LGBTQ
content. To look for possible clues as to why some of these titles were more popular with
librarians than others, I ordered these titles by their Rasch score and noted beside them the main
reason the books had been challenged in the past, which can be seen in Table 7.2.

49

Table 7.2
Common Reasons for Controversy for Control List
Title
Collins, Suzanne. The Hunger Games.
Meyer, Stephenie. Twilight.
Hinton, S.E. The Outsiders.
Anderson, Laurie Halse. Speak.
Lowry, Lois. The Giver.
Cormier, Robert. The Chocolate War.
Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Deathly
Hallows.
Dessen, Sarah. Just Listen.
Crutcher, Chris. Whale Talk.
Myers, Walter Dean. Fallen Angels.
Sebold, Alice. The Lovely Bones.
Pullman, Phillip. The Golden Compass.
Cooney, Caroline. The Face on the Milk Carton.
Greene, Bette. Summer of My German Soldier.
Asher, Jay. Thirteen Reasons Why.
Alexie, Sherman. The Absolutely True Diary of a
Part-Time Indian.
Going, K.L. Fat Kid Rules the World.
Duncan, Lois. Killing Mr. Griffin.
Collier, James Lincoln and Christopher Collier.
My Brother Sam is Dead.
Klause, Annette Curtis. Blood and Chocolate.
Rennison, Louise. Angus, Thongs and Full
Frontal Snogging.
Guterson, David. Snow Falling on Cedars.
Mackler, Carolyn. The Earth, My Butt, and Other
Big Round Things.
Sones, Sonya. What My Mother Doesn’t Know.
Blume, Judy. Tiger Eyes.
Myracle, Lauren. ttyl.
Reynolds, Marilyn. Detour for Emmy.
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Dangerously Alice.

Rasch
Measure
-2.99
-2.36
-2.21
-1.53
-1.44
-1.27
-0.98

Reason Controversial

-0.56
-0.51
-0.45
-0.45
-0.35
-0.1
-0.1
-0.01
0.17

Rape
Racism
Profanity, violence
Rape
Offensive to God
Disrespect of Authority
Racism, Religious Bigotry,
Domestic Violence
Suicide
Profanity, Violence

0.25
0.47
0.63

Suicide Attempt, Profanity
Murder of a Teacher
Violence

0.75
0.96

Violence
Suggestive title

1
1

Sexual Content
Sexual Content

1.03
1.12
1.86
2.49
3.59

Sexual Content
Sexual Content
Sexual Content
Sexual Content
Sexual Content

Violence
Violence
Gang Violence
Rape
Euthanasia, Utopia
Disrespect of Authority
Occult

Once again, the most adopted titles were those that had movie counterparts, which
definitely increases their demand among young readers. Most of these titles are by wellrespected authors, and only one of the titles was significantly underrepresented in library
50

collections. Nearly all of the titles were very familiar to the respondents of the informal survey,
and several of them were best sellers.
The most interesting finding when considering the common reasons given for objection
to the books is that librarians seem more comfortable with books containing violence, even rape,
than they do with books that contain sexual situations. For the titles in this list, “sexual content”
generally refers to heterosexual behavior, including intercourse, included in the novel. It is
interesting that every novel that had been challenged for “sexual content” is on the bottom of the
list. This can also help explain why many of the LGBTQ books are hard to adopt – books
dealing with sexuality generally have some degree of sexual content, and whether the sexual
content is heterosexual or queer, librarians seem to shy away from books that contain it. In other
words, for some librarians, it may not be the queerness, but rather the sexual content, that causes
concern.

51

Chapter 8: Discussion
This study has uncovered fascinating and useful knowledge about how librarians are
choosing whether or not to include LGBTQ materials in school libraries and the reasons behind
their decisions. It is my fervent hope that by unveiling discriminatory attitudes and practices, as
well as highlighting inclusive and beneficial collection development, meaningful change can be
effected.
Reflection
The first phase of the study revealed a wide disparity between library collections. While
some school libraries were clearly providing a significant number of materials with LGBTQ
content, the majority of the libraries possessed very few, and some none at all. This phase
produced quantitative evidence that the bulk of Ohio librarians who are purchasing controversial
books are still hesitant to buy materials with LGBTQ content.
Of the factors that were found during the second phase to correlate with increased
inclusion of LGBTQ materials (large student population, diverse student population, liberal
communities and library staff certified in library media), school districts have control over only
one factor: a certified librarian. However, the qualitative data showed that even in small, rural,
conservative districts, a certified librarian is sometimes the only apparent difference between a
well-balanced, diverse library collection and a limited one. Certified librarians are educated and
grounded in principles of equity, inclusion and access, and those principles are critical for
collection development.
However, all is not lost for school libraries located in small buildings, conservative areas
or racially homogenous communities. It became apparent from both the quantitative and
qualitative data that the influence of the “community” strongly impacted the library program in
both positive and negative ways. However, it is truly the perception of the librarian as to the
extent of community support for diverse and inclusive collections that seemed to make the
difference. While it may be easy to feel confident about selection choices when you teach in a
largely liberal, privileged community, as Ms. Spiegelman and Mr. Kenyon did, Mr. Bethune of
Crutcher High School also showed that even in a conservative county and in a community where
some tend to challenge library holdings frequently, a strong belief in the ethics of librarianship,
including equity of access, as well as a strong selection policy, can bolster a librarian’s courage
to continue to provide diverse materials for all students. Mr. Bethune reminded me during our
conversation that the vocal minority who object to library materials do not speak for the entire
community. It is important for school leaders to be aware of the voices within the community,
and to make sure that supportive community members are also heard.
Finally, 12 librarians shared their experiences and philosophies regarding selection and
censorship. Their narratives revealed a variety of interpretations regarding selection, ageappropriateness, censorship and access. The most salient variable with the most impact on
selection across the 12 librarians seemed to be administrative and community support; those who
felt supported seemed more comfortable with potentially controversial materials than did those
who felt stifled. All were very aware of their community’s collective values, although some were
willing to challenge the status quo, either overtly or subversively, while others acquiesced. The
existence and use of a quality district selection and reconsideration policy was also found to be
important. While more restrictive librarians seemed to view it as a mandate to exclude certain
52

titles, the librarians with more inclusive collections tended to regard the selection policy as a
safeguard against censorship, knowing that a procedure is in place to protect controversial books
from arbitrary removal.
Limitations
As with all studies, this project does have some limitations. The instrument, two
carefully selected lists of titles, is limited. Whenever choices are made to include some books
and exclude others, some quality titles will be overlooked. It is possible that libraries could have
LGBTQ-friendly holdings that are not acknowledged by this study. Also, these lists measure
Young Adult fiction only. School libraries with quality LGBTQ nonfiction resources would not
be recognized. Although there was an attempt to control for other variables, including budget
issues, it is possible that the controls did not effectively neutralize them.
Moving Forward
Librarians and other school leaders committed to creating a more inclusive and inviting
environment for all of their students, but especially for those who identify as LGBTQ, would
serve their students well to develop a diverse school library collection that includes high quality
materials with LGBTQ content. This study has shown that the presence of a school librarian
certified in library media, paired with a supportive administration, encourages such welcoming
library collections and environments. It has also shown the impact of the local community on
library collections, and how the librarian’s perception of the political and ideological bent of the
local area can color selection decisions. School leaders, working within the community, should
make certain that positive, supportive voices are heard, while librarians must ensure that the
entire school community can be served by the library collection. School- and community-based
support groups, such as GSA clubs, also help LGBTQ students feel valued and supported. The
literature shows that supportive school environments discourage bullying and encourage students
to become allies, and that LGBTQ-themed literature can be a lifesaver to young LGBTQ
students.
This study reveals the overwhelming need to improve Ohio’s school library collections.
There are already some schools with outstanding library collections and library professionals in
place. Now is the time for school leaders to emulate those schools and commit to a strong and
inclusive library media collection.

53

References
About Rainbow Books. (n.d.). Rainbow Books. Retrieved November 18, 2013, from
http://glbtrt.ala.org/rainbowbooks/about
Alexander, L. B., & Miselis, S. D. (2007). Barriers to LGBTQ collection development and
strategies for overcoming them. Young Adult Library Services, 5(3), 43-49.
American Library Association. (2011). Frequently challenged books. Retreived April 28, 2011
from http://www.ala.org/ala/issuesadvocacy/banned/frequentlychallenged/index.cfm
Archived Reports. (n.d.). Ohio School Report Cards. Retrieved March 1, 2014, from
http://reportcard.education.ohio.gov/Pages/Archives.aspx
Bellows, N. K. 2005. Measuring self-censorship in school media centers. Master‘s diss., Univ. of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Retrieved from SIL Electronic Theses and Dissertations
(accessed Aug. 22, 2005) .
Bengtson, V. L. (2005). Sourcebook of family theory & research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Benton, T., & Craib, I. (2011). Philosophy of social science: the philosophical foundations of
social thought (2nd ed., 10th anniversary ed.). Houndsmill, Basingstoke, Hampshire:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Berlant, L., & Warner, M. (1998). Sex in public. Critical Inquiry, 24(2, Intimacy), pp. 547-566.
Burke, S. K. (2008). Removal of gay-themed materials from public libraries: Public opinion
trends, 1973-2006. Public Library Quarterly, 27(3), 247-264.
Burress, L. (1989). Battle of the books: Literary censorship in the public schools, 1950-1985.
Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press.
Cart, M., & Jenkins, C. (2006). The heart has its reasons: Young adult literature with gay
lesbian queer content, 1969-2004. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press.
Clyde, L. A., & Lobban, M. (2001). A door half open: Young people's access to fiction related to
homosexuality. School Libraries Worldwide, 7(2), 17-30.
Coley, K. (2002). Moving towards a method to test for self-censorship by school library media
specialists. School Library Media Research 5. <www.ala.org> (accessed Aug. 9, 2013).
Cook, J. C. (2004). LGBTQ teen literature: Is it out there in Indiana? Indiana
Libraries. 23(2) 25-28.
Day, F. A. (2000). Lesbian and gay voices: An annotated bibliography and guide to literature
for children and young adults. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
DePalma, R., & Atkinson, E. (2009). Interrogating heteronormativity in primary schools: The
work of the No Outsiders project. Stoke-on-Trent, UK; Sterling, VA: Trentham.
54

Esposito, J. (2009). We're here, we're queer, but we're just like heterosexuals: A cultural studies
analysis of lesbian themed children's books. Educational Foundations, 23(3-4), 61-78.
Ferfolja, T. (2007). Schooling cultures: Institutionalizing heteronormativity and heterosexism.
International Journal of Inclusive Education, 11(2), 147-162.
Freedman, L. & Johnson, H. (2001) Who’s protecting whom? I hadn’t meant to tell
you this, a case in point in confronting self-censorship in the choice of young
adult literature. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy. 44( 3) 56-69.
Gough, C. & Greenblatt, E. (1998). Gay and lesbian library materials: A book selector’s toolkit.
Acquisitions Librarian, 20(1) 151-170.
Jagose, A. (1996). Queer theory: an introduction. New York: New York University Press.
Jennings, K. (2006). Librarians make a difference. Knowledge Quest, 34(5), 22-22.
Keeves, J. P., & Alagumalai, S. (2005). Applied Rasch measurement: A book of exemplars:
papers in honour of John P. Keeves. (Springer e-books.) Dordrect: Springer.
Kosciw, J. G. (2004). The 2003 National School Climate Survey: The school-related experiences
of our nations lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth. New York: GLSEN.
Leckey, R., & Brooks, K. (2010). Queer theory: law, culture, empire. Abingdon, Oxon:
Routledge.
Lester, N. A. (2007). (Un)happily ever after: Fairy tale morals, moralities, and heterosexism in
children's texts. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education, 4(2), 55-74.
Limited shelf life. (2010). School Library Journal, 56(7), 15-15.
Luhmann, S. (1998). Queering/quering pedagogy? Or, pedagogy is a pretty queer thing. In W.
Pinar (Ed) Queer theory in education (pp. 141-155). Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum
Associates.
Manfredi, A. (2009). Accept the universal freak show. Young Adult Library Services, 7(4), 2631.
Martin, H. J. (2006). A library outing: Serving queer and questioning teens. Young Adult Library
Services, 4(4), 38-39.
Maycock, A. (2011). Issues and trends in intellectual freedom for teacher librarians: Where
we’ve come from and where we’re heading. Teacher Librarian 39(1) 8-12.
Moody, K. (2004) Censorship by Queensland public librarians: Philosophy and practice.
Australian Public Libraries and Information Services. 17(1) 168-85.
Oder, N. (2005). Oklahoma legislators urge limits on kid's books with gay themes. No.
130).Library Journals, LLC.
55

Paul, A. M. (2012, March 17). Your brain on fiction. The New York Times. Retrieved August 2,
2013, from http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/18/opinion/sunday/the-neuroscience-ofyour-brain-on-fiction.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0
Pinar, W. (1998). Queer theory in education. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Quantz, R. (2013a). EDL 775: Theoretical foundations of educational inquiry, written lecture
#3: on interpretive discourses. [Class handout]. Department of Educational Leadership,
Miami University, Oxford, Ohio.
Quantz, R. (2013b). EDL 775: Theoretical foundations of educational inquiry, written lecture
#4: on critical discourses. [Class handout]. Department of Educational Leadership,
Miami University, Oxford, Ohio.
Rauch, E. W. (2011). GLBTQ collections are for every library serving teens! Teacher Librarian
39 (1) 13-16.
Reichman, H. (2001). Censorship and selection: Issues and answers for schools (3rd ed.).
Chicago: American Library Association.
Rowell, E. H. (2007). Missing!: Picture books reflecting gay and lesbian families. Young
Children, 62(3), 24-26.
Sadowski, M. J. (1994). Anti-gay amendment to ESEA would restrict school libraries. School
Library Journal, 40(9), 115.
Sanelli, M. (2001). 'I could be anybody': Gay, lesbian, and bisexual students in U.S. schools.
NASSP Bulletin, 85(622), 69.
Smolkin, L. B., & Young, C. A. (2011). Missing mirrors, missing windows: Children's literature
textbooks and LGBT topics. Language Arts, 88(3), 217-225.
Teddlie, C., & Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of mixed methods research: integrating
quantitative and qualitative approaches in the social and behavioral sciences. Los
Angeles: SAGE.
Toomey, R. B., McGuire, J. K., & Russell, S. T., (2012). Heteronormativity, school climates, and
perceived safety for gender nonconforming peers. Journal of Adolescence, 35187-196.
Typology of Ohio School Districts. (n.d.). Ohio Department of Education. Retrieved November
18, 2013, from http://education.ohio.gov/Topics/Data/Frequently-RequestedData/Typology-of-Ohio-School-Districts
Warner, M. (1993). Introduction. In M. Warner (Ed.), Fear of a queer planet. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Whelan, D. L. (2006). OUT and ignored. School Library Journal, 52(1), 46-50.
Whelan, D. L. (2009a). A dirty little secret. (cover story). School Library Journal, 55(2), 26-30.
Whelan, D. L. (2009b). SLJ self-censorship survey. School Library Journal. Retrieved April 22,
2011, from http://www.schoollibraryjournal.com/article/CA6633729.html

56

Appendix I: Young Adult Books with Prominent LGBTQ Themes (The LGBTQ List)
Beam, Cris. I am J. New York: Little, Brown. 2011
Bray, Libba. Beauty Queens. New York: Scholastic Press, 2011.
Chbosky, Stephen. The Perks of Being a Wallflower. New York: Pocket Books, 1999.
Cohn, Rachel and David Levithan. Naomi and Eli’s No Kiss List. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
2007
Crutcher, Chris. Athletic Shorts. New York: Greenwillow, 1991.
Ferris, Jean. Eight Seconds. New York: Harcourt, 2000.
Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1982.
Geerling, Marjetta. Fancy White Trash. New York: Viking, 2008.
Going, K. L. King of the Screw-ups. New York: Harcourt/Houghton Mifflin, 2009.
Green, John and David Levithan. Will Grayson, Will Grayson. New York: Speak, 2010.
Hartringer, Brent. The Geography Club. New York: HarperCollins, 2003.
Homes, A.M. Jack. New York, Macmillan, 1989.
Hopkins, Ellen. Tricks. New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books, 2009.
Hurwin, Davida Wils. Freaks and Revelations. New York: Little, Brown, 2009.
Hyde, Catherine Ryan. Becoming Chloe. New York: Knopf, 2006.
Johnson, Maureen. The Bermudez Triangle. New York: Razorbill/Penguin, 2004.
Klise, James. Love Drugged. Woodbury, MN: Flux, 2010.
Levithan, David. Love is the Higher Law. New York: Knopf, 2009.
Lo, Malinda. Ash. New York: Little, Brown, 2009.
Moore, Perry. Hero. New York: Disney/Hyperion, 2007.
Myracle, Lauren. Shine. New York, Abrams, 2011.
Peters, Julie Anne. Keeping You a Secret. Boston: Little, Brown, 2003.
Peters, Julie Anne. Luna. Boston: Little, Brown, 2004.
Plum-Ucci, Carol. What Happened to Lani Garver? New York: Harcourt, 2002.
Reynolds, Marilyn. Love Rules. Buena Park, CA: Morning Glory Press, 2001.
57

Sanchez, Alex. Rainbow Boys. New York: Simon & Shuster, 2001.
Sones, Sonia. one of those hideous books where the mother dies. New York: Simon & Shuster,
2004.
Wittlinger, Ellen. Parrotfish. New York: Simon & Shuster, 2007.

58

Appendix II: Popular Young Adult Novels Commonly Found in High School Libraries
(The Control List)
Alexie, Sherman. The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian. New York: Little, Brown,
2009.
Anderson, Laurie Halse. Speak. New York: Puffin Books, 1999.
Asher, Jay. Thirteen Reasons Why. New York: Razorbill, 2007.
Blume, Judy. Tiger Eyes. New York: Dell, 1981.
Collier, James Lincoln and Christopher Collier. My Brother Sam is Dead. 1974
Collins, Suzanne. The Hunger Games. New York: Scholastic, 2008.
Cooney, Caroline. The Face on the Milk Carton. New York: Bantam, 1990.
Cormier, Robert. The Chocolate War. New York: Bantam, 1974.
Crutcher, Chris. Whale Talk. New York: Greenwillow, 2001.
Dessen, Sarah. Just Listen. New York: Speak, 2008.
Duncan, Lois. Killing Mr. Griffin. New York: Little, Brown, 1978.
Going, K.L. Fat Kid Rules the World. New York: Speak, 2003.
Greene, Bette. Summer of My German Soldier. New York: Puffin, 1973.
Guterson, David. Snow Falling on Cedars. New York: Vintage Books, 1995.
Hinton, S.E. The Outsiders. New York: Viking Press, 1967.
Klause, Annette Curtis. Blood and Chocolate. New York: Delacorte Press, 1997.
Lowry, Lois. The Giver. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1993.
Mackler, Carolyn. The Earth, My Butt, and Other Big Round Things. Cambridge, MA:
Candlewick Press, 2003.
Meyer, Stephenie. Twilight. New York: Little, Brown, 2005.
Myers, Walter Dean. Fallen Angels. New York: HarperCollins,.
Myracle, Lauren. ttyl. New York: Amulet Books, 2004.
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Dangerously Alice. New York: Simon Pulse, 2006.
Pullman, Phillip. The Golden Compass. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995.
Rennison, Louise. Angus, Thongs and Full Frontal Snogging. New York: Harper Collins, 1999.
59

Reynolds, Marilyn. Detour for Emmy. Buena Park, CA: Morning Glory Press, 1993.
Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. New York: Scholastic,.
Sebold, Alice. The Lovely Bones. Boston: Little, Brown, 2002.
Sones, Sonya. What My Mother Doesn’t Know. New York: Simon Pulse, 2001.

60

Appendix III: The Freedom to Read Statement
The freedom to read is essential to our democracy. It is continuously under attack. Private
groups and public authorities in various parts of the country are working to remove or limit
access to reading materials, to censor content in schools, to label "controversial" views, to
distribute lists of "objectionable" books or authors, and to purge libraries. These actions
apparently rise from a view that our national tradition of free expression is no longer valid; that
censorship and suppression are needed to counter threats to safety or national security, as well as
to avoid the subversion of politics and the corruption of morals. We, as individuals devoted to
reading and as librarians and publishers responsible for disseminating ideas, wish to assert the
public interest in the preservation of the freedom to read.
Most attempts at suppression rest on a denial of the fundamental premise of democracy:
that the ordinary individual, by exercising critical judgment, will select the good and reject the
bad. We trust Americans to recognize propaganda and misinformation, and to make their own
decisions about what they read and believe. We do not believe they are prepared to sacrifice their
heritage of a free press in order to be "protected" against what others think may be bad for them.
We believe they still favor free enterprise in ideas and expression.
These efforts at suppression are related to a larger pattern of pressures being brought
against education, the press, art and images, films, broadcast media, and the Internet. The
problem is not only one of actual censorship. The shadow of fear cast by these pressures leads,
we suspect, to an even larger voluntary curtailment of expression by those who seek to avoid
controversy or unwelcome scrutiny by government officials.
Such pressure toward conformity is perhaps natural to a time of accelerated change. And
yet suppression is never more dangerous than in such a time of social tension. Freedom has given
the United States the elasticity to endure strain. Freedom keeps open the path of novel and
creative solutions, and enables change to come by choice. Every silencing of a heresy, every
enforcement of an orthodoxy, diminishes the toughness and resilience of our society and leaves it
the less able to deal with controversy and difference.
Now as always in our history, reading is among our greatest freedoms. The freedom to
read and write is almost the only means for making generally available ideas or manners of
expression that can initially command only a small audience. The written word is the natural
medium for the new idea and the untried voice from which come the original contributions to
social growth. It is essential to the extended discussion that serious thought requires, and to the
accumulation of knowledge and ideas into organized collections.
We believe that free communication is essential to the preservation of a free society and a
creative culture. We believe that these pressures toward conformity present the danger of
limiting the range and variety of inquiry and expression on which our democracy and our culture
depend. We believe that every American community must jealously guard the freedom to publish
and to circulate, in order to preserve its own freedom to read. We believe that publishers and
librarians have a profound responsibility to give validity to that freedom to read by making it
possible for the readers to choose freely from a variety of offerings.
61

The freedom to read is guaranteed by the Constitution. Those with faith in free people
will stand firm on these constitutional guarantees of essential rights and will exercise the
responsibilities that accompany these rights.
We therefore affirm these propositions:
1. It is in the public interest for publishers and librarians to make available the widest
diversity of views and expressions, including those that are unorthodox, unpopular, or
considered dangerous by the majority.
Creative thought is by definition new, and what is new is different. The bearer of every
new thought is a rebel until that idea is refined and tested. Totalitarian systems attempt to
maintain themselves in power by the ruthless suppression of any concept that challenges the
established orthodoxy. The power of a democratic system to adapt to change is vastly
strengthened by the freedom of its citizens to choose widely from among conflicting opinions
offered freely to them. To stifle every nonconformist idea at birth would mark the end of the
democratic process. Furthermore, only through the constant activity of weighing and selecting
can the democratic mind attain the strength demanded by times like these. We need to know not
only what we believe but why we believe it.
2. Publishers, librarians, and booksellers do not need to endorse every idea or presentation
they make available. It would conflict with the public interest for them to establish their
own political, moral, or aesthetic views as a standard for determining what should be
published or circulated.
Publishers and librarians serve the educational process by helping to make available
knowledge and ideas required for the growth of the mind and the increase of learning. They do
not foster education by imposing as mentors the patterns of their own thought. The people should
have the freedom to read and consider a broader range of ideas than those that may be held by
any single librarian or publisher or government or church. It is wrong that what one can read
should be confined to what another thinks proper.
3. It is contrary to the public interest for publishers or librarians to bar access to writings
on the basis of the personal history or political affiliations of the author.
No art or literature can flourish if it is to be measured by the political views or private lives
of its creators. No society of free people can flourish that draws up lists of writers to whom it
will not listen, whatever they may have to say.
4. There is no place in our society for efforts to coerce the taste of others, to confine adults
to the reading matter deemed suitable for adolescents, or to inhibit the efforts of writers
to achieve artistic expression.
To some, much of modern expression is shocking. But is not much of life itself shocking?
We cut off literature at the source if we prevent writers from dealing with the stuff of life.
Parents and teachers have a responsibility to prepare the young to meet the diversity of
experiences in life to which they will be exposed, as they have a responsibility to help them learn
to think critically for themselves. These are affirmative responsibilities, not to be discharged
62

simply by preventing them from reading works for which they are not yet prepared. In these
matters values differ, and values cannot be legislated; nor can machinery be devised that will suit
the demands of one group without limiting the freedom of others.
5. It is not in the public interest to force a reader to accept the prejudgment of a label
characterizing any expression or its author as subversive or dangerous.
The ideal of labeling presupposes the existence of individuals or groups with wisdom to
determine by authority what is good or bad for others. It presupposes that individuals must be
directed in making up their minds about the ideas they examine. But Americans do not need
others to do their thinking for them.
6. It is the responsibility of publishers and librarians, as guardians of the people's freedom
to read, to contest encroachments upon that freedom by individuals or groups seeking to
impose their own standards or tastes upon the community at large; and by the
government whenever it seeks to reduce or deny public access to public information.
It is inevitable in the give and take of the democratic process that the political, the moral, or
the aesthetic concepts of an individual or group will occasionally collide with those of another
individual or group. In a free society individuals are free to determine for themselves what they
wish to read, and each group is free to determine what it will recommend to its freely associated
members. But no group has the right to take the law into its own hands, and to impose its own
concept of politics or morality upon other members of a democratic society. Freedom is no
freedom if it is accorded only to the accepted and the inoffensive. Further, democratic societies
are more safe, free, and creative when the free flow of public information is not restricted by
governmental prerogative or self-censorship.
7. It is the responsibility of publishers and librarians to give full meaning to the freedom to
read by providing books that enrich the quality and diversity of thought and expression.
By the exercise of this affirmative responsibility, they can demonstrate that the answer to
a "bad" book is a good one, the answer to a "bad" idea is a good one.
The freedom to read is of little consequence when the reader cannot obtain matter fit for that
reader's purpose. What is needed is not only the absence of restraint, but the positive provision of
opportunity for the people to read the best that has been thought and said. Books are the major
channel by which the intellectual inheritance is handed down, and the principal means of its
testing and growth. The defense of the freedom to read requires of all publishers and librarians
the utmost of their faculties, and deserves of all Americans the fullest of their support.
We state these propositions neither lightly nor as easy generalizations. We here stake out a
lofty claim for the value of the written word. We do so because we believe that it is possessed of
enormous variety and usefulness, worthy of cherishing and keeping free. We realize that the
application of these propositions may mean the dissemination of ideas and manners of
expression that are repugnant to many persons. We do not state these propositions in the
comfortable belief that what people read is unimportant. We believe rather that what people read
is deeply important; that ideas can be dangerous; but that the suppression of ideas is fatal to a
democratic society. Freedom itself is a dangerous way of life, but it is ours.
63

This statement was originally issued in May of 1953 by the Westchester Conference of
the American Library Association and the American Book Publishers Council, which in 1970
consolidated with the American Educational Publishers Institute to become the Association of
American Publishers.
Adopted June 25, 1953, by the ALA Council and the AAP Freedom to Read
Committee; amended January 28, 1972; January 16, 1991; July 12, 2000; June 30, 2004.
A Joint Statement by: American Library Association and Association of American Publishers

64

