THE URBAN MESSENGER: THE GROWTH OF THE ST. LOUIS PUBLIC LIBRARY, 18701930

by
Matthew Nichols
B.A., Ball State University, 2011

A Thesis
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the
Master of Arts in History

Department of History
in the Graduate School
Southern Illinois University Carbondale
August 2014

UMI Number: 1566950

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1566950
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

THESIS APPROVAL

THE URBAN MESSENGER: THE GROWTH OF THE ST. LOUIS PUBLIC LIBRARY, 1870-1930

By
Matthew Nichols

A Thesis Submitted in Partial
Fulfillment of the Requirements
for the Degree of
Master of Arts
in the field of History

Approved by:
Dr. Jonathan Bean, Chair
Dr. Kay Carr
Dr. Ras Michael Brown

Graduate School
Southern Illinois University Carbondale
June 19, 2014

AN ABSTRACT OF THE THESIS OF
MATTHEW NICHOLS, for the Master of Arts degree in HISTORY, presented on JUNE 19,
2014, at Southern Illinois University Carbondale.
TITLE: THE URBAN MESSENGER: THE GROWTH OF THE ST. LOUIS PUBLIC
LIBRARY, 1870-1930
MAJOR PROFESSOR: Dr. Jonathan Bean
Between the late nineteenth century and the early twentieth century, drastic changes were
made to the structure, organization, and purpose of libraries throughout the United States. The St.
Louis Public Library was no exception, beginning as a public school library during the 1860s.
Between 1870 and 1930, the foundations were established for the St. Louis Public Library to
become a modern American library through the efforts of administrators such as Frederick
Crunden, Arthur Bostwick, and Effie Power, among others. This project seeks to examine the St.
Louis Public Library as a case study of library development across the United States, and how it,
as a Progressive institution, sought to inculcate a love of readership and education and therefore
democratize the availability of books and other materials for the advancement of all.

i

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The creation of a work of scholarship is a highly collaborative process, and as is the case
with every monograph, dissertation, or thesis, this Master‟s thesis could not have been written
without the assistance of several key figures along the way. Renee Jones and the staff of the St.
Louis Public Library Archives were immensely helpful, providing friendly guidance, advice, and
professionalism without which the necessary information could not have been obtained. They
truly did, and continue to do, the lasting legacy of Frederick Crunden, Arthur Bostwick, their
administrative descendents and librarianship in general, a great service.
Ann Marie Wieland is another such figure, whose assistance with the collection of
materials relating to Effie Power and her initial years of librarianship at the Cleveland Public
Library proved to be a great help in terms of shaping her story and how she helped the St. Louis
Public Library to serve children as well as adults. Again, she is one of many who continue to
make librarianship the important profession it is.
I would also like to thank the professors who have played a significant role in my
development as a scholar up to this point, namely Drs. Abel Alves, Sviatoslav Dmitriev, Scott
Stephan, Jonathan Bean, Holly Hurlburt, Peter Argersinger, and Robbie Lieberman, whose
advice and guidance have helped me to become a better researcher and writer. Last but not least,
I would like to thank my friends and family, who have encouraged and inspired me to keep going
even when things were at their darkest. Thank you all.

ii

PREFACE
In November of 1926, an article was published in Libraries, an academic periodical with
a specific focus on the development of libraries across the United States. The article, titled “The
Library and the Child,” examines the relationship of the library to its patrons, regardless of
whether they are adults or children. The article, written by librarian Arthur E. Bostwick,
provided librarians and interested readers with a survey of his experiences with the Children‟s
Department during his tenure at the St. Louis Public Library. In catering to children, the library
had undergone a significant expansion in terms of its ideology and mission. Alongside their
service to adults, children were instilled with a love of reading and education early in their lives,
which they would carry with them into adulthood and subsequently teach to their own children.
One of the most important aspects of Bostwick‟s article, however, is not just his survey,
nor his prognosis for further development in library service to children. It is in the way he
outlines the difference between the older libraries and those immediately prior to the stock
market crash in 1929. “The old fashioned library,” he wrote, “is little more than the arboreal
ancestor of the modern institution. Perhaps the change may be summed up by saying that in the
old library the book was a record, to be preserved; in the new, it is a message, to be
proclaimed.” 1
Novels, histories, biographies, science pamphlets, newspapers – all were and still are
forms of expression that carry individual messages that appeal to different people. The aim of the
library as an urban messenger was to function not just as a repository where rare books could be
preserved, but as a place where adult workers and children in a newly ascendant middle class
could go to meetings of local organizations, conduct research, listen to public readings or stories
being told if they were children, and read what suited their interest. Steven Roger Fischer, the
1

Arthur E. Bostwick, “The Library and the Child,” Libraries 31, No. 9 (1926): 442.

iii

former director of the Institute of Polynesian Languages and Literatures and prolific author of
works on language, writing, and reading, speaks of the presence of multiple copies of single
books as a democratizing influence. Where the ownership of books was once a signifier of great
wealth and education, the availability of several copies at once “became intellectual property,
something to be „owned‟ and shared with like-minded book possessors.” 2
In this light, librarians such as Arthur Bostwick and other like-minded intellectuals of the
period viewed the library as a democratizing influence intended to combat the ill effects of the
Industrial Revolution on cities and their populations, many of whom could not obtain a decent
education because of the time spent in the factories to support themselves or their families.
Progressivism, the disparate social movement made up of several different entities, was the
response to these ills, and libraries as bastions of education and readership were a byproduct of
that response. This is evident in the way libraries comport themselves in the present day. In
addition to books, libraries now house films, music, and video games. They also provide ample
opportunities for young entrepreneurs, musicians, writers, artists, and game designers to hone
their craft before embarking on their chosen careers. The St. Louis Public Library is no
exception.
When one examines it from the outside, it becomes clear how the St. Louis Public
Library, despite the surrounding buildings looming oppressively over it, became one of the
defining bastions of librarianship and education in the city whose name it bears. Ringed by dark
concrete and constructed of white marble and stone, the three-story central building stands as a
monument to several years of work on the parts of the librarians and administrators who worked

2

Steven Roger Fischer, A History of Reading (London: Reaktion Books, 2004), 206.

iv

within, one of whom is honored with a direct quote inscribed in the stone above the entryway for
new and current patrons alike to see.
The library, having reopened on December 9, 2012 after several months of remodeling, is
a marvel of aesthetic blending within. Technology mixes with old architecture in a mindboggling sluice, as one chamber defined by glass and the latest in technological innovation melds
into another constructed of restored mahogany wood and stone in its walls, tables, chairs, and
engraved symbols honoring education, literature, and literacy.
According to an article in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, the most drastic changes to occur
in the 2010-2012 renovation included the creation of over 40,000 additional square feet of public
space, a new auditorium containing 244 seats, new spaces for children and teenagers, and finally,
a “creativity lab” for patrons to create and edit personal videos, songs, and online games. The
latest in entertainment, namely films, video games, and music, can now be borrowed along with
tablets and laptops. Wireless communication enables seamless connections with the internet for
both patrons and the current librarians, who use it to communicate with the various branch
libraries in the city. 3
In an age that has thus far seen fit to retain the printed word, the St. Louis Public Library
contains the hallmarks of what constitutes a modern library in an age of high-speed connectivity
and communications. Consequently, when one thinks of its history, a deeper question arises:
aside from bringing education, literacy, and a love of reading to its patrons, what exactly
constituted a modern library over a century ago, and how did those who sought to construct and
develop these institutions attempt to reach their society‟s standards for them.

3

Jane Henderson, “Renovated Library Awes „Friends‟: Brighter, More Accessible Central Library Opens
Sunday,” The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, December 3, 2012.

v

In order to answer this question, it is necessary to step back a century to the actual
opening of the Central Building of the St. Louis Public Library, and glimpse the figures involved
in its creation and how they envisioned its future destiny in serving the population of St. Louis.
THE OPENING OF THE NEW LIBRARY
On January 6, 1912, a crowd of over eight hundred people gathered in the new Central
Library Building in St. Louis for its official dedication ceremony. After the initial introductory
remarks by George Carpenter, the President of the St. Louis Public Library‟s Board of Directors,
Dr. Herbert Putnam, the Librarian of Congress, read a speech focusing on the new building‟s
place in St. Louis society and the fabric of American society as a whole.
Putnam, a thin, balding man with piercing brown eyes and the immaculately curved
mustache of his time, had this to say regarding to the library:
…as to the function of public libraries there is after but three score years a substantial
agreement: just as there is such an agreement that they are so important to the community
as a whole that they should be maintained at the expense of the community as a whole;
that no charge, however small, shall stand between them and their service; that no citizen,
however poor, shall have the excuse of his poverty for neglecting them.4

Putnam‟s remarks are essentially a summation of the argument over public libraries as
they developed across the United States. Initially, libraries of varying backgrounds had charged
admission fees and membership dues that rendered them exclusive to the upper echelons of
society, barring entrance to the poorer elements as a result. By paying a local tax, the citizens of a
community contributed to the well-being and development of their libraries, and consequently
freed themselves from the yolk of the aforementioned fees and dues. In doing so, literacy,
education, and a love of readership could be instilled in the adults and children frequenting the
library, despite their economic status, race, or ethnicity. These people were the focu s of the

4

Herbert Putnam, et al, The Public Library of St. Louis: Addresses and Other Proceedings of the Opening
of the New Central Library Building, January 6, 1912 (St. Louis: Shelly Print, 1912), 7-8.

vi

Progressive Era, which sought to improve the lives of the poor, minorities, and immigrants
through the establishment of institutions dedicated to bringing them up to the level of education
and class that they deemed appropriate.
Progressives, according to Michael McGerr, sought to do this by using state and local
government. On a national level, the emphasis appeared to be the regulation of American
economic affairs. On a local, more personal level, the emphasis was on the people themselves,
with the purpose of “nothing less than to transform other Americans, to remake the nation‟s
feuding, polyglot population in their own middle-class image.” 5
Several Progressive-related institutions, such as Jane Addams‟ Hull House or social
welfare agencies such as the Children‟s Bureau – identified by Robyn Muncy as a female
stronghold dedicated to the control of child welfare policy in the American government 6 - did this
through direct work with children and families sponsored by new agencies and institutions. This
coincided with a changing economic milieu, the middle-class instigators of which, according to
Walter Licht, defined themselves “in opposition to those above and below them – to both the
profligate, indulgent rich and the improvident poor.” 7
John F. Kasson outlines these transformations in his work Rudeness and Civility. Changes
in the industrial economy in addition to a more individual approach towards business – namely,
young men and women setting out to make their mark with new middle-class positions – swept

5

Michael McGerr, A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the Progressive Movement in America, 18701920 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), xiv.
6

Robyn Muncy, Creating a Female Dominion in American Reform, 1890-193 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994), 38.
7

Walter Licht, Industrializing America: The Nineteenth Century (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1995), 76.

vii

people in increasingly powerful tides toward the cities, where they contributed to the formation
of the new middle class and its Victorian-era standards of gentility and etiquette. 8
Progressives sought to respond to these changes, and solve the mystery behind what they
meant in the grand scheme of turn-of-the-century American urban life. The motivations of these
middle-class reformers have been the subject of great debate on the part of historians of this era.
In his book Industrialism and the American Worker, Melvyn Dubofsky offers several
characteristics of the different schools of thought regarding historians‟ interpretations of the
Progressive Era. With a particular emphasis on the period between 1897 and 1914, three schools
of thought iterate a number of different aspects: that businessmen were coerced into making these
reforms to avoid revolution from the poor, that so-called “welfare capitalists” such as Andrew
Carnegie instigated these reforms, that working-class voters alongside their representatives were
primarily responsible for the enacting of reforms, and finally, that changes wrought in gender
relations and the subsequent rise of women in government and politics contributed greatly to
Progressive reforms. 9
Undoubtedly, all of these motivations were present among Progressive leaders in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The mitigating circumstances presented by a newly
ascendant middle class, the presence of the poor, immigrants, and minorities, the need to address
the welfare of children, and the creation of new roles for women in American society provoked a
dizzying myriad of responses on the parts of Progressive reformers who attempted to address
them in a variety of ways in the midst of what John Kasson calls a “crisis of meanings” in the

8

John Kasson, Rudeness and Civility: Manners in Nineteenth Century Urban America (New York: Hill and
Wang, 1991), 41.
9

Melvyn Dubofsky, Industrialism and the American Worker, 1865-1920, 3rd Edition (New York: Harlan
Davidson, 1996), 87.

viii

turn-of-the-century American city. 10 The public library was an institution intended to ameliorate
this crisis of meanings.
As a byproduct of Progressivism, the library found itself at the locus of these
aforementioned developments. Its origins can be traced to the private collections of privileged
individuals for whom literacy, education, and the presence of literature, histories, and
philosophical works were a sign of class wealth. Its evolution occurred over the course of several
centuries, beginning in the 1700s and consisting of branching institutions coalescing around a
central institution. The development into individual institutions took several centuries, but it was
between 1870 and 1930 that the library fully acquired the traits that allowed it to be defined as
“modern” in the eyes of Arthur Bostwick and his contemporaries.
The first characteristic was that a modern library had to be free to the public. Technically,
the library was not entirely free, since the citizenry of an urban metropolis were taxed in order to
ensure that the library was up to date with the latest books, technologies, and materials. The
library‟s “free” nature mostly pertained to the ability of patrons to come and go as they pleased
(within reason, of course), examine new issues of periodicals, borrow books, or use the many
rooms of the library for study or for meetings.
The second characteristic involves branch libraries. Like the settlement houses founded by
Jane Addams, branch libraries were built in poorer neighborhoods, where minorities and
immigrants often lived in enclaves in which they lived in a different country among similar
people. The idea behind this was to expose both groups to the latest offerings in literature and
non-fiction, as well as provide a place where the children from these areas could receive further
education beyond what they experienced in schools.

10

Kasson, Rudeness and Civility, 70.

ix

Service to these immigrants and minorities constitutes the third characteristic of libraries,
with service to children being the fourth. Children were increasingly treated as regular library
patrons, a role usually reserved for adults. The idea of including children as library patrons did
not appeal to librarians of an earlier era, who felt that adults should be prioritized over children.
Those who supported the idea argued that if the library was to be a truly democratic institution
that fostered education for all, then children should be included. This was especially important,
since they would pass their love of reading and education on to their own children.
The idea of openness to everyone influenced the inclusion of open shelving, the fifth trait
of the modern library. The browsing of bookshelves is something that is frequently done and
taken for granted in today‟s bookstores and libraries. At the turn of the century, however, the idea
of open shelves that people could directly access was considered highly controversial. Most
libraries, including St. Louis, made use of closed shelves before this time, which entailed housing
books in display cases behind a locked door. If a patron wanted access to a book, the librarian on
duty was called upon to unlock the display case and pull out the book. A free public library, in the
progressive librarian‟s mind, did not admit everyone and then force them to stand in front of a
closed shelf that only a librarian could open.
The sixth and final characteristic of the modern library was an expectation that librarians
become both educators and writers. As librarianship became professionalized through the
founding of library schools and training classes, older librarians passed along the expectation that
they were an integral part of the library patron‟s education. This meant disseminating writings on
librarianship and education through bulletins or through independent pamphlets published for
mass distribution to patrons about books they could use to further their knowledge. In short,
librarians had to be completely committed to their role as educators – it was not simply a job, but

x

a prestigious, honored position that demanded total commitment and participation on the part of
the people filling them.
All of these traits were considered by those in charge of library administration to be
essential in the creation and subsequent evolution of a genuinely American, democratic
institution, which the St. Louis Public Library, like other libraries, was expected to be. In the
period of time between 1870 and 1930, the St. Louis Public Library, through the efforts of its
administrators, mirrored the developments of other libraries throughout the country and became
one of the most prominent institutions in its area, its administrators well-regarded and considered
scholars and educators by St. Louis society and other librarians around the world. By 1930, the
library had truly become an urban messenger, proclaiming a Progressive message of moral and
societal uplift through books and the arts.
With the goal of contributing to scholarship on American libraries, this thesis will
examine the St. Louis Public Library between 1870 and 1930 as a case study of Progressive
library development. It will examine the efforts of its administrators during this time to mold the
library into the kind of local institution that served Progressive purposes, and how they drew from
the developments of their historical era and from the accomplishments of other libraries to make it
so. The thesis will ultimately trace the library‟s transformation from a school-based book
collection to an influential public institution, and will provide insights into how modern libraries
were defined and how that definition continues to influence the American library to the present
day.
METHODS AND CONTENTS
The first chapter, “Early Beginnings,” will take a dual-pronged approach. It will focus on
the state of the library in the United States and then in St. Louis to 1886, examining the divisio

xi

between social and mercantile libraries, and how they contribute to the arguments surrounding
the need for free public libraries. It will also investigate these arguments as they were applied to
the development of the library in St. Louis, since the macrocosmic changes trickled down to the
microcosmic world of the Midwestern city and those who lived there.
The second chapter, “The Road Towards a Free Public Library,” will focus on the period
between 1887 and 1909, the period of tenure for one of the St. Louis Public Library‟s most
famous administrators, Frederick Crunden. It will introduce him biographically before examining
his many contributions, the most important of which not only made the St. Louis Public Library
into a “free” library, but also involved overseeing important infrastructural changes such as the
development of branch libraries, delivery stations, and the introduction of new technologies.
Crunden was also the author of several pamphlets and articles, and invested a great deal of time in
making the library‟s monthly bulletin a significant part of the library‟s educative properties.
The third chapter, titled “The Mold Hardens,” will focus on the period between 1909 and
1925, which presents the introduction of Arthur E. Bostwick as the library‟s administrator
following the retirement of Frederick Crunden. It will examine the changes he wrought in the
library‟s infrastructure, including further expansion of branch libraries, the development of the
Children‟s Department, the founding of the St. Louis Library School, and the introduction of new
methods of communicating readership and education to patrons both potential and contemporary.
The fourth chapter will effectively conclude the thesis with an emphasis on the period between
1925 and 1938, in which the library further cemented itself in the public consciousness of the city
and continued to exert influence after the onset of the Great Depression in 1929.
The researcher hopes that the thesis will provide historians, library specialists, and other
interested readers with insight into what constituted a modern library in the late nineteenth and

xii

early twentieth centuries, and information about the men and women who worked towards
creating a modern library in St. Louis, and possibly spark discussion on what makes a library
modern in today‟s technology-driven world.

xiii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………………….i
Acknowledgements……………………………………………………………………………….ii
Preface……………………………………………………………………………………………iii
Chapter 1: Early Beginnings, 1850-1886………………………………………………………....1
Chapter 2: The Road to a Free Public Library, 1886-1909………………………………………26
Chapter 3: The Mold Hardens, 1909-1925………………………………………………………51
Chapter 4: Conclusion, 1925-1938………………………………………………………………76
Bibliography……………………………………………………………………………………..87
Vita………………………………………………………………………………………………90

xiv

CHAPTER 1: EARLY BEGINNINGS, 1850-1886
In order to understand the macrocosmic effects on the development of the St. Louis
Public Library, it is important to understand how American libraries were affected by changes in
perceptions as well as national and local infrastructure. During the colonial era and immediately
following the Revolutionary War, libraries in America occupied an ambiguous place in the
minds of the people that began to use them, along with those who were to establish and maintain
them.
These new libraries were caught between the old European standards and the new
American ones. In the infancy of the United States, the idea of what exactly constituted wholly
American ideals was a difficult question to answer, especially when what constituted an
American government was also in question. According to historian Gordon S. Wood, utopian
ideals such as equality for all in a free democratic society were “the conclusions of what many
enlightened thinkers took to be the modern science of society,” or what they felt society should
be.11 The ideals infused into institutions such as libraries would ultimately be experimental at
best.
The same could be said for the city of St. Louis. By the mid-nineteenth century, westward
expansion had transformed the frontier settlement into a burgeoning metropolis that was only
growing larger as people, commodities, and the businesses that sold them began to call the city
home. The tide of people brought new advances in communication and transportation, which
also carried their ideas, amorphous as they might have been, to St. Louis to begin the
construction of new institutions that would later be influenced by the rise of Progressivism
following the Civil War.

11

Gordon S. Wood, Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789-1815 (New York: Oxford
University Press, Inc., 2009), 11.

1

This chapter will provide brief insights into the development of the American library
between the Revolutionary War and 1850, when a movement towards the professionalization of
librarianship began in earnest throughout the United States. Following 1850, the chapter will also
chronicle how these developments affected the initial growth of the St. Louis Public School
Library, the progenitor of the city library as it can be seen today.
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY, 1700-1850
In his pamphlet The Free Public Library: Its Uses and Values, librarian Frederick M.
Crunden discusses the superior nature of the free public library versus the subscription library,
the latter of which constituted the bulk of American libraries before 1893, when the pamphlet
was published. He states that his sixteen years of experience up to that point had led him to the
belief that the free library‟s “superiority over any form of a subscription or class library, and its
absolute necessity to a progressive community, appear to me as obvious facts.” 12
At the time when Crunden was expressing this assertion, the St. Louis Public Library was
two years away from becoming a free public library, supported by funds generated from a local
tax paid by the citizens of St. Louis. Said citizens had become convinced over years of using
either St. Louis‟s mercantile library or the St. Louis Public School Library, incorporated and
established between 1865 and 1869, that such an institution was necessary for their education
and enlightenment. The road to this development, however, began long before the
aforementioned founding of the Public School Library. Its development, like the development of
most other libraries throughout the nation, began with the establishment of small collections of
books attached to preexisting institutions, specifically the church and the philosophical society.

12

Frederick M. Crunden, The Free Public Library: Its Uses and Value (St. Louis: R.P. Studley and
Company, 1893), 3.

2

An example of church libraries can be found in the early 1700s, where a reverend named
Thomas Bray established a series of parish libraries through which parishioners could obtain
copies of what he deemed as the most pertinent religious tracts and books. These libraries
consisted of collections of books contributed by parishioners, laymen, and the reverend himself,
who was dedicated to the philosophical and religious education of the people attending his
church. From Bray‟s point of view,
...there seem none to me would be greater Advantage to either, would tend more to
cultivate the Minds of our young Gentry, and can be more adapted to the present
Circumstances of our Parochial Clergy…than if we could have Lending Libraries
dispos‟d, one in every Deanery throughout the Kingdom, for the Service of those who
have occasion to borrow. 13

Bray, like librarians two centuries later, was a prolific essayist, writing numerous tracts
on the need for these lending libraries in early American communities as well as abroad. These
essays also included advice on which books would be best suited for these libraries. One such
essay deals specifically with libraries in English market towns, and includes works such as
Duplin‟s Ecclesiastical History, Sleidan‟s History of the Reformation of the Church from the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and Dr. Gibson’s Anatomy, among several
others.14 These were books that, from the viewpoint of a Protestant minister, were essential in the
moral uplift and well-being of those who sought their own enlightenment rather than seek it
through the words and actions of a single figure.
Libraries such as those established by Thomas Bray and his peers eventually became a
part of secular life in the early days of the United States as well as the ecclesiastical. An example
13

Reverend Thomas Bray, “An Essay Towards Promoting all Necessary and Useful Knowledge, Both
Divine and Human, In All the Parts of His Majesty‟s Dominions, Both at Home and Abroad,” in Bernard C. Steiner,
ed., Reverend Thomas Bray: His Life and Selected Works Relating to Maryland (Baltimore: J. Murphy Co., 1901),
56.
14

Reverend Thomas Bray, “The Catalogue of Books Design‟d to lay the Foundation of Lending Libraries
to be Fix‟d in all the Market Towns of England,” in Bernard C. Steiner, ed., Reverend Thomas Bray: His Life and
Selected Works Relating to Maryland (Baltimore: J. Murphy Co., 1901), 67-70.

3

of a secular social library can be found in Philadelphia in the 1790s, founded by none other than
Benjamin Franklin. The origins of Franklin‟s library can be traced to the Junto, a group of men
brought together by Franklin to discuss the philosophical issues of the day. It began its forays
into early librarianship due to an idea that occurred to Franklin during one of the Junto‟s many
meetings. In his autobiography, Franklin states that
…since our Books were often referr‟d to in our Disquisitions upon the Queries, it might
be convenient for us to have them all together where we met, that upon Occasion they
might be consulted; and by thus clubbing our Books to a common Library, we should,
while we lik‟d to keep them together, have each of us the Advantage of using the Books
of all the other Members, which would be nearly as beneficial as if each owned the
whole.15

Franklin and the other members consequently combined their efforts to contribute books
from their own collections to the Junto‟s growing library. Franklin eventually seized upon the
idea of their library being a subscription library, where members paid a fee in order to use it. By
the time they were finished, Franklin and the other members of the Junto had established what
Franklin would call “the Mother of all the North American Subscription Libraries now so
numerous.” 16 The Junto‟s library and the parish libraries established by Thomas Bray are among
the first examples of American social libraries, where book collections belonged toa specific
groups of people that charged outsiders a fee in order to join the ranks of their membership and
read the books they had to offer.
In her dissertation on the St. Louis Mercantile Library, Betty Boyd Walker identifies the
social library and mercantile library, the latter of which was intended for those learning a trade,

15

Joyce E. Chaplin, ed., Benjamin Franklin’s Autobiography: An Authoritative Text, Contexts, Criticisms
(New York: W.W. Norton, 2012), 66-67.
16

Ibid.

4

as ways in which the people responsible for founding these libraries attempted to distance their
institutions from the trappings of religion, be it Catholic or Protestant. 17 Bray and Franklin‟s
libraries are examples of the ways in which different motivations underlay the founding of those
particular libraries, but each were intended for the enlightenment for their patrons, be it
philosophical or religious, and their additional characteristic of being attached to preexisting
institutions only makes them all the more familial in terms of their mutual contributions as
ancestors of the public library.
As the United States expanded across the continent, libraries would continue to evolve
along the same lines as the previously mentioned libraries. In his study of rural public libraries,
Wayne A. Wiegand found that into the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, churches
remained a vital part of local print culture in the small towns dotting the Midwest. Books for
Sunday schools, devotional aids, and religious periodicals were maintained by these churches for
the use of their respective parishioners. Alongside this influence, independent libraries were
established with the assistance of local organizations interested in establishing more secularized
libraries as repositories for fiction and non-fiction books. 18 These church libraries and printing
services functioned as predecessors and even existed alongside more secular libraries as they
developed in other Midwestern towns.
Between 1850 and 1875, several smaller cities throughout an expanding America
initiated similar processes for establishing town libraries. Sauk City, Minnesota, for example,
took the first steps towards its own public library through the efforts of a women‟s reading club.
The club worked collectively to establish a library fund which could later be used to buy books
17

Betty Boyd Walker, “The History of the St. Louis Mercantile Library: Its Educational, Social, and
Cultural Contributions,” (PhD diss., St. Louis University, 1986), 17.
18

Wayne A. Wiegand, Main Street Public Library: Community Spaces and Reading Places in America’s
Heartland, 1876-1956 (Iowa City: Iowa University Press, 2011), 5.

5

once the library had been established. On December 13, 1878, a public meeting was held in Sauk
City, which involved a transfer of over four hundred donated books to the women‟s library
association. The new library was named after William Cullen Bryant, a New England poet, and
in its first annual report, almost two thousand library patrons turned out with a circulation of over
a thousand books within its first year. 19
As libraries such as the one established in Sauk City began to appear elsewhere in
America, two national events transpired that would have a profound effect on libraries and the
people responsible for establishing them. According to library historian Dee Garrison,
librarianship was among the first professions to organize itself in an effort to gain recognition as
a legitimate field, and the first step to be taken in this direction involved a librarianship
convention in New York in 1853. The second event, which occurred in 1873, was Melvil
Dewey‟s creation of a method of organization which came to be known as the Dewey Decimal
System. First established at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, it was the first method of
organization by which books in a library could be organized. 20
This combination of evolving subscription libraries, efforts towards professionalization,
and methods of organization were the first steps taken in the direction of free public libraries for
all, and these developments had a wide-ranging national effect that eventually petered down to
the microcosmic levels as seen in cities such as St. Louis.
THE FOUNDING OF THE ST. LOUIS PUBLIC SCHOOL LIBRARY, 1857-1869
Different independent libraries existed in St. Louis long before any efforts toward
centralization took place. The earliest library establishment was the St. Louis Library

19

Wiegand, Main Street Public Library, 11.

20

Dee Garrison, Apostles of Culture: The Public Library and American Society, 1876-1925 (New York:
Macmillan Publishing Company, 1979), 3.

6

Association, which appeared as early as 1824. The Library Association later evolved into the St.
Louis Lyceum and Library Association in 1839. The St. Louis Law Library Association was
established in 1840 to meet the needs of local law students, and the St. Louis Mercantile Library
was founded in 1846. There were also areas established throughout the city where people who
frequented these libraries could return their books, such as the Literary Depot and Circulating
Library at the corner of Chestnut and Second established by 1842. 21
The evolution of these independent libraries reflected broader trends in American cities.
The collective pooling of funds and books by groups of interested parties was a common
characteristic of these libraries, and it was typical to find them on the upper floors of preexisting
institutions. Events began to turn in that direction in St. Louis, where the beginnings of a free
public library began with changes in the education system in St. Louis, rippling outward from
events in 1857.
According to the minutes of several meetings conducted throughout the year of 1857, the
officials in charge of the school system in St. Louis began to change their approach to education.
They were interested in aiding in efforts to establish what is referred to as “Teachers‟ Institutes”
throughout the state of Missouri, for reasons that are outlined below.
…its [the St. Louis Board of Public Schools] members feel that they cannot look with
indifference upon any movement established, to advance the cause of Education in
Missouri, believing as they do, that its present condition is not such as the wants of the
age, or the future destiny of the State imperatively demand, and that it is only by such, or
similar steps, as the one contemplated, that the initiative can be taken to place it upon an
equal footing with other great public interests, and make it an honor to her people…22

In addition to assuming a less isolationist approach that limited their activities to the city
proper, the Board of Public Schools was also seeking to change its approach towards children
21

David Kaser, Directory of the St. Louis Book and Printing Trades to 1850 (New York: The New York
Public Library, 1961), 26.
22

Minutes of the Board of Public Schools, June 2nd, 1857, Papers of the Board of Public Schools, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

9

and their discipline. During a meeting on September 8 of that same year, the Board of Public
Schools voted to extend additional “appreciation,” as they put it, towards teachers who could
control their students without the use of bodily punishment. They also voted to allow school
principals to dictate the internal workings of their institutions without interference from members
of the Board of Public Schools or the Superintendent. 23 This created an atmosphere of increased
autonomy for schools, which boded well for the future development of the St. Louis Public
School Library, since the school was the preexisting institution on which it would be founded.
The Board of Public Schools also established guidelines for what would become its most
important contributions towards the establishment of the St. Louis Public School Library – the
books to be used by students. The managers of the O‟Fallon Polytechnic Institute, a local
technical institute, were given permission by the Board of Public Schools to use two buildings
for what they called “even-lag schools,” which were to be used for both day scholars and
students who were taking evening classes. 24
Overseeing these developments was Ira Divoll, a former lawyer and teacher then serving
as the Public School Superintendent. He was a respected professional in the field of education,
and an integral element in the development of the St. Louis Public School Library. Born in
October 1820 in Topham, Vermont, Divoll had a substantial background in law and education.
He graduated from Burlington University in 1848 and became the principal of a grammar school

23

Minutes of the Board of Public Schools, September 8, 1857, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
24

Minutes of the Board of Public Schools, October 13, 1857, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

6

in New Orleans. In 1852, he was admitted to the Louisiana bar after studying law, and then
moved to St. Louis three years later. 25
Divoll‟s background in law and education served him well. By 1860, he‟d ascended to
the post of Superintendent of Schools in St. Louis and, in addition to being an ardent supporter of
education, Divoll was equally ardent in his support for libraries. He recommended to the Board
of Education that a library was necessary in order to serve not just the children of the local
schools, but the city‟s adults, as well. Divoll‟s goal was that everyone, children included, could
benefit from a library functioning both independently and as a corollary to the local system. 26
In the midst of the more liberal environment that the Board of Public Schools was
attempting to establish, Ira Divoll and his colleagues gradually accomplished their goal of
establishing a school library for all to use. The first step in this direction came with the
establishment of the St. Louis Public School Library Society on February 3, 1865, on which date
Ira Divoll was officially authorized by S.D. Bailons, the President of the Board of Public
Schools, to open a registry of new members. 27 The Society functioned as an affiliate of the local
school system, whose purpose is outlined in Section 2 of the Charter that was drawn up for it.
The object of said Society is declared to be the establishment and maintenance of a
Public School Library and Lyceum, and all persons who have been heretofore, are now,
or may be hereafter, directors, officers, teachers, or pupils of the St. Louis Public
Schools, may become life members of said Library by paying to the Board of Trustees
herein provided for the sum of twelve dollars. 28

25

Mendel E. Brandom, “One Hundred Years of Teacher Education in the St. Louis Public School System,
Part 1: The St. Louis Normal School, 1856-1904,” St. Louis Public School Journal 11, No. 1 (1958), 5-6.
26

Sarah J. Van Ausdal, “The Origin and the Development of the St. Louis Public School Library, 18651894,” The Journal of the West 30, No. 3 (1991), 6.
27

S.D. Bailons to Ira Divoll, February 3, 1865, Ira Divoll Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

28

Act of Incorporation for the St. Louis Public School Library, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

6

Divoll‟s vision for the library mirrored the development of libraries in other cities in the
United States, namely its fixture to a preexisting institution and its funding through
subscriptions. The difference here is the institution in this case was not a church or a
philosophical society, but a school, where those in charge of it could foster a love of education
and reading through corollary institutions.
The St. Louis Public School Library was officially established and turned over to the
control of the school board in 1869, but in the meantime, its leaders were studying libraries and
what the care of a library would entail. One matter to be settled involved the details of life
membership for those who subscribed the library. On December 8, 1866, the Chairman of the
High School Committee, one N. Myers, wrote a letter to the President of the Board of Trustees
for the Public School Library suggesting that a committee be formed to estimate the value of the
Library, and whether or not the cost of subscriptions should be proportionate to said value.29 This
question was answered by a library committee known as the Committee on the Library and
Reading-room. In a report made to the Board of Managers of the Public School Library, they
found that the life membership costs should be permanently fixed at $12.00, with anyone paying
that amount being accorded the rights and privileges of a full member. 30
The next step involved establishing connections with booksellers and public figures who
might consider donating part of their collections to the fledgling library. One such donor was a
firm known as Willmer and Rogers, whose business involved importing foreign newspapers and
books for immigrants and other interested parties. Divoll received a letter from them on August

29

N. Myers to President of the Board of Trustees of the Public School Library from N. Myers, December 8,
1866, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
30

Report to Board of Managers from Committee on the Library and Reading-room, December, 1866, St.
Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

10

28, 1867, involving the conclusion of a transaction in which foreign newspapers and books were
purchased at a total of $96.40.31 Preparations were being made for the official opening of the St.
Louis Public School Library, and its first librarian, John Jay Bailey, was given authorization to
begin an inventory of all the volumes acquired thus far, and volumes were moved up to the
newly christened library room in the Darby Building, which doubled as the home of the Board of
Education.32
Control of the Library was officially turned over to its Board of Managers in 1869. In
spite of its connection to the school, its Board of Managers was attempting to mold it into an
independent institution per the guidelines set down in the conditions of transfer to the Board of
Managers. It stipulated that the students of O‟Fallon Polytechnic Institute and night class
students were to be considered life members of the library paying $12.00 a year, that it was to be
entirely directed under the influence of the Board of Managers, and that all revenues from the
renting of lecture halls and other services were to be directed towards the fund the Board had
established to purchase books and other necessary materials. 33
The deed of transfer to the Board of Managers also made explicit two particular purposes:
to house books and plats in rooms with acceptable conditions for reading and research, and that
members of the Public School Library Society, and anyone else who became members or
procured membership for other people, were members for life. 34

31

Firm of Willmer and Rogers to Ira Divoll, August 28, 1867, Ira Divoll Papers, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
32

Authorization of Superintendent of Public Schools for John Jay Bailey, September 24, 1868, St. Louis
Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
33

Conditions of the Transfer of the Public School Library to the Board of Public Schools, St. Louis Public
School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
34

Deed of Transfer to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis Public School
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

11

Now that the Public School Library had been founded, measures were taken to ensure
that matters would run smoothly. During a meeting of a new committee titled the Committee on
Books and Donations held on July 9, 1869, it was determined that all of the books, periodicals,
pamphlets, and other records acquired to that point were to be examined to see which of them
needed to be repaired, which needed to be decreased in circulation and volume, and how best to
advertise them to the public. 35
The officials in charge of the library were also reaching out to other libraries across the
country to see how they were managing their own libraries. On May 16, 1869, Lewis Freeman, a
librarian at the Cincinnati Public Library, sent a letter to John Jay Bailey thanking him for the
provision of the Public School Library‟s annual report and informing him of the accompanying
reports sent to him from the Cincinnati Public Library, which contained all the information
requested by Bailey. 36 This marks the first steps taken in the kind of quid pro quo relationships
among early libraries such as these, where both materials and information were exchanged as
valuable building blocks for the libraries of the negotiating parties.
The following year found the St. Louis Public School Library gaining a firmer footing in
the St. Louis community, both in terms of its collection available to its patrons and to its further
collaborations with other libraries. A representative of the Kansas Pacific Railway Company
named Joseph Wherry sent a letter to Ira Divoll on May 30, 1870, in which thirty-three
pamphlets and a host of documents detailing the construction of railroad systems were presented
for the library‟s use. 37 Further information about the Cincinnati Public Library‟s circulation
35

Minutes of Committee on Books and Donations, July 9, 1869, St. Louis Public School Library Records,
St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
36

Lewis Freeman to John Jay Bailey, May 16, 1869, John Jay Bailey Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St.
Louis, MO.
37

Joseph Wherry to Ira Divoll, May 30, 1870, Ira Divoll Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

12

holdings, and revenue were obtained in an exchange of letters between Divoll and W.E.
Barnwell, an assistant librarian in Cincinnati, in order to see how the St. Louis Public School
Library could be further molded. 38
In March of 1870, the library received further materials from the Boston Public Library.
In a letter to John Jay Bailey, J. Wuiser, the Superintendent of the library in Boston, presented
the reports of the Boston Prison Discipline Society in cloth binding, establishing yet another
connection with a prominent library elsewhere in the country. 39 The Mercantile Library in New
York City also provided a notice along with copies of its supplementary catalogue of books to
acknowledge its receipt, dated March 29, 1870 40, and Divoll went about establishing connections
with local libraries as well. The St. Louis Mercantile Library acknowledged and thanked Divoll
for the receipt of the copies of the St. Louis Public Schools‟ records extending between 1860 and
1866 later that year. 41
By the end of 1871, much had been accomplished. According to John Jay Bailey‟s annual
report, presented in 1871, the St. Louis Public School Library had grown exponentially. So many
people had become life members of the St. Louis Public School Library that “at the present rate
of increase, visitors to our reading room will hardly find in it room to sit down,” further
suggesting that “should the School Board consent to appropriate to our use a larger room, the

38

W.E. Barnwell to Ira Divolll, April 20, 1870, Ira Divoll Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

39

J. Wuiser to John Jay Bailey, March 1870, John Jay Bailey Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

MO.
40

Notice from New York Mercantile Library, March 29, 1870, Ira Divoll Papers, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
41

Notice from St. Louis Mercantile Library Association Notification to Ira Divoll, Ira Divoll Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

13

apartment we shall vacate may be at once converted into a museum of Natural History, for
which purpose it is admirably adapted.” 42 Bailey also commemorated the death of Ira Divoll,
signifying the end of one era and the beginning of another.
THE ST. LOUIS PUBLIC LIBRARY AFTER DIVOLL, 1871-1886
On March 13, 1873, a report was made to the Board of the President and the Directors of
the South St. Louis Iron Company. The first page of the report details a task that had been
delegated to the Executive Committee of the St. Louis Public School Library by its Board of
Managers – namely, the task of establishing a branch library in South St. Louis. The reason why
such an event was being reported to an iron company was because of its location in the same
area, the Carondelet section of St. Louis. By that point, citizens living in that area had
contributed to a fund that amounted to $535. Companies such as the South St. Louis Iron
Company were being asked to donate, since the Board of Public Schools had “deemed
important…to obtain a total subscription of Twelve Hundred Dollars, in order to open the
proposed Branch on a good scale.” 43
In addition to beginning the library‟s expansion throughout the city, the St. Louis Public
School Library was beginning to meet with some financial troubles. On December 11, 1875, a
special committee that had been established to examine the library‟s financial state that found
that, through the acclimation of statistics, the library‟s revenues had begun to dwindle. The
reason behind it was attributed to the library having been “made free to the public for purposes
of reading and reference.” Even though the library‟s resources were shrinking, its officials found

42

Report of the Librarian, St. Louis Public Schools, 1870-1871, St. Louis Public School Library Records,
St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
43

Report to the Board of the President and Directors of the South St. Louis Iron Company, March 13, 1873,
St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

14

itself in a quandary concerning the workforce, none of whom could be released from their
services due to the large amount of work being done in terms of keeping stock of the library‟s
materials and its revenue while still serving its patrons. 44
In the midst of these new developments was a new assistant librarian by the name of
Frederick M. Crunden. Born in Gravesend, England, in 1847, he would become a St. Louisan by
sentiment rather than birth. His family emigrated to the United States shortly after he was born,
where he graduated from high school and later received a Master of Arts in education from
Washington University. 45 By that time, he was well-established in St. Louis society, having
conducted public readings in 1871 that included scenes from Shakespeare‟s The Merchant of
Venice and Dickens‟s Speech of Sergeant Buzfuz, suggesting a close acquaintance with the
classics of the time period. 46
1872 found Crunden assuming a position at Washington University as an instructor of
elocution and mathematics, having already served as the principals of two different schools in St.
Louis, respectively the Jefferson and Benton Schools after graduating from Washington
University in 1868.47 In 1877, Crunden became a librarian at the St. Louis Public School Library
following the ouster of John Jay Bailey, whose differences with the Board of Managers over
issues of administration had reached a crisis point. 48

44

Report of Committee on the Financial Conditions of the Library to Board of Managers, December 11,
1875, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
45

“Frederick M. Crunden,” in Bodhan S. Wynar, ed., The Dictionary of American Library Biography
(Littleton: Libraries Unlimited, 1978), 103.
46

Advertisements for Public Readings, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

MO.
47

Article about Frederick Crunden from Unknown Newspaper, 1872, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
48

“Frederick M. Crunden,” Wynar, ed., The Dictionary of American Library Biography, 103.

15

Despite the controversy surrounding his young age and inexperience, Crunden
immediately devoted himself to the task of maintaining the library‟s standards in the community.
At the beginning of his tenure, Crunden established firmer policies for taking the library‟s annual
inventory. In 1878, he established a plan that entailed closing down the library alcove by alcove
and comparing the total inventory list of the library to different cards that determined which
books were still present, which books were still in the hands of patrons, and which books were
lost.49 He also began to implement policies that were reflected in a pamphlet that Crunden would
later publish in 1884, under the title Rules and Regulations of the St. Louis Public School
Library. Such policies included the Librarian‟s powers of discretion in terms of what books
would be loaned out and which would not, the provision of a card to patrons with their names on
it, a two-cent fine for books that are overdue, and the Librarian‟s role as the prime record-keeper
and organizer of library services. 50
Meanwhile, the controversy continued to swirl around Crunden‟s stewardship of the
library unabated, and public opinion on the subject caromed around St. Louis‟s newspapers. One
example of this is an opinion piece published in the St. Louis Times-Journal on January 23,
1879, titled “Let Us Investigate.” The author noted that a multitude of opinion pieces had been
published in other papers around St. Louis by different authors, all of whom leveled charges
ranging from Crunden‟s version of simony to inadequate handling of library affairs. 51
Crunden responded to these charges in an article of his own, in which he was interviewed
by a reporter from The St. Louis Post-Dispatch for a piece that was eventually published in
49

Plan for Taking the Inventory of the Books of the Public School Library, 1878, Frederick M. Crunden
Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
50

Rules and Regulations of the St. Louis Public School Library, 1886, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
51

“Let Us Investigate,” The St. Louis Times-Journal, January 23, 1879, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

16

March of 1880. According to Crunden, the troubles against him began following his reelection,
after which Louis Soldan, the library‟s actuary, began a furtive campaign to unseat Crunden and
install himself as the new librarian. This campaign involved a scheme to make it look as if the
Library Board‟s nominations had been rejected, and was found out at a meeting in February
1880. Crunden ended the interview by stating that he was “perfectly confident of my ability to
refute any and all charges that Mr. Soldan or anybody else can bring, and I am equally sure of
the result of the investigation.” 52 As the investigation continued, rumors swirled unabated around
the proceedings, including one involving a conspiracy of the members of the Board with German
ancestry to assert dominance over the library. 53
Despite the changes being arrayed against him by those who wanted to unseat him,
Crunden continued to enact his changes to the library‟s infrastructure. A report of a committee
on a library employees made to the Board of Managers in the early 1880s reveals firmer
guidelines regarding the characteristics deemed appropriate by Crunden for a good library
employee: “sound health and bright intellect,” “good education,” “industry and energy,”
“unquestionable morals,” “gentlemanly appearance,” and, of course, “library experience.”54
Crunden also noted the extraordinary progress of the library in his report to the Board of
Managers in 1880, in which he praised the progress made on the cataloging of U.S. documents

52

“Crunden‟s Account,” The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, March, 1880, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
53

“German and Anti-German,” The St. Louis Globe-Democrat, March 11, 1880, Frederick M. Crunden
Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
54

Report of a Committee on Employees to the Board of Managers, 1880-1881, Frederick M. Crunden
Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

17

and recommended that “a room so situated and furnished that students and professional men and
journalists can better utilize the literary treasures which the Library had amassed” should be one
of its goals for the near future. 55 The reasoning behind this was to further enhance the library‟s
reputation among scholars, journalists, and other interested parties and to make regular citizens
more aware of it through word of mouth.
Crunden‟s report for the year between 1880 and 1881 included details on the library‟s
efforts to make itself known not just in St. Louis, but throughout the nation. He noted in the
report that circulars and pamphlets had been dispatched to all of the states thus far included in
the union, and had also made endeavors to establish exchange programs with other libraries akin
to what Ira Divoll and John Jay Bailey experienced in the library‟s earlier years with the
Cincinnati Public Library and the Boston Public Library. The library‟s considerable holdings of
books by that time also included several hundred books in German and French, which appealed
to immigrants in St. Louis from Germany and France. It also boasted an improved card catalogue
through which large influxes of books such as these could be properly catalogued and placed. 56
A letter from Frederick Crunden to the Board of Managers written on December 10,
1881, reveals the first of many incidents that were to occur throughout his library career
concerning his health. In the letter, he asks for a further leave of absence in order to regain his
good health, stating that despite his illness, Crunden had not found himself incapacitated
regarding the library‟s bibliographic work and had decided to continue working on the task from
home. He further notes, perhaps to dissuade any detractors from taking advantage of the

55

St. Louis Public School Library Annual Report, 1880, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
56

Report of the Librarian of the St. Louis Public School Library, August 1, 1881, Frederick M. Crunden
Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

18

situation, that he had contributed many long hours to the library‟s well-being, and had foregone
several vacations in order to bring the library up to its satisfactory state at that time in 1881. 57
The library also began tentative steps toward a more permanent footing in the growing
field of children‟s services. A member of the Women‟s Christian Home in St. Louis wrote a
letter to the library‟s Board of Managers on March 2, 1882, stating that “having been informed
that new arrangements are to be made in regard to the distribution of books to the children, and
thinking possibly an extra assistant would be necessary, allow me, in case such arrangements
should be carried out, to apply for the position of that assistant.” 58 The library had been serving
both children and adults since its inception, but with the influx of new books for both groups, it
would soon become necessary to hire assistants devoted specifically to different types of
literature, particularly juvenile literature.
The St. Louis Public School Library was also continuing to expand itself in terms of
branch libraries. A library association by the name of the Carondelet Library Association
appealed to the Board of Managers in a letter dated November 10, 1883. In the letter, they ask
the Board of Managers to consider establishing a branch in the Carondelet area of St. Louis,
since their own association was unsuccessful in doing so. A meeting time and place is also called
for as a place to discuss said opening. 59
What is particularly significant about this event is how other local businesses planned on
aiding in the efforts of the new library. On the same date as the letter from the Carondelet

57

Board of Managers to Frederick Crunden, December 10, 1881, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, Mo.
58

Board of Managers to Women‟s Christian Home, March 2, 1882, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
59

Carondelet Library Association to Board of Managers, November 10, 1883, Frederick M. Crunden
Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

19

Library Association, another letter, written by a representative of the Western Iron Boat
Building Company named Theodore Allen, was addressed to Frederick Crunden. Allen‟s letter
requested the presence of two or more library board members at the meeting mentioned in the
Carondelet Library Association‟s letter. 60
The mid-1880s also saw some significant internal charges when it came to rules of
election. On March 10, 1883, Frederick Crunden tendered his resignation “in order that your
honorable body may elect a librarian under the new rule,” which entailed a librarian being
temporarily resigned from his position in order to provide the Board of Managers with an
objective and fair vote. 61
The year 1884 would see extraordinary growth in terms of the library‟s internal
infrastructure, its relationship to societal expectations at large, and its increasing national and
international reach. On February 9 of that year, a letter to the Board of Managers from the Public
School Library‟s Executive Committee was written detailing the need for a “suitable division”
between “the Ladies‟ Department of the Reading-room” and a section “for students” and
“investigators.” 62
This is reflective of the views of the time period when it comes to gender relations and
what men and women were expected to do. Abigail A. Van Slyck, a library historian, found in
her article on women and libraries that sex segregation in libraries was highly common in the late
nineteenth century. Part of it had to do with what Van Slyck refers to as municipal

60

Theodore Allen to Frederick Crunden, November 10, 1883, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
61

Frederick Crunden to Board of Managers, March 10, 1883, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
62

Executive Committee to Board of Managers, February 9, 1884, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

20

housekeeping.” Because women were seen as the spiritual and moral guidance in the home, there
were expectations of where they were supposed to go in order to fulfill that role – namely, the
church, department stores, and of course the library, for the purpose of acquiring “the domestic
goods, religious piety, and cultural refinement that they dispensed at home.” 63 Another reason
why reading rooms were segregated by sex involved the belief in women‟s complete purity as
opposed to that of men. Said purity was thought to be sullied by the male leer, which was
thought to be akin to sexual assault and the subsequent ruination of the woman in question.64 The
creation of a separate space in the St. Louis Public School Library reflected these views.
On February 5, 1884, the Committee on Books and Donations made their report to the
Board of Managers, in which they lauded the Public School Library‟s increasing international
reach. According to their report, the library had achieved “a constant demand for the Library‟s
publications are deemed by Librarians and other valuable aids in library and educational work.”
Sadly, the library‟s current funds would not allow its officials to extend themselves further when
it came to providing those kinds of aids, which is something that would have to be remedied in
the future once the library had more funds at its disposal. 65
On the same day, another library committee, the Executive Committee, made its own
glowing report, but the most significant feature of the report involved the library‟s use of
advertising. According to the report, the library had spent $120.95 on advertising in local St.

63

Abigail A. Van Slyck, “The Lady and the Library Loafer: Gender and Public Space in Victorian
America,” Winterthur Portfolio 31, No. 4 (1996): 223.
64

Ibid.

65

Report of the Committee on Books and Donations to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public
School Library, February 5, 1884, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

21

Louis newspapers, which had resulted in the enrollment of 225 new members. 66 It was clear that
advertising in the newspapers worked wonders when it came to inspiring people to enroll and use
the library, which meant that this measure would remain in place. In March of 1884, the
Executive Committee had further good news to report. It had authorized the printing of over
2000 copies of the librarian‟s annual report, which would serve well not just in providing a
means of exchange of materials with other libraries, but also function as a circular in pamphlet
form for ordinary citizens who wanted to know more about what was going on with their local
library.67
A report made by the Committee on Books and Donations on May 9, 1884, uncovered
both good news and bad news for the library. The good news involved further connections with
other libraries. A local connection involved the St. Louis Mercantile Library, which involved the
provision of several collected volumes of The St. Louis Times and magazines. Additions had also
been made to the library‟s new South Branch, originating from the original dealings with the
Carondelet Library Association, and reference lists had been printed that signified the only major
additional printing the library had done, but had proven valuable to other librarians and educators
as aids. The bad news involved having to curb the amount of books recommended by the
Committee on Books and Donations due to limited funds, which would again be remedied in
later years.68
The Report of the Librarian for June 1884 reveals what Frederick Crunden was doing
during his leave of absence from the library following his temporary resignation. Following the
66

Report of the Executive Committee to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library,
February 5, 1884, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
67

Report of the Executive Committee to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library,
March 5, 1884, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
68

Report of the Committee on Books and Donations to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public
School Library, May 9, 1884, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

22

report, Crunden spent a great deal of time abroad, examining the bookselling firms of Europe to
see which would be the most reliable in terms of the importation of foreign books and
newspapers. He also attended the Second International Conference of Librarians as a
representative of the St. Louis Public School Library, with the hope of bringing back information
on developments in the library world. The report also shows the beginning of the library‟s
internal division into departments, with the librarian‟s resolution that the work being done
towards the foundation of a mechanical department for engineers should continue unhindered.69
Crunden‟s report for September of 1884 unveils his findings concerning booksellers
during his time abroad. He found that their present arrangements with booksellers in England
and France were satisfactory “except when such books are wanted immediately, in which case it
would be well to avail ourselves of the offer of an eastern publishing house to supply them…” 70
He had not been able to see what Germany had to offer, and ultimately advised a middle course
of action when it came to purchasing books from international booksellers. 71
The report of the Committee on the Library and Reading-room reveals further
developments and revelations regarding what the library had accomplished, and where it could
be further improved. The bookcases and catalog stands had been removed to make way for a
boardroom, catalogue room, and a Librarian‟s office. Room was also made for gas fixtures to
provide adequate lighting for those who wanted to read and conduct research. Furthermore, it
was found that despite the large amount of circulars and pamphlets that had been distributed, the
majority of the people of St. Louis still did not understand that the library was meant for both
69

Report of the Librarian to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library, June 1884, St.
Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
70

Report of the Librarian to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library, September1884,
St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
71

Ibid.

23

children and adults. One proposed remedy involved changing of the name of the library to the
St. Louis Public Library, since “the retention of the present name will continue to neutralize in a
great measure all efforts to advertise the institution as a library for all the people of St.
Louis…” 72 What is especially important about this particular report is the way in which the
change in the name of the library leads to the paving of a road towards what Crunden calls the
library‟s ultimate destiny, which was to be a free public library that everyone could enjoy
without having to pay a subscription fee.
The St. Louis Public School Library only continued to improve as the year passed into
1885. On January 10 of that year, a report of the Committee on the Library and Reading-room
found that circulation of books had increased by 24%, with the books being borrowed providing
“works of solid value which have an external influence on their readers.” 73 Crunden‟s report
made for the month of January 1885 points to a massive increase in enrollment of life
memberships, consisting of 2,341 enrollments since January of 1884, and also pointed to the
completion of an alphabetically-ordered catalogue. 74
The library‟s Executive Committee found that advertising and printing costs were to take
up a considerable part of the library‟s finances in the foreseeable future, and also points to
further steps being taken in establishing a fund for the Technological Department recommended

72

Report of the Committee on the Library and Reading-room to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis
Public School Library, December 6, 1884, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.
Louis, MO.
73

Report of the Committee on the Library and Reading-room to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis
Public School Library, January 10, 1885, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.
Louis, MO.
74

Report of the Librarian to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library, January 31,
1885, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis, MO.

24

by Frederick Crunden during one of his earlier reports. 75 In his own report for February, Crunden
noted the need for additional assistants and librarians, since the increasing diversity in the work
undertaken at the library required more than the people already employed there. 76
Crunden oversaw several other developments in the library that served as the foundations
for what would eventually transpite in the development of the St. Louis Public Library. A letter
written by Crunden to the principal of a local school requested a list of pupils determined by the
principal for the receipt of life memberships in the library, in an attempt to expand the librar‟ys
continually expanding base. 77 The decision had also been made to create an official logo for the
library to use in further advertising, and according to a letter to Crunden from one A.E. Stevens
of Stevens Lithographing, multiple lithographs could be made at a price of $300.78
Frederick Crunden was officially reelected as the librarian of the St. Louis Public School
Library in 1886.79 The main points of expansion for the library involved acquiring more patrons,
and more room for the books that strained against their shelves, in addition to continuing its
outreach, all of which would be accomplished under Frederick Crunden‟s expert tenure.

75

Report of the Executive Committee to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library,
February 4, 1885, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
76

Report of the Librarian to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library, February 1885,
St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
77

Frederick Crunden to Principal of Gardenville School, May 28, 1885, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
78

A.E. Stevens to Frederick Crunden, April 4, 1885, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
79

“F.M. Crunden Elected: The Choise of the Library Board for Librarian,” The St. Louis Republican,
January 10, 1886, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

25

CHAPTER 2: THE ROAD TOWARDS A FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY, 1886-1909
The St. Louis Public School Library had come a long way since its inception. Now
housed in the Board of Education and boasting a massive collection of pamphlets, books, and
periodicals for those who frequented it, the Public School Library had, by 1886, become a local
institution of great repute whose reach had expanded across the nation to other libraries, where
information and materials were exchanged. The library had also begun to expand itself within the
realm of its home city, having established a South Branch that was also in the process of
acquiring materials for patrons in that part of the city.
Despite this progress, however, there was still much work to be done. Frederick Crunden,
newly reelected in 1886 as the librarian of the St. Louis Public School Library, had every
intention of working towards his goal of making the library free per the developments occurring
elsewhere throughout the nation. Until that goal was reached, Crunden‟s primary task involved
improving the infrastructural elements of the library concerning the assistant librarians that
worked there, the rules and regulations governing the institution, and different methods of
approaching a diverse pool of patrons that ranged from adults to children with varying ethnic
backgrounds.
Crunden‟s labors would bear fruit by the time of his death in 1911. Between 1886 and
1909, when he officially resigned from his post citing health reasons, Crunden was instrumental
in expanding the influence of the library via additional branches and delivery stations where
books could be returned. He also advanced the library‟s progressive status as a social institution
through his writings, which were widely published in both library-related periodicals,
newspapers, and the St. Louis Public Library‟s own Monthly Bulletins and pamphlets. Most

26

importantly, Crunden initiated the development of the library as the central node of a social
book-exchanging network that threaded its way throughout the city, which became a reality with
the opening of the new central library in 1912. How this was accomplished will be the focus of
this chapter.
THE LIBRARY‟S NEW GROWTH, 1887-1895
In 1887, a report was presented to the Board of Managers of the Public School Library
from the Committee on the Library and Reading-room. The report presented its findings
regarding the establishment of a new Teacher‟s Department, which the committee had deemed as
one of the more important events of the year. This department had received an estimated amount
of over a thousand new books and pamphlets concerning education throughout the United States,
which the teachers in the St. Louis school system could use to improve their approach to their
respective classrooms. On a more serious note, the Committee recommended petitioning the
School Board for a larger appropriation of money, since, once again, the Library was having
financial difficulties concerning the steadily increasing volume of work and the lack of
employees with which to address it. 80
Frederick Crunden, in the meantime, was in the process of molding the library from an
amorphous institution whose purpose in society was unclear to an important part of a local,
national, and even international community, and he did this partially by making the library
relatable in a way that people from varying walks of life could understand. He did this through
his writings, one of which included an article published in 1887, titled “Business Methods in
Library Management.

80

Report of the Committee on the Library and Reading-room to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis
Public School Library, 1887, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

27

In this article, Crunden outlines the ways in which a library is similar to a business, be it a
small, family-owned business or a large corporation owned by people such as Andrew Carnegie,
whose dealings with Crunden will be discussed later in this chapter. One principle he discusses is
the need for a librarian to “swear by” his institution, much like an employee or a manager
supports whatever product their business is producing. In this way, a librarian or an assistant had
to be completely invested in their library and the books it provided for patrons. Another principle
requires loyalty on the part of the assistants to the chief librarian, analogous to employee loyalty
to a chief executive, with the interesting use of Abraham Lincoln‟s “house divided” analogy
evoked here. 81
Perhaps the most telling aspect of Crunden‟s view on library management and its
likening to the businesses of the time period can be seen in a paragraph in his article, presented
below.
A chief librarian is in a position analogous to that occupied by the head of a commercial
house. He must know his wares, i.e., his books; he must know his customers, the
community; he must study their wants; and, like a merchant of the highest type, he will
endeavor to develop in them a taste for better articles. Like a merchant also, he must
advertise his business.82

In essence, a chief librarian had to know the target market of the library he oversaw, what
the library‟s patrons, or customers, wanted, as well as their backgrounds and how said
backgrounds determined their wants. Crunden was also careful to emphasize the librarian‟s
responsibility to provide access to wares that would educate them and therefore elevate them
above their perceived station in life.
This kind of ideation was common to the Progressive era, and would lead to other
instances of public figures attempting to use local or national government to implement their
81

Frederick M. Crunden, “Business Methods in Library Management,” Library Journal 12 (1887): 2.

82

Ibid., 2.

28

vision of a proper, educated society. One such case can be seen in Daniel Danbom‟s The Resisted
Revolution, in which an effort to reform rural communities to match the standards seen in urban
environments, known as the Country Life Movement, was met with a great deal of resistance
from locals who, understandably, did not want outside influences to change practices and
institutions that had been living with for generations. 83 While the library as a progressive
institution was not as invasive or as pervasive as the efforts depicted in Danbom‟s work, the
mindset of elevation to a new plane of societal excellence was very much prevalent in libraries.
Crunden continued to oversee the ensuring of the survival of the library with the above
purpose as its guiding mission through its expansion throughout the city, which included delivery
stations and branch libraries. A letter to the Board of Managers from the library‟s Executive
Committee dated February 11, 1888, reveals the renewal of insurance policies for up to $25,000
in the event of fire or other destructive events 84, as well as the addition of an insurance policy for
up to $1,000 for the library‟s new South Branch to ensure its continuation should anything
happen.85 The reasoning behind Crunden‟s support for such measures of insurance can be seen in
his annual report for the year between 1887 and 1888.
A few years ago we could have secured a valuable medical collection of 20,000
volumes if we had had a fire-proof building in which to place it. Not only are our
70,000 volumes, many of which could not be replaced, in constant jeopardy from
fire; but the administration is carried on under the disadvantages of crowded
quarters and inconvenient arrangements. 86
83

Daniel Danbom, The Resisted Revolution: Urban America and the Industrialization of Agriculture, 19001930 (Ames: The Iowa State University Press, 1979), 51.
84

Executive Committee to Board of Managers, February 11, 1888, St. Louis Public School Library
Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
85

Executive Committee to Board of Managers, June 9, 1888, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
86

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1887-1888, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

29

The application of insurance policies to the library and its South Branch was therefore not
only a means to ensure the existence of the library in the event of fire, but also as a means of
making it solvent as a receptacle of materials that other institutions would hesitate to exchange if
the facilities where they were to be held were considered fire hazards.
In May 1888, a proposition was fielded, but tabled until December, regarding the
potential establishment of a delivery station at the Stoddard School in St. Louis, which would
enable students of the schools to have easier access to book returns. 87 The Committee on the
Library and Reading-room noted in a letter to the Board of Managers that the shelves were
becoming increasingly overcrowded, a problem that had been brought up the previous year. It
was recommended that this problem be addressed through the requisition of more shelves from
the School Board. 88
By the close of that year, the Public School Library had begun to experiment more with
services to children. This is noted in another letter to the Board of Managers from the Committee
on the Library and Reading-room, which recommended that fifty copies of four classic tales be
purchased and sent to the upper grades for the children within them to read for the remainder of
the year, possibly to gauge what kind of juvenile literature the children of St. Louis were
primarily interested in. 89
As 1889 opened, new opportunities for internal expansion and division into departments
came with it. Prior to his reelection as the librarian of the Public School Library, Crunden had

87

Executive Committee to Board of Managers, May 4, 1888, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
88

Committee on Library and Reading-room to Board of Managers, September 8, 1888, St. Louis Public
School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
89

Committee on Library and Reading-room to Board of Managers, December 8, 1888, St. Louis Public
School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

30

stressed the need for a technological department to fulfill the needs of engineers, merchants, and
other technologists who wanted to conduct research into the workings of steam engines and
factory mechanization. On January 5, 1889, moves were definitively made to initiate progress
towards the establishment of the department within the Public School Library. The Special
Committee for the Technological Department held a preliminary meeting on November 7, 1888,
to determine the level of support such an endeavor would draw. While there was little
attendance, the motion was presented and carried to allow the businessmen throughout the city to
establish a committee to solicit funds for books for the proposed Technological Department‟s
collection of materials, and also to begin printing and distributing 20,000 circulars advertising
the department. 90
The measures employed here worked. In another report made by the committee devoted
to the Technological Department on February 9 of that same year, it was found that the
aforementioned circulars had resulted in the support of several local businessmen and merchants,
with the expectation that a sum of $10,000 could be raised for the establishment of the
department.91
In addition to the progress of the Technological Department, 1889 would prove to be the
year in which the prospect of transforming the public school library into a free public library
became closer to fruition. It had always been Crunden‟s goal to make the Public School Library
free for all with the support of a municipal tax, but by 1889, the library had a branch in the
southern part of the city, a new department awaiting establishment, and shelves that
90

Report of the Special Committee for the Technological Department to the Board of Managers of the St.
Louis Public School Library, January 5, 1889, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.
Louis, MO.
91

Report of the Special Committee for the Technological Department to the Board of Managers of the St.
Louis Public School Library, February 9, 1889, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

31

were overflowing with books. It was the perfect opportunity for Crunden to begin a more active
push towards making the library into a free public library that would generate enough funds to
expand.
Crunden began with his annual report for the year between 1888 and 1889. He began by
citing the need for more room, not just in terms of the books and other materials crowding the
shelves, but also in terms of fire safety and room for the multitude of organizations that had
begun to meet in the Public School Library‟s reading room. He discussed the need for a sounder
financial basis, which involved the aforementioned tax, and cited examples from several other
libraries in cities such as Boston and New York City, where libraries had been funded either
through a tax or through substantial financial gifts from other sources. 92
One particular source Crunden mentions in his report is Andrew Carnegie‟s corporation,
who, according to Crunden, “established free libraries in three small cities of Pennsylvania at an
aggregate cost of $395,000 and has offered a half million for a library in Pittsburgh.” 93 Part of
Andrew Carnegie‟s philanthropy involved the provision of funds for the establishment of
libraries, and part of Crunden‟s hope in mentioning Carnegie was approval for appealing to the
tycoon for additional funds. Any contributions that Carnegie could provide in addition to a tax
would provide the library with a level of financial resources that would enable them to take the
library in new directions, and perhaps make it a more formidable presence in St. Louis and on a
national and potentially international scale.
Crunden‟s annual report for 1889 and 1890 reveals that his requests for improved spaces
and room for the books and materials housed in the library had been answered. The Public
92

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1888-1889, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
93

Ibid.

32

School Library was to obtain new quarters in a building owned by the School Board, intended to
occupy the sixth and seventh floors of the building. According to the report, it was expected that
the newly expanded library would be ready by 1892. 94 The move was made between 1891 and
1892, with Frederick Crunden lauding the effort that went into the movement of over 80,000
books , newspapers, pamphlets, and other materials to the new library. 95
The annual report for the year between 1890 and 1891 reveals further interaction with
organizations beyond permitting their meetings to take place in the library‟s reading room.
Reference lists had been furnished to these organizations, which Crunden noted were related to a
wide array of diverse subjects, such as Russian history and studies on the writings of Emerson,
for example. He also continued to push for a free library by presenting statistics on how much
revenue a tax such as this would bring in for the library - $40,000 to $50,000 a year, with only
eight to ten cents per citizen. 96
By 1893, new measures had been taken in the drive towards making the library free and
supported by a tax. Permission had been granted by the principles of schools across St. Louis to
distribute circulars that had been printed up by the library, intended for the children to bring
home to their parents. In this way, they were, in essence, bringing the library‟s issues to their
parents with the hope of gaining their support for a new public library. 97

94

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1889-1890, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
95

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1891-1892, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
96

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1890-1891, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
97

Executive Committee of the Free Library Movement, March 16, 1893, St. Louis Public School Library
Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

33

In January of 1893, during a meeting that was held in Crunden‟s office, it was
unanimously voted upon to begin collecting signatures for a petition for a free public library,
which was intended to be brought to a vote later that year, in April. 98 A meeting of the Executive
Committee on February 4, 1893, bespoke the necessity of mentioning that the library tax would
not be an additional tax when circulars were printed and distributed before the April municipal
vote.99
In the meantime, other opportunities availed themselves for Crunden and his colleagues
at the library. The 1893 World‟s Fair was fast approaching, and in a report of the Executive
Committee to the Board of Managers, books by authors from Missouri had been handpicked to
be featured in the library‟s exhibit at the fair. This was done with the hope that potential donors
would see the talent of Missouri writers on display, and subsequently support a library for the
housing of the books. 100
On April 4, 1893, it was voted that a free public library should be established in St.
Louis, but did not actually make provisions for the Public School Library. The vote had simply
offered an opening through which a public library could be established, which Crunden and
those allied with his cause intended to take full advantage of. It was determined that efforts
should be made to include the provisions for a 1/5 of a mill tax for the public library in the new
tax ordinance. 101 They did, however, have to remain one step ahead of the library‟s patrons, who

98

Minutes of Meeting Held in the Office of the Librarian, January 21, 1893, Frederick M. Crunden Papers,
St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
99

Minutes of the Executive Committee of the St. Louis Public School Library, February 4, 1893, St. Louis
Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
100

Executive Committee to Board of Managers, April 8, 1893, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
101

Minutes of the Executive Committee of the Free Library Movement, April 11, 1893, St. Louis Public
School Library, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

34

had begun to discontinue renewing their $12-a-year subscriptions in anticipation of the library
becoming free. In the library‟s circulars, they emphasized the need for restraint, and that the
process to make it free was ongoing, and would not be resolved anytime soon. 102
1893 ended with Crunden including statistics for the amount of money being allocated
towards advertising, something that he had emphasized in particular in his article on business
methods in managing a library. The total costs included $109.35, with several hundred
advertisements in St. Louis trolley cars all over the city, and also included costs for the gas
lighting for a suitable reading environment – something else that Crunden emphasized. 103
1893 also marked a watershed moment in the library‟s history, which, in addition to the
vote to support a public library through the 1/5 of a mill tax, involved a change in the name of
the library. Instead of the Public School Library, the library would now be known as the St.
Louis Public Library, based on a request made by Crunden and the other life members of the
library to the School Board to transfer the library to the newly formed Free Public Library
Board.104 1893 also saw the publication of Crunden‟s seminal pamphlet The Free Public
Library: Its Uses and Values, in which he again outlined the reasons why St. Louis needed a free
public library, now more than ever.
While 1893 marked a year of successes for the library, 1894 opened with new obstacles,
beginning with the aforementioned proposed transfer of the library away from the School Board
to the Free Public Library Board. In a letter to Crunden from John Noble, a representative of the

102

Address of the Executive Committee to the Board of Managers of the St. Louis Public School Library,
May 6, 1893, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
103

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1892-1893, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
104

Free Public Library Document, 1893, St. Louis Public School Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

35

school board, dated January 22 of that year, Noble included the written opinion of the school
board‟s attorney that the representatives of the public library was not authorized to conduct such
a transfer unless it was prepared to pay rent for the top floors of its building on 9th and Locust
Streets. A negotiation of these terms would be pending for later that year. 105
The pending negotiation proved to be successful a month later. In a letter to Frederick
Crunden from the secretary of the school board, dated February 14 of that same year, duplicate
copies of the lease for the upper two floors of the school board building were presented to
Crunden, along with copies of an agreement in which conditions had been negotiated for the
official transfer of the public library from the school board to the Free Public Library Board. 106
books for the library, and with the increase of said patrons, more work necessitated the hiring of
new employees for a library whose role had just increased significantly within its community. 107
THE NETWORK EXPANDS, 1895-1911
Per the business principles he had written about in his article on the business methods of
library management, the primary focus now that the newly renamed St. Louis Public Library was
free and operating under its own volition was advertising the library and its new condition.
Communications with a local company known as the Tobin Brothers Painting Company involved
a contract to paint fifteen boards advertising the fifteen or so delivery stations that existed
throughout the city. 108

105

John Noble to Frederick Crunden, January 22, 1894, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
106

Secretary of Public Schools to Frederick Crunden, February 11, 1894, Frederick Crunden Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
107

Annual Report of the St. Louis Public (Free) Library, 1894-1895, St. Louis Public Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
108

Tobin Brothers Painting Company to Fredrick Crunden, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

36

Crunden also took the opportunity to further elaborate his comparisons of the library to a
business institution in an article he published in the periodical Public Libraries. Titled “The
Function of Library Trustees and their Relations to Trustees,” the article discussed the necessity
of having trustees in charge of securing funds for the library, which would in turn leave the
librarian free to pursue his true purpose: the maintenance and provision of enlightening books for
people to read. 109 Now that a free public library in St. Louis was a reality, it was important to
continue emphasizing the library‟s similarities to the businesses that patrons were already
familiar with, and also important to continue defining the library in this manner for posterity‟s
sake.
Crunden had plenty to discuss in his annual report for the year between 1895 and 1896.
The income from the city tax had increased by $3,000, enabling the library to gain more revenue
than it had in previous years. 110 Two additional delivery stations would enable patrons to return
books in other parts of the city, adding to an intricate system of stations networked throughout
the city.111 The additional revenue from the tax had enabled what Crunden referred to as the
signature event of the year – the purchase of a new building site. Even though the library‟s
quarters were spacious, the amount of books and materials being donated to or purchased for the
library would eventually overcrowd its shelves as it had before the move into the school board
building at 9th and Locust Streets. “The work of a great public library,” Crunden added, “cannot

109

Frederick M. Crunden, “The Function of Library Trustees and its Relations to Trustees,” Public
Libraries, 21 (1896): 32-37.
110

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1895-1896, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
111

Ibid., 15.

37

be carried on to the satisfaction of the public in the sixth and seventh floors of a commercial
building.” 112
The monthly bulletin eventually gained a sibling in the library‟s patron-oriented for its
patrons. In letters that were written and distributed to members of the library on April 28, 1897,
Crunden introduced the Public Library Magazine, which included the latest news concerning the
library in addition to a full catalogue of the library‟s holdings. The magazine offered a more
personable alternative to the monthly bulletin, which not only sought to solicit additional
subscriptions but to stoke support for the library. 113
On an international scale, Crunden represented the St. Louis Public Library at the Second
International Library Conference in London later that year in 1897, reading a paper titled “Books
and Text-Books: The Library as a Factor in Education.” The paper was ultimately a plea for a
change in attitudes concerning fiction and history books, that textbooks were not the only means
of learning, and that the public library could greatly aid in this additional education and
enlightenment by providing children and adults with an appreciation for history, literature, and
the finer qualities of life. 114
Crunden‟s annual report for the year between 1896 and 1897 shows an increase in the
circulation of books and materials, as well as the increased use of the reference rooms for
research and work on academic subjects. He again pressed the need for a larger library building

112

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1895-1896, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
113

Frederick Crunden to Members of St. Louis Public Library, April 28, 1897, Frederick M. Crunden
Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
114

Frederick M. Crunden, “Books and Text-Books: The Library as a Factor in Education,” Frederick M.
Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

38

all to itself to work with the massive amount of volumes and materials in its collection, asking
whether the citizens of St. Louis wanted its library to want for space and housing. 115
The annual report for the following year, between 1897 and 1898, shows Crunden‟s
continued emphasis on the lack of room. But there was also a new development concerning the
library‟s work with children – the opening of what Crunden refers to as a Young Folk‟s
Department.116 The library had had a collection of juvenile literature for some time, but this is
the first mention of a separate room for children‟s literature that is specifically devoted to
children. Such a measure had won the favor of several patrons, who contributed gifts of juvenile
book collections to the library.
Between 1898 and 1899, further work was done to make this space more inviting for
children. Crunden noted in his annual report for this space of time that moving the juvenile
collection into the space that formerly housed the library‟s collection of medical materials had
worked well, since children coming to the library were constantly entering the room and sifting
through the juvenile literature that had been made available. Crunden also noted that efforts had
been made towards including picture charts and lists that included the birthdays of prominent
American statesmen. 117
As the nineteenth century passed into the twentieth, the library began to receive
increasing amounts of attention from outside parties in other parts of the United States. One such
figure was Charles Francis Adams, statesman and descendent of John Quincy Adams, who had

115

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1896-1897, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
116

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1897-1898, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
117

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1898-1899, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

39

asked Crunden what was being read at the St. Louis Public Library along the lines of history and
social affairs. Crunden responded in a letter dated August 4, 1900, informed Adams that
American history ahead of English and French history were the most popular works of history
being read.118
The annual report of the librarian for the year between 1899 and 1900 is the first to show
the change in the name of the library, which is seen here as the St. Louis Public (Free) Library.
This was perhaps done in an effort to further advertise the library‟s new nature as a free rather
than a subscription library. Additionally, one of the events that Crunden speaks of marks and
important event in the library‟s history – the beginning of negotiations with Andrew Carnegie
and his corporation for funds to help establish other branch libraries as well as the central library
building that Crunden had been pressing for in earlier circulars. 119
In her study of Carnegie-funded libraries in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, Abigail A. Van Slyck identifies two clearly defined procedures for American urban
libraries to follow upon contacting the Carnegie Corporation for funds. The first involved the
provision of funds to large municipalities with a population at a minimum of 1,000, and a city
tax of 10% of the provided gift to ensure payment of the libraries, funds for books and materials,
and the construction of further branch libraries. 120
The annual report for the year between 1900 and 1901 shows some internal changes
designed to take advantage of the library‟s new internal divisions into departments. Different

118

Frederick Crunden to Charles Francis Adams, August 4, 1900, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
119

Annual Report of the St. Louis Public (Free) Library, 1899-1900, St. Louis Public Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
120

Abigail A. Van Slyck, Free to All: Carnegie Libraries and American Culture, 1890-1920 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1998), 22.

40

rooms included the Art Room as well as the Juvenile Department, which Crunden notes
produced over eighty thousand books for children to be borrowed throughout the year. 121 1901
saw Crunden and other members of the St. Louis community attempting to drum up support from
Carnegie and his corporation for the funding of branch libraries.
One such member was a doctor identified as S.J. Nicholls, who had sent a letter to
Carnegie detailing the need for assistance in this regard. Carnegie responded to this letter by
pledging his support, but not in the way Crunden and those assisting him were hoping. Carnegie
stated in the letter that he felt it would be a mistake to spend several thousand dollars on funds
for a central library building – that branch libraries were the best way to reach the people of a
city. He did, however, offer a proposal.
If the city of St. Louis will agree to tax itself and expend not less than $150,000 per
annum on its Library System I shall be glad to give $500,000 to be expended hereafter in
Branch Libraries as these are needed, the city to furnish sites for the Libraries and the
money I give to be used for the Buildings.122

While negotiations proceeded with Carnegie through his secretary, James Bertram, the
first additional branch library after the establishment of the South Library received funding from
a local businessman. William Barr, the owner of several dry goods stores throughout St. Louis,
had donated several thousand dollars to aid in the construction of a branch library, which, of
course, would bear its philanthropist‟s name.123 In addition to the upcoming Barr Branch, the St.
Louis Public Library purchased the site of the original Louisiana Purchase Exposition for the
sum of $280,000, which had been accrued through subscriptions by the St. Louis Union Trust
121

Annual Report of the St. Louis Public (Free) Library, 1900-1901, St. Louis Public Library Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
122

Andrew Carnegie to S.J. Nicholls, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

MO.
123

William Barr to Frederick Crunden, May 26, 1902, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

41

Company. This new site was intended for the proposed central library, which Crunden held out
hope would receive funding from Carnegie. 124
1903 would prove to be a significant year for the development of the library. This year in
particular saw increased communication between Frederick Crunden and James Bertram, the
personal secretary to Andrew Carnegie, regarding negotiations towards acquiring funds towards
branch libraries and the central library that was Crunden‟s primary goal at this point. 1903 also
saw the beginning of the library‟s efforts to collect its monthly bulletins in volumes for the sake
of posterity, containing information for use by historians or those interested in library history
later on.
With regard to the first aspect of the importance of 1903, a flurry of communications
between Bertram and Crunden occurred in November of that year. The resolutions that Carnegie
had mentioned in his response to Dr. Nicholls had been put together and sent to Carnegie on
October 14th of that year. Bertram responded in a letter to Crunden dated November 2 nd, 1903, in
which he made this statement.
The articles sent with your letter of 14 th October are what we should expect from a village
to whom a gift of Five or Ten Thousand Dollars had been made, not such as would
emanate a City of 600,000 people. You should see the unique tribute which San
Francisco sent, in the shape of a set of Resolutions framed in a slice of Redwood tree.
However, you have lost your opportunity. 125

Evidently, a more ostentatious display was called for, and Crunden responded by sending
a placatory letter to Bertram on the 14 th of that same month, asking if it was not too late to

124

Annual Report of the St. Louis Public Library, 1901-1902, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
125

James Bertram to Frederick Crunden, November 2, 1903, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

42

retrieve the scrolls that had been sent out in October of that year. 126 Bertram replied by
confirming that the scrolls could be returned in exchange for properly displayed resolutions for
Carnegie to have.
In the meantime, Crunden‟s annual report for the year between 1902 and 1903 mentioned
the recent donation of funds by William Barr in addition to the acquiring of the former grounds
of the Exposition for the site for the new central library. There was also mention of a new
collection of books in German – over 1,500 – that had been acquired for the library‟s collection,
and in a similar vein to Crunden‟s other reports, the growing juvenile department gains a
significant amount of attention. It, according to Crunden, was growing rapidly, and boasted
hundreds of child subscribers with reading cards for the educational benefits of the library‟s
juvenile department. 127
Negotiations with Bertram and Carnegie, by proxy, appear to have concluded by March
of 1904, in which Bertram thanked Crunden for the unique means through which the scrolls had
been dispatched. 128 In the meantime, Crunden continued to make appearances in different venues
and agreements with different companies for the purpose of promoting the library and the good it
could do for the overall community. His annual report for 1903 through 1904 shows continued
growth and satisfaction with the library‟s juvenile department, and his notation of the monthly

126

Frederick Crunden To James Bertram, November 10, 1903, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
127

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1902-1903, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
128

James Bertram to Frederick Crunden, March 26, 1904, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

43

bulletin‟s success as a means of delivering the latest library-related news and holdings of books
to the public.129
An example of the library‟s attempts at making the bulletin relevant to the daily lives of
its patrons can be found in the January 1905 issue of the monthly bulletin. Beforehand, the
Russo-Japanese War had erupted as the latest efforts on the part of the Japanese to reveal their
military prowess to the world following the Sino-Japanese War of 1895, from which Japan
emerged with control over Korea. Theodore Roosevelt, the President of the United States at that
point, was an integral part of the negotiations between the Russians and the Japanese, and would
later win a Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.
If the library were to function as an educative institution beyond newspapers and
textbooks, it would have to point its patrons in the correct direction regarding the latest global
events. In the January 1905 bulletin, Crunden did just that. The bulletin includes lists of
nonfiction books on Russia, Japan, and China, one of which included C.H. Hawes‟s In the
Uttermost East: Being an Account of Investigations Among the Natives and Russian Convicts of
the Island of Sakhalin, with Notes of Travel in Korea, Siberia, and Manchuria.130 Sakhalin was
one of the territories in dispute following the conclusion of the Russo-Japanese War, with the
Japanese and the Russians both claiming ownership of the island. Including a book on the
island‟s history, along with additional notes on the three regions mentioned in the book‟s byline,
would help patrons to better understand that part of the conflict in terms of why it was so
valuable to both parties.

129

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1903-1904, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
130

Monthly Bulletin, January 1905, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

44

In spite of a site being purchased, things were not budging as far as funds being provided
by Carnegie for a central library. In a letter sent to Frederick Crunden dated December 15, 1905,
James Bertram essentially reiterated what Carnegie stated to Dr. Nicholls in their brief exchange
of letters, adding further that Carnegie would more likely fund a central building for a lesser
amount of money than branch libraries, which he was all too willing to fund in the entirety of
what they would cost. 131
In the midst of these continuing developments, Frederick Crunden found himself in very
ill health. While vacationing in New York, Crunden suffered the first of several strokes, which
led to his being hospitalized in a sanitarium for two weeks. 132 By May 24th, 1906, Crunden was
deemed fit to remove himself to the countryside and then afterwards return home. 133 Crunden
had always been afflicted with various bouts of illness, but in this case, his illness was
particularly acute due to the amount of stress he was facing in St. Louis.
Part of Crunden‟s high stress level most likely came from the library‟s three new branch
libraries, one of which officially opened in September of 1906. The Barr Branch, named for its
benefactor, William Barr, began its work with patrons on September 18, 1906, registering a total
of 3,566 new patrons. One important detail seen in this section of Crunden‟s annual report for
1906 and 1907 is how the system of checking out and returning books between the libraries was
interchangeable. A book could be checked out from either the main branch in the school board
building or the Barr Branch and then be subsequently returned at either one. This, in effect,

131

James Bertram to Frederick Crunden, December 15, 1905, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
132

“Librarian F.M. Crunden Paralyzed in New York: Abandons Trip to Europe,” The St. Louis Republic,
May 10, 1906.
133

“Crunden Able to Leave New York,” The St. Louis Republic, May 24, 1906.

45

would establish a workable network of checkouts and returns for all patrons no matter what
branch they patronized in its respective part of the city. 134
The two other branch libraries were known as the Cabanne and Carondelet Branches,
respectively. The public library‟s officials had been receiving a steady stream of funds for branch
libraries from Carnegie‟s corporation up to that point, and Crunden‟s annual report for 1906 and
1907 shows the receipt of $80,000 for the Cabanne Branch in April of 1906, and then a further
$75,000 intended for the Carondelet Branch arrived on December 12 th of that same year. 135
1907 was the year in which designs for the new central library were finalized, put
forward, and approved by the Board of Managers. Several architectural firms based in St. Louis
had been tapped by the Board in a contest to see which would do the best work when it came to
designing a library, which included incorporating all of the necessities that had been found to
make a functioning library. The design of architect Cass Gilbert would be chosen as the design
for the new central library, and Crunden congratulated him on his design in a letter dated June
29, 1907, stating that Gilbert‟s “clear comprehension of the practical problems of library
administration called forth the admiration of us all.” 136Around the same time, on June 28 of that
same year, the new Cabanne Branch opened for business, and resulted in the registration of 941
readers within a single month.137
In 1908, Crunden‟s declining health, exacerbated by years of toil on behalf of the library,
began to take its toll. In a letter to the library‟s Board of Directors on February 20, 1908,
134

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1906-1907, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
135

Ibid.

136

Frederick Crunden to Cass Gilbert, June 29, 1907, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
137

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1907-1908, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

46

Crunden‟s wife, Kate, stated that due to her husband‟s condition, it was highly unlikely that
Crunden would be able to resume his duties with the same level of effectiveness and vivacity
with which he‟d approached his post. 138 In response to this new development, Paul Blackwelder,
an assistant librarian, was tapped to assume the majority of Crunden‟s original duties while the
chief librarian recovered and did what he could from home. 139
In the meantime, the expansion of the library throughout the city continued unabated.
Using the funds distributed to the St. Louis Board of Directors from the Carnegie Corporation, a
lot at the corner of Fourteenth and Cass Avenues was purchased for a new branch library on
February 24, 1908, a library that was to be named after Frederick Crunden. 140 Another lot,
intended for what was to be called the Soulard Branch, was purchased on May 31 of the previous
year.141
By April 21, 1908, it was clear that Crunden would not be able to return to his former
duties as chief librarian at all. According to a letter to his wife written by the Board of Directors,
the Administration Committee had held off on searching for a replacement until such a
conclusion had been reached. It seemed now that a replacement would be necessary, and they
began their search in earnest around the country to tap experienced librarians for the job of chief
librarian.142

138

Kate Crunden to Board of Directors, February 20, 1908, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
139

Annual Report of the St. Louis Public Library, 1907-1908, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, MO.
140

Annual Report of the St. Louis Public Library, 1908-1909, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, MO.
141

Ibid.

142

Board of Directors to Kate Crunden, April 21, 1908, Frederick M. Crunden Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

47

One of their choices was Arthur E. Bostwick, a librarian working at the New York Free
Circulating Library in New York City. By 1908, Bostwick had already established himself as a
respected figure in the library field. Born in Litchfield, Connecticut, on March 8, 1860, Bostwick
received a doctorate in physics at Yale University in 1883 and held positions as a high school
teacher and then as an editor of Appleton’s Cyclopedia of American Biography. He became the
chief librarian of the New York Free Circulating Library in 1895, and then eventually served as
the chief librarian for the Brooklyn Public Library by the turn of the century. 143
Like Crunden, Bostwick came to librarianship from a background in education. At that
point, there was no formal training for librarians to be had at universities in the United States
aside from Melvil Dewey‟s library school at Columbia University. What he learned of
librarianship, he learned through a mixture of trial and error and experience gained during his
time at the New York Free Circulating Library and the Brooklyn Public Library, and his
evolving view on books can be best summed up in a speech he gave at a library conference in
New York State in 1908.
I know of no more desirable classification of books for our present purpose than the old
three categories – the Good, the True, and the Beautiful. Those books that we desire, we
want because they fall under one or more of these three heads – they must be morally
beneficial, contain accurate information or satisfy the [aesthetic] sense in its broadest
meaning.144

As the search for a replacement for Frederick Crunden continued, plans moved forward
on yet another branch library in the growing network of branches throughout St. Louis. In a
meeting of the public library‟s Board of Directors on March 12, 1909, architectural plans for a

143

“Arthur Bostwick,” in Bodhan S. Wynar, ed., The Dictionary of American Library Biography (Littleton:
Libraries Unlimited, 1978), 47.
144

Arthur Bostwick, “The Librarian as a Censor: Address of the President, American Library Association,
Lake Minnetonka Conference, 1908,” Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

48

branch named after Ira Divoll were approved along with additional changes that Cass Gilbert
desired to make regarding the architectural layout for the central building.145
On June 29 of that same year, Frederick Crunden officially resigned from his position as
chief librarian. In a meeting of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, his
resignation was officially accepted, and motions were made concerning the election of a new
librarian. Based on the minutes of this meeting, it is apparent that out of the wide pool of
candidates for the position of chief librarian, Arthur E. Bostwick became the foremost choice.
During this same meeting, the Board of Directors unanimously carried a motion to elect
Bostwick as the new chief librarian. 146
Bostwick received a copy of the minutes of this meeting along with a letter from F.W.
Lehmann, the President of the Board of Directors, asking him if he would be interested in
accepting the position. On July 6, he sent a hasty letter of acceptance, requesting to begin his
new work as the chief librarian no later than October, since he needed time to put in his notice
along preparing for the move across the country to St. Louis.147 Upon his arrival, the monthly
bulletin for October of 1909 shows Bostwick as the new librarian, and included the
aforementioned meeting minutes in order to inform patrons of the new regime change. 148
Bostwick initially left much unchanged about the way in which the St. Louis Public
Library was run following Crunden‟s resignation. The only change to be made during the

145

Meeting Minutes, Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, Friday, March 12, 1909, St. Louis
Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
146

Ibid.

147

Arthur Bostwick to F.W. Lehmann, July 6, 1909, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
148

Monthly Bulletin, October 1909, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

MO.

49

beginning of his tenure involved the introduction of a new internal circular meant for library
employees, which he titled Staff Notes. The first issue of this circular in October of 1909 points
to what exactly would constitute each monthly issue of the new circular.
This mimeographed sheet will be issued every Saturday hereafter and will be sent to each
head of a department or branch. It will contain a calendar of events for the following
week; a statement of changes in the library staff, and other matters of local library
interest; and official notices in separate form. Each member of the staff will be required
to read it carefully and ignorance of what it contains will not be received as an excuse. 149

Through Staff Notes, Bostwick was hoping to achieve the same level of awareness of
internal library affairs as was being disseminated through the monthly bulletins for patrons.
Knowledge of what was going on in the other departments of the library would also hopefully
foster increased interdepartmental communication and transference of ideas within the library.
The annual report for the year between 1909 and 1910 shows ground being broken on the new
site for the central library.
By this point, the St. Louis Public Library had exponentially grown in local, national, and
international esteem. It had acquired the characteristics of other libraries across the nation that
had made the institutions successful – the expansion into branch libraries to reach as many parts
of urban populations as possible, the incorporation of business practices to monitor funds used to
purchase books and equipment, and librarians who believed in their institution and commanded
the respect of others as scholars and educators. It had broken away from its preexisting
institution of the local school system while still maintaining ties to it, and like other free libraries
throughout the country, stood on its own while being funded through the local tax of one-fifth of
a mill as well as donated funds from the Carnegie Corporation for its branch libraries. Under
Bostwick‟s tenure, the library would continued its meteoric rise as a local and nationally
renowned educational institution.
149

Staff Notes, October 1909, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

50

CHAPTER 3: THE MOLD HARDENS, 1910-1925
The first decade of the twentieth century was over, and with it, the second major period
of development and expansion of the St. Louis Public Library came to a close. Arthur E.
Bostwick was now the chief librarian following the resignation of Frederick Crunden, whose role
in making the library free for all and expanding it throughout the city through the construction of
branch libraries would be commemorated through the building of a new branch bearing his
name.
There was still more to be done with the library, however. Developments beyond the
scope of St. Louis concerning libraries needed to be addressed in the city‟s public library, and
they largely concerned service to children, how libraries dealt with disease, and library schools
for more effective staff. These issues, in addition to further expansion of the library, were ones
that Bostwick would address with the same vivacity and fervor by which his predecessor
addressed the issues facing the library during his tenure.
THE BENEVOLENT OCTOPUS, 1911-1915
The primary issues that Bostwick addressed during the first year of his tenure involved
disease and the ways it could potentially be transmitted via book borrowings, in addition to the
establishment of a reputable library school in St. Louis. With regard to the first case, Bostwick
contacted a medical doctor named G.A. Jordan to seek his opinion on the matter, since he was
one of the primary physicians dealing with outbreaks of disease such as tuberculosis in the city.
Their first exchange of letters took place between January 27 and 28, 1910, in which Bostwick
inquired as to whether or not books that had been borrowed by patrons whose homes had become
sites of disease were safe. Jordan responded by stating that such books were safe for other

51

patrons to borrow following a proper disinfection process. 150 Another series of letters between
February and March of that same year reveals the process by which “infected books” were
identified and then fumigated. In going from house to house to check infected patients, they were
asked whether or not they had books within the house. If there were, they would be removed,
marked with a red sticker to prevent their being sent back into circulation, and then sent to
Jordan‟s office for fumigation procedures. 151
Under Bostwick‟s tenure, the monthly bulletin had undergone some minute, yet
important changes. The bulletin now included an official logo and seal, possibly to make the
library seem like a more official institution, and also began to include snippets on the progress of
the Central Library‟s construction. Bostwick also noted in the monthly bulletin that the
reclassification of the library, begun under Crunden‟s tenure, had resumed anew, and that the
open shelf room for people to browse books without having to worry about display cases had
undergone significant expansions. 152
In the monthly bulletin for April of 1910, the Soulard Branch was officially opened on
March 21. The neighborhood in which it had been opened largely consisted of Czech
immigrants, who took “special interest in it and have made gifts of books and pictures to it,
besides taking part in the exercises…and furnishing the decorations.” 153 Shows of support like
this were not uncommon, since different branches existed in neighborhoods housing their own

150

G.A. Jordan to Arthur Bostwick, January 28, 1910, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
151

G.A. Jordan to Arthur Bostwick, February 12, 1910, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
152

Monthly Bulletin, January 1910, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

153

Monthly Bulletin, April 1910, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

MO.
MO.

52

immigrant populations who sought books and periodicals that delivered news and reading in
their own language depicting issues that were important to them.
The next issue that Bostwick addressed midway through 1910 was the establishment of a
library school. Both Bostwick and Frederick Crunden had come to librarianship through
education, having been either teachers or the principals of schools. They had had no formal
training for librarianship, and everything they had accomplished had been done through
experience rather than learning from a class. As evidenced by Melvil Dewey‟s library school at
Columbia University, the importance of having a reputable library school for professionals to
work with adult and juvenile patrons was steadily growing, and Bostwick felt it was necessary
for St. Louis to have its own library school.
The individual to which he offered the job of establishing and managing the school was
Harriet P. Sawyer, a teacher and librarian. Their first communication took place in May of 1910,
in which Sawyer expressed interest in Bostwick‟s outline for a library school in St. Louis and
asked if she could have a week to consider his offer. 154 Their final exchange for that month
shows them laying the groundwork for the library school, discussing entrance requirements and
the preliminary work for the kinds of classes students would be required to attend. 155
In addition to trying to establish a working library school, Bostwick expressed interest in
establishing a municipal reference library in a letter to F.W. Lehmann, the President of the St.
Louis Public Library‟s Board of Directors. Such a library, Bostwick suggested, could be housed
in City Hall, yet Lehmann‟s response was less than favorable. In a letter to Bostwick dated

154

Harriet P. Sawyer to Arthur Bostwick, May 11, 1910, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
155

Arthur Bostwick to Harriet P. Sawyer, May 18, 1910, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

53

October 16, 1910, Lehmann suggested that such a library ought to be established in the central
building of the library before any movement could be made towards renting spaces in City Hall
for use by engineers or interested parties. 156
1910 closed with the opening of a new branch library. The Divoll Branch, named after Ira
Divoll, opened on December 5, registering hundreds of new patrons. At the opening of the
branch, the library attempted to experiment with a new process aimed at inculcating children
with an appreciation for the care of the books they were borrowing. The latest in the library‟s
series of attempts to inculcate children with an appreciation of reading, the experiment consisted
of using a pledge-book that children were required to sign in addition to reciting a pledge to care
for the books they borrowed. 157
As 1911 opened, the Children‟s Department, once formerly known as the juvenile
department, had grown in importance and consideration. Libraries across the country now
boasting departments that were devoted specifically to service for the children, with the hope
that, in goals that were similar to the aforementioned experiment at the Divoll Branch, a love of
reading and education could be fostered in the children who attended their programs and heard
about what kinds of selections were available through their schools. Effie Louise Power, a
pioneer in the field of children‟s librarianship, was a prominent figure in the developing field,
and she would be tapped for the work of Supervisor of Children‟s Work at the St. Louis Public
Library, which would begin in 1910.

156

F.W. Lehmann to Arthur Bostwick, October 16, 1910, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
157

Monthly Bulletin, December 1910, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.

Louis, MO.

54

Before her arrival at the St. Louis Public Library, Power had built a successful career in
children‟s librarianship. According to her resume, she was born in Conneautville, Pennsylvania,
and received her high school diploma in 1892. Her career in librarianship began following her
graduation from the Training School for Children‟s Librarians in 1904, after which she resumed
her work at the free public library in Cleveland, Ohio. 158
Before she embarked on her graduate education in Pennsylvania, Power had done
extensive work at the Cleveland Public Library in helping to develop its department for
children‟s service. Her first report on the progress of the Children‟s Department at the Cleveland
Public Library is featured in the library‟s 33 rd annual report, which covers the year 1901 in its
entirety. In the report, Power details the need for reference books, since reference work between
librarians and teachers was steadily increasing, and also notes the care with which the children‟s
librarians, herself included, had selected the books for the department. 159
Before her arrival at the St. Louis Public Library, Power was involved in the creation of
lists of books for children, which were experiences that would translate into her short tenure at
St. Louis. Part of the inspiration for these lists originates with Sara Cone Bryant‟s well-known
bibliographic work, titled How to Tell Stories to Children and Some Stories to Tell. “Storytelling,” Bryant writes in her conclusion, “as a real mission to perform in setting free the natural
creative expression of children, and in vitalizing the general atmosphere of the school.” 160 Power
was among several children‟s librarians who would carry this ideology into their respective

158

Effie L. Power Resume, Cleveland Public Library Records, Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, OH.

159

33rd Annual Report, Cleveland Public Library Records, Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, OH.

160

Sara Cone Bryant, How to Tell Stories to Children and Some Stories to Tell (1905; repr., New York:
Kessinger Books, 2004), 55.

55

departments, and it served as the bedrock of their mission to inculcate children with a love of
reading and education.
Power‟s status as pioneer in terms of children‟s services is reflective of broader trends
affecting gender issues, as well as politics, in the United States. In her monograph Creating a
Female Dominion in American Reform, Robyn Muncy notes that between 1903 and 1917,
women gradually established a place for themselves in American government and politics
through the founding of agencies such as the Children‟s Bureau. It was founded in 1912 and, in
addition to handling child welfare policies in the United States, managed an intricate network of
organizations devoted to similar goals. 161 What is significant about organizations such as this
Children‟s Bureau, whose efforts were undoubtedly aided by American libraries‟ increasing
emphasis on services for children, is the way in which women created a field of their own rather
than trying to push into territories that were typically dominated by men. This, according to
Muncy, constituted a large part of the settlement house mentality that was later carried into
organizations such as the aforementioned Children‟s Bureau. 162
Effie Power became a part of the St. Louis Public Library‟s Children‟s Department in
March of 1911. Her arrival was announced in the monthly bulletin for that month, having moved
to St. Louis following her departure from her role as first assistant at the Children‟s Department
in the Carnegie Library in Pittsburgh.163 She arrived amidst continuing changes in the internal
structures of the library, as well as the connections it nurtured with other aspects of the
community that surrounded it.
161

Robyn Muncy, Creating a Female Dominion in American Reform, 1890-1935 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994), 38
162

Ibid., 48.

163

Monthly Bulletin, March 1911, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis,

MO.

56

One example of such a connection involves the religious aspects of St. Louis society. In
April of 1911, a catalogue of books was compiled and published by members of the Knights of
Columbus, who had voted to compile such a catalogue at Marquette Council No. 606. Their
reasoning for this can be found in the introduction to their pamphlet, which states that “many for
want of knowledge and proper guidance, read everything that falls under their notice, and as a
result read much that is utterly without literary merit, and much, perhaps, which from the higher
stories.164
This was done in an effort to promote readership during the summer vacation between
schools, and thusly served as a corollary to the aforementioned movements towards opening
small, temporary branches in the schools. In the meantime, the library school was moving ahead.
The first step was to establish a training class, the first of which was advertised in a pamphlet
released during the summer of 1911. It announced a six-week course to be held in the Cabanne
Branch of the St. Louis Public Library, titled the Missouri Summer School for Library Science. It
would be administered by Harriet Sawyer, who, along with Bostwick, would serve as one of
several instructors teaching classes on library administration, cataloging, and other facets of
library service. 165
Bostwick continued the library‟s inexorable drive towards collecting new patrons from
different walks of life by including the disabled as well as minorities and immigrants. In the
monthly bulletin for September of 1911, the library began its drive towards purchasing books
written in Braille, so that it could serve patrons that were blind. Relatives or friends could obtain

164

“Playground Books Would End Scraps: Librarians Will Use Jules Verne to Stop Boys‟ Quarrels Over
Apparatus,” The St. Louis Republic, July 21, 1911.
165

Missouri Summer School of Library Science Pamphlet, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

57

the books using the blind individual‟s library card. In doing this, the library expanded its services
to include the disabled. 166
On October 28, 1911, it was announced in The St. Louis Globe-Democrat that Frederick
Crunden had passed away at St. Luke‟s Hospital from natural causes and complications due to
the strokes and illnesses he‟d suffered earlier in his life. The Frederick M. Crunden Branch
would serve as the library‟s testament to one of its greatest champions and librarians, who had
established the foundation on which Arthur Bostwick was continuing to build. 167 The Municipal
Reference Library that Bostwick had advocated for earlier that year came to fruition in
November of 1911, when it was opened in City Hall. 168 Crunden‟s vision was clearly in good
hands.
Following the fanfare of the opening of the new central library building on January 6,
1912, the St. Louis Public Library settled into new routines. The library had arrived at a turning
point in its history, now that it had its own central building and a network of branches linked by
distribution services that enabled citizens throughout the city to access books no matter the
section in which they lived. What was left to do now involved continual expansion of its services
to different aspects of the population, as well as the expansion of its departments to incorporate
the new developments of the time period.
Now that the library science summer courses held in 1911 had come and gone, Bostwick
felt the need to establish a library school with a firmer footing. While Harriet P. Sawyer was
working locally to do just that, Bostwick contacted other sources for information, namely Mary
166

Monthly Bulletin, September 1911, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.

Louis, MO.
167

“Former Librarian F.M. Crunden Dies,” The St. Louis Globe-Democrat, October 28, 1911.

168

Monthly Bulletin, November 1911, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.

Louis, MO.

58

W. Plummer, the principal of the New York City Public Library School. Bostwick initiated
contact in a letter dated March 25, 1912, in which he asked Plummer for her opinion regarding
the feasibility of expanding the training class into a full-fledged library school. 169
Plummer‟s response, dated April 1, was favorable, stating that she had long felt that their
region was in need of a good library school, and could not think of any other favorable
environment than that of St. Louis and its library. Her advice in the same letter involved
increasing the age limit, charging a tuition, and creating an effective entrance examination, and
said that after developing the methods for their own library school, “the school is making an
impression on an entirely different class of people from those who would have been impressed
by a training class for apprentices.” 170
Bostwick, however, decided to temporarily put a hold on his ambitions for a library
school as of late January 1913. At the conclusion of another exchange of letters with Mary W.
Plummer, dated January 25, Bostwick had decided to take Plummer‟s advice to hold off on
moving forward until a library school inspector could investigate the conditions of the library‟s
training class and the library itself in order to determine whether or not a library school was
really feasible. 171
While the initial plans for a library school were being placed on hold for the moment,
Bostwick wrote a small treatise that was first published in one of the monthly bulletins. Titled
Books I Like and Why I Like Them, Bostwick, like Crunden, sought to connect with the library‟s

169

Arthur Bostwick to Mary W. Plummer, March 25, 1912, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
170

Mary W. Plummer to Arthur Bostwick, April 1, 1912, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
171

Arthur Bostwick to Mary Plummer, January 25, 1913, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

59

patrons by presenting his favorite books and the reasons why he enjoyed them. His list of books
included James Bryce‟s The American Commonwealth (“The most just, sympathetic and
inspiring account of things American ever penned.”), H.G. Wells‟ A Modern Utopia (“No form
of fiction interests me more than the ideal states that philosophers have imagined, and of these
sociological dreams that of Mr. Wells please me most.”), and Jack London‟s The Call of the
Wild, among several others (“Heredity, environment and free will, we are told, are three
determinants of man. Does the last-named attribute enter into a dog‟s life? London assumes it
does and so [makes] „Buck‟ almost a rational creature…”).172
A similar book list was published later in 1914, by none other than Effie Power. Using
the inspiration from compilations such as the aforementioned pamphlet by Sara Cone Bryant,
Power compiled a list that she titled A List of Books for Older Girls, which, like Bostwick‟s own
compilation, appeared in one of the monthly bulletins. One important difference to note in
Power‟s pamphlet is her discriminations between which books were better for reading aloud,
since a significant part of service for children involved storytelling. The books she marked
included Jane Austen‟s Pride and Prejudice, from which she noted Chapters 3, 10, and 29, and
Richard Blackmoor‟s Lorna Doone, from which she noted Chapters 7, 8, and 10. 173
Effie Power was also instrumental in providing a detailed analysis of children and their
interactions with the St. Louis Public Library in all of its branches. Her article, titled “How the
Children of a Great City Get Their Books,” provides a wealth of statistical and sociological data
for librarians to read, digest, and hopefully apply to their own practice of serving the juvenile

172

Arthur E. Bostwick, Books I Like and Why I Like Them: The St. Louis Public Library’s Collection of
Favorites, 2nd Edition (St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1913), 3-16.
173

Effie L. Power, A List of Books for Older Girls, 3rd Edition (New York: The H.W. Wilson Company,

1914), 6.

60

populations of their respective cities. Power‟s statistics were based on a census that had been
taken of the city‟s population in 1910, which bespoke a total of 99,905 children between the ages
of 6 to 14 years of age, with 2% being illiterate, 85.5% in school, and finally, 12.5% either out of
school or working to support their families. 174 After noting a brief history of the kinds of libraryrelated services for children since the beginning of the Public School Library, Power noted racial
statistics as well, with the children being served consisting of 55.5% white, 34.5% white as
foreign immigrants, 5.5% foreign-born, and 4.5% African-American. 175
Power went on to note that 748,763 juvenile books had been issued from the children‟s
rooms in the Central Library and the other branches. The books were checked out by children
from different walks of life, of which Power was careful to note the respective characteristics.
Russian Jewish children, for example, had a thirst for knowledge and reading that was, to Power,
“a constant surprise and delight.”176 Children with Slavic ancestry, on the other hand, were cause
for concern. According to Power, Slavic children were sickly and lived in overcrowded
apartments and homes, and were also led to believe that attendance at school should only be
adhered to until the children were old enough to leave school and work to support the family.
Power recommended patient work with Slavic children, who tended toward history, travel, and
biographical works. 177
With regard to storytelling, Power noted the effectiveness of using myths and legends to
inspire children to better themselves as well as to immerse themselves further in reading.

174

Effie L. Power, How the Children of a Great City Get Their Books: Being an Account of the Work with
Children in the St. Louis Public Library (St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1914), 2.
175

Ibid., 7-8.

176

Ibid., 10.

177

Ibid., 13.

61

Storytelling at playgrounds and during story hours at the branch libraries were, of course,
intended to inculcate children with a love of reading and education that would carry on to their
later years, with the hope of bucking the kinds of trends that Power noted amongst Slavic
families. Such books were vetted by the children‟s librarians to make sure they would serve the
purposes outlined by the library‟s overall progressive mission.
One of the most interesting details of Power‟s article involves an observation she
included from one of the children‟s librarians at the Central Library, in which she stated that the
librarian made “special mention of the increasing number of fathers who are selecting their
children‟s books and of the delight which they show in doing it.” 178 This effectively shows that
the library had had a significant role in blurring the lines demarcating gender boundaries, since
the library had once been thought of as a place where men educated themselves, and women only
went to provide education for their children and thusly enrich the home. It now seemed that
fathers were doing this, as well, actively acquiring books for their children and partaking in their
children‟s education, a role that had primarily been reserved for women at one point.
Following the release of this article in the library‟s monthly bulletins, Arthur Bostwick
made his annual librarian‟s report to the Board of Directors. In the report, he hearkened back to
the recommendations he‟d made in his first report as the chief librarian of the St. Louis Public
Library in 1909. His recommendations had included the re-classification of the library‟s
collection of books, the organization of a children‟s department under an effective supervisor,
the foundation of a training class for librarians, the allowance of the chief librarian to implement

178

Power, How the Children of a Great City Get Their Books, 43.

62

graded tests for library personnel, and finally, the establishment of a municipal reference
library.179
In the five years since Bostwick had assumed his post, all of these goals had been
addressed and accomplished, with service to children and the hiring of new personnel having
been improved through Bostwick‟s exams and the training class, which, under Harriet P. Sawyer,
had graduated seventeen new members as of November 9, 1914. 180 He recommended that the
branch system be extended further, and continued to push for the establishment of a library
school, stating in his report, “The growth of libraries to the west and south of us will make a
library school in St. Louis a desirable thing, and if an endowment can be secured, yielding at
least $5,000 a year, we could, with the start that we have now made, establish a school of the
first grade here in St. Louis.” 181
WORLD WAR I AND BEYOND, 1915-1925
The advent of the First World War, known mostly as the Great War during its initial
years, wrought extensive changes in the library and its city. St. Louis was not alone amongst
large urban populations in terms of the upheavals in immigrant populations, who were not only
concerned about the families they had in Europe, but also expressing antipathy towards other
ethnicities on both sides of the dividing line between the Allied and Central Powers.
The St. Louis Public Library, nonetheless, was still highly active in terms of educating
the populace on the countries involved in World War I, as well as the issues that lay underneath

179

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1914, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St.

Louis, MO.
180

Notice of the St. Louis Public Library Training Class, November 9, 1914, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers,
St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
181

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1913-1914, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

63

it. In the annual report for the library covering the year between 1914 and 1915, the room that
housed magazines and newspapers carried German newspapers, which had been received
through the office of the Mayor since the war began. According to Bostwick, these newspapers
were much in demand by German immigrants and other German-speaking individuals interested
in what was being reported from the actual country. 182
A significant section of the report detailed the effects that the war had been having on the
library and its patrons. Bostwick noted that great effort had been expended in acquiring books,
pamphlets, and all manner of materials concerning the war and the country involved. 183 The
library‟s Art Department, for example, received forty German posters on loan from the Newark
Public Library between May 1 and June 1, 1914. 184 The goal was to provide a well-rounded view
that included views from all sides of the conflict, and the library, being the educative institution
it was meant to be, attempted to do this as much as it possibly could.
In the report, Bostwick also included statements from librarians at the other branches, in
order to provide other viewpoints on the effect that the war was having on their respective
libraries. One librarian, a Miss Pretlow working out of the Cabanne Branch, expressed her
surprise that the children who visited the branch did not express a great deal of interest in the
war. “It seems,” Pretlow commented further, “so strange that it should be necessary to keep them
officially ignorant of this great war because the grandfather of one spoke French and another
German.”185 Other libraries were experiencing the same pressures as the St. Louis Public

182

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1914-1915, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
183

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1914-1915, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
184

Ibid., 36.

185

Ibid., 64.

64

Library. According to Wayne A. Wiegand, other American libraries sought to provide
information about the conflict that had engulfed Europe, and in doing so, adopt a neutral position
on the war while serving all interested parties. 186 With the largely populated enclaves of
immigrants residing in American metropolitan areas, this was undoubtedly a highly difficult
position to maintain.
While the library‟s patrons were partaking of its collection of materials relating to the
war, business continued as usual. On January 8, 1916, Bostwick wrote a thankful letter of
acceptance to Bertha Bruenning, a representative of the Catholic Women‟s Association, of
several books that had at one time belonged the Catholic Free Library. 187 A log of activities from
the Central Library‟s children‟s room, compiled by Frances Bowman, the children‟s librarian for
that library, shows equally mundane activity, in which children of different racial and ethnic
backgrounds came in, read, and then left. 188 An agreement was furnished regarding the provision
of two large trucks and two small trucks for book deliveries throughout the city 189, and the
annual report for the year between 1915 and 1916 bespoke further experiments with advertising.
Window displays and continued cooperation with local newspapers was the order of the day, and
cooperation with a summer library science course integrated with the one already available at the
library school at Columbia University. Alice I. Hazeltine, the new Supervisor of Children‟s
Work following Effie Power‟s departure in 1914, had this to say about the use of the children‟s
186

Wayne A. Wiegand, “An Active Instrument for Propaganda”: The American Public Library During
World War I (Westport: Greenwood Press, 1989), 28.
187

Arthur Bostwick to Bertha Bruenning, January 8, 1916, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
188

Central Children‟s Room, April 30 through May 28, 1916, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
189

Clarence O. Musgrove to Arthur Bostwick, October 2, 1916, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

65

department: “Perhaps the most interesting feature of the work of the Central Children‟s Room for
the year has been the increased use of the room by parents, teachers, ministers, social workers
and artists. The special collection of books kept in the locked case is proving its usefulness in
this way.” 190
1917 saw a host of developments occurring within the St. Louis Public Library and the
community it served. Woodrow Wilson‟s declaration of war in April of 1917 resulted in massive
upheavals in American society, and as one of the preeminent Progressive institutions, the library
and its stewards felt they needed to respond to serve its population and, ultimately, its country.
Before the declaration of war, business continued as usual, with Alice I. Hazeltine writing a letter
to Arthur Bostwick regarding the massive increase in book circulation, and how it was creating
an enormous strain on the assistants within the children‟s department. 191 An equally high strain
was placed on the other employees as well, which led the Board of Directors to pass a resolution
stating that, excepting the employees working with re-binding books, there would be a $5.00
raise provided for the salaries of the other employees. 192
Other initiatives were taken as well during the early months of 1917. One such initiative
involved reaching out to newly arrived immigrants as opposed to a more restrictive focus on
immigrant families that had already established themselves in their respective corners of the city.
In the annual report for the year between 1916 and 1917, Bostwick points to an initiative where
permission was obtained from an immigration agent to begin distributing library cards among

190

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1915-1916, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
191

Alice I. Hazeltine to Arthur Bostwick, January 1917, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
192

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, February 9, 1917, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

66

immigrants arriving in St. Louis. According to that section of the report, 5,000 cards had been
given out between May 1, 1916, and April 1, 1917, thus expanding the library‟s area of influence
to newly arrived immigrants. 193
It was also revealed in the report that beginning in October 1917, the training class for
new librarians would officially be changing its name to the St. Louis Library School. “The
class,” Bostwick wrote, “has been for some time furnishing training of library-school grade, and
the only changes that will be necessary are to strengthen and increase the teaching and
administrative force and to amplify the courses of instruction, especially in the direction of
teaching comparative methods.” 194 Bostwick now had the library school that he had been
working toward for some time.
The aforementioned section of Bostwick‟s report also pointed to a circular of information
about the new library school that would be distributed to the proper channels in order to provide
prospective librarianship students with the necessary information. Such a circular was released
later in 1917, which provides a wealth of information regarding what was planned for the library
and how it would approach the education of new librarians. First and foremost, a 36-week
scholastic year was established, in which the students would learn technical, bibliographic, and
administrative details of librarianship. The students were also rotated between branch libraries,
which served as practice grounds for the students to apply what they had learned in classes. 195
In spite of Wilson‟s declaration of war in April of 1917, the library‟s receipt of books in
all languages continued unabated. In a meeting of the Board of Directors on May 3, 1917, it was
193

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1916-1917, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
194

Ibid.

195

St. Louis Library School, Circular of Information, 1917-1918, St. Louis Library School Records, St.
Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

67

shown that 232 books in foreign languages had been added to the library, 74 of which were in
German.196 German maps were also sent to the library from a professor in London, which
detailed the nations of the Central Powers, the territories that Germany controlled, and the battle
lines that had been charted across Europe, further adding to the informative materials the library
had sought to gather on the war for its patrons. 197
The American Expeditionary Force was eventually dispatched to Europe, and one of the
librarians at the St. Louis Public Library, Earl H. Davis, was carried with it. In a letter dated
October 14, 1917, he sent a letter back to his coworkers at the library, informing him on the state
of books and readership across the front. In the letter, he mentions an English Y.M.C.A. a mile
from his camp that provides books for soldiers, and discussed magazines and newspapers at
length.
Magazines and newspapers are being received quite regularly from the States and I assure
you the men appreciate the literature received. If our friends will only send their
magazines after having read them I am sure a welcome will be accorded them. The needs
of the soldiers in other respects are quite amply provided for, in fact we are much better
provided for than I had expected to find.198

In December of 1917, the library began efforts to further aid the war effort on the home
front. The Board of Directors passed a resolution that gave permission for the Red Cross to set
up stations in the Central and branch libraries, to sell badges to raise money for their efforts in
Europe. The Board passed another resolution that allowed them to invest $500 in Thrift Stamps
and War Savings Certificates, which they would then sell to their patrons in an effort to help ease

196

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, May 3, 1917, St. Louis Public Library
Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
197

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, October 1917, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
198

Letter to Arthur Bostwick from Earl H. Davis, October 14, 1917, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

68

the financial burdens of the war. 199 The St. Louis Public Library, according to Wayne A.
Wiegand, was particularly aggressive in other areas, as well, by actively helping local
businessmen with accountancy and other areas such as business psychology. 200
December also proved to be a strenuous month in terms of the library‟s relationship with
its local government and, by proxy, the increasingly pervasive influence of the national
government. The St. Louis Efficiency Board was an organization established to ensure that
things went well in terms of the city‟s aid to the war effort, and on October 22, 1917, they asked
the library‟s Board of Directors to provide information on all of the library‟s employees. A
month passed, and on December 3, they received another letter, one that carried sharper teeth.
As sufficient time has elapsed and the board has not been furnished with this information,
nor with any indication of when it will be furnished, I am instructed to inform your board
that unless we have a complete list of your employees and the data requested by
December 10, 1917, we will be compelled to notify the Treasurer and Comptroller not to
pay out any money for salaries to employees of your board. 201
Charles H. Dawes, one of the board members, consulted with a lawyer in another letter dated
December 11, asking him what exactly the nature of the relationship was between the library
board and the Efficiency Board and if there was anything to be done about the kind of control
that the Efficiency Board wanted to exert over the library. 202 Much of 1918 found Bostwick and
the other libraries of the St. Louis Public Library further engaged in work related to World War
I, especially now that the United States was fully engaged on the European continent. But while

199

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, December 13, 1917, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
200

Wiegand, “An Active Instrument of Propaganda,” 36.

201

W.E. Van Pelt to George O. Carpenter, December 11, 1917, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
202

Charles H. Dawes to John F. Lee, December 11, 1917, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

69

they kept one eye on efforts related to the First World War, the other attempted to continue
addressing issues pertaining to their local community. The meeting of the Board of Directors
held on January 4, 1918, found Bostwick presenting a petition from a local organization known
as the Mann School Mothers‟ Circles to build a branch library in their city. Bostwick was
instructed to respond by informing them that no funds existed at that time to pursue such an
endeavor.203
The meeting of the Board of Directors in March of 1918 reveals that among the library‟s
primary roles in their community during World War I, one of them involved vetting books to
ensure their suitability for military camp barracks, the closest one of which was Jefferson
Barracks. It is noted in the minutes for this meeting that by March 8, 1918, that 1,788 works
including books, pamphlets, and periodicals had been received at the library. Instead of being
included in the library‟s collection, however, most of these materials were diverted to camp
libraries. “Many of the books received,” the minutes state, “are absolutely unfit to send to the
Camps, but would be very useful in the Library.” 204
Another aspect of the library‟s involvement involved committing its recently christened
library school to training an influx of new librarianship students. The reasons for this are outlined
in a special bulletin for the St. Louis Library School circulated throughout the country.
Training library workers are now in great demand in the offices of the different war
activities at Washington. The training that is given at a good library school has been
found to fill the needs of these offices for filing, indexing and other business work. As a
result of the demand thus created by the war, the libraries of the country are finding that

203

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, January 4, 1918, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
204

Meeting of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, March 8, 1918, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

70

their staffs are being rapidly depleted and the demand for library workers is therefore
constantly on the increase.205

The coming of the war had had its detriments for the library, including a workforce
depleted by the need for soldiers, camp librarians, and materials for the same libraries in the
military camps at home and abroad. In terms of the library school, it had also provided an
opportunity to bolster the library‟s prestige by opening the doors of its library school to train
people who would go on to fulfill the filing and indexing tasks needed by the U.S. government.
These graduated trainees could then potentially seek jobs in libraries, and thusly add to their
respective workforces once the war reached its conclusion.
As the chief librarian, Bostwick was frequently called upon to recommend librarians for
the different training camps for soldiers in the greater St. Louis area. In a notice to area
newspapers, Bostwick reported that he was having difficulties finding a qualified librarian for the
training camp at Jefferson Barracks. The reduced workforce that Bostwick was attempting to
draw from provided little opportunities for him to conduct this responsibility, and he thusly
found himself having to cast a wider net for anyone who possessed the best characteristics for the
job, which included “education, intelligence, and adaptability.” 206
After an armistice was declared and the First World War officially ended on November
11, 1918, the library attempted to aid in efforts that maintained a normal daily routine for its
employees and patrons. In 1919, Norma Weis, one of the children‟s librarians operating within
the St. Louis library system, released a bibliography of children‟s stories titled American Home
Life, which included stories pertaining to the Revolutionary War, the Civil War, and westward
205

St. Louis Public Library Bulletin, St. Louis Library School Special Number, June, 1918, St. Louis
Library School Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
206

Notice for City Editors, November 4, 1918: Camp Librarian Wanted, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

71

expansion, possibly in line with efforts at recalling a glorious American pastime. 207 The St. Louis
Public Library also sought to maintain ties with the military by allowing the American Library
Association to act through them when purchasing an older building used by the Knights of
Columbus at Jefferson Barracks, which would be used to provide soldiers in peacetime with
suitable reading material. 208 In the latest attempt to add newer technologies to be used in the
library, discussions were opened with a phonograph company known as the Victor Talking
Machine Company to possibly begin hosting phonograph concerts in the library 209, and a tablet
honoring the fallen American soldiers of the 4 th Ward of St. Louis was approved for installment
in the Crunden Branch. 210
One of the developments surrounding libraries across the United States, including the St.
Louis Public Library, was increased recognition of libraries and their role in society due to their
involvement in war work in soldiers‟ barracks both at home and abroad. Bostwick made note of
this development in an article he wrote for a library-related periodical titled The Bookman, titled
“The Socialization of the Library”: “The most widespread recognition of groups ever made by
libraries was in connection with the war work of the American Library Association. Financed by
the Association itself in the early part of the war, this work later became part of that cared for by
the united war fund, raised jointly by seven welfare organizations, of which it was one.” 211

207

Norma Weis, American Home Life: A List of Stories for Children (St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library,

1919), 1-2.
208

Notice to Editors of The Library Journal, St. Louis Newspapers, and Other Public Libraries, February
25, 1919, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
209

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, April 8, 1919, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
210

Minutes of the Board of Directors of the St. Louis Public Library, December 5, 1919, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
211

Arthur Bostwick, “The Socialization of the Library,” Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

72

The ascendency of Warren G. Harding to the presidency led to his subsequent call for a
return to normalcy following the social upheavals experienced during World War I. The year
between 1921 and 1922 found the library and its employees engaged in finding ways to further
expand the library‟s influence in terms of establishing new, smaller branch libraries, particularly
in the high schools. This idea was met with approval by the Library Committee, yet the details of
such an endeavor had yet to be worked out. 212
According to the annual report for the year between 1921 and 1922, the library found
itself heavily patronized by men and members of families suffering economic hardship following
the war. The Open Shelf Room in particular saw a great deal of this visitation, according to a
report presented by Mary Crocker, the librarian in charge of the Open Shelf Room. Crocker
found that those visiting the library were mostly reading “literature, essays and drama in
particular, psychology, psycho-analysis, business, sports, games and radio,” and were also
reading Arthur Conan Doyle, William Jennings Bryan, and books on spiritualism. 213
Another change to greet the library involved the passage of the Smith-Hughes Act, in
which part of the financial burdens of vocational education were assumed by the federal
government. The passage of this act, as reported by librarian Julia Krug of the Teachers‟ Room,
enabled the establishment of a new kind of school that was referred to as the part-time school,
where children who left school to work to support their families could attend school, gain a
vocational education, and still be able to earn money through work. 214

212

Memorandum of the Library Committee, 1922, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St.

Louis, MO.
213

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1921-1922, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
214

Ibid.

73

In the annual report for the year between 1922 and 1923, it is reported that the circulation
of books had, for the first time since the outbreak of World War I, returned to relatively normal
conditions, due to the rise in employment rates. 215 As 1923 continued, one event in particular had
international ramifications on the part of the libraries across the world – the work with libraries
in China. Between December 6, 1923, and April 21, 1924, the United States Senate and the
House of Representatives passed a joint resolution that what had come to be known as the Boxer
Indemnity should be discontinued. Since 1908, the Chinese government had been forced to pay
restitution for the lives lost and the destruction of property during the Boxer Rebellion of 1901,
which combined American, British, and Japanese forces had crushed. By remitting the payments
back to the Chinese as an “act of friendship,” part of the funds were now being used to open
libraries throughout China, and help was being asked for on that front. 216
Mary E. Wood was one of several people in communication with members of the
Chinese government regarding the use of the remitted funds for educational purposes. In a
communication with Hsiao Yao-Nan, the governor of Hupeh Province in China, Hsiao affirmed
the use of the funds towards building educational institutions for Chinese students, and wished
Wood and the U.S. government success in further remission of funds for that purpose. 217
In an academic paper delivered at the International Symposium on the Development of
Theory and Practice of Library and Information Science at the Central China Normal University
in May of 1993, later republished in Libraries and Culture in 1998, library science specialists

215

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1922-1923, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
216

Joint Resolutions, U.S. Senate and House of Representatives, in Mary E. Wood, ed., The Boxer
Indemnity and the Library Movement in China: A Collection of Official Documents Pertaining to the Boxer
Indemnity and Public Libraries in China (Hankow: Central China Post Ltd., 1924), 3.
217

Letter, September 1, 1923, in The Boxer Indemnity and the Library Movement in China, 5.

74

Priscilla C. Yu and Donald G. Davis, Jr., studied the state of libraries in China before and after
the visit of Arthur Bostwick, who would be tapped by the American Library Association as their
delegate to China in 1925. Yu and Davis point to three occurrences in China that took place
between 1917 and 1920, which consisted of the adoption of the local vernacular language pei hua
as the primary means of Chinese expression, an event known as the May 4 th Movement that
inspired more people to literary and artistic expression, and finally, the Mass Education
Movement, which occurred in 1920 and endeavored to teach illiterate Chinese citizens how to
read and write using one thousand characters. 218
In the annual report of the librarian for the year between 1924 and 1925, it is reported that
Bostwick was chosen as the delegate of the American Library Association to be sent to China per
the request of the Chinese Association for the Advancement of Education. He would be traveling
through China for a period of three months, with no expenses, and his salary for that time period
would be reimbursed through contributions of those who supported the endeavor. 219
Bostwick left the St. Louis Public Library in good hands as he embarked on a three
month journey to another country, doing so in an effort that, according to Yu and David,
expanded upon the work that Mary Elizabeth Wood had begun using the experience of his tenure
at two different libraries.

218

“Arthur E. Bostwick and Chinese Library Development: A Chapter in International Cooperation,”
Priscilla C. Yu and Donald G. Davis, Jr., Libraries and Culture 33, No. 4 (1998), 389.
219

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1924-1925, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

75

CHAPTER 4: CONCLUSION, 1925-1938
THE STATE OF THE LIBRARY, 1925-1938
Beginning on April 25 and ending June 21, 1925, Arthur Bostwick‟s journey through
China began in Shanghai and ended in Yokohama, Japan, after which he made the journey home
to the United States. 220 “The whole trip,” Bostwick wrote in a letter to his assistant librarian,
Charles Compton, “is full of new and interesting things. Chinese libraries are more numerous
and on the whole more progressive than I had supposed. I find even children‟s rooms and
traveling libraries.” 221
One of the libraries that Bostwick toured while in China was the Sung Po Library in
Peking. According to a notice released in English for the visiting delegate‟s benefit, the library
had been established a year prior to Bostwick‟s visit, and was composed of two buildings. One
building was devoted to Chinese books, and the other contained the library‟s collection of
foreign books, published in languages ranging from English to Esperanto. 222 Bostwick noted
some drawbacks to the Chinese library that he noticed throughout his tour, which included their
being “fire traps” that endangered the books within, and that the Chinese were still dealing with
problems such as handling and storing the books in Chinese, problems that American libraries
had solved.223
In addition to Bostwick‟s role as delegate for the American Library Association to China,
another development concerning library schools across the United States concerned him greatly.
220

Itinerary Document, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

221

Arthur Bostwick to Charles H. Compton, May 14, 1925, Charles H. Compton Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
222

Library Notice, Sung Po Library, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

223

Arthur Bostwick to Charles H. Compton, May 14, 1925, Charles H. Compton Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

76

This was the provision of funds by the Carnegie Corporation to library schools, which had
apparently recognized their importance in training new generations of librarians. Bostwick made
note of this in a letter to John Mauren a few months before his departure to China, dated March
26, 1925, in which he stated that the Carnegie Corporation had approved the sum of one million
dollars for library schools across the nation, and that it was “a pity that we should not make an
effort to get some.” 224
Efforts in this direction commenced on November 25, 1925, in a letter written by
Bostwick to a representative of the Carnegie Corporation by the name of Dr. F.A. Keppel. In the
letter, Bostwick states that he had been formally asked by the St. Louis Public Library‟s Board of
Directors to request an annual fund to assist in the maintenance of the St. Louis Library School.
The library school‟s maintenance rested on the city tax of one-fifth of a mill, and the library
administration wanted to increase their enrollment to at least forty. Petitions for admission came
to the library almost daily, yet due to a lack of significant funding beyond the city tax, large
classes of students were simply not possible despite the abundance of willing manpower. 225
As negotiations toward this goal commenced, Bostwick‟s reports from his journey
through China became available in the form of a collected pamphlet titled Reports of Arthur E.
Bostwick’s Mission to China as A.L.A. Delegate, where Bostwick‟s experiences would be readily
available for public consumption. The publication of his reports also served to provide guidelines
for the areas in which Chinese libraries needed improvement, supported by the knowledge of his
position as one of the most experienced librarians in the United States. His concluding
recommendation involved assisting the Chinese with extensions of their library-related services,
224

Arthur Bostwick to John L. Mauren, March 26, 1925, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
225

Arthur Bostwick to Dr. F.A. Keppel, November 25, 1925, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.

77

ranging from branch libraries in cities to services such as delivery stations and children‟s
departments.226 Bostwick presented these findings to an organization known as the China
Foundation, and recommended that funds be provided for the construction of model libraries in
different cities. This led the China Foundation to make an initial donation of $500,000 in gold to
establish such a model library in Peking. 227
The annual librarian‟s report for the year between 1925 and 1926 shows business as usual
as well as new developments. Three branch libraries had been opened in 1925, with a fourth
planned for the latter half of 1926. Arthur Bostwick provided a collection of 172 books and 161
pamphlets for circulation in the library that he had obtained during his trip to China. Two
particularly noteworthy developments in the library at this time involve the establishment of
what came to be known as a Readers‟ Advisory Service for adult education, and the use of an
emerging technology, radio, to communicate library-related news and book lists to potential
listeners.228 By 1927, several lectures by library staff had been collected and published in a
single volume titled The Library Over the Radio, lectures which ranged from services that the
Missouri Library Commission were conducting in rural areas to the aforementioned Readers‟
Advisory Service. 229

226

Arthur E. Bostwick, Reports of Arthur Bostwick on his Trip to China as A.L.A. Delegate, (St. Louis: St.
Louis Public Library, 1926), 9.
227

In the Interest of China, 2nd Circular Letter, October, 1926, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
228

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1925-1926, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
229

St. Louis Public Library Staff, The Library Over the Radio: Specimen Talks on Library and Home
Service, Broadcasted over “The Voice of St. Louis” (St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1927), 1-2.

78

Bostwick was also examining different possibilities for financing the library school. The
primary possibility involved Washington University in St. Louis assuming full financial
responsibility with no official connection, which, according to Bostwick, was something that was
actually being practiced between library schools and universities in other parts of the United
States. He cited several examples including the Cleveland Public Library and its relationship to
the Western Reserve University Library School, and then mentioned the possibility of the library
school course constituting the final requirement for a bachelor‟s degree, which was also in
practice at the Universities of Wisconsin and Michigan. 230
On April 26, 1927, Bostwick initiated contact with Herbert Hadley, the Chancellor of
Washington University of St. Louis, to see if this kind of arrangement could be reached. In his
letter, he was sure to mention that the Carnegie Corporation had already provided some funds for
the maintenance of the library school, but stressed that an arrangement like the aforementioned
Cleveland Public Library-Western Reserve University connection would be most beneficial to
the library school. 231 Hadley responded in a letter dated May 9, 1927, stating that unless
Washington University was able to secure a significant financial endowment, there would be no
point in assuming the fiscal responsibility and linked classes with the St. Louis Library
School.232
Despite the abrupt end of Progressivism following World War I, the ideologies that had
been infused into the library‟s creation were still alive and well in its daily activities. In an
address to library school graduates in Atlanta, Georgia, Arthur Bostwick stated, “Books, if they
230

Arthur E. Bostwick to Charles H. Compton, January 21, 1927, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
231

Arthur E. Bostwick to Herbert Hadley, April 26, 1927, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
232

Herbert Hadley to Arthur Bostwick, May 9, 1927, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

79

are the right books, may cause the wicked man to turn from his wickedness and the good man to
fix his eyes on a higher level of achievement; they may kindle the fires of enthusiasm in the
breast of the indifferentist and stir the materialist into spiritual life.” 233 The library school had
expanded its own practices, enabling librarians to practice their craft in three public school
buildings and a community center in an effort to provide them with a view to working with
people in other institutions. 234
In the annual librarian‟s report for the year between 1927 and 1928, the opening of a new
branch library, the George O. Carpenter Library, named after the president of the Board of
Directors for the St. Louis Public Library, is reported. Additionally, the library-related lectures
delivered via radio had proven to be exceptionally popular, and numerous requests for additional
broadcasts had been made. The librarians who contributed the most responded accordingly,
broadcasting five times a week instead of only two, including book reviews, children‟s stories,
and current events concerning the library. 235 Harriet P. Sawyer, still serving in her capacity as the
principal of the St. Louis Library School, reported that the school had graduated its highest
number of students since the school‟s founding – a total of 33.236
1929 saw the publication of an anthology of articles by leading educational experts in
China titled Libraries in China, created by the Library Association of China. One essay, written
by a Dr. T.C. Tai, the Director of Higher Education in the Kiangsu Educational District, had this
conclusion to offer about libraries and education in China.

233

Bulletin of the American Library Association 22, No. 3, Chicago, IL (1928): 161

234

St. Louis Library School, Circular of Information, 1927-1928, St. Louis Library School Records, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
235

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1927-1928, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
236

Ibid., 43.

80

The progress of the library movement during the last eighteen years has been a slow but
steady one, made in spite of financial difficulties and civil wars. The government and the
educational leaders now realize that to establish modern libraries all over the country is
one of the surest ways to educate the general masses. Modern public libraries are
peoples‟ universities and they will play an ever increasing part in the educational world
of China.237

Like Bostwick‟s collected reports, this collection of essays was made available to the
library‟s interested patrons, especially since Bostwick had played a significant role as the A.L.A.
delegate to China.
The year between 1928 and 1929 saw the opening of a new branch in a public school, as
well as continued success with radio broadcasts. It was also found that readers were greatly
benefiting from the interchangeable network of book deliveries between the Central Library and
its surrounding branches, using it in an increased capacity than ever before. The Children‟s
Department in the Central Library had found its own collections lacking due to the opening of
public library stations in public schools staffed by the library‟s librarians. 238
Through the exploits of Arthur Bostwick, the St. Louis Public Library and its library
school had gained a great deal of national and international attention, to the point where the
library was being asked for advice on cataloging and organization. One example was provided in
the librarian‟s annual report for the year between 1929 and 1930, in which it was reported that
the library had rendered assistance to businesses such as railroad offices and other industrial
organizations. 239 Despite the stock market crash of 1929 and the onset of the Great Depression,

237

T.C. Tai, “Development of Modern Libraries in China,” in Tongli Yuan, ed., Libraries in China
(Peiping: Library Association of China, 1929), 16.
238

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1928-1929, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
239

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1929-1930, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.

81

librarian Mary Crocker, who handled the Open Shelf Room, had this to say about the books
being selected:
The rise and fall of the stock market, religious persecution in Russia, illicit salt marketing
in India, racketeering in Chicago and census taking in the remote fastnesses of this
country, are among the spectacular events of the apst year. None has availed to interrupt
this department‟s normal functioning or prevented it from adding its annual cubit to its
issue…240

In 1932, the St. Louis Library School received further attention when Arthur Bostwick
responded to Melvil Dewey‟s request for historical data on the library school for the sake of
posterity. His response involved a letter accompanying the materials that Dewey had requested,
affording his predecessor, Frederick Crunden, much of the credit for establishing “the nucleus of
our school, although it was not carried into effect until his absence from the library due to his last
illness, had been planned by him before he left and that he had in mind Mr. Dewey‟s ideas with
regard to library instruction.” 241
Members of the library continued to offer advice in other capacities based on the actions
of other departments of the library. An example of this can be seen in a letter from Arthur
Bostwick‟s son, Andrew, working as a librarian, to Jennie Owen Cochran, the head of the
Stations and Extension Department at the Louisville Free Public Library, dated September 29,
1934. He informed her that the number of delivery stations in St. Louis numbered approximately
sixty, with a great deal of them located in drug stores with no need for advertisements due to
their well-established presence. 242

240

Annual Report of the Librarian, 1929-1930, St. Louis Public Library Records, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
241

Arthur Bostwick to Melvil Dewey, June 15, 1932, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library,
St. Louis, MO.
242

Andrew Bostwick to Jennie Owen Cochrane, September 29, 1934, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis
Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

82

1935 found Arthur Bostwick working on the behalf of an African-American former
Pullman porter by the name of Walter Cannon, who was trying to publish a manuscript. His first
attempt involved Charles Scribner, the head of the publishing company. He received a response
from Scribner dated May 14, 1935, stating that while the material was compelling, it was not
enough for a novel, and suggested submitting it to The Saturday Evening Post for serialization. 243
Bostwick would not be deterred. Another publisher, George Lorimer, said the same thing as
Scribner, stating that he was not interested in its publication in spite of finding it out of the
ordinary.244 After speaking with several other publishers, Bostwick informed Walter Cannon
that all had refused the former porter‟s manuscript, and that he would have to return the
manuscript to him. 245
On April 26, 1937, Bostwick presided over a joint committee consisting of members of
the public schools and the library branches, which sought to review the conditions of the libraries
that had been opened in the schools. The work of the library‟s Children‟s Department was wellestablished by this point, with each grade of classes approached in a different way through
stories, workshops, and explanations of the ways in which books and other materials are
organized and catalogued so the older children could easily find a book they wanted either for
entertainment or for research. 246

243

Charles H. Scribner to Arthur Bostwick, May 14, 1935, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
244

George H. Lorimer to Arthur Bostwick, May 27, 1935, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
245

Arthur Bostwick to Walter Cannon, August 14, 1935, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public
Library, St. Louis, MO.
246

Minutes, Joint Committee of the Public Schools and Public Library, April 26, 1937, St. Louis Public
Library Records, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

83

1938 saw another era in the St. Louis Public Library close with the resignation of Arthur
Bostwick. On January 8, 1938, a notice was released by the Board of the Directors concerning
Bostwick‟s retirement, stating that he had officially resigned his position and would be replaced
by Charles H. Compton, the assistant librarian since 1921. He would stay on at the library as an
associate librarian, but much of the burdens of leadership would be removed from his shoulders,
now that he was in his twilight years. 247 Bostwick‟s contributions to the St. Louis Public Library
and its growth were numerous and officially recognized in a resolution passed by the Board of
Directors concerning Bostwick‟s retirement. Under his tenure, he had significantly expanded it
through branches and service to minorities and the disabled, and had also contributed greatly to
scholarship on American libraries through the many books and articles that he‟d published over
the years.248 Bostwick died in Oak Grove, Missouri, on February 13, 1942.
CONCLUSION
During his tenure, Charles H. Compton would work within the processes and
mechanisms established by Frederick M. Crunden Arthur E. Bostwick. Like Bostwick, Compton
contributed a great deal to advancing librarianship throughout the 1930 and into the years of
World War II. He wrote extensively, writing articles and books including Memories of a
Librarian and Fifty Years of Progress in the St. Louis Public Library.
Memories of a Librarian is fairly self-explanatory, since it is essentially Compton‟s
memoir of his experience as a librarian. He was inspired to become a librarian based on
information he received from his sister, a librarian at the campus library for the University of

247

St. Louis Public Library Board‟s Announcement of Arthur Bostwick‟s Retirement, January 8, 1938,
Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
248

Arthur Bostwick, Resolution of the Board of Directors, March 4, 1938, Arthur E. Bostwick Papers, St.
Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.

84

Nebraska.249 After various librarianship positions, Charles Compton became the head librarian at
the St. Louis Public Library in 1921. As the head librarian, he followed Frederick Crunden‟s and
Arthur Bostwick‟s examples by advocating fiercely for federal aid. About his advocacy he had
this to say:
I was by no means the first man to advocate federal aid for libraries. At the New
Haven Conference of the A.L.A. in June, 1931, the Council adopted a resolution
advocating an appropriation by Congress of $100,000,000 as an equalizing and
stimulating fund for rural public library service to be expended over a ten-year
period. The resolution went on to recommend how the fund should be
administered. 250
He also wrote six articles over the course of eight years, which focused on who was
reading which author. One example includes William James, in which he “found even in the case
of his heavier philosophical works that persons in all walks of life were reading them,” and also
noted that “readers included a trunk-maker, machinists, stenographers, a Post Office clerk, a
sales lady in a ready-to-wear clothing store, a Negro probation officer,” and “a maintenance man
in a soap factory,” among others. 251 Like Margaret Pilcher‟s Who’s Who Among Readers,
Compton‟s study was instrumental in terms of looking at working-class people, what they read,
and how they were educating themselves.
Today‟s librarians at the St. Louis Public Library provide similar services, although
events have changed. High-speed communications and connectivity rule the day, and technology
has changed the face of readership through innovations such as tablets and e-readers. Films,
video games, and other forms of interactive media are now offered by a library that has become
technologically astute, its librarians working with children and adults alike in an effort to further
249

Charles H. Compton, Memories of a Librarian, (St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1954), 22.

250

Ibid., 114.

251

Ibid., 146-147.

85

their educations through the latest developments in technology. These inclusions and
accountings, however, rest on the proverbial shoulders of giants, who laid the foundations for
urban libraries and their patrons for centuries to come.

86

BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRIMARY SOURCES
Bostwick, Arthur E. St. Louis Public Library: A Guide to the Central Building for Librarians. St.
Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1913.
Bostwick, Arthur E., ed. Books I Like and Why I Like Them: The St. Louis Public Library’s
Collection of Favorites, 2 nd Edition. St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1913.
Bostwick, Arthur E. Earmarks of Literature: The Things That Make Books Good. Freeport:
Books for Libraries Press, 1966 (first published 1914).
Bostwick, Arthur E., A Librarian’s Open Shelf: Essays on Various Subjects. New York: The
H.W. Wilson Company, 1920.
Bostwick, Arthur E. Bostwick, A Life with Men and Books. New York: The H.W. Wilson
Company, 1939.
Bostwick, Arthur E., Papers, St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, MO.
Chaplin, Joyce E., ed., Benjamin Franklin’s Autobiography: An Authoritative Text, Contexts,
Criticism. New York: W.W. Norton, 2012.
Crunden, Frederick Morgan. The Free Public Library: Its Uses and Value. St. Louis: R.P.
Studley and Company, 1893.
Crunden, Frederick Morgan, Papers, St. Louis Public Library. St. Louis, MO.
Doud, Margery. Five Hundred Books for Hospital Patients. St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library,
1919.
Monthly Bulletins, St. Louis Public Library, 1903-1914.
Power, Effie L., ed. Lists of Stories and Programs for Story Hours. White Plains: The H.W.
Wilson Company, 1915.
Power, Effie L., How the Children of a Great City Get Their Books: Being an Account of the
Work with Children in the St. Louis Public Library. St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library,
1914.

87

Power, Effie L., ed. A List of Books for Older Girls. St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1914.
Power, Effie L., Papers, Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, OH.
Power, Effie L., Papers, Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, OH.
Quigley, Margery, Where Neighbors Meet: An Account of the Use of Assembly and Club Rooms
in the St. Louis Public Library, St. Louis, 1917.
Steiner, Bernard C., ed., Reverend Thomas Bray: His Life and Selected Works Relating to Maryland,
Baltimore: J. Murphy Co., 1901.

Weis, Norma. American Home Life: A List of Stories for Children. St. Louis: St. Louis Public
Library, 1919.
Putnam, Herbert, The Public Library of the City of St. Louis: Addresses and Other Proceedings
at the Opening Exercises of the New Central Library Building, January 6 th, 1912. St.
Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1912.
SECONDARY SOURCES
Brandom, Mendel E., One Hundred Years of Teacher Education in the St. Louis Public School
System, Part 1: The St. Louis Normal School, 1857-1904. St. Louis: St. Louis Public
Schools, 1958.
Bryant, Sara Cone, How to Tell Stories to Children and Some Stories to Tell. 1905. Reprint, New
York: Kessinger Books, 2004.
Compton, Charles. Memories of a Librarian. St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1954.
Fischer, Steven Roger. A History of Reading. London: Reaktion Books, 2004.
Garrison, Dee. Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920.
New York: Macmillian Publishing Co., Inc., 1979.
Henderson, Jane, “Renovated Library Awes „Friends‟: Brighter, more accessible Central Library
opens Sunday,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, December 3rd , 2012 (accessed December 15th,
2012).
Kaser, David. A Directory of the St. Louis Book and Printing Trades to 1850. New York: The
New York Public Library, 1961.

88

Kimball, Melanie A., “Youth Services at St. Louis Public Library, 1909-1933: A Narrative Case
Study,”(doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 2003).
McGerr, Michael. A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of Progressive Movement in America,
1870-1920. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Muncy, Robyn. Creating a Female Dominion in American Reform, 1890-1935. New York:
Oxford University Press USA, 1994.
Van Slyck, Abigail A., Free to All: Carnegie Libraries and American Culture, 1890-1920.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Van Slyck, Abigail A., “The Lady and the Library Loafer: Gender and Public Space in Victorian
America,” Winterthur Portfolio, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Winter, 1996), pp. 221-242.
Betty Boyd Walker. “The History of the Saint Louis Mercantile Library: Its Educational, Social
and Cultural Contributions,” (doctoral dissertation, St. Louis University, 1986).
Wiegand, Wayne A., “An Active Instrument for Propaganda”: The American Public Library
during World War I. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1989.
Wiegand, Wayne A., Main Street Public Library: Community Places and Reading Spaces in the
Rural Heartland, 1876-1956. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2011.
Wood, Gordon S., Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789-1815. New York:
Oxford University Press, Inc., 2009.
Wynar, Bohdan S., ed. Dictionary of American Library Biography. Littleton: Libraries
Unlimited, Inc., 1978.

89

VITA
Graduate School
Southern Illinois University
Matthew A. Nichols
oculus2westeros@gmail.com
Ball State University
Bachelor of Arts, History, May 2011
Special Honors and Awards:
Southern Illinois University Graduate Tuition Scholarship, Fall and Spring Semesters, 2012-2013
Academic Year
Outstanding Senior History Department Award, Spring Semester, 2010-2011 Academic Year
Recognition of Service to Phi Alpha Theta, Mu Beta Chapter, Spring Semester, 2010-2011
Academic Year
Thesis Title:
The Urban Messenger: The Growth of the St. Louis Public Library, 1870-1930
Major Professor: Jonathan J. Bean

90

